Every day, our teams collaborate around the world to actively uncover, discuss and debate investment opportunities, which leads to better decisions for our clients.
What the English really think about their northern neighbours, page 50.
America's Supreme Court seems nervous about a Iteri n g a n a n ci ent i n stituti o n , page 21.
What life is like for gay couples who cannot wed, page 22 Mexico Investors take a century-long bet on boomand-bust Mexico, page 61.
Their members don't wear balaclavas or wave banners, but NGOs are bringing about change, page 29 Victory Day Vladimir Putin corrupts the memory of victory over Nazism to justify his warin Ukraine, page 43.
As the anniversary approaches, Germany draws the right lessons, page 44 ►► Contents continues overleaf 6 Contents The Economist May 2nd 2015 Earthquake in Nepal A 7.8-magnitude earthquake brings tragedy, and reveals political shortcomings, page 32 DrugwarAsonewaron drugs ends, anotheris starting.
Nowis the time to think about howto detectthem and knock them down safely, page 69.
The Economists a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited.
Printed by Quad/Graphics, Saratoga Springs, NY 12866 The world this week The Economist May 2nd 2015 7 Politics At least 6,000 people were killed when an earthquake of magnitude 7. struck Nepal, one of Asia’s poorest countries.
Aid agencies struggled to reach remote areas in Gorkha district, near the border with Tibet, where many more bodies are expected to be found.
In Pakistan Sabeen Mahmud, one of the country’s leading liberal activists, was shot dead in Karachi by unknown gunmen, shortly after she left an event to highlight the cases of the 5,000 people thought to have been abducted and killed by the security forces.
Australia recalled its ambassador to Indonesia after the Indonesians executed two convicted Australian drug smugglers, along with six others.
The gang was arrested in 2005 trying to take 8kg of heroin out of Bali.
Sticks and stones The governor of Maryland sent the National Guard to Baltimore to quell rioting, the worst in the city since 1968.
Six police officers were seriously injured and hundreds of rioters arrested when violence broke out hours after the funeral of a black man who had died from spinal injuries that he had sustained while in police custody.
Rioters burned down their own neighbourhoods, torching buildings and looting shops.
America’s Supreme Court heard arguments about whether gay couples have a constitutional right to marry.
Jerry Brown, the governor of California, set new and tougher state targets on curbing greenhouse gases.
He called for carbon emissions to be cut by 40% by 2030 from what they were in 1990.
Shinzo Abe visited Washington, where he became the first prime minister of Japan to address a j oint meeting of Congress.
During his trip new guidelines were unveiled for Japan’s alliance with America, which will allow Tokyo to take on a more assertive role in international security.
Royals flushed King Salman changed the line of succession in Saudi Arabia, appointing his nephew, Muhammad bin Nayef, crown prince and naming his son, Muhammad, who has been leading the war in Yemen, as second in line.
Separately, the interior ministry said that 93 people, most of them Saudi citizens, had been arrested in the country since December on suspicion of being members of Islamic State.
Iran seized a container ship in the Strait of Hormuz, which connects Gulf states to the open sea.
Iran said the vessel, registered in the Marshall Islands, had been taken because of a commercial dispute.
It said it respected freedom of navigation, although it has previously threatened to close the strait in protest at international sanctions over its nuclear programme, on which it is negotiating with six other countries.
Binyamin Netanyahu was poised to complete the formation of his new cabinet, following his victory in Israel’s general election in March.
It emerged that the French government is investigating allegations that French peacekeeping troops raped boys as young as nine years old in the Central African Republic last year.
The claims were first made in a classified un report that was leaked to the press.
In Burundi, protests against President Pierre Nkurunziza’s bid for a third term were met with a violent response by the army and police.
At least six people are reported to have died, and there have been hundreds of arrests.
The protesters say the constitution bars Mr Nkurunziza from seeking re-election.
Friends indeed A summit in Kiev between the European Union and Ukraine produced no new pledges of support.
Ukraine wants more generous bail-out funds for its economy, military aid, and a Eu peacekeeping mission to secure its ceasefire line with Russian separatists.
The eu declined to provide any military help and said aid would be contingent on reforms.
A Finnish naval vessel dropped two small depth charges after detecting what is believed to be a Russian submarine in Finnish waters.
Nordic countries have become increasingly concerned over Russian intrusions into their territorial waters and air space.
The Greek government sidelined its controversial finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, removing him from responsibility for negotiations with finance ministers from the euro zone.
Mr Varoufakis’s mercurial style had been blamed for a loss of trust in Greece’s government, which is scrambling to come to an agreement to unlock billions of euros in bail-out financing.
Britain’s political parties began a frantic last week of campaigning ahead of an election on May 7th, while new data showed the economy growing in the first quarter at its slowest pace in two years.
If the polls are correct, no party will hold a maj ority on May 8th, meaning another coalition government will have to be formed.
They include eliminating anonymous donations to political parties, state financing for parties and the writing of a new constitution.
Ms Bachelet’s son has been at the centre of an influence-peddling scandal.
Venezuela’s government decided to shorten the workday for public employees, from eight or nine hours to five-anda-half, to save energy.
Bureau of Economic Analysis America’s economy grew by just 0.2% in the first quarter at an annualised rate compared with the previous three months.
There was no single explanation, though bad winter weather and a labour dispute at California’s ports played a part.
With energy firms curtailing their exploration activities, investment in wells and mines slumped.
At its latest meeting the Federal Reserve blamed “transitory factors”, but the timing of a rise in interest rates looks ever more uncertain.
Brazil raised its benchmark interest rate by half a percentage point to 13.25%, the highest level in six years.
It was the latest in a long series of consecutive rate rises from the central bank, which is trying to tame soaring inflation.
Meanwhile, Sweden’s Riksbank stepped up its fight against deflation by enlarging its quantitativeeasing programme.
Thailand’s central bank reduced its key rate to 1.5% to boost the country’s flagging economy.
Sans Ferdinand Ferdinand Piech shocked corporate Germany by resigning as Volkswagen’s chairman.
He went after the carmaker’s board backed Martin Winterkorn, the chief executive, in a spat between the two.
A grandson of the inventor of the Beetle, Mr Piech has been the driving force behind vw for the past two decades.
His family retains considerable clout through its share holdings, giving it a say in choosing a new chairman.
Deutsche Bank presented its long-awaited reorganisation plan, which involves shrinking its investment bank, selling its Postbank retail subsidiary and trimming its debt load.
Deutsche’s leadership insisted that it would still compete with the titans of Wall Street, but investors, expecting something more ambitious, sent its share price down.
Earlier, Deutsche paid $2. billion to settle claims by American and British authorities that it manipulated libor, a benchmark interest rate, the biggest such fine to date.
In the latest example of a crackdown on graft, China’s authorities accused the president of Sinopec, one of the country’s oil giants, of “serious violations of discipline and law”, code for corruption.
A drug triangle Mylan, a drug company in Pennsylvania, roundly rejected a $40 billion takeover bid from leva, which is based in Israel.
Mylan wants to pursue its own takeover of Perrigo, which is incorporated in Ireland, raising its offer this week to $36 billion-an approach that Perrigo immediately spurned.
Revenue grew by 74% in the first quarter, to $43 6m, but this was less than investors had hoped for.
With growth tepid in its user base, Twitter also lowered its annual profit outlook.
Time Warner Cable was rumoured to be seeking a new merger partner, following Comcast’s decision to pull its $45 billion takeover offer in the face of opposition from regulators to a deal.
A combined company would have carved out roughly 30% of America’s cable-Tv market and provided almost 60% of broadband connections, which was a concern to Netflix and others in the rapidly growing streaming-TV industry.
Comcast was not the only company to have its ambitions thwarted by competition regulators this week.
A merger between Applied Materials, which is based in California, and Tokyo Electron that would have created the world’s biggest producer of chipmaking-equipment was called off because of antitrust concerns in America.
Apple sold more iPhones in China than in America for the first time in the latest quarter, which helped push net profit up to $13. billion.
In a now familiar tale, Samsung reported another drop in quarterly profit, to 4. trillion won ($4. billion), as it continued to be squeezed in the smartphone market between Apple and lower-cost Chinese rivals.
BP kicked off the earnings season for big oil firms, reporting a profit of $2. billion for the first quarter.
This was 20% lower than in the same period a year earlier, when Brent crude averaged $108 a barrel, compared with $54 in the first three months of 2015.
It was either that or Walmart Ben Bernanke, who retired as chairman of the Federal Reserve in 2014, has joined the ranks of workers with multiple part-time jobs.
Having already taken a position at Citadel, a hedge fund, this week he j oined pimco, an investment firm, as a senior adviser.
Despite the risk on Europe, the coalition led hy David Cameron should have a second term B ritain is a midsized island with outsized influence.
Its parliamentary tradition, the City’s global role, the union of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, membership of the European Union and a history of leading revolutions in economic policy mean that British elections matter beyond Britain’s shores.
But few have mattered more than the one on May 7th, when all these things are at stake.
Though you would never know it from the campaigns’ petty squabbling, the country is heading for profound and potentially irrevocable change.
The Tories have promised to renegotiate Britain’s relations with the eu and put the result to an in/out referendum on membership by the end of 2017.
Meanwhile Ed Miliband, Labour’s leader, wants to remake British capitalism in pursuit of a fairer society.
If he had his way, he would be the most economically radical premier since Margaret Thatcher.
A balance of risks If the stakes are high, the trade-offs are uncomfortable, at least for this newspaper.
In 2010 we endorsed David Cameron, the Tory leader, seeing in him a willingness to tackle a yawning budget deficit and an ever-expanding state.
The Tories’ Europhobia, which we regretted last time, could now do grave damage.
A British exit from the eu would be a disaster, for both Britain and Europe.
But such is the suspicion many Britons feel towards Brussels that a referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU is probably inevitable at some point.
The Lib Dems share our welcoming attitude towards immigrants and are keen to reform the voting system.
The electorate, and this newspaper, therefore face a choice between a Conservative-dominated government and a Labour-dominated one.
Despite the risk on Europe, the better choice is Mr Cameron’s Conservatives.
Our decision is based on the economy, where the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition has a stronger record than many realise and where Labour poses a greater risk.
The budget deficit, at 5% of gdp, is still the second-highest in the 07.
And although employment is high, living standards have suffered and productivity is weak.
The Tories have made this squeeze on British living standards more painful, particularly for young people.
They have protected pensioners from budget cuts and showered them with tax giveaways, forcing bigger sacrifices elsewhere.
A failure to boost housing supply has led to soaring prices, also hitting the young.
Some of the Tories’ election promises-to spare houses worth up to £im from inheritance tax and to sell social housing at a discount-are economically indefensible vote-buying gestures that will only add to the unfairness.
The coalition has cut the deficit more pragmatically than it admits and more progressively than its critics allow.
Though the poorest Britons have been hit hard by spending cuts, the richestio% have born the greatest burden of extra taxes.
Eull-time workers earning the minimum wage pay a third as much income tax as in 2010.
Government spending has fallen from 45-7% of gdp in 2010 to 40.7%, yet public satisfaction with the police and other services has gone up.
Although almost im public-sector jobs have been cut, Britain has a higher share of people in work than ever before.
Erom extra competition in education (with new free schools and academies) to the overhaul of the benefits system, public services are being revitalised.
Some innovations have failed, including a rejigging of the National Health Service , but Britain’s reform of the state has been energetic and promising.
And lastly, in the short term, Britain’s weak productivity is the corollary of a jobs-rich, squeezed-wage recovery.
Wage stagnation, as our briefing explains , is not an exclusively British malaise.
It is also preferable, both in economic efficiency and social equity, to the Erench or Italian disease of mass joblessness.
Better to recover from a financial crash and deep recession with a flexible labour market in which wages adjust than through unemployment.
Britain will be a model for Europe if the Tories can boost productivity-and they aim to do so by improving schools and infrastructure, giving power and money to cities and investing in science.
Statism masquerading as progressivism Labour has a different way to tackle what it calls the “crisis” in living standards.
Mr Miliband also promises deficit reduction, and at a pace that makes more macroeconomic sense than the Tories’ plan-though his numbers are vaguer, and Labour’s record makes them harder to believe.
Labour plans tax increases for the wealthy, including raising the top rate of tax back to 50%, from 45%, and imposing a “mansion tax” on houses worth more than £2m.
But, taken ►► 10 Leaders ► together, these plans risk chasing away the most enterprising, particularly the footloose global talent that London attracts.
Mr Miliband believes that living standards are squeezed because markets are rigged-and that the government can step in to fix them.
He would freeze prices while “reviewing” energy markets, clamp down on the most flexible “zero-hour” labour contracts and limit rent rises.
Along with this suspicion of private markets is an aversion to competition in the public sector, leading to proposals for, say, a cap on profit margins when private companies contract to provide services for the nhs.
Mr Miliband is fond of comparing his progressivism to that of Teddy Roosevelt, America’s trustbusting president.
Rather than using the state to boost comThe Economist May 2nd 2015 petition, Mr Miliband wants a heavier state hand in marketswhich betrays an ill-founded faith in the ingenuity and wisdom of government.
Even a brief, limited intervention can cast a lasting pall over investment and enterprise-witness the 75% income-tax rate of France’s president, Francois Hollande.
The danger is all the greater because a Labour government looks fated to depend on the snp, which leans strongly to the left.
On May yth voters must weigh the certainty of economic damage under Labour against the possibility of a costly eu exit under the Tories.
On that calculus, the best hope for Britain is with a continuation of a Conservative-led coalition.
In America and the other rich countries that fought by its side, the campaign meant strict laws and harsh sentences for small-time dealers and addicts.
In the poor, chaotic countries that supplied their cocaine and heroin, it meant uprooting and spraying coca and poppy crops, and arming and training security forces.
Billions of wasted dollars and many destroyed lives later, illegal drugs are still available, and the anti-drug warriors are wearying.
In America and western Europe addiction is increasingly seen as an illness.
Several countries may follow Portugal, which no longer treats drug use as a crime.
Echoing Nixon, China’s president has called for “forceful measures to wipe out”; his Indonesian counterpart has declared drugs a “national emergency”, and in January sent six traffickers to a firing squad.
This week Indonesia executed eight more, despite international pleas for clemency.
Iran is executing five times as many drug-smugglers as it did a few years ago.
Russia is arguing for the spraying of opium-poppy fields in Afghanistan, and is trying to get its neighbours to follow it in banning methadone, an opioid used to wean heroin addicts off their fix.
Earlier this year China lobbied the UN’s drug-control body to place tighter restrictions on ketamine, an anaesthetic, though it failed-for now, at least.
Prohibition suits criminal gangs, which enjoy exclusive control of a global market worth roughly $300 billion annually.
It is also convenient for corrupt politicians and officials, who can extract rents for turning a blind eye.
Several of those whom Indonesia executed this week claimed that judges offered them clemency in exchange for huge bribes.
After the Caribbean cocaine-trafficking route was sealed, new, bloodier ones sprang open in Mexico, and then in Central America.
A shortage of one drug caused by a big seizure seldom lasted long; in the meantime addicts turned to alternatives, sometimes more dangerous ones.
The drug war turned Latin American “cartels” into bands of sadistic, well-financed killers whose reach extended into governments, security forces, judiciaries and jails.
Meanwhile, rules meant to stop opioids leaking to the black market have left the innocent to die in avoidable pain.
Multiple-sclerosis sufferers and cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy have been denied the relief that cannabis can bring.
But nobody knows, because drug laws have made trials close to impossible.
A safe, orally administered anaesthetic, it can be used outside hospitals, even for caesarean sections and amputations.
If China succeeds in tightening restrictions on the drug, poor people in countries with weak health systems will suffer and even die unnecessarily.
A better prescription In the West few politicians have been ready to admit the drug war’s failure-even as they quietly moderate their policy.
They need to be honest with their own voters about the misery it has caused.
Only then can they make a good case to the rest of the world that drug addicts need treatment, not prison, and that supply should be managed, not suppressed.
A un meeting next year to take a fresh look at the international conventions that shape national drug laws would be an excellent place to start.
In the past few months these fears have been amplified by satellite pictures showing Chinese barges pouring sand onto disputed reefs, in order to turn them into islands.
On several of these remote outcrops, unsuited to civilian habitation, China appears to be building airstrips and harbours to accommodate jets and warships.
With this show of military force, China is asserting a longstanding, if outrageous, claim to ownership of virtually the entire sea.
China still claims to believe in settling territorial disputes by diplomacy.
Yet, by going ahead and planting its flags, it is ignoring the protests of its neighbours, not to mention America.
This change is even more unsettling, given that for years China has been trying to win friends in South-East Asia.
The ten-country Association of South-East Asian Nations is usually reluctant to criticise the giant next door.
And in Washington, standing next to Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, President Barack Obama said that “real tensions” had arisen in the South China Sea and that China’s muscle-flexing was “the wrong way” to go about things.
There has always been a risk that rivalries in the South China Sea could flare into military conflict.
In 2002 China and ASEAN agreed that disputants should resolve differences peacefully, “exercise self-restraint” and adopt a formal code of conduct for their activities.
The Philippines, fed up with its obduracy, has challenged the basis of its territorial claims before a UN-backed tribunal.
If it sticks together, it stands a better chance of persuading China to embrace a code of conduct.
But asean is weak and will become weaker if its largest member, Indonesia, fails to play a leading role-as may happen under the country’s new president, Joko Widodo Although China has signed up to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, which sets the rules for territorial claims, America has yet to ratify it.
Greening the way to peace Security is not the only concern in the South China Sea.
An ecological catastrophe is taking place, as reclamation destroys reefs, agricultural and industrial run-off poisons the water and overfishing depletes fish stocks.
The littoral states ought to be working together to manage the sea, but the dispute over sovereignty fosters the fear that any collaboration will be taken as a concession.
If they are to save the sea, the regional states must urgently put aside their differences.
Indeed, if they could only co-operate over the environment, they might just find the territorial disputes easier to settle, too.
So they cannot formally adopt each other’s children and there is no guarantee, if one of them dies, that the rest of the family will be allowed to stay together.
But after Mr DeKoe, a soldier, finished serving in Afghanistan, the couple moved to Tennessee, which does not recognise their union.
Both couples are suing to have their states’ bans on same-sex marriage struck down.
Many expect the justices to make gay marriage legal throughout America.
Marriage has long been a matter for the states to regulate, not the federal government.
In several liberal states lawmakers have given the go-ahead to same-sex unions; in conservative states they have not.
If voters do not like this outcome, they are free to elect different politicians.
If advocates of gay marriage want to rewrite the rules of an ancient institution in Michigan or Tennessee, they should persuade Michiganders and Tennesseans of the justice of their cause, rather than relying on the courts to overrule the will of the people.
In general, big social controversies are better settled democratically than by judicial fiat.
However, the court’s first duty is to uphold the constitution, ►► I Up and up Americans saying they favour same-sex marriage, % 1996 2000 05 60 40 20 0 12 Leaders The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► which means striking down laws that violate it.
In 1973, for example, when abortion was legal in some states but not in others, the court ruled in Roe v Wade that it should be legal everywhere, citing a right to privacy that is nowhere mentioned in the constitution.
This newspaper favours legal abortion, but in Roe the justices invented the law rather than interpreting it, substituting their preferences for those of voters.
That power-grab has poisoned the debate on abortion in America ever since.
Opponents of same-sex marriage worry that the court is planning to do the same thing again.
Limiting marriage to heterosexuals plainly denies such equality to gay people.
So the court should strike down all remaining bans on same-sex marriage.
But the backlash will be nothing like as severe or long-lasting as the one that followed Roe V Wade.
The right to be smug and boring Some Republicans in Congress are threatening to cut funds for any federal enforcement of a court ruling they do not like, but they will not get far.
Indeed, many in their party will be glad to see the issue taken out of their hands, for they know this is a battle they will lose sooner or later.
Public opinion has changed fast, and in a relentlessly liberal direction.
The most religious and conservative states are now less hostile to gay marriage than the most secular, liberal ones were a decade ago.
With luck, they will reach a decision they will not be ashamed to explain to their grandchildren.
The country’s stockmarket is just 3% of the world’s total, down from 5% a decade ago.
An American activist fund, psam, has just mauled Vivendi, a media firm.
Flagging Gallic contenders, among them Alstom , Alcatel and Lafarge , are being bought by foreigners.
Peugeot has sold a stake to Dongfeng, a carmaker from Wuhan that doubtless hopes to take control eventually.
Club Med, a holiday firm managed by the son of a French president, is now in the hands of a billionaire who began by selling bread in Shanghai.
Enter, stage left, the French government, which has legislated to strong-arm firms to give souped-up voting rights to loyal shareholders.
It reckons this will protect firms from speculators and raiders, and allow them to punch above their weight.
A revolutionary idea The “Florange law” was passed in 2014 and will come fully into force in March 2016.
Shareholders who have owned stock in a listed French company for more than two years will then see their voting rights double.
First, it will add clout to an elite of insiders whose record is mediocre.
Two-thirds of firms in the CAC-40 index have a long-standing anchor investorusually the state, a family or a mogul.
The government will probably get more sway over Renault, to the irritation of its boss, Carlos Ghosn.
Supporters say that such anchor investors allow firms to plan for the long run.
Google, for example, is controlled by its founders and can ignore Wall Street’s whims.
Orange (formerly France Telecom) and Bouygues, a conglomerate, are protected by the state and a family respectively and have drifted since the 1990s.
Bosses in Italy are adept at creating fiddly capital structures that fortify their control and feeble at building competitive multinationals.
Second, France is attempting to impose double voting rights as a default option.
One-share-one-vote is not a divine right; nor is a wholly free market for takeovers.
Firms should be allowed to issue whatever securities they want-though, if they protect themselves, they will pay a higher cost of capital and may perform worse.
Even countries that think an open approach to ownership breeds more ruthless and valuable firms will block deals that genuinely threaten the public interest.
But when a country systematically tries to enforce unequal shareholder rights (and even worse, does so on already-listed firms) there are high costs.
The higher cost of capital will apply to all French firms; their valuations will be lower than their peers’ in investor-friendly places; and they will find it harder to issue shares to pay for expansion or takeovers.
Actually, the evidence is that internet voting does not increase voter participation.
A recent study in British Columbia concluded that it has increased turnout in some elections, but when other factors such as the closeness of the race and a spike in interest in particular contests are taken into account, internet voting does not generally cause nonvoters to participate.
In a recent election in New South Wales, Australia, 66,000 people voted online before a security hole in the system was discovered and patched.
No one knows if those votes were tampered with, since it is impossible to determine whether or not the electronic versions of the ballots accurately reflect the will of those 66,000 people.
Voters’ computers can also be targeted by election-rigging malware that could modify their selections without their knowledge.
The idea that election officials can protect their computing systems from attacks when large organisations such as Google and the Pentagon are unable to do so is ludicrous.
There is a consensus within the computer-security industry that all the current online-voting systems are insecure and are subject to hacking.
BARBARA SIMONS Chair Verified Voting San Francisco It was disappointing to see The Economist recommend replicating Estonia’s online-voting process.
A hacked election, or worse still, an election in which online voters buy and sell votes, would be a disaster for democratic legitimacy.
Even in this digital era, the secret paper-ballot is still the way to go.
KEVIN MCDOUGALD Winnipeg, Canada Rescuing migrants at sea Your leader on “Europe’s boat people” contains sound analysis of the crisis in the Mediterranean and the lack of action by European Union states.
But your suggestion, under the heading “The cruel seafarers”, that merchant ships routinely turn their radios off to avoid rescuing migrants is an unacceptable slur, given that almost 1,000 commercial ships have already been involved in the rescue of 40,000 distressed people from small boats, at considerable risk to the seafarers concerned.
The obligation to come to the aid of anyone in distress at sea, whatever the circumstance, runs very deep in our industry.
The source of your unsubstantiated claim does the world’s merchant seafarers a great disservice.
In his early years as prime minister Mr Najib set out a vision of a diverse and united country under his “iMalaysia” liberal economic plan that also promised to tackle corruption.
But after six years we are witnessing the creeping return of discriminatory ethnic-based economic policies.
Mr Najib made glorious promises of reform, but he forgot to transform his own party and it has now become a big obstacle to his plans.
Since enacting the UMNO-led New Economic Policy in 1971, the party has made an explicit policy of favouring ethnic Malays through affirmative action in everything from education to public-sector jobs.
Even private-sector ipos have not been left untouched, with 30% of shares being set aside for Bumiputras.
As such, suspicion and mistrust of the umno among Malaysia’s ethnic Chinese and Indian minorities runs deep, and is unlikely to be overcome unless the party makes a radical break with its past and advances a Malaysia that treats all its citizens fairly and sees them as equals.
If reiteration of the truth were all that was required, there would have been no post-referendum bounce for the nationalists.
A recent survey commissioned by Scotland In Union found that 14% of Scots are voting tactically.
Add those who would back a leading non-SNP candidate anyway, and we might just be spared the outcome which many want to avoid.
British politics is littered with wouldhave-beens who were arguably better than those who eventually became party leaders, but who lacked the spark or organisation needed.
Its mandate and vision are to ensure that people everywhere have access to the essential medicines and health products that they need; that the medicines and products are safe, effective and of assured quality; and that they are prescribed and used rationally, and affordable to the health systems and patients.
Observe* the Odgers Berndtson Global Magazine Gartenstrasse t9* 8002 Zurich.
UNITAID catalyzes improvements for the larger response through forward -looiung and time'limited investments to increase access to belter, more effecbve and more affordable solutions.
These can include price reductions, improvements in quality and supply, and the introduction of innovative products suitable For the populations in need.
UNITAID has a unique funding model, based on an air ticket levy and long-terTn contributions from governments that enable steady, reliable and sizeable hjndir>g.
Since its establish nnent in 200S, UNITAID has received $2. billion of contnbiitions from donors.
The organisation currently has a portfolio of 23 active grants across the three diseases in more than 90 counliies.
DIRECTOR, OPERATIONS • Leads and manages UNiTAiO's Operations department in the development and implementation of grants, bi^ng of partnarships, and the management of risk.
DIRECTOR, STRATEGY 8 RESULTS • Leads and manages UNiTAlO's Strategy 4 Results department and IS responsible for leading the strategic approach arvd identification of innovative global health interventione. and for corttributing to the developnnent and evaluation of a complex portfolio of grants.
Headquartered in British Columbia, Canada, COL promotes innovation and works with national and international partners to facilitate learning in support of development goals.
This three-year initial appointment is renewable for a further term by mutual agreement.
The person must be a citizen of a Commonwealth country, with the ability to work with governments, multilateral organisations and with people from different cultural backgrounds.
A full job description is displayed on COL’s web site at www.col. org/opportunities.
Interested applicants must provide a resume and cover letter highlighting their professional background.
The E(B group has been a key partner in unlocking liquidity for European investment projects since the onset of the crisis, providing more than EUR SOObn since 2007.
As a resuft, we are growing rapidly and are keen to recruit qualified and highly motivated people to help us take initiative, seize opportunities and share expertise, to ensure we make the right investment decisions.
To everyone. ...like sustainable energy, dependable transport, innovation and entrepreneurship.
We promote and value diversity and inclusion among our staff and candidates, irrespective of their gender, age, nationality, race, culture, education and experience, religious beliefs, sexual orientation or disability.
The Economist May 2nd 2015 Executive Focus ca<|^GLOBaL> BANKING ' , INSURANCE. lEGAl & FINANCE The African Export-Import Bank is a pan-African Multilateral financial institution established in 1993, for the purpose of financing and promoting intra and extra African trade.
We are seeking to nn the position of Director, OfHce or Communications at the D2 level, based at our Headquarters In Rome, Italy.
Cor^tructive, open and able to develop and empower staff to communicate strateglCBlIy and effectivelv.
E^ead Technical Specialist Rural Markets and Evnierprises, P-S, Policy and Technical Advisory Division.
IS the corporate agenda, by providing technical advice throughout the project cycle on issues related to the development of rural small and medium-si/ed enterprises and the promotion of publicprivate partnerships in the agricultural /rural sector ItAl) offers a competitive remuneration .and benefits package that includes tax-free salary, de|iendency allowance education grant up to university level, medical and group life Insurance home leave and pension plan.
II AD is committed to achieving diversity and is seeking a balanced workforce from its Member States, Women are particularly encoumged to apply.
The Global Director, Human Resources is a seasoned global leader with experience in managing a diverse human capital population and capable of working effectively across borders, languages, cultures and working conditions.
The successful candidate should have a proven track record in Executive Leadership, Talent Selection, Development & Retention, HR Infrastructure and Performance Management, Compliance and Relationship management.
This position is part of lUCN's Leadership Team residing in Gland, Switzerland with regular international travel, when required.
Reporting to the Associate Dean of Executive Education, the Director of Custom Prograrnmes {DCPJ will lead client devetopment, strategic account management and income growth whitsi sustaining quality and volume at a level that few other business schools in Europe can match.
Candidates will be successful leaders with records of setting and implerTrenting strategy, building businesses, growing and retaining high pedorming teams and pfDvidir>g high impact, high quality executive education and/or leadership advisory services to multifkatior^l clients.
We seek highly regarded arxJ trusted advisors working at board level, with the agility arxJ appetite to deploy their core skills in a world-class academic community.
Candidates could come from a business schcxil, major cor^ultancy firm, corporate university and/or executive recruitment firm with experience in adjacent or similar fields.
This is a full-time appointment and will be made by Oxford Said Business School Limited.
Thus, the JDBG Is searching for a strategic Executive leader for the most senior position of Ehe consolidated private sector development entity, that of IK General Manager.
Under the direction of the Board of Executive Directors and the supervision of the Chairman of the Board of the IIC, who Is also the IDB President, the ItC General Manager Irnplernents the NCs business and development objectives and strategy.
The General Marrager Is responsible for the day-to-day business of the IIC. and Is responsible for implementing the strategic direction and long term vision for the institution while maximizing development Impact and ensuring financial sustainability.
S/he provides executive leadership and policy direction to the organization and supports the Chairman of the Board who represents It vts-l-vls its shareholders.
S/he oversees all IIC operations, forges partnerships and maximizes synergies with the I DBG ar^d externally.
The ideal candidate Is a seasoned executive with experience In Latin America and the Caribbean , who has a strong track record of success as a CEO, COD, or equivalent of an organization with similar scale and complexity, with excellent stature and slarvdlng In the field and relevant professional communities.
Proven track record of IS* years of relevant experience at a slgnlfkant public or private corporation, financial and/or development Institution, or similar enterprise required.
Excellent oral and written professional proficiency In English and Spanish required, as well as advanced degree tri finance, business admlnlstratfon, economics, or relevant field.
Extensive understanding of the role of the private sector in developmerrt. public policy, development finance, and financial and operational risk on a global scale is sought.
Also required Is an understanding of the multilateral role as a partner and catalyst In private and public sector development.
Deadline for appitcatlanst 22 Hay, 2015, The SIC offers a d/verse and itKloiivt wofk eov/ronmenf.
Extractive H ■ H Industries H H H TranspariflfKy ■ ■ ■ Initlatfvw Chairperson Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative With almost 50 countries implementing the EITI across all major continents, the EITI has become the pre-eminent global standard for the governance of extractive resources.
This is an outstanding opportunity to lead a high-level Board that seeks to ensure that natural resource wealth becomes a key engine for sustainable growth for economic development and poverty reduction.
S/he seeks to maintain collaborative relationships between members and key participants, including governments, companies, civil society, and oversees, on behalf of the Board, the work of the Secretariat.
The term of the Chair is the three year period between ordinary Members' meetings, at which the whole Board is appointed.
Ability to moderate a large meeting effectively and build consensus between shareholder groups.
Availability to travel both short and long-haul minimum 2 days per month.
The previous Chairs have worked pro-bono but alternative arrangements could be considered.
A dedicated office including an executive assistant and necessary office and communications equipment could be considered.
More details, including liow to state interest, are available from Eddie Ricli via ericli@eiti.org.
Join m thi# asthIot rol* based ol Muncfui^iter Airport, and you'll p*l kOTRS of th* mosi inf|y#Fitiai ord-innavoti^T; strgt ^ pej in jrte srtdiiistry.
Yoa'II creot^tjraiyfl* ckrF* lorword our framework, evolve otir+rtrnt-Hne processes andmakc busmese-defintog dedskms wk#n ii matteft.
They may struggle to improve things-and could make them worse A ccording to the rich world’s politiLcians, economics has a new villain.
In America workers have been demonstrating for higher pay and stronger union rights in the profitable but poorly paying food industry.
In Japan Shinzo Abe has sworn to lift salaries, and cajoles and threatens Japanese bosses to deliver on his promise.
In most places the recession that followed the financial crisis had dire effects on wages.
Despite five years of growth American real wages are still 1.2% below what they were at the beginning of 2009.
In Britain, real wages fell every year between 2009 and 2014, the longest decline since the mid-i8oos.
Germany, a haven during the euro-zone crisis, has done better, but wages are still 2.4% below their 2008 level.
While there are exceptionsmedian pay has risen since 2008 in Canada and France-these have generally been bad years for wages.
Across the G7 group of rich countries household consumption ranges from 55% to 68% of gdp.
While it makes sense for an individual boss to hold down pay, low pay across the economy as a whole threatens to put a lid on the growth that one would otherwise expect after a recession.
If it does not there’s a chance it will be because households are again borrowing to spend in an unsustainable way.
But if there is good reason to be worried about wages, the political heat also has a concerning side.
To design sound policies it is vital to understand why wages have stopped rising, what the implications of a flat-wage world would be, and the likely impact of pay-propelling policies.
But economics is still only just getting to grips with these questions.
And of the share that goes to labour, more and more has been going to the people who earn the highest salaries, exacerbating the problem for the rest.
Scholars seeking to explain this decline in the labour share reckon a number of big forces are at work.
One is that the income from capital-especially from housinghas been increasing more than the income from labour.
Another is that, in many industries, capital goods have become a lot cheaper and/or better.
ONS; OECD; BLS; Federal Reserve; Insee ► isting machines get cheaper or because new ones can do more-reduce demand for labour.
The usual assumption is that once unemployment gets below a certain rate, idle labour becomes scarce and competition to hire already employed workers heats up.
As firms outbid each other for talent, new workers get better starter salaries and valued staff secure juicy raises.
Estimating the unemployment rate at which wage-driven inflation kicks in the nairu (non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment)-is part of the core business of central banks.
Matching quandaries Eollowing a major recession, the nairu often goes up.
Periods of unemployment have lingering effects on workers, from a loss of vim to clinical depression.
Time out of work can mean skills dwindle or become mismatched to the needs of the market; the skills needed by industries that flourish in the recovery may differ from those central to the industries which laid people off in the slump.
OECD presence on the unemployment rolls thus does little to hold down wages.
So after a big crisis the nairu rises; inflation should kick in sooner rather than later.
But despite the fact that joblessness has fallen by more than two percentage points since then, median hourly wages were the same in the first quarter of 2015 as a year earlier.
And there is evidence that realterms wages might now be shaking off their sloth.
The latest British data show average salaries up by 1.7% in a year; with inflation close to zero this is a decent real-terms rise.
If this continues as unemployment falls it would mean a return to pre-crash normality, with sustained wage inflation eventually triggering central-bank interest-rate hikes.
There is, though, another possibility; that the recent hints of a wages bump are largely an artefact of unexpectedly low inflation, and that the underlying wage stagnation continues.
Average pay data in America and Britain may be hiding the continuing plight of the median worker behind the success of the most sought after.
It may be that the damage this recession did to the labour market-the loss of skills and the mismatch between industries where workers have experience and those where there are vacancies-is being expressed not in the form of long-term unemployment but as lasting low pay.
If that is true, and low pay locks in, sustained inflation might not return even with low rates of unemployment.
That labour-market shift would chart a very different course for central banks, which would keep rates low.
One likely factor is that, in many places, more flexible labour contracts make it easier to fill posts without raising wages.
In Germany “mini jobs”-positions with pay under €400 per monthare rocketing.
In Britain, “zero hours” contracts, in which neither employer nor employee commits to a fixed number of hours, have been becoming more common.
By making it easier to fire workers these contracts aim to take the worry out of hiring.
Not for the long haul The ever larger “staffing industry” may be having a similar effect.
It is important across a much wider swathe of the economy than is often realised; having started out in the 1960s supplying office temps, today temping companies like Kelly Services, Adecco and Randstad mainly supply light manufacturing and industrial workers.
In 2013 Kelly Services was America’s secondlargest private-sector employer, after Walmart, with 750,000 staff America’s 2.9m temps account for 2% of its jobs.
In Japan, once the land of the shushin koyd, or job for life, transient employment is ever more common; in 2014 Recruit, the coun►► 20 Briefing The economics of Low wages The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► try’s largest temp agency, listed for $19 billion on the Tokyo stock exchange.
But labour aggregators that compete for business on the basis of helping lower clients’ staff costs have an incentive to keep pay low.
In 2014 a report by Rebecca Smith and Claire McKenna of the National Employment Law Project, an American lobby group, claims that staffing agencies cut temps’ bargaining power.
Across the Gy politicians are mulling three ways to overcome the problems low pay poses.
The first and least appealing is re-regulating the labour market so as to limit flexibility.
In Germany trade unions are critical of mini jobs, arguing that they cannibalise higher-paying ones.
The evidence suggests that this is not the case; mini jobs are growing fastest in industries where full-time jobs are up strongly too, according to the lAB, a government research institute.
For one thing many workers like the twoway flexibility temping provides.
Temping is popular with some Japanese workers, allowing women with young children and retired workers seeking a pension top-up to enter the workforce.
And making the market less flexible raises the risk that an economic downturn will cause mass layoffs.
France has the Gy’s least flexible labour market, and a 10% unemployment rate.
Although politicians are right to ensure that work pays, the hard truth is that in a wounded economy a low-paying job is better than none at all.
In 2010 a worker in Britain earning the minimum wage-then £5.93 per hour-was liable for tax on £5,900 of the £12,300 he would have earned that year.
Today the equivalent total is £13,520 , but increases in the tax-free allowance mean only £2,920 is taxable.
The problem is that such tax cuts are untargeted, so the betterand indeed best-off gain too.
OECD; Istat; Destatis *2015 t2014 ^2012 instead, many countries use tax “credits”, like the Working Tax Credit in Britain or the Earned Income Tax Credit in America, which provide refunds to those on the lowest pay.
In Britain, for example, someone earning £13,100 or less receives a top-up of £1,960.
Since there is no cost to the employer any urge to hire remains robust.
Some worry that stingy bosses are able to rely on tax credits rather than raise pay.
Low-paid workers flipping burgers at McDonald’s, Burger King or Wendy’s, America’s largest fast-food chains, or those pulling pints at JD Wetherspoon, Britain’s biggest pub group, will be getting substantial tax credits.
Yet critics point out that these outfits are profitable and returning cash to their shareholders.
Walmart plans to raise its minimum wage from $ 7.25 to $9, a step which should be easily manageable given profits of $2y billion and dividends of $6 billion in 2014.
Indeed it may pay for itself through reduced churn and better motivation; studies of Britain’s economy find that lEvarsjtfF Temporary solutions higher pay helps firms retain workers.
Two major outlays-tax credits and food stamps ($71 billion)-aim to pep up purchasing power directly.
The other-Medicaid ($83 billion)-offsets the fact that companies provide less health insurance than they did, with coverage falling from 67% to 59% of workers between 2003 and 2013.
A third approach-higher minimum wages-would shift the burden back to firms.
In America, Barack Obama wants the minimum wage boosted by nearly 40% to $10.10.
Energy-price caps can stop firms investing in power stations, wage floors can stop them from hiring workers.
Yet most studies suggest that at moderate levels they do little to worsen unemployment.
American cities, free to set their own pay floors, often demand wages well above the federal minimum, and a 2011 study of San Francisco, Santa Fe and Washington, DC, by John Schmitt and David Rosnick of the Centre for Economic and Policy Research found that this had no impact on employment.
To that extent new political interest in stagnant and falling pay is welcome if it really boosts what poorly paid workers take home while not deterring job creation.
Hillary's money woes For daily analysis and debate on America, visit Economist.com/unitedstates Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamerica Equality before the law Showtime for gay marriage WASHINGTON, DC The Supreme Court ponders the biggest case of the decade N ineteen years after a district court first allowed gay couples to marry in Hawaii, the Supreme Court could be poised to do so nationwide.
If so, its ruling will be final, unlike the one in Hawaii, which was swiftly rejected by voters.
Everything hinges on how the nine justices respond to the two-and-a-half-hours of oral argument they heard on April 28th.
Over two-thirds of Americans live in states where same-sex marriage is legal.
Only 13 states still ban it, including Ohio, Michigan, Kentucky and Tennessee, which are parties to the four cases before the court collectively known as Obergefellv Hodges.
These cases involve gay couples who have suffered because the state where they live frowns on same-sex marriage.
Eor example, Pam and Nicole Yorksmith (pictured) were married in San Erancisco but live in Kentucky.
But the hospital did not recognise that a child can have two mothers, and Nicole’s name was already in their records.
So Pam was not allowed to give a parent’s permission for doctors to treat her child.
It took an hour for hospital staff to reach Nicole, as the baby coughed and wheezed.
Indeed, such stories are now common , as is inevitable when some states allow marriage equality and others don’t.
The argument for striking down state bans on same-sex marriage is simple.
This suggests that gay marriages performed legally in one state should be valid in others.
Arguing in favour of the state bans, John Bursch, a lawyer for Michigan, contended that changing the definition of wedlock would bring undesirable consequences for society.
A child who grows up “believing that marriage is about keeping that couple bound to that child forever” might fare better than a child whose parents’ marriage “is more about their emotional commitment to each other,” he said.
By opening marriage to same-sex couples, “you’re not taking anything away from heterosexual [onesl,” Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said.
Justice Stephen Breyer noted that plenty of gay couples have kids, and “a very high percent” of heterosexual couples do not or cannot procreate.
Gay marriage is illegal in Georgia, and only spouses can adopt a child jointly Ms Wurz’s son has two mothers, but only one is legally recognised.
If permission were needed to perform some tricky operation, she could not give it.
The harm that gay marriage might cause to heterosexual families is entirely theoretical.
The harm that continuing to ban it does to gay people is real and palpable.
Same-sex couples in the 13 states where they cannot marry are denied the rights and benefits that wedlock confers on straight couples.
They lose out on big tax breaks, inheritance rights, health insurance that covers spouses and the custody of jointly raised children if one of them dies.
Shelton Stroman and Christopher Inniss, a Georgian couple, are bringing up a son together.
Still, several justices seemed nervous about tinkering with an institution that has existed for millennia.
Others worried that it would be presumptuous for the court to overrule voters.
Perhaps it would be wiser to wait and see whether gay marriage does, in fact, cause some kind of harm, wondered Mr Breyer.
Donald Verrilli, the solicitor-general, delivered a thundering rebuke to such arguments.
It is “simply untenable”, he said, that “they can be required to wait” for equal protection.
A decision is expected in June. ■ ping enquiries about whether he was really the boy’s dad when he tried to pick him up early from school.
But the judge to whom he presented his case described this wish as a “mockery”, Mr Stroman recalls, adding that he walked out of the court and wept.
Horrified executives at the company’s national headquarters in Salt Lake City, Utah apologised and offered to print them without charge.
Georgia’s attorney-general, Sam Olens, has fought to defend the state’s ban on same-sex weddings.
But on April 22nd he said that if the Supreme Court overturns it, “it’s not time for criticism.
The economy Oil be damned The economic boost from lower oil prices is smaller than you might expect I N 2014 oil prices crashed.
The oil price does not much affect government spending, but has a big impact on the other three.
Bureau of Economic Analysis; Thomson Reuters Net exports have certainly been boosted by the lower oil price.
With the oil price roughly $60 below its peak, Americans now send $500m less abroad every day-or about $200 billion a year.
Add to this the lower price of domestically produced oil, and Americans have received a windfall, akin to a juicy tax cut.
But consumers are reluctant to splash out, perhaps because wage growth has been so miserable.
The monthly growth rate of retail sales-not including those at petrol stations-has stumbled in the past few months.
Investment in mining structures shrank at a 60% annualised rate in the first quarter of 2015, says Capital Economics, a consultancy-enough to subtract 0.8% from overall gdp growth.
In March Texas, an oil state that in recent years has seen rapid job growth, saw its largest month-on-month drop since 2009.
Indeed, at a meeting on April 29th it decided to keep interest rates at rock bottom, as it has done since late 2008.
In the past few weeks, however, the oil price has stopped falling, so this deflationary effect is wearing off.
Economists are left wondering how what seemed like such a big bonus for the American economy could have had so little effect.
Baltimore exploded into violence on the evening of April 27th after several days of largely peaceful protests against Mr Gray’s treatment.
Soon after the funeral, angry teenagers, some apparently stranded by a shutdown of the city’s transport network, began attacking a mall in the north-west of the city.
By sunset, large areas of West Baltimore had descended into lawlessness.
Groups of young men and women looted bars and corner shops, set fire to buildings and joyrode through the streets.
By the following morning, the National Guard, state police and cops from neighbouring counties had flooded the city to enforce a city wide overnight curfew.
The riots were the most dramatic unrest in a large American city since 2001.
Some see them as an outpouring of understandable rage at police brutality.
Others wonder how torching the local pharmacy could possibly be the answer to anything.
In the neighbourhood where much of the violence took place, a third of homes were already vacant and more than half of working-age residents do not have jobs.
The median household income is $25,000, less than half the national average.
More businesses will flee, making j obs even harder to find and groceries even more costly.
In Wonderland Liquors, a local store that was looted, volunteers sweep up the broken glass.
The store is insured but it will take time to reopen and premiums will probably soar.
Baltimore’s tragedy has intensified the national soul-searching about the relationship between African-Americans and the police that began with similar disturbances in Ferguson, Missouri last August.
Hillary Clinton called for an end to mass incarceration, for police officers to be equipped with body cameras and for reforms intended to rebuild trust in policing.
There, a newly arrived and more middle-class black population faced a mostly white police department and white city leaders who essentially treated them as a source of revenue by constantly fining them for minor infractions.
The mayor, Stephanie Rawlings-Blake, is a black Democrat; her police chief is black, and most police officers are non-white.
Even as thousands of cops in riot gear enforced a curfew on April 28th, police scanners reported carjackings, robberies and one murder-none of them connected to the protests.
In the aftermath of the riots, young men in the uniforms of the Bloods and Crips gave interviews claiming to have done a better j oh than the police of preventing looting.
As in many north-eastern and midwestern American cities, black migrants seeking industrial jobs in the 1950s and 1960s faced violence and racist housing policies which concentrated them into ghettos.
Middle-class whites fled, particularly after the riots that followed the murder of Martin Luther King in 1968.
In the 1970s deindustrialisation sucked away jobs; in the 1980s, heroin and crack cocaine filled their place.
As police adopted tough tactics to try to stop the drugs trade, violent crime instead flourished.
An investigation by the Baltimore Sun in September revealed that between 2011 and 2014 alone, the city paid out $5.7m to settle lawsuits over allegations of brutality.
One case was of an 87-year-old woman who was pushed over by a police officer after calling because her grandson had been shot.
In 2012 the fbi found 51 of the city’s cops involved in a corruption racket.
Under the orders of the then mayor Martin O’Malley (who now seems likely to run for president), the police adopted a “zero tolerance” strategy.
Few AfricanAmericans trust cops to enforce the law fairly, so many crimes are not reported, and police struggle to get witnesses to testify.
Graduation rates in the city’s public schools have climbed in recent years; a 60year population decline has finally been stemmed.
Alas, a few days of delirious mayhem could set the city back for a decade or more.
CREATING A DATA-DRIVEN, MOBILE WORKFORCE Takeshi Numoto Microsoft The evolving workplace Is an undeniable reality of global business today.
No longer constrained by office walls, employees expect to have access to the necessary tools, resources and information to be productive while working from any location — in a word; mobility.
To understand the potential, first consider the proliferation of connected devices.
Staggering Numbers While this number Is staggering on its own, the value ultimately comes down to empowering employees with anytime, anywhere tools that can help create actionable insights from the influx of data simultaneously generated and consumed by these devices.
Accomplishing this requires businesses to think of mobile and cloud as equal parts of a larger whole — a new world of cloud-based solutions that impact how we live and work.
Today, it's not just about phones, the band on your wrist or the billions of other Internet-connected devices,' says Takeshi Numoto, corporate vice president.
Companies can begin by consolidating their various structured and unstructured data sources.
Then, using business intelligence and advanced analytics, they can extract insights from that data to drive better customer experiences, improve produaion and operations, and lower costs.
Finally, companies can facilitate knowledge-sharing and collaboration by making data and analytics tools more accessible — tools that can uncover “small patterns"" in big data to drive innovation.
Bring Your Own Device However, Numoto cautions that data access and selfservice business intelligence are only part of the equation.
Microsoft's answers to these challenges include enterprise-mobility solutions, which can help businesses of any size manage identities — on nearly every type of device — with integrated data and application protection, as well as the 99.95% availability, tech suppoa round-the-clock service health monitoring and the scalability of Azure.
U With cloud and mobile technologies, businesses can help employees be productive from anywhere by connecting them to intelligence drawn from business applications and processes, as well as social media, loT and other sources/' Sponsored by ||H Microsoft Cloud This cloud open's dne stadium to The Microsoft Cloud empowers Real Madrid to create a more personal connection with every fan from Madrid to Mumbai.
Using Microsoft Azure, Dynamics CRM and Power Bl, the team can deliver a unique experience that ignites everyone’s passion as if they were all there.
This is the Microsoft Cloud learn more at microsoftcloud.com Microsoft Cloud 26 United States The Economist May 2nd 2015 Roland Fryer From the hood to Harvard A hotshot economist with lessons for Baltimore and other trouble spots W HEN Roland Fryer was a teenager, he hung out with a bad crowd.
Surrounded by drug dealers and getting into fights, he used to sell counterfeit handbags to make a bit of extra cash.
Asked by a friend where he would be at 30, he replied that he would probably be dead.
In fact, at that age, in 2008, he became the youngest African-American to win tenure as an economics professor at Harvard.
On April 24th the American Economic Association announced that he had won this year’s John Bates Clark medal-the profession’s second-highest honour after the Nobel prize.
His research has sought to explain why black children do so much worse in life than their white peers-and why relatively few have, like him, overcome their rough backgrounds.
One of his early studies asked why black kids do worse than whites at school.
He found that, after controlling for such things as income, there was no gap in kindergarten.
By the middle of third grade , they were 20% less likely than whites to be able to perform tasks such as multiplication.
One explanation, long dismissed as an urban myth, was that black pupils do not study hard because those who do are accused by their peers of “acting white”-and ostracised.
He measured how popular pupils were by asking them to name their friends.
To guard against fibbing, he counted a friendship as real only if both children named each other.
Black high-school students with good grades had fewer friends than those with mediocre ones.
Mr Fryer suggested offering small cash rewards to children who meet certain goals, such as memorising their times tables.
One of his experiments in Houston’s elementary schools showed that, for every 10% increase in incentive payments, pupils worked 8.7% harder.
Roly polymath Mr Fryer’s next challenge is to study racial inequality outside the classroom.
You have to show that they are more likely to shoot blacks than whites under the same circumstances.
It should be possible to use police data to control for things that might prompt a cop to open fire, such as whether a suspect was holding a gun when being arrested.
The results, Mr Fryer says, may help the police figure out how to reduce the death toll.
With Baltimore in flames and Ferguson still reeling from riots over police heavy-handedness, such dispassionate research is urgently needed.
When Rahm Emanuel, Chicago’s mayor, decided in 2013 to shut down 47 public schools that were halfempty and had atrocious results, he sparked protests that nearly cost him the next election.
Parents, teachers and activists held rallies and candlelight vigils to protest.
However, a new report from the Thomas Fordham Institute, a think-tank, may encourage future closures of bad schools, because it suggests that they are good for students.
Researchers looked at 23,000 displaced pupils from shut-down district and charter schools in eight Ohio cities between 2006 and 2012.
Critics argue that shutting schools destabilises and, in some cases, derails the academic progress of pupils.
Once a school had closed, most of the children ended up in better ones, where they eventually got higher grades.
Three years after the closure, children were found to have gained the equivalent of at least an extra month of learning in their new schools.
Those who went from a failing charter school to a high-performing one did even better, gaining 58 more days of learning in reading and 88 days in maths.
Nearly three-quarters of the children were black and more than 90% were poor.
The National Assessment of Educational Progress, which periodically tests sample-groups of America’s children on various subjects, this week released disappointing results for history, geography and civics for 13-year-olds.
Most did not understand time zones, and a quarter thought Canada was a dictatorship.
More than half thought that the government should guarantee everyone a job.
That was the wrong answer as far as the examiners were concerned, but perhaps an accurate reflection of what a lot of voters think.
After leading his disciples from Ohio, Illinois and Missouri in 1847, Brigham Young, the polygamist leader of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, chose a plain fringed by the snow-capped Wasatch mountains deep in the desert West as the place to found his Zion, Salt Lake City.
For the next 40 years the Mormons’ insistence on polygamy stopped their homeland being fully accepted into the United States; only after the practice was formally renounced in 1890 could the Utah Territory become a state.
And so it may seem a strange place to look for lessons for the rest of America.
Its governor, both senators and the entire congressional delegation are all Republicans.
In several aspects of policy, Utah is quietly forging a model of constructive Republicanism.
In March Utah’s state legislature passed a bill that banned discrimination in housing and employment on the ground of sexuality.
In the same session, the state also passed a bill which changed many drug offences from felonies to misdemeanours and redirected money towards treatment for the mentally ill and persistent drug users.
Over the past decade Utah has reduced by around 75% the number of people living permanently on the street, by giving them homes without first insisting that they quit alcohol or drugs or solve their mental-health problems.
This policy was controversial, says Gordon Walker, the head of Utah’s housing division.
On immigration, the state has long been fairly tolerant-and much more so than its neighbour Arizona.
In 2010, when Arizona passed a law compelling police officers to check immigration papers, Utah became the first in America to issue a special class of driving licence available to illegal immigrants who can prove their residency.
The state is also among 18 which allow certain illegal-immigrant students to claim in-state tuition benefits, and it enthusiastically takes in refugees under the federal resettlement programme.
This year the state passed a law reintroducing the firing squad for murderers.
It has not yet accepted Obamacare’s expansion of Medicaid, the federal-state health programme for the hard-up, though it may do soon.
Yet Utah is different, argues Spencer Cox, the state’s young lieutenant-governor.
Mr Cox reckons that Mormons, long persecuted themselves, are tolerant of other people’s opinions.
Because many serve overseas as missionaries, they are more open to foreigners, he says.
Whether that is true or not, the Mormon church has a direct influence on the state’s politics.
The state is 92% white; and yet, because Mormons marry young and have large families, it is the youngest state in America.
It also has the lowest level of income inequality and one of the lowest poverty rates.
In recent years Salt Lake City, which is a more liberal, less religious place than most of Utah, has become a magnet for finance and tech companies.
In other equally Republican-leaning places, such as Texas and the Deep South, politics is more raw and fiercely fought.
Some billionaires relish flying political chums around, which is even handier.
But sometimes, when all else fails, flights end up being cadged from frankly unsavoury jet-owners.
This does not matter much once a political leader has left office and hit the global-grandee circuit-a lucrative world of paid speeches, charity work and discreet consulting gigs.
The private-jet conundrum sheds light on a challenge facing Hillary Clinton.
Her husband Bill long ago passed through what might be termed the “money door”, cashing in his celebrity, eloquence and connections to become a rich man.
Unlike the Brits, who treat Tony Blair as a pariah these days, Americans do not necessarily think it outrageous that a former head of government should become rich.
Mr Clinton’s allies add that personal wealth holds little interest for him.
Given a pile of money, he might buy an expensive watch but that is about it, admirers maintain.
Mrs Clinton is described-to put it politely-as intently focused on her family’s financial security.
Even her friends thought this an unconvincing show of solidarity with the working stiff.
Meanwhile, news outlets posed awkward questions about her family’s pursuit of wealth since leaving the White House 15 years ago.
In particular she has been asked about the foreign governments and businesses that showered speaking fees, philanthropic donations and, indeed, private jet flights, on her husband and family-run charities while she served as secretary of state from 2009 to 2013.
The Untold Story of How and Why Foreign Governments and Businesses Helped Make Bill and Hillary Rich”, by Peter Schweizer.
Some of the most pointed concern donations made to the Clinton Foundation, the family’s philanthropic arm, by a group of Canadian businessmen at the same time as they struck politically sensitive deals to snap up uranium assets worldwide, including a fifth of America’s uranium reserves.
Their uranium holdings were later sold to the Russian state-a sale which required approval by the State Department led by Mrs Clinton.
Mrs Clinton’s campaign staff say there is not a “shred” of evidence that the former secretary of state used her office to help donors.
To be sure, no smoking gun has been found; but Clintonland sounds defensive.
The Clinton Foundation-which seeks to reduce childhood obesity, lower the cost of hiv drugs and other good things-has announced that while Mrs Clinton is running for office it will accept donations only from foreign governments that are already funding programmes.
This burst of interest in the Clinton family’s finances follows revelations about Mrs Clinton’s use of a private e-mail server throughout her time as secretary of state, allowing her to delete tens of thousands of e-mails as she saw fit rather than preserve them in government archives.
Mistakes were made Republicans say all this is evidence that the Clintons are calculating and corrupt.
Mitt Romney, the Republican presidential nominee in 2012, told conservative radio that he saw “every appearance that Hillary Clinton was bribed to grease the sale of, what, 20% of America’s uranium production to Russia,” and that e-mails were later erased to cover up the scandal.
Democrats loyal to the Clintons closed ranks, telling media outlets that partisans are confecting allegations out of nothing, and that all charges will prove unfounded.
Among diehards on the right and left, this latest fuss will probably change few minds.
The approximately 40% of Americans who would not dream of voting for Mrs Clinton will scorn her a little more.
But there are Americans whose support cannot be taken for granted by either party.
These include young people and minorities who only sometimes vote, as well as several million working-class whites who stayed at home in 2012 rather than vote for Mr Romney, an awkward plutocrat.
Extended discussion of the Clinton family’s wealth, and whether any of it was ill-gotten, is likely to exhaust and alienate such voters.
When they hear Mrs Clinton complain about bosses’ pay or money in politics, they will roll their eyes.
This problem will persist even if no vast scandals are unearthed by further digging into the Clinton Foundation, or indeed into the more than $ioom that the former first couple are estimated to have earned from speechifying.
America has spent years listening to the Clintons defending themselves against charges of greed, and of sticking to the letter rather than the spirit of rules and undertakings.
The prospect of another 18 months arguing about such things is not a happy one.
She is the Harvard-educated head of an ngo that uses analysis, statistics and cheeky social-media campaigns to agitate for clean government.
Instead of adopting the rabble-rousing tactics of the street, she is part of a movement of civilsociety wonks who are gaining big influence in Mexico.
In recent months, after the murder of 43 students in the south-western state of Guerrero in September and widespread allegations of corruption, these organisations have come into their own.
They have persuaded the government of Enrique Pena Nieto to go further than he originally wanted in a constitutional reform to tackle corruption.
In April ngos and think-tanks lobbied successfully for laws opening up greater access to government information.
And an education charity, Mexicanos Primero, headed by a member of a prominent industrial family, is taking legal action to force the interior ministry not to cave in to radical teachers who are opposed to a sweeping education reform.
The ngos’ methods include “name and shame” campaigns that play well on social media.
It shows in real time which states have and have not approved the anti-corruption reform that will, for the first time, subject them to federal audits.
Within a week of approval in the federal Congress on April 22nd, ten of the 32 states had ratified it.
Recently, two ngos, the Mexican Competitiveness Institute and Transparencia Mexicana, created a platform called Three out of Three, which encourages candidates in mid-term elections on June 7th to go beyond legal requirements and make public their assets, interests and proof of tax payments, imco’s head, Juan Pardinas, says the aim is to overcome a political credibility crisis in Mexico.
He urges voters to send tweets to candidates, offering to vote for them only if they provide the information.
Latin America's rural dream For daily analysis and debate on the Americas, visit Economist.com/americas this influence in a country where the technocratic elite used almost automatically to join the government.
Its mishandling of rescue efforts after the 1985 Mexico City earthquake produced an upsurge of grassroots activism.
Civil-society groups gained further prominence by fighting fraud during elections in the 1980s and 1990s, until the pri finally lost its 72-yearold grip on power in 2000.
Once Mexico had become more democratic, the American foundations that had bankrolled some of these ngos moved elsewhere, says Shannon O’Neil of the Council on Foreign Relations, an American think-tank.
But a new law in 2004 gave charities more access to government support and the tax authorities have slowly made it easier to make tax-deductible donations.
By one estimate, donors such as the Ford Foundation account for more than half the funding of large ngos.
After a lull, the number of ngos grew again as Mexico’s domestic security troubles increased in the late 2000s.
Some, supported by Mexican business groups, became highly effective in getting the government to deal with drug-related violence in such northern cities as Ciudad Juarez and Monterrey.
There was, however, a social split, says Juan Salgado of cide, a government research institute.
Because violent crime affected both rich and poor, well-heeled victim-support groups emerged with powerful government connections.
The grassroots anti-crime organisations tended to be poorer, more ideological and more focused on the causes of crime and on human rights.
They find a stronger echo in ►► 30 The Americas The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► street protests than in the government.
The grassroots organisations can be dismissive of their more technocratic brethren, labelling them neoliberal and government stooges.
Indeed, some of their leaders are graduates of itam, one of Mexico’s most prestigious universities, which spurns the ideological biases that afQict most others.
It instils an evidence-based approach to learning that often leads students to Ivy League universities in the United States.
The technocrats have a pragmatism that makes their agenda hard to pin down.
But it also campaigns against obesity, which is partly blamed on the food industry.
They also rely on mass movements to put the government on the defensive, as in the street protests last year against Mr Pena over the students’ deaths and over his wife’s role in a potential conflict-of-interest scandal.
Such incidents forced the government to come out of its bunker, says Luis Rubio, head of cidac, a think-tank.
He says the ngos’ job is not just to help write good laws but also to make sure they are implemented.
OTTAWA The opposition may end the longest winning streak in Canadian politics J IM PRENTICE had every reason to feel confident when he called an election for May 5th.
His Progressive Conservative party has governed Alberta without interruption since 1971.
Its victory would be a shock for a province that is, as one political scientist puts it, conservative in every sense of the word.
After several years growing faster than the national average, Alberta’s economy will barely expand this year and may even shrink.
Organisers of this summer’s Calgary Stampede, a wild-west jamboree, fret that corporate sponsors will serve hot dogs rather than steak.
The province is projecting deficits of almost C$5 billion ($4. billion) in this fiscal year and C$3 billion in the next one.
He called elections a year early because, he said, he needed a new mandate to enact such big tax increases.
The real reason may have been to avoid a vote next year, when the economy could be even weaker.
Mr Prentice’s tax plans have given new heart to Wildrose, which was founded in 2008 by disaffected Conservatives who wanted the government to rein in spending and taxes.
Hostility to tax increases seems to be the party’s only deeply held belief, but it resonates with Albertans.
By splitting the rightof-centre vote, Wildrose has created an opening to the ndp, which wants to raise taxes on companies and the rich.
They were in fact found in the lagoon where rowers will race. a big bank, he became premier in September after his predecessor was felled by scandal.
He wants to reduce Alberta’s dependence on oil and has tried to improve relations with indigenous people whose co-operation is needed if Alberta is to develop other natural resources.
But Mr Prentice has hurt himself with policy u-turns and campaign gaffes.
His government at first exempted religious institutions from a law obliging schools to tolerate clubs supporting gay students, then reversed itself, angering social conservatives.
The pollsters were wrong in 2012, when they predicted a Wildrose victory.
A three-month strike starting last year by workers in the judicial system further tarnished its image.
The Constitutional Court won their gratitude by securing access to health care and upholding the rights of 5m displaced people.
The Supreme Court prosecuted politicians who had colluded with right-wing paramilitary groups.
The Constitutional Court’s president, Jorge Pretelt, faces allegations that he solicited a bribe of 500m pesos to issue a ruling in favour of Fidupetrol, an oil company, in a dispute with the government.
Mr Pretelt denies the charge and has temporarily stepped down as the court’s president to defend himself before a congressional commission.
Two-thirds of Colombians say they mistrust the high courts, according to a poll taken in March, after news of the scandal broke.
Some critics called for the resignation of all high-court magistrates; others proposed a constitutional assembly to overhaul the judiciary.
The scandals should not lead Colombians to “go to extremes and demonise” the judiciary, he advised.
Instead, he added new provisions to a grab-bag constitutional reform bill, which was already making its way through Congress.
These would strip high-court judges of their role in choosing other senior officials, such as the comptroller-general, a government spending watchdog.
The reforms would also end the practice of judges from one high court naming judges on another, which encourages cronyism.
This does not address the biggest problems, says Jose Manuel Acevedo, a lawyer who leads sos Justice, a group that campaigns to make the judicial system more accessible and transparent.
These stem from a “crisis of values” among lawyers, prosecutors and judges.
One solution, he thinks, would be to require lawyers to pass a bar exam, as American lawyers must.
Mr Santos’s reform takes a first step, by providing for the creation of a bar that lawyers would have to j oin.
The government is holding peace talks with the farc, a leftist army, to end their half-century war.
If they reach agreement, the courts will have to consider whether to bring criminal charges against thousands of demobilised guerrillas.
So says Pilar Angel, one of three siblings who are the narrators of “La Oculta”, a new novel by Hector Abad Faciolince, one of Colombia’s leading writers.
Mr Abad’s finely crafted novel not only expounds its narrators’ contrasting attitudes towards sex, rural life and tradition in a modernising country, but also tells in fictional form the true story of an attempt to create a rural middle class in Colombia.
In doing so, it throws an evocative light on the enduring pull of the land in Latin America-and the undercurrent of violence that has gone with it.
Conflict over land is the region’s oldest story, dating to before the Iberian conquest.
This installed a uniquely unequal pattern of landholding, sustained by serfdom and slavery.
That lies at the root of the region’s inequality, and it made land reform one of the big ideological battles of the 20th century.
When it came, reform too often destroyed efficient farms without creating a workable alternative-and was too late to stop poor peasants from flooding into the cities.
In the 1850s two merchants to whom the government had granted the area in repayment of bonds gathered together young families and offered them plots in return for communal labour.
Unlike in Central America or Brazil, most of Colombia’s coffee has been grown by small and medium-sized proprietors.
The hills of Antioquia and the provinces to the south are studded with flowerdecked, brightly painted farmhouses.
For the past seven decades rural Colombia has seen persistent violence, partly a battle for land but mainly for plunder and ideology, farc guerrillas and kidnappers come to La Oculta, and then paramilitaries using chainsaws as murder weapons.
Since the 1980s some 5m Colombians have fled the land to escape threats or violence.
For centuries, they drew their identity and only hope of economic security from the land, the still-venerated pachamama of the Incas.
If they moved to the cities, it was because they wanted more than subsistence.
One reason for Latin America’s low rate of saving is its people’s preference for land, bricks and mortar.
Farming is rooted in Latin America’s past but it is also part of its future.
Although officially 76% of Latin Americans are urbanites, a study by the World Bank in 2005 found that 42% live outside big cities in what could be classed as the countryside.
Many countries have enjoyed agricultural revolutions in the past two decades, applying technology to commercial export farming.
There is scope for this to benefit smaller-scale farmers as well as agribusiness.
The main things missing are good transport, public services and security in the countryside.
In Peru a burst of rural roadbuilding and the spread of mobile phones are transforming poorer parts of the country.
Rural incomes rose by more than 7% a year betweeni994 and 2011, according to a study by Richard Webb, a former president of the country’s Central Bank.
That is also the biggest potential prize from peace talks between Colombia’s government and the farc.
Shield and spear For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit Economist.com/asia After Nepal's earthquake To the rescue DELHI AND KATHMANDU A 7.8-magnitude earthquake brings tragedy, and reveals political shortcomings A CLOUD of brown dust filled with rock .doves rose over Kathmandu, the Nepali capital, when the earthquake struck on April 25th.
As the Indian tectonic plate lurched three metres northward, the ground shook so violently that people struggled to stand.
The earthquake rattled windows in Delhi, India’s capital, 1,000 kilometres away.
More buildings fell down in Durbar square, a unesco world heritage site that is home to old temples.
But for the most part, the city’s glass-and-concrete structures stayed standing, despite notoriously poor enforcement of building codes.
Thanks to that, experts’ worst fears of a big earthquake flattening three-fifths of the capital and killing 100,000 were not borne out.
Most victims were in the Kathmandu valley, which has seen rapid and haphazard urban growth over the past couple of decades, partly because a civil war that ended in 2006 pushed villagers towards the capital.
The valley’s buildings are especially vulnerable since they rest on sediment layers that are prone to liquefaction.
Rebuilding the stricken areas could cost $10 billion-a huge bill for one of Asia’s poorest countries.
Three days after the quake, the roads from Kathmandu were thronged with people taking food and tents to nearby villages.
In Kavrepalanchok district villagers camped in fields under plastic sheets.
Two parents digging in the rubble for the body of their 16-month-old daughter said local police would not help.
Next door in Sindhupalchok district, every mud-and-stone house was cracked, and many had collapsed outright.
The government guesses that 530,000 houses were damaged in all, and over 70,000 destroyed.
The UN says 8m people in a population of nearly 30m are affected in some way.
The epicentre was 80km north-west of the capital, in a steep and mountainous area.
Unseasonal rain and cold, and continuing aftershocks, including one with a magnitude of 6.9, have left many ►► The Economist May 2nd 2015 Asia 33 ► survivors exposed.
On Mount Everest, east of Kathmandu, tremors set off an avalanche that crushed at leasti9 climbers and Sherpas.
Nothing puts off determined climbers, but a tourism industry that is vital to the economy looks to be in trouble.
In India the quake killed over 70 people, but concern was directed largely at the neighbour.
In a radio address, India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, vowed to “wipe the tears of every Nepali”, adding that Nepal’s pain was also India’s.
Millions of Nepali migrants live and work in India, sending remittances home.
He appears to be guiding the relief effort better than Nepal’s own leaders.
Mr Modi has twice visited Nepal since he came to office a year ago, after a gap of 17 years during which no Indian prime minister deigned to pay a bilateral visit.
And Nepal is a main beneficiary of India’s trebling of aid over the past three years, to 94 billion rupees a year.
After the quake China sent a rescue team and promised $3m in immediate aid.
Several countries and un agencies quickly promised financial and other help.
Indeed, so many donors rushed search-and-rescue teams, field hospitals, blankets, tents and medical equipment to the main airport in Kathmandu that it grew overwhelmed.
Rescue and immediate relief operations are now making way for more sustained help for the survivors.
Distributing materials for proper shelter and ensuring good sanitation are urgent priorities before the monsoon rains arrive in a couple of months.
The sowing season also starts soon, so distributing seeds and farm supplies is pressing.
Jamie McGoldrick, who leads the un in Nepal, worries that it is the most rural and remote areas, where the poorest, lowestcaste Nepalis live, that are at risk of neglect.
Though the needs of the countryside’s poor are greatest, the lion’s share of foreign attention and aid goes to Kathmandu, home to the political elite, the bulk of foreign workers and much of the country’s rich cultural heritage.
He sees bureaucratic rivalries as well as sloth as impediments to the country’s relief efforts.
Others point out that politicians have long been interested mainly in their own well-being, fruitlessly debating a new constitution for the past seven years while paying little attention to governing.
Effective local councils would be the most useful form of administration to have in place now.
Many are notorious for being unaccountable, corrupt and prejudiced towards the lowest castes.
Donors are in a quandary, wondering how much to trust questionable partners while rushing to help.
It is more readily thought of as a pit of instability than as a source of opportunity.
The IMF reckons that the economy will grow by 4.7% next year, the fastest rate in eight years.
Consumer prices rose by 2.5% in the year to March, the smallest increase for more than a decade.
Twice already this year the central bank has lowered its benchmark interest rate.
Compared with a year earlier, cement sales, which are a guide to how much construction is taking place, rose by 5.5% from July to March.
The country’s import bill can easily overwhelm the foreign-exchange earnings from textile exports and the remittances that Pakistanis working in the Middle East and Europe send home.
In 2013-14 Pakistan’s net import bill for oil came to $12. billion, or around 5% of gdp.
The money could be spent on things with more local content and give the economy a lift.
The government of Nawaz Sharif takes some credit for the economy’s new stability.
It has stuck to an imf programme agreed to in 2013, a few months after it came to power in Pakistan’s first-ever handover from one civilian government to another.
Electricity tariffs have been raised, and some unpaid bills collected, easing the cash burden on hard-pressed distribution companies.
Tax receipts have risen, albeit from pitiful levels, in response to efforts to broaden the base and cut exemptions.
A privatisation drive that stalled last June resumed in April, when the government sold its stake in Habib Bank, the country’s largest lender, for $1 billion.
Pakistan’s stockmarket has doubled in dollar terms since the start of 2012, thanks in large part to such foreign interest.
Listed companies are highly profitable, although in part because they often face too little competition.
Visitors to Pakistan are surprised to discover good roads and a strong business culture.
The country is mid-table in the World Bank’s ease-of-doing-business rankings, well above India.
But Pakistan needs sustained growth of 5-7% a year if it is markedly to cut poverty-at the last count, nearly a quarter of Pakistanis were below the poverty line.
There are doubts to whether Mr Sharif has the strength and authority to implement deeper reforms.
Despite a better electricity industry, power shortages remain a bugbear.
Big firms in textiles, which ►► 34 Asia The Economist May 2nd 2015 Australia and Indonesia Chill factor SYDNEY Drug executions strain relations T WO days before he was to die, Andrew Chan married his fiancee in his island prison on Nusa Kambangan.
Myuran Sukumaran, his fellow Australian on death row, spent his last days painting self-portraits and an Indonesian flag dripping with blood.
On April 29th the two men were executed by firing squad, along with four Nigerians, a Brazilian and an Indonesian.
A Filipina, who was also due to be executed, won a lastminute temporary reprieve.
Australia swiftly withdrew its ambassador from Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital.
His Liberal-National coalition government has suspended ministerial contacts.
It has pushed the relationship with Australia’s closest northern neighbour into yet another trough.
Mr Chan and Mr Sukumaran were the alleged ringleaders of the so-called Bali Nine, arrested in Bali in 2005 and later convicted of trying to smuggle heroin into Australia.
Australia called on Indonesia to recognise their rehabilitation and their work with other prisoners as a reason to spare their lives.
Soon after Mr Abbott ► account for over half of Pakistan’s exports, have long taken to generating their own electricity.
A textiles executive says that buyers need to look at and feel the products for themselves before they buy.
Yet the representatives of big European retailers are often too scared to come to Pakistan.
Optimists point to a sharp decame to power in 2013, relations with Indonesia were rocked by revelations that Australia had tried to tap the phone of Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, Joko Widodo’s predecessor as president.
Indonesia is also angry over naval incursions into Indonesian waters in fulfilment of Mr Abbott’s campaign promise to turn asylum-seekers packed in boats back to Indonesia, their main embarkation point.
In calling for clemency for Mr Chan and Mr Sukumaran, Mr Abbott asked Indonesia to remember the A$i billion that Australia sent after the 2004 tsunami.
Aaron Connelly, of the Lowy Institute in Sydney, argues that withdrawing the ambassador could prove counter-productive.
As Mr Abbott spoke, the bodies of Mr Chan and Mr Sukumaran were handed over to their families.
But the latest flounder in the relationship will last long after they have been put to rest.
Joko Widodo did not help dine in recent years in the number of deaths from terrorist attacks-despite frequent grim headline news, such as a school massacre in Peshawar in December.
Now the army is stepping up operations in regions bordering Afghanistan that harbour the Pakistani Taliban and other militants.
Their fates, which hung on the pen of the president, have strained Indonesia’s foreign relations.
The executions may throw light on how Jokowi, as he is known, intends to conduct his foreign policy.
Only a few months ago, pundits said the chief risk under Jokowi was that handling foreign matters would hardly feature at all.
In terms of its population and its economy , Indonesia is the giant of South-East Asia.
But geographically disparate, chronically underdeveloped and wracked by political instability after the fall of Suharto in 1998, it has punched below its weight diplomatically.
That began to change under Jokowi’s predecessor, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
Indonesia joined the G20, took an increasingly assertive role in climate-change talks and encouraged pluralism among developing countries at the Bali Democracy Forum.
By the end, it came to look less like an expression of universal goodwill than an excuse to avoid hard choices.
Still, Indonesia began to play a role on the world stage that was more commensurate with its size.
Mr Yudhoyono seemed a foreignaffairs heavyweight compared with Jokowi, a former mayor with no foreign-policy experience.
Yet even before the latest executions (Mr Yudhoyono introduced a moratorium on capital punishment), Jokowi had signalled a break with the past.
He abandoned the “thousand friends” policy after returning from his first foreign trip as president.
He said that he would favour those countries “who give the most benefit to the people.
He seems to have little patience for its consensual, process-driven flummery.
Millions of Indonesians live off the sea, mainly from fishing, while much of the vast archipelago’s trade moves by sea.
Jokowi wants to spread prosperity by making fisheries more productive, assert control over Indonesia’s sovereign waters and build marine infrastructure to help bring Indonesia’s poor and far-flung eastern islands into Java’s relatively prosperous orbit.
But that entails a crackdown on illegal fishing by other countries’ vessels-as many as 5,000 a day, according to the president.
Jokowi has promised to boost the naval and coastguard budgets as he doubles the share of gdp spent on defence (to 1.5%) over the next five years.
In the meantime, Jokowi has plumped for theatrical displays of deterrence.
Since he took office in October the navy has blown up 30-odd foreign boats fishing illegally, most of them from Thailand or Vietnam.
Even an Indonesian foreign-policy hand calls the boatburning “the act of an insecure power” designed to appeal to a domestic audience.
The Indonesian authorities have seized Chinese vessels, but they have not sunk them.
It is true that Jokowi cares deeply about a drugs scourge and the damage to national interests caused by illegal fishing.
But his prescriptions of executions of drug-traffickers and blowing up fishing boats (except China’s) are more the outward manifestations of a domestic nationalism than anything more considered.
He was jailed, like dozens of ethnic Uzbeks, after unrest in southern Kyrgyzstan in 2010.
After continued harassment by security forces and another jail term, he left for Syria, where he died fighting last May.
There is plenty of disaffection in poor, nominally Muslim but largely secular Kyrgyzstan.
As in much of the former Soviet Union, the courts are a sham and jobs rely more on connections and kickbacks than merit.
Authorities say that most of those from Kyrgyzstan are ethnic Uzbeks, who officially account for 14% of the population.
Central Asian leaders use claims of extremism and instability engendered by Afghanistan to justify repression and requests for military aid, from both Russia and the West.
This suits Russia, which wants to expand its military and political influence in a region that, economically, is drifting towards China.
Hardly a week passes without a report that alleged extremists have been arrested, sometimes for “plotting to join” is.
Human Rights Watch, a monitoring group, says neighbouring Uzbekistan has jailed ovem,ooo Muslims on vague charges related to their faith.
The charges referred to a sermon he had given eight months earlier, and came just days after he publicly accused the secret police, the gknb, of using bogus charges of extremism to extort money from young Uzbeks, thus fuelling radicalism.
The authorities say that he encouraged jihad; a congregant says Mr Kamalov had denounced IS and urged his followers to stay home.
On March 27th the gknb raided the office of Mr Kamalov’s lawyer, Khusanbay Saliev, in Osh, Kyrgyzstan’s second city, as well as his home and that of a colleague.
Mr Saliev says they seized files and computers, including his only recording of the sermon in question and records detailing three cases of alleged gknb abuse.
An American journalist who had called on his ngo, Bir Duino, was arrested, threatened with charges of extremism and deported.
Activists “exaggerate” when they complain of abuses, says a senior police officer in Osh, hinting that their aim is to please foreign donors.
Many believe the security forces are behind a push in parliament to impose restrictions on ngos which, like Bir Duino, receive foreign funding.
Similar rules in Russia are used to harass government critics and even shut them down.
But silencing conversations about terrorism is not the same as fighting it.
But unlike Japan, South Korea enj oys excellent relations with China, while it faces a serious military threat from a third party, its bellicose and now nuclear-armed neighbour.
The tension in South Korea between reliance on China’s economy and America’s armed forces can be acute.
This week, too, Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, visited Washington, dc, agreeing with Barack Obama’s administration on a revision of guidelines covering the two countries’ defence co-operation, in effect strengthening the bilateral alliance.
That is reassuring to Japan, given the risk that its territorial dispute with China might lead to a confrontation.
But for South Korea, managing the alliance with America, which has nearly 30,000 troops on its soil, is more delicate.
Both America and China harbour suspicions about the other’s intentions.
South Korea, close to both, at times finds itself at odds with one or the other.
This year South Korea has already defied America as one of several allies that ignored advice to shun the new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank that China is setting up.
At issue was America’s suggestion that it might deploy a new missile-defence system in South Korea, known as Terminal High Altitude Area Defence, or thaad.
South Korea has plenty of reasons not to anger China, which takes a quarter of its exports and is also its biggest source of imports.
Park Geun-hye and Xi Jinping, relations between South Korea and China have blossomed.
Both sides are united in their suspicion of Mr Abe, whom they accuse of trying to rewrite the history of Japanese militarism in the first half of the 20th century-and even of wishing to revive it.
Moreover, China’s traditional ties with North Korea increase its importance as a partner for the South.
No longer are China and North Korea “as close as lips and teeth”, and China has yet to receive the young dictator, Kim Jong Un, for a visit.
But it remains the only country capable, in theory, of exerting any restraining influence on his erratic regime.
Last year it conducted 19 missile tests involving at least m projectiles.
Test firings into the sea have continued this year, including of two missiles in early April, just before America’s defence secretary, Ashton Carter, arrived in Seoul, the South’s capital.
A senior American military officer has postulated that North Korea may now have the capacity to launch intercontinental missiles from a mobile launcher.
In Eebruary in Beijing, a Chinese expert told a seminar with some American counterparts that North Korea may already have as many as 20 nuclear warheads, twice as many as had been thought.
The debate in South Korea about how the country should defend itself is not resolved, however.
Both South Korean and American officials say formal talks on thaad have not yet begun.
It will be controversial, needing a lot of land, and an exclusion zone because of the dangers to health and the environment of the radar that the system uses.
THA ad’s not the way to do it So it is puzzling that China should have made such a public fuss about THAAD now.
In fact, say analysts, China knows thaad will have no impact on the effectiveness of its missiles.
Nor is it likely to provoke more than the usual hysterical reaction from North Korea.
Some suspect that it is for symbolic reasons that China has decided to pick a fight-to show that in the emerging Asia which China expects to dominate, it wants a say in decisions that it reckons affect its own security.
If so, it seems to have overplayed its hand, antagonising South Korea by bullying it-just as America blundered when it tried to stop its allies joining the aiib.
The moral seems to be that China’s economic clout can win it commercial acquiescence, but that when it comes to arm-wrestling over matters of national security, America still has the muscle.
It opened a think-tank in Arlington, Virginia-an outpost of its National Institute for South China Sea Studies on Hainan, a tropical island on the sea’s northern shore.
One role for the new think-tank is to make an academic case for China’s vaguely backed assertion that most of the strategically vital waters are within its domain-despite rival claims by South-East Asian countries.
On April i6th the Institute for ChinaAmerica Studies, as the Virginia-based centre is called, held a conference at a hotel in Washington.
Henry Kissinger, a former secretary of state whom Chinese leaders much revere, spoke in a pre-recorded video about the importance of ties between Beijing and Washington.
Mr Cui told participants that his country would act with “restraint” in the South China Sea, although he also said it would vigorously defend its interests there.
China’s efforts to put a scholarly gloss on its claims (which, on its official maps, are represented by broken lines of striking crudity) are unlikely to convince many in America or in South-East Asia.
China’s recent construction spree on more than half a dozen reefs has caused widespread alarm among the other claimants, which include Brunei, Malaysia and Vietnam, as well as the Philippines, an American ally.
On April 28th leaders of the ten-member Association of South-East Asian Nations issued an unusually strong statement.
In Beijing a foreign-ministry spokesman retorted that China’s actions were “beyond reproach” and not targeted at anyone.
But the pace and scale of China’s construction activities have been remarkable.
This month ihs Jane’s, a consultancy, published satellite photographs showing China’s rapid building this year of installations in the sea that could have military uses.
The reef is now three times bigger than the largest natural island in the Spratly archipelago.
A few weeks ago satellite images published by IHS Jane’s and the Centre for Strategic and International Studies , an American think-tank, showed similar activity on Mischief Reef, also in the Spratlys.
China’s behaviour is also striking for its inconsistency with other recent trends in its foreign policy.
These include an effort since late last year to mend fences with Japan, with which it has a separate maritime dispute.
And as part of an attempt to draw closer to India, with which it disagrees over long stretches of their land border, China will give India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, a warm welcome in Beijing next month.
In the South China Sea, Chinese authorities say they are just catching up with what others have been doing.
But officials in South-East Asia complain that China’s construction activity breaks the spirit of an agreement that it reached in 2002 with ASEAN to exercise “self-restraint” in the area.
Many analysts see it as part of efforts to give China more room to project its power in an area previously dominated by the Americans.
China’s reclamation efforts conform to ►► 38 China The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► a pattern of assertive behaviour in the South China Sea.
In 2011 Chinese patrol boats harassed Vietnamese and Philippine oil-exploration vessels near the Spratlys.
In 2012 China occupied Scarborough Shoal after a stand-off with the Philippines, which also has a claim.
Last year a Chinese state-owned company sent an offshore oil rig into waters claimed by Vietnam, leading to violent anti-Chinese protests in Vietnamese cities.
China has responded angrily to a case challenging the basis of its claims in the South China Sea which was filed in 2013 by the Philippines at a UN-backed arbitration panel.
It has refused to co-operate with the hearings; a defeat, which some Chinese experts acknowledge is likely, will make China even crosser.
It appears prepared, however, to accept the consequences, including the risk that America’s so-called “pivot” to Asia (now referred to as a “rebalancing”)-which has often been seen by America’s friends in the region as something of a fiction-will become more of a reality.
During Mr Abe’s trip to Washington, America signed a new defence agreement with Japan that would allow greater military co-operation between them.
America has also been establishing closer military ties with its erstwhile enemy, Vietnam.
The Chinese state-controlled media dutifully respond with stridently worded screeds, which appear to enjoy the approval of China’s easily aroused online nationalists.
But the new think-tank in Virginia is part of an effort to make China’s case more persuasive abroad.
It is only thanks to foreign satellites that the recent reclamation work in the South China Sea has come to light.
There is a broader message that China is trying to convey, beyond simply (as it sees it) the correctness of its claim.
The term describes people who have moved families and assets abroad in readiness for escape themselves.
Now, however, anti-graft officers are trying to extend their reach beyond China’s borders.
Since late last year, as part of the most intense and sustained anti-corruption drive in the history of Communist-ruled China, officials have been stepping up efforts to persuade foreign countries to send back those who have fled with their ill-gotten gains.
The operation involves other agencies such as the police, the central bank and the foreign ministry.
Among the wanted fugitives, for whom Interpol has issued arrest warrants, 48 were the most senior officials in their workplaces.
One was the deputy head of a provincial construction bureau accused of fleeing to America with 250m yuan in embezzled funds.
Another was a county-level finance official who allegedly took 94m yuan to Singapore.
On April 27th the state prosecutor’s office said a further 61 people suspected of “dereliction of duty” had been arrested after spending time on the run abroad.
After a visit to Beijing in April by Jeh Johnson, America’s secretary for homeland security, state media said America “actively” supported China’s efforts.
The Americans say they have agreed to a more “streamlined” procedure for handing back Chinese nationals whom they decide to repatriate.
China says it has sent 61 agents abroad to “persuade” accused fugitives to return and face justice.
State media last month reported one fugitive in America who dared not even see a doctor, so worried was he that his identity might bei come known.
But as the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, puts the finishing touches to his fourth coalition after an election in March, he is preparing for an unprecedented fight to muzzle the court.
The outcome of the contest-between politicians and judges, and between nationalist and universal values-could tear his government apart, and determine the future character of Israeli politics.
Five of its six parties are committed to vote for new legislation that would fulfil the long-held aspiration of right-wing and religious parties to limit the Supreme Court’s power to strike down laws passed by the Knesset.
Even then the Knesset would be able to push the law through with another vote.
He also plans to expand the judicial appointments committee, which chooses all of Israel’s judges.
By adding a minister and an additional Knesset member to the existing nine-strong committee, politicians would gain the upper hand; the legal profession currently has a majority, with three Supreme Court justices and two members of the bar association.
Just how interventionist the Israeli Supreme Court has been is open to debate.
Some civil-rights groups think it is too timid, especially on security-related issues.
Two weeks ago, in another decision that angered the left, the court upheld a law that allows cases to be brought against Israelis who call for any form of boycott against Israel and its settlements in the West Bank.
The court, however, struck down a clause allowing compensation to be awarded without proof of damage.
But such rulings in favour of the government and security forces have not endeared the court to the right.
Likud and its allies were incensed by two rulings in recent years that struck down laws allowing the authorities to hold African migrants in long-term detention without trial.
The ultra-Orthodox parties see the court as a secular enemy, because of its rulings on issues of state and religion-including a judgment that yeshiva students should not be exempt from serving in the army.
Without Kulanu’s ten members, the prime minister has only 57 votes, four short of a majority.
In discussions this week Mr Netanyahu made it clear that he was resolved to pursue his campaign.
One option is to keep up the pressure on Kulanu’s leader, Moshe Kahlon, the intended finance minister, to accept judicial changes in return for greater freedom to reform the economy.
Ironically, Likud was historically the party of both Jewish nationalism and deep respect for the judiciary.
Today Likud is run by a leader who has sworn to break the power of the “old elites” and whose colleagues see the Supreme Court judges as remnants of a privileged left-wing establishment which disregards Jewish values in favour of secular and universal principles.
The struggle to limit the powers of the Supreme Court is part of a broader contest over the nature of Israel-pitting religious and nationalist activists against advocates of a more liberal and secular-minded country.
The Supreme Court’s president, Miriam Naor, also departed from protocol, declaring that “the court is the last barrier preventing harm to human dignity and other basic rights.
What she might have added is that, with Israel facing potential indictments for war crimes at the International Criminal Court, it can ill afford to tarnish the image of its Supreme Court.
Egypt, after the counter-revolution of Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, is a close friend that shares Israel’s loathing of the Islamist Hamas movement in Gaza.
Syria has imploded, and has given up enough of its chemical weapons for Israel to halt distribution of gas masks.
The jihadists who have filled the vacuum are too busy fighting Arab foes to worry much about the Zionist enemy.
Israel is convinced that the Islamic republic is seeking to build nuclear weapons under the guise of a nuclear-power project.
But if a nuclear accord is signed, the threat of an Iranian bomb should be delayed by a decade or more.
The second, more immediate, concern is Iran’s Lebanese client, Hizbullah.
Israeli intelligence reckons the Shia militia-cum-party is armed with around 100,000 missiles of various ranges.
Israel is anxious to stop it acquiring more accurate missiles which, as well as sowing fear in Israeli towns, can target specific strategic installations and might be armed with chemicals.
Hizbullah has long cast itself as the leading force of resistance against Israel, but it is now fighting fellow Arabs in Syria and Iraq.
Once a proxy of Syria, it has become the main guarantor of President Bashar Assad’s regime.
This means that Israel’s northern border with Syria on the Golan Heights, which used to be the quietest, has become unstable.
In January an Israeli drone strike hit a convoy near the border, killing the commander of Hizbullah operations on the Golan and a general from Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, among others.
Hizbullah retaliated with a missile attack on an Israeli patrol, killing two soldiers.
Now tension is rising again, after a series of incidents near the border.
On April 24th a Syrian army missile base in the Qalamoun mountains near the Lebanese borWe're watching you der was hit by an air strike.
Two days later Moshe Yaalon, the defence minister, all but acknowledged that Israel had carried out the attack.
Aircraft attacked and killed four men who were laying explosive devices along the Israeli side of the Golan border; a second attack took place at another Syrian base on Oalamoun.
Uncharacteristically, Israel took responsibility for the first strike, although “Israeli sources” denied involvement in the second, suggesting it was the work of local rebels.
Although the Israeli government has little desire for a wide-scale military campaign so soon after the Gaza conflict of last summer, it appears more willing to risk one.
Right now, the militia is embroiled in other wars and is suffering many casualties; it may have lost 1,000 fighters, some Lebanese sources reckon.
In a few years’ time, Hizbullah’s battlehardened fighters could be back home.
If trouble on the Golan serves to present Hizbullah’s actions in Syria as destabilising, it could strengthen Israel’s campaign to portray any nuclear deal with Iran as a menace to the region.
The turbulence of recent years, starting with the overthrow of Hosni Mubarak in 20U and through the chaotic presidency of Muhammad Morsi, who was himself toppled in 2013, has left many longing for order and stability.
As Mr Sisi has kept Egypt from descending into mayhem, he has unremittingly repressed critics.
Several thousand dissidents, both secular and Islamist, have been jailed; at least a thousand were killed.
But his authoritarian habits leave Egypt looking a lot as it did before the Arab spring, when Mr Mubarak, another military man, ruled with an iron first.
The Muslim Brotherhood of Mr Morsi has borne the brunt of the crackdown.
Mr Sisi, the power behind the coup, has stripped the Islamist group of power and crushed it, labelling it a terrorist organisation.
Hundreds of its supporters have been killed by state-security forces during protests.
The politicised judiciary has handed down death sentences (many since commuted) to hundreds more.
Mr Morsi got off relatively lightly on April 21st when he received a 20-year sentence for, ironically, inciting the killing of demonstrators in 2012.
Bemoaning the dismal political climate, several opposition parties decided to boycott parliamentary elections that had been scheduled for March.
The vote was postponed after the law governing it was found to be unconstitutional.
Critics say that it was designed to create a parliament in thrall to the president, who continues to rule unchecked.
But few think the new law, expected by the end of the year, will be fairer.
Mr Sisi has urged all parties to form “one inclusive coalition” that he could back-and, presumably, would back him.
But in portraying himself as Egypt’s protector, he has turned his critics into enemies of the state.
And his government’s less public appeals for solidarity sound rather more like demands.
Most of the private media, controlled by a small elite, have refrained from criticising the government, while parroting its views.
That said, some outlets have grown more assertive, and they have also come under the cosh.
Several papers, both privateand state-owned, have recently criticised abuses by the police and the interior ministry.
Under Mr Mubarak ngos were tolerated, so long as they trod lightly; under Mr Morsi they were largely ignored.
But under Mr Sisi “there is no hope,” says Muhammad Zaree of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies.
His group has moved most of its staff to Tunisia after receiving threats.
Other groups, such as Human Rights Watch and the Carter Centre, both based in America, have left.
Those that remain have been obliged to register with the aptly named ministry of social solidarity under an old but rarely enforced law that gives the government broad authority over their activities and funding.
Vaguely worded bans on protests and terrorist groups have been used to harass NGOS and imprison staff.
Most big civil-society groups in Egypt get money from abroad because it is hard to raise at home.
The government has aroused ordinary people’s fear of foreign meddling-supposedly by America, Europe and Israel-to rally Egyptians behind its crackdown, even as it asks many of the same foreigners to invest in Egypt’s economy.
In fact, activists complain of a lack of pressure on Mr Sisi from abroad.
Many foreign governments see him as a bulwark against Islamic extremism in the region.
America, which could influence the government by withholding military aid, is still sending arms.
Wooing foreign investors at an economic conference in March, he emphasised the stability that his rule has brought.
Security and prosperity, he argues, are necessary precursors to greater liberty.
But often he appears more interested in enhancing his own power, and his actions may be selfdefeating.
Eaced with such oppression in the past, some have found other, often violent, ways to express their opinions.
Bombings by radical groups are becoming more frequent-giving Mr Sisi even more reasons to tighten his grip.
At 4am the state media announced that King Salman had appointed a new heir to the throne, and the successor to that heir.
Muhammad bin Nayef, the interior minister and second-in-line to the throne, was elevated to crown prince.
He replaces Muqrin, the king’s half-brother and the youngest living son of Abdel Aziz al-Saud, who founded the modern kingdom in 1932.
The new deputy crown prince is the 30-something son of the king, Muhammad.
Muhammad bin Nayef’s elevation means the crown will pass to the next generation on the king’s death, ending a 60year tradition of rule passing between brothers.
Many Saudis will welcome this, since the ruling generation is ever more remote from its youthful population.
They shore up Salman’s branch of the royal family-the Sudairis, the seven sons and their descendants of one of Abdel Aziz’s many wives-at the expense of the rest.
Since Salman came to the throne in January he has relentlessly promoted his favourite child, Muhammad, despite his lack of experience.
He appointed him head of his royal court, defence minister and head of a powerful new body overseeing the economy.
He has been the face of the war in Yemen, while Muqrin, although a former air force pilot, has barely appeared in the media.
Only a day before the reshuffle Saudi Arabia announced the arrest of 93 militants for ties to Islamic State, including two whom it alleges were planning to bomb the American embassy in Riyadh, the Saudi capital.
Among the other changes announced in the small hours, Saud al-Eaisal, who has been foreign minister for 40 years, was replaced by Adel al-Jubeir, a non-royal who until this week was ambassador to America.
Sudairi or not, the House of Saud needs to make sure that it, not Iran, remains the Americans’ main ally in the region.
JOHANNESBURG Traditional rulers can cause much embarrassment Burundi's president v term limits Apres moi, moi More Africans are resisting presidential efforts to flout constitutional term limits P IERRE NKURUNZIZA is the latest in a string of African presidents to risk a conflagration by refusing to step down when the constitution says their time in office is up.
His announcement on April 25th that he would seek a third term in an election due at the end of June sparked riots in Bujumbura, the capital.
So far at least six people have been killed and 25,000 are said to have fled across the border.
The UN, the African Union and Western governments have urged Mr Nkurunziza to think again before things spin out of control.
As the constitutional court prepares to hear the case, the president’s loyalists are arguing that his first term in office, starting in 2005, does not count, as he was elected to his first stint by parliament rather than directly by the people, as the constitution requires.
Since independence in 1962 it has been plagued by coups, massacres and the killing of several presidents, against a backdrop of ethnic strife between the country’s Tutsis, who make up a tenth of the lom-plus population, and the Hutus, who comprise most of the rest.
Mr Nkurunziza, a Hutu, came to the fore as a rebel leader in the 1990s after many thousands of Burundians, including his father and most of his siblings, had been murdered.
A fragile peace has more or less held since 2000, initially thanks to the mediation of South Africa.
Mr Nkurunziza’s fate will be watched warily across Africa, for the issue of presidential term limits is increasingly fraught.
Since the early 1990s, when a breeze of democracy swept across the continent, at least 34 of Africa’s 54 countries (55 since South Sudan was recognised in 2011) have put term limits on their presidents, usually giving them a maximum of two five-year spells, as in Burundi.
A handful-Zambia’s Erederick Chiluba in 2002, Malawi’s Bakili Muluzi in 2004 and Nigeria’s Olusegun Obasanjo in 2007-stepped down only after trying in vain to wangle extensions.
Last year mass protests prevented Burkina Easo’s Blaise Compaore from hanging on, and he was forced to flee.
At least half a dozen presidents have cajoled their legislatures, by foul means or fair, into ditching the limits.
When King Goodwill Zwelithini, the Zulu traditional head, made anti-foreigner remarks recently that whipped up attacks on black migrants.
The response was similar when King Goodwill called homosexual relationships “rotten” a few years back.
Then, as now, some South Africans wondered why King Goodwill continues to be bankrolled by taxpayers given his pronouncements that clash with the country’s progressive constitution.
King Goodwill is just one of ten traditional kings, and one queen, each receiving a yearly public stipend of about $110,000.
Some 8,000 other traditional leaders, including chiefs and headmen, get smaller amounts.
In April, his household bought seven Mercedes-Benz sedans-six for his wives, plus a backup vehicle.
In rural areas, far from the courts, chiefs and headmen play a practical role in mediating disputes.
But customary law often stands at odds with South Africa’s Bill of Rights, which protects women and minorities, among others.
The Traditional Courts Bill, proposed in 2012, would have handed greater judicial powers to male leaders.
In some cases, women would have had to rely on male relatives to speak for them.
It was sharply critiyears in office by the constitution of 1995, has now served 29 years in all.
Paul Biya, another rule-changer, has presided over Cameroon since 1982.
This month Togo’s Eaure Gnassingbe was re-elected to a third term, extending his family’s unbroken tenure to 48 years.
Others suspected of wanting to stretch their terms in defiance of the constitution include Joseph Kabila in the Democratic Republic of Congo, who should retire next year, and Denis Sassou-Nguesso, across the river in Congo-Brazzaville, who has ruled for most of the past 31 years.
Much of South Africa’s communally held rural land is also the richest in minerals.
When traditional leaders strike deals with mining companies, the danger is that chiefs and their families will benefit most.
Last year the Restitution of Land Rights Amendment Act made it easier to lodge land claims.
Under black-majority rule, traditional leaders-in particular King Goodwill-have become a valuable link between the ruling African National Congress and rural voters-despite the cost and political embarrassment.
Zwelithini's Zulu style veneer of constitutional propriety even while flouting its spirit.
Eriends of Paul Kagame, Rwanda’s dynamic but authoritarian ruler, talk of a “Putin-Medvedev scenario” that would let him stay merrily in charge, perhaps as prime minister, when his supposedly final term as president ends in 2017.
In Ethiopia the presidency is limited to two six-year terms, but Meles Zenawi ran the show for 17 years as prime minister, with no hint of cutting short his rule, until his death in 2012.
And Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe, who has held power since 1980, signed a new constitution in 2013 that limits the head of state to two terms-but only from that date.
He will talk about Russia’s continuing struggle against fascism (in Ukraine) and attempts by its sponsor (America) to impose its dominance on the world.
Western leaders’ decision to abstain will be seen by Russians as confirmation of their continued struggle against the West.
The feelings of isolation and aggression stoked by the Kremlin in the build-up to Victory Day could hardly be more different from those that reigned in Moscow in the early hours of May 9th 1945, when thousands of people kissed and danced in the streets in a spontaneous outburst of joy and liberty, mixed with sorrow at the deaths of 27m compatriots.
Fighting against fascism was a liberating experience for people who were terrorised by Stalin.
The dictator himself, possessed by paranoia, was too scared to come out onto Red Square.
In the evening a vast illuminated banner with his face appeared in the sky.
The feelings of freedom and compassion inspired by the victory were not to be encouraged.
To avoid reminding people of the staggering losses, the limbless veterans who once dotted Moscow’s streets were shipped off to a former monastery on an island.
Stalin feared victory celebrations would enhance the popularity of Soviet military commanders such as Marshal Georgy Zhukov, who signed Germany’s surrender along with the allies.
Official celebrations resumed only in 1965, a year after the fall of Nikita Khrushchev.
By that time, most military commanders were too old to pose a challenge.
The Soviet leaders who came to power as a result of the coup against Khrushchev used Victory Day to boost their legitimacy.
Europe's competition tsar For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit Economist.com/europe only unifying Soviet holiday that caused no disagreements between the people and their leaders.
While the memory of the war was used by the Kremlin to assert Soviet power, it also served as a common denominator between the Soviet and American leaders who belonged to the war generation.
Mr Putin has appropriated the iconography of Victory Day, along with other Soviet symbols, to assert the dominance of the Russian state and its place in the world.
Western leaders used to oblige him, taking part in celebrations meant to mark the country’s resurgence after the Soviet collapse.
A decade later, the memory of the second world war was cynically exploited by the Kremlin as a pretext for the annexation of Crimea and the war in Ukraine.
During the second world war, Ukrainians ended up on both sides of the lines.
Western Ukrainian nationalists who sought independence allied with Nazi Germany and fought against Ukrainians serving in the Soviet army.
But the failure of the Ukrainian government in the past quarter-century to build a nation-state has allowed the Kremlin to use history as a weapon.
Russian state television described the modern pro-European Ukrainians who ousted their corrupt and authoritarian president Viktor Yanukovych as nationalists and Nazi collaborators, planning to annihilate Russians in Crimea.
It planted fake stories about Ukrainians crucifying children, while showing a Russian soldier in Crimea holding a small child in his arms-a reference to the giant statue of the Soviet Liberator Soldier erected in Berlin in 1949.
But after a year-long war against Russian aggression, Ukraine is fighting for its own right to celebrate the Soviet victory ►► 44 Europe The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► over fascism.
A recent Ukrainian advert opens with a shot of a model Soviet plane in soft light.
A boy at a modern-day military base calls to speak to his grandfather, a Soviet Red Army veteran.
To reconcile Ukraine’s Soviet past with its European future, the president, Petro Poroshenko, announced that this year the country will honour both the Western victory celebration on May 8th and Soviet Victory Day on May 9th.
The traditional Russian orange-and-black St George’s ribbon has been swapped for the British crimson Germany's war remembrance poppy.
Alexei Navalny the Russian opposition leader, says Mr Putin’s “project” has destroyed any hope of a larger Russian world built on common memories.
Even Alexander Lukashenko, the dictatorial president of Belarus, decided to celebrate Victory Day separately.
The display of Russia’s newest weapons is expected to be followed by a procession of 100,000 people holding photographs of those who died in the war.
Yet the ideas propagated by the Kremlin seem eerily similar to the ones which Soviet soldiers defeated 70 years ago.
Guilt and reconciliation BERLIN As the anniversary approaches, Germany draws the right lessons G ERMANY’S way of remembering the 70th anniversary of the second world war’s end is the opposite of Russia’s grandstanding.
Germans see the occasion as an exhortation to humility and moral honesty.
They commemorate their own suffering, including mass rapes of German women by the Allies.
But mainly they accept responsibility for the suffering that Germans inflicted on so many others.
On May 3rd, Angela Merkel, the chancellor, will strike a similar tone on the anniversary of Dachau’s liberation.
By chance the commemorations coincide with what may be the last big trial of a former Nazi.
Oskar Groning, Asking for forgiven ess now 93, was a book-keeper of sorts in Auschwitz-Birkenau.
His job was to count the money of the arriving inmates and transfer it to Berlin.
He says he sometimes stood at the ramp where the trains disgorged the victims, but only to guard luggage.
Mr Groning is now accused of being an accomplice in the murder of about 300,000 Jews who arrived on trains from Hungary.
Just as unusually, one Auschwitz survivor, Eva Mozes Kor, who is one of the 65 co-plaintiffs, did offer her forgiveness.
She was ten when she was brought to Auschwitz, but survived because she had a twin sister and was kept alive for medical experiments by the infamous Josef Mengele.
Impressed by Mr Groning’s honesty, she approached him in court and embraced him.
In a statement, 49 of the other co-plaintiffs said that Ms Mozes Kor was speaking only for herself Germany will thus observe May 8th, the day it capitulated, in a solemn spirit.
Today, says Mr Gauck, Germany “pledges to defend the dignity of human beingswe will put an end to injustice wherever we can.” this ‘civilised humanity’ is only civilised to the extent that the Soviet people and the Soviet soldier forced it to be in 1945.
Eor all the uniqueness of Russian culture, the celebration of Victory Day, just like the war in Ukraine, has been packaged into patriotically-themed consumer entertainment.
Opinion polls show that 90% of Russians are prepared to discuss the possibility of nuclear war.
While 57% of older Russians say that such a war cannot have any winners, 40% of younger people are convinced that Russia would defeat America and nato.
Ukraine wants commitment from the Eu; the eu wants proof that Ukraine has really changed.
When eu officials visited Kiev on April 27th for a joint summit, they snubbed Ukraine’s requests for a peacekeeping force in the Donbas, for additional military aid and for visa-free travel.
European leaders want to see Ukraine implement its new laws and decentralise governance, as agreed in the Minsk peace plan.
Some worry that failure to do this will invite Russia to relaunch the war.
Al►► The Economist May 2nd 2015 Europe 45 ► ready violence is ticking up near the rebel capital of Donetsk and the Ukrainian-held port of Mariupol.
Petro Poroshenko, Ukraine’s president, takes umbrage at charges that reforms are lagging.
Lawmakers recently passed legislation to break up gas monopolies, increase energy-sector competition, and unbundle the state gas conglomerate Naftogaz, a fiscal black hole.
Last month Mr Poroshenko picked a head for the newly created National Anti-Corruption Bureau.
The latest battle pits the state against the country’s richest man, Rinat Akhmetov.
The government wants to end Mr Akhmetov’s coal and electricity monopolies, and may let his holding company, dtek, go bankrupt.
Coal miners have taken to Kiev’s streets, banging their helmets and calling for the energy minister to resign.
Mustafa Nayyem, a reformist legislator, published leaked documents allegedly issued by dtek that set out plans to engineer protests, dtek said it “did not know the source of the documents”, but did not deny that they were genuine.
In a column in the Guardian, a British newspaper, Mr Poroshenko boasted of taking down Ihor Kolomoisky an oligarch forced to resign as a regional governor last month after he deployed armed guards to protect his oil-industry assets from government reforms.
But Europe does not want de-oligarchisation to become a game of whack-a-mole led by Mr Poroshenko, who is himself an oligarch.
It wants Ukraine systematically to transform the oligarchs’ empires into law-abiding big businesses.
Until that happens, Ukraine may feel itself to be in a relationship with the Eu, one that could even lead towards membership-hut the eu will respond that things are complicated.
When news emerged of investigations into a former official in Castile and Leon who had secured lucrative windfarm licences from his ex-colleagues and a former official in Andalusia whose companies netted regional contracts for state-subsidised worker-training courses, few were surprised.
Corruption and cronyism (the Divorce in Italy Arrive derci, darling ROME Italy makes it easier to split up W HEN divorce was legalised in Italy in 1970, it followed a titanic parliamentary battle.
Unwilling to accept defeat, conservative Catholics secured a referendum.
Only after that vote finally went against them four years later was the issue settled.
So it is a sign of changed times that, when Italian deputies voted to liberalise the divorce laws recently, they did so by a crushing maj ority and amid little controversy.
Avvenire, a newspaper owned by the Catholic church, predictably railed against the reform.
Other critics termed it another blow to an institution fast losing its appeal in Italy.
More and more young Italians opt for cohabitation and have children outside marriage.
In 2012 the number of marriages peri,ooo inhabitants was the fifth-lowest in the European Union.
Under the new law, couples can untie the knot after 12 months of separation if the divorce is contested, or six months if it is not.
Some critics felt the reform could have been more radical, but amending it might have endangered its passage through parliament.
Distrust reached a nadir with the temporary arrest two weeks ago of Rodrigo Rato, a former pp finance minister who went on to run the imp in Washington.
Police searched Mr Rato’s office and home in an investigation into unexplained income.
He was already under scrutiny over freewheeling use of company credit cards during his chairmanship of Bankia, a bank that needed a €22 billion rescue under his stewardship.
Mr Rato was seen as one of the architects of Spain’s economic miracle in the early 2000s.
Unemployment is running at 23%, and the imp The number of divorces peri,ooo has risen in recent years, but in 2012 it was still the second-lowest in the eu.
The most-cited reasons are complexity and high legal costs, especially when a divorce is contested.
This was part of a package of measures devised by Matteo Renzi’s left-right coalition government to speed up civil justice.
In a country plagued by bureaucratic delays, a rise in the divorce rate may perversely be encouraging.
Eurostat *0r Latest says it will take nine years, until 2017, to return the economy to its pre-crisis size.
Researchers are beginning to see links between Spain’s excessively cronyistic and corrupt public administration, and the defects that have made it so hard for the economy to recover.
From 1995 to 2007, while the Spanish economy was growing at 3.5% per year, productivity declined by 0.7% per year-even as overall EU productivity was growing at an average of 0.4% per year.
Blame has traditionally been pinned on a housing bubble that fostered distorted growth in the construction industry.
But a recent paper by a team headed by Manuel Garcia-Santana of the Universite Libre de Bruxelles finds that the productivity fall was spread more evenly across all sectors.
It had little to do with skills, innovation or ►► 46 Europe The Economist May 2nd 2015 Friends in high places ► debt.
Productivity falls were greater when the government was heavily involved, through contracts, licences or regulations.
Luis Garicano, the economics adviser of the liberal Ciudadanos party, says this points to an economy dependent on contacts, corruption and cronyism.
Banks may have been happier lending to companies with public contracts, and some more productive businesses may have limited their growth to avoid losing fiscal, labour or social-security advantages enjoyed by smaller firms.
Either way, those who successfully negotiated their way around the public administrationwhether through luck, knowledge, cronies or backhanders-did best.
Popular anger over cronyism helps to explain why the pp government and its prime minister, Mariano Rajoy seem likely to take a hammering in elections to regional governments and municipalities on May 24th.
Over the past year 500,000 jobs have been created and growth is forecast at 2.9% this year, yet the pp has shed half its support.
The Socialists are also low in the polls, while Ciudadanos and the left-wing Podemos party have risen.
A poor result on May 24th could even force Mr Rajoy to bring forward a general election due at the end of the year.
It trumpeted the latest economic-sentiment figures from the European Commission, which put Spain ahead of the other big euro-zone economies.
But if voters are less concerned about the latest figures than about the underlying rot of decades of kickbacks and insider dealing, that may not count for much.
In 2012 Ms Ismailova received a package containing stills from a secretly filmed sex tape of her, and a warning that unless she stopped digging it would be published online.
In December, she was arrested on charges of inciting a fellow j ournalist, Tural Mustafayev, to attempt suicide.
In Eebruary more charges were added, including tax evasion and abuse of power.
There is growing concern about Leyla Yunus, a leading human-rights activist, and her husband Arif, a historian.
They have been in jail since last summer on charges of treason and tax evasion.
Mr Gogia tried to visit Azerbaijan in March to attend the trials of two activists.
The oil-rich former Soviet republic will be hosting the inaugural European games next month.
Human-rights groups are demanding that world leaders boycott the whole affair.
Azerbaijan’s authoritarian president, Ilham Aliyev, apparently fears that his critics will seize the occasion to air their gripes.
Azerbaijan has used its energy riches to enlist powerful friends in Europe and America.
Wedged between Russia, Georgia, Armenia, Turkey, Iran and the Caspian Sea, Azerbaijan is a strategic prize.
Determinedly pro-secular, it has allowed the Americans to use its bases to attack Muslim extremists in Afghanistan.
This may help to explain why Azerbaijan was allowed to act as chair of the Council of Europe, a Strasbourg-based human rights body, for six months in 2014, even as it jailed dissenters.
The dollops of caviar and other perks used to oil Azerbaijan’s lobbying machine don’t hurt.
Energy makes up around 95% of the country’s exports and 40% of its gdp.
Inflation is rising and the government’s attempts to prop up the local currency, the manat, have largely failed.
Another worry is tensions with neighbouring Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh.
The mainly Armenian-populated enclave in Azerbaij an fell under Armenia’s control after a nasty three-year war that broke out in 1991 when the Soviet Union collapsed.
Clashes between Azeri and Armenian troops along the border have become worryingly frequent.
Mr Aliyev uses Karabakh to drum up nationalist sentiment and divert attention away from corruption at home.
Or so it has seemed this month in Brussels, as Margrethe Vestager, the European competition commissioner, has made ambitious moves against formidable adversaries for three weeks in a row.
On April 15th it was Google, which Ms Vestager thinks unfairly privileges its shopping service over rivals.
A week later she trained her sights on Gazprom, Russia’s mostly state-owned gas giant, accusing it of unfair pricing and market meddling.
And on April 29th Ms Vestager announced a probe into the subsidies European governments provide to electric utilities, some of which she thinks may amount to illegal state aid.
Amid constant reminders of the eu’s weakness, from Mediterranean migration to the endless Greek saga, Ms Vestager’s shows of strength are a reminder that Brussels has bite.
Ms Vestager, who previously served as Denmark’s economy minister, is clearly a tough cookie.
But her impact has as much to do with European law as with her personality.
Unburdened by the constraints that shackle most of her 27 fellow commissioners, she can block mergers, launch surprise raids on private offices and threaten multinationals with vast fines.
The perception of Ms Vestager’s power is reflected in the parody Twitter accounts set up in the names of different commissioners.
Her colleagues are lampooned as propeller-headed nincompoops or scheming mini-Rasputins.
Ms Vestager, by contrast, is portrayed as a medieval warrior queen sporting two giant battleaxes.
For some, the power vested in the competition job is a model of how Europe could work if it took rules seriously.
Wolfgang Schauble, Germany’s finance minister, once suggested endowing the economics commissioner, who oversees the euro zone’s fiscal rules, with powers comparable to those of Ms Vestager.
Others, though, worry about political appointees wielding regulatory authority.
Those fears are exacerbated by the tendency of Jean-Claude Juncker, the commission president, to describe his administration as the most “political” in history.
Such concerns have inspired calls for an independent agency to enforce competition law.
In speeches she links her work to the commission’s pledges to jump-start Europe’s economy.
Ms Vestager bats away charges that her office may unfairly tilt towards one country or another.
Some suggest that she launched the cases against America’s Google and Russia’s Gazprom, both begun by her predecessor, within a week of each other to fend off any allegations of national favouritism.
She notes simply that the sequencing shows that competition law pays no heed to a company’s ownership.
In effect, she has deployed a politician’s sense of timing to deflect allegations of political bias.
Charming, thoughtful and armed with a functioning sense of humour, Ms Vestager cuts an unusual figure in Brussels.
Even Gazprom’s officials have been impressed by her matter-of-fact approach.
And although fears are growing in Washington that Europe is bent on erecting protectionist barriers against Silicon Valley, American officials are careful to point out that they do not see the Google antitrust probe in this light.
Unlike her predecessor, Joaquin Almunia, she is said to have a distaste for backroom deals, preferring to see cases taken to court if necessary.
New rules, it was suggested, might be a snappier way of bringing tech firms to heel than the heavy weaponry of antitrust law.
Taxing times A different test comes with another set of cases inherited by Ms Vestager.
Four multinationals-Amazon, Apple, Starbucks and Fiat-face allegations of beneficial and discriminatory tax treatment by the authorities in Ireland, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.
Ms Vestager has pledged to investigate, and says she will wrap up her work by June; her findings could prove awkward.
Mr Almunia is widely seen as a failure for his thricethwarted attempts to settle with Google.
Ms Vestager did not choose to take on most of the cases that have made her name.
Tearing the union Fo r dai Ly a n a Lysis a n d d ebate 0 n B ri tai n , vi sit Economist.com/britain Politics Wooing white-van man The Tory party badly needs working-class votes to hold on to power C OMMUTERS on the A414 in Essex have recently become used to a curious sight.
Every day between yam and 9am, then again from 4pm to ypm, a man in a peaked cap perches on a small chair by the dual carriageway, beams at the oncoming traffic and gives drivers the thumbs-up sign.
He has won admirers from across the political spectrum by fighting a series of campaigns on consumer issues, from taxes on bingo halls to surcharges on electricity bills.
He is best known for persuading the Tory-Liberal Democrat coalition government to cancel every planned fuel-duty increase since 2010.
The MP calls his brand of politics “white-van Conservatism”-a reference to the aspirational working-class voters who make towns like Harlow, north-east of London, such crucial bellwethers.
They voted for Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s and Tony Blair in the 1990s.
In order to form another coalition with the Lib Dems, the Tories must hold almost all of their seats in the House of Commons.
Ipsos MORI i 11 12 I Nigel Farage re-elected as UKIP Leader Televised debate with seven party Leaders.
Nicola Sturgeon triumphs Satisfied minus dissatisfied ^January estimate 50 Britain The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► servative in 2010 have since left the party for UKiP, which detests the European Union and immigration.
Lynton Crosby, the Tories’ campaign chief, reckons that the party’s typical target voter earns about £15,000 a year-40% less than the national average-reads the Sun on Sunday, a right-wing tabloid, and values economic and national security above all else.
The Tories have courted white-van man in their manifesto and in the promises they have made on the campaign trail.
The prime minister has pledged to create 50,000 new apprenticeships, expand free child care and take those earning the minimum wage out of income tax.
He even promises to legislate against any increases in the government’s main revenue-raising taxes until 2020.
He has revived Margaret Thatcher’s totemic bid for working-class support by promising to extend the “right to buy” social housing to tenants of housing associations.
Stuck in a lay-by Mr Halfon reports that voters are now raising the issue on the doorsteps.
He declares himself delighted at his party’s campaign; after the election, he plans to frame the newspaper coverage of its manifesto.
On April 30th the Sun newspaper endorsed the Tories-though, muddling the message, its Scottish edition went for the snp.
The party has not achieved the long-expected “crossover” with Labour in the polls mainly because it has not squeezed ukip enough.
Matthew Goodwin, an expert on UKIP, estimates that the party could indirectly cost the Tories around 30 seats.
Labour must pick up about 40 English seats to lead the next government.
The best explanation is that many voters still doubt that the Conservatives understand their lives and interests.
And at times the party has helped to reinOur opinion poll Scotland is another country What the English really think about their northern neighbours P OLITICIANS and psephologists have tried desperately hard to divine the Scottish mood over the past year.
Rather less attention has been paid to what the 57m inhabitants of England and Wales think of Scotland.
A poll conducted for The Economist by YouGov on April 25th and 26th tells us, starkly.
By 48% to 34%, more Britons believe that Scotland will be independent in 20 years’ time than think it will remain part of the United Kingdom.
Only 20% think Scottish independence would be good for England, Northern Ireland and Wales, whereas 49% think it would be bad.
Yet, if Britons tend to think the union would be worse off with Scotland gone, they are absolutely clear on the benefits to Scotland of the current set-up-in which, crudely, the whole of Britain gets North Sea oil but Scotland gets more lavish state spending.
By the enormous margin of 70% to 8%, more people think Scotland gets a good deal out of being part of the United Kingdom than think it gets a bad deal.
And voters outside Scotland are disinclined to sweeten an already tasty deal.
We asked Britons whether they would pay to keep Scotland in the union, suggesting less than £250 a year, £250 to £500 a year and more than £500 a year as hypothetical sums.
It turns out that 23% of Scots would pay something to stay in, and 26% would pay to leave.
In England and Wales, though, only 10% would pay for Scotland to stay and 6% would pay to see the back of it.
People divided evenly on the question of whether they would be better off under Mr Cameron or Mr Miliband-32% thought the former, 30% the latter, and 29% reckoned it would make little difference.
But Mr Cameron holds a decent nine-point lead on the question of whether Britain as a whole would be better off.
His difficulty in translating broad economic credibility into votes is the great story of this campaign.
More damagingly low-income voters are not feeling better off than they did in 2010.
Though unemployment has fallen steeply, this is partly the flipside of insecure work and stagnant wages.
Tories protest, with reason, that low wages are better than none at all-and that at least things are not going backwards.
But the van drivers can be forgiven for not being overwhelmed with gratitude to the governing party.
As Mr Halfon’s roadside vigil demonstrates, it can take extraordinary efforts to persuade such voters that Conservative mps are truly on their side.
It may be doomed T his ill-tempered, promiscuously focused election should be about the economy-and if the Conservatives pull off the win that their ratings on the issue seem to warrant, it may yet be.
But future historians may prefer to recall the existential questions that accumulated in the campaign, little-noticed, like toxic mercury in a dolphin’s liver.
Politicians on all sides are talking on that theme but, a week before a general election, with such fevered partiality that the real issue of Britain’s future is being warped or ignored.
The Conservatives, discreetly revelling in Schadenfreude, warn that Labour will be able to form a government only with support from a party dedicated to dismembering Britain.
The SNP looks likely to become Britain’s third biggest party, with over 40 seats.
And that would not be, as some in Labour mystifyingly imply, somehow the Tories’ fault for fulminating on the issue, thus driving Scots into the nationalists’ embrace.
Yet nor, as Labour counters, would it make Scots much likelier to hive off than they were last September, when they voted by 55% to 45% to keep the union.
And it would not in any way be “illegitimate”, as Theresa May, a senior Tory, argued this week, for Labour to use the SNP’s support to sustain a government.
Opinion polls suggest there has in fact been no post-referendum surge in support for Scottish independence.
That the snp may be about to win twice as many votes as it did in 2010 is because most of the Scottish Labour voters who plumped for independence in September are sticking with the party that promises it.
That this will improve the nationalists’ fortunes absurdlywith only 4% of the national vote, they may have 8% of seats in Parliament-reflects the unfair workings of the first-past-the-post electoral system, which both Labour and the Tories love.
For Labour to take advantage of this would not be illegitimate, but simply a reflection of British democracy.
Nor even would the snp, in or near power, be able to carry out quite the wrecking job David Cameron, the Tory prime minister. predicts for it.
Ridding Scotland of the Tories was the main slogan of the independence campaign and remains thp snp’s battle-cry.
The “Nats” could make havoc for a Labour government, but they would almost certainly not bring it down.
The last time they did that, in 1979, they annoyed their leftist followers mightily.
It might not, because even if it could deliver another plebiscite the polls suggest the result would probably be the same.
Yet while they rid Scotland of unionist rivals, and most Scots under the age of 50 are believed to want independence, the nationalists can afford to be patient.
Almost half of Britons, according to this week’s YouGov poll for The Economist, think Scotland will be independent in 20 years’ time; the evidence of Scottish opinion suggests they may be right.
Bagehot’s travels around Britain during this campaign have thrown up a dismal litany of nationalist and regionalist complaint.
In Belfast, he heard middle-class Catholics-who would have recoiled from Republican violence during the Troubles-declare their support for the Irish nationalist Sinn Fein party, whose terrorist wing, the ira, carried out those killings.
In Cardiff, Leanne Wood, leader of the Welsh nationalist party Plaid Cymru, and a minor star in this campaign, described her plausible ambition to ape the snp’s success by dropping the cultural nationalism that long restricted Plaid to a few Welsh-speaking counties and embracing the leftwing Utopianism that has fuelled the snp.
Merry England, Great Britain Britain has never been in such an all-round querulous state.
And if some of this wrestling is inspired by the Scottish Nats, it has a common source.
British identity is not nearly as old as, and has never been as strong as, the identities of its constituent parts.
England predates the Act of Union that bound Scotland to England and Wales by almost a thousand years.
No wonder Mr Farage’s demand to make St George’s Day a public holiday is popular.
By contrast, British identity is how Britons have tended to dress up for the world-to unite in their common defence, to build an empire, to assert their shared values.
But, properly understood and argued for, Britain is no less valuable than it ever was.
If England, Scotland and the rest retain any ambition to have a say in the world, culturally and commercially if to a diminishing extent militarily, Britain is their beautifully appointed tool.
And it will remain, as it always has been, a comfort blanket against the intemperate nationalism to which Britons, almost uniquely among their European peers, and for this reason, have remained stolidly immune.
And if unionist politicians cannot clinch that argument, against the populists and the disaffected, they had better move aside to let others try.
The impending defeat of Scottish unionists will at least provide that opportunity.
Half of Americans want to lift the ban on cannabis, the world’s favourite illicit drug.
Latin American presidents whose countries once battled narcos with helicopter gunships now openly wonder if prohibition was a mistake; Uruguay has legalised weed.
Heroin addicts in Western countries usually have access to clean needles, substitutes such as methadone and, in parts of Europe, heroin prescriptions.
Many governments are starting to believe that managing drug use causes less harm than trying to stamp it out.
On April 29th eight convicted drug offenders, seven of them foreign, were executed by firing squad.
Joko Widodo, the president, became convinced of the need for a hard line on drugs as mayor of Solo, a city in central Java, and governor of Jakarta, the capital.
His seven months in office have seen 14 executions, more than twice as many as in the previous 15 years.
Indonesia is only the highest-profile example of a trend across Asia and the Middle East, the only regions that routinely execute drug offenders.
Saudi Arabia beheads smugglers of cannabis, a drug which is not conclusively linked to a single fatality among the 200m or so who use it each year.
In the first five months of 2014 nearly 40,000 people were sentenced for drug offences in China, 27% more than in the same period in 2013.
In June most countries will mark the UN’s “international day against drug abuse” with speeches; China often celebrates it with a round of executions.
More enthusiastic still is Iran, where the government is increasingly alarmed about high rates of addiction.
Since 2011 possession of as little as 30g of some drugs has been a hanging offence.
According to Harm Reduction International , a drug-focused NGO, in 2008 Iran executed at least 96 people for drug crimes.
Drug offenders account for a “large majority” of all those put to death in Iran, says hri; the country may execute as many drug traffickers as China, despite having a population only 6% as big.
Afghan smugglers of heroin, some as young as 15, have been hanged near the border as a cautionary spectacle.
Over the past two decades Singapore has reduced its drug executions from several dozen a year to one or two; and Malaysia is using the death penalty less.
It is not known whether drug offenders among the 8,000 on its death row will have their sentences carried out.
Somebody lighting a legal joint in Colorado or Washington might not care that, in a faraway country, a person selling the same substance could suffer beheading.
After all, Saudi Arabia executes people for adultery and sorcery without impeding extramarital flings or witchcraft elsewhere.
But the cross-border nature of the drug trade means countries have tried to reach basic agreement about what to ban.
Nearly all UN members have signed conventions in 1961, 1971 and 1988, which mandate prohibition of the main recreational drugs.
In the early 2000s it helped fund Plan Colombia, a multi-billion-dollar military-focused crackdown on Andean coca growers, briefly making Colombia the third-largest recipient of American aid.
Failure to co-operate has meant “public shaming, economic sanctions, or back-channel punitive uses of American influence with international funding agencies like the World Bank and IMF,” writes Moises Naim, a former executive director of the World Bank.
Each year America names the countries it regards as having fallen short of their counter-narcotics obligations.
In 2006 Mexico’s congress voted to decriminalise the possession of fairly large quantities of drugs.
But he vetoed it after George W Bush made clear that decriminalisation would jeopardise longed-for ►► The Economist May 2nd 2015 International 53 ► immigration reform in the United States.
Now America’s own inconsistent drug laws are forcing it to soften its line.
Marijuana is prohibited by the federal government, but legal according to a growing number of states.
William Brownfield, the assistant secretary of state for drugs, has performed linguistic acrobatics in an attempt to reconcile America’s legalisation of cannabis with its obligation to uphold the UN conventions that ban it.
We are allowed to interpret them so long as our interpretation is still consistent with our universal desire to reduce the misuse and abuse of harmful products throughout the world,” he said last year.
Increasingly America is turning a blind eye to measures elsewhere that it once would have excoriated.
America’s change of heart has led many to wonder if the un conventions might be reformed to legalise some drugs and treat the use of others as a problem requiring health measures, not criminal or military ones.
But as America has drawn back from prohibition, new drug warriors are stepping up to defend it.
Though Russia does not apply the death penalty, for drugtrafficking or any other crime, it is ultrastrict in other ways.
It bans methadone, a drug taken orally which most countries with enough money give to heroin addicts to stop them overdosing and to prevent diseases spreading via shared needles.
Undeterred, it is trying to persuade east European countries also to ban methadone.
And just as America once believed that the best way to stop its crack-cocaine epidemic was to eradicate coca in South America, so Russia has sent intelligence agents to disrupt the production of heroin in Afghanistan.
At the UN it has argued loudly for an aerialspraying programme, similar to those used in the Andes.
In March, backed by fellow Asian hardliners, it successfully lobbied the UN to put forward a motion to ban ketamine, a widely abused anaesthetic.
But the World Health Organisation lists it as an essential medicine, which by the UN’s own rules should put it beyond any attempt at a ban.
Though the motion was withdrawn at the last minute, the mere possibility of tighter restrictions rattled African countries that rely on it for emergency surgery.
Other emerging drug warriors include Egypt, where addiction is treated as a form of insanity; South Africa, where a vicious new home-cooked drug called “whoonga” has panicked the authorities into a crackdown; and Cuba, whose isolation and security apparatus have kept a lid on consumption, giving it little incentive to support moving on from prohibition.
In recent years India has aggressively campaigned against a proposal to license Afghan opium farmers to supply the legal medical market, in part because its own licensed opium farmers would see their business threatened.
Fifteen years ago almost all funding for the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (unODc) came from “major donors”, dominated by America and eu countries.
Colombia, for instance, now the biggest donor, pays the unodc to run programmes to persuade farmers to grow crops other than coca.
Last year $28im out of a total donated of $288m was earmarked for such country-specific projects.
Some believe that the result is that the agency has become too quick to do whatever governments will pay for.
A deal to help Iran catch traffickers, many of whom would later be hanged, has attracted particular criticism.
A spokesman for the UNODC acknowledges “a significant diversification of our portfolio over the previous years” but says that all projects fall within “clear and substantiated mandates” set out by its governing bodies.
UN bigwigs deny that earmarked donations give countries more power to shape policy.
But persuading countries to cough up non-earmarked cash is hard, and “often those contributions are reflected in terms of [the donor country’sl visibility, in terms of positions,” one senior un official admits.
In the same year a Russian candidate, Yury Fedotov, was appointed its new head.
The three previous directors had come from Italy, which often used to be the agency’s main source of non-earmarked donations.
A war of two halves Western countries will find it hard to wind down the war on drugs without wide consensus.
Most decisions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the UN’s policymaking body, require unanimity among its 53 members.
That is why updating its position on such matters as how best to treat addicts has proved impossible.
It has yet to pass a resolution mentioning harm reduction, which has been part of everyday drug-policy language for years in many countries, notes Mr Jelsma.
The difficulty of agreeing on change has left the UN’s drugs authorities out of step with other agencies.
Last year the World Health Organisation endorsed the decriminalisation of drugs.
Next April a special session of the un General Assembly will offer the best chance in years to consider such new approaches.
Called by Latin American countries frustrated over the ineffectiveness of present policies, it will review the drugcontrol system from first principles.
At the most recent such session, in 1998, America blocked serious debate.
It remains to be seen whether next year’s will be more productive-or whether the new drug warriors will condemn the world to decades more fighting an unwinnable war.
The last such meeting, in 2010, produced agreement over a 64-point action plan.
RevCons are high both on obscure technical discussion, and on diplomatic grandstanding.
And the npt has often been under stress since it came into force in 1970.
At least one bit of good news for the four-week conference was the announcement on April 2nd of a framework agreement to overcome the decade-long crisis over Iran’s nuclear programme.
If a comprehensive deal can be reached by the end of June and then successfully implemented, it will go a long way towards vindicating the NPT and the tools it provides to bring those who violate its safeguards back into compliance.
Mark Fitzpatrick, a nonproliferation analyst at the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies, believes that the agreement has strengthened two of the npt’s pillars by upholding the right to a civil nuclear programme and confirming the role of intrusive inspections to ensure that all related activity is indeed peaceful.
The countries that do not have nuclear weapons are most concerned by the failure of the five that do to take further steps to reduce the size of their own nuclear arsenals.
The previous RevCon was held in the afterglow of a New start deal between America and Russia to limit the number of deployed strategic nuclear weapons to 1,550 on each side, and the inspirational speech in Prague a year earlier by Barack Obama, America’s president, in which he held out the prospect of a world without nuclear weapons. c Looking for lift-off Since then, despite the establishment in 2009 of the so-called P5 process as a forum for discussing multilateral disarmament, not much has happened.
The main reason is the chilling of relations between Russia and the West, which predated Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
An offer by Mr Obama in 2013 of new negotiations to reduce each side’s stock of warheads by a third was met with stony silence.
The Russians are also refusing to attend next year’s Nuclear Security Summit, a meeting to prevent fissile material falling into the wrong hands.
Without further cuts in American and Russian nuclear forces (which account for more than 90% of the world’s nuclear weapons), China, the most opaque of the P5 powers, will block attempts to get multilateral disarmament talks going.
However, Rose Gottemoeller, America’s undersecretary of state for arms control, praises China for its leading role in producing a common glossary of nuclear terminology.
This may not sound much, but it is seen within the P5 as essential for future negotiations.
Ms Gottemoeller is also keen to stress that, despite the Russian impasse, America has tried to meet its obligations.
It is eliminating “excess” warheads at the rate of almost one a day and closing down old bits of nuclear infrastructure.
In December it launched a scheme to bring together nuclear and non-nuclear weapons states to develop new approaches to verification.
It is doubtful whether these modest, incremental efforts will cut much ice with the Humanitarian Impacts of Nuclear Weapons Initiative, a movement supported by civil-society groups and championed by Austria, Norway and Mexico.
Faced with what they see as foot-dragging by the P5 (which are modernising their nuclear forces to maintain their long-term effectiveness), the initiative’s backers, some of which want to make nuclear weapons illegal, may question whether working through the npt serves any purpose.
Nobody disputes the horror of nuclear weapons, but moral fervour is not a policy.
Progress on nuclear disarmament must take account of the complex deterrence relationships between the P5.
Another source of friction is the failure to hold the conference on creating a wmdfree zone in the Middle East that was promised in 2010.
Israel, an undeclared nuclearweapons state, has joined preparatory meetings at a high diplomatic level and is attending the RevCon as an observer.
But it insists that regional security arrangements must precede any talks on disarmament, whereas Egypt says the first step is for Israel to accede to the NPT-a non-starter.
It is possible that Israel’s new chumminess with the Gulf Arabs, the verification measures to ensure the civil nature of Iran’s nuclear programme and the chairing of the conference by an Algerian, Taous Feroukhi, may provide some impetus.
For this RevCon to rediscover the spirit of 2010, what is needed is an outbreak of realism among countries without nuclear weapons-and a willingness by the P5, above all Russia, to demonstrate that they are prepared to pay more than lip-service to the vision of eventual nuclear disarmament.
That may be a tall order, but, imperfect though the npt is, most of its signatories know that keeping it alive is better than any alternative.
The B-3, as it is likely to be named, will be a nuclear-capable aircraft designed to penetrate the most sophisticated air defences.
The contract itself will be worth $50 billion-plus in revenues to the successful bidder, and there will be many billions of dollars more for work on design, support and upgrades.
The stakes could not be higher for at least two of the three industrial heavyweights that are slugging it out.
On one side is a team of Boeing and Lockheed Martin; on the other, Northrop Grumman.
The result could lead to a shake-out in the defence industry, with one of the competitors having to give up making combat aircraft for good.
After the B-3 contract is awarded, the next big deal for combat planes-for a sixth-generation “air-dominance fighter” to replace the F-22 and f-i8 Super Hornetwill be more than a decade away.
So Richard Aboulafia of the Teal Group, an aviation-consulting firm, believes it will be hard for the loser to stay in the combat-aircraft business.
If Northrop were to miss out, its investors may press for it to be broken up.
If Boeing were to lose, Mr Aboulafia thinks it may seek to buy Northrop’s aircraft-building business, to ensure it gets the job after all.
The production line in St Louis that makes Boeing’s f-i8 (the us Navy’s mainstay fighter until it starts to get the carrier version of the new F-35 in numbers) is due to close in 2017.
If Northrop were to depart the field, that could leave Lockheed Martin as the only American company with the ability to design combat planes, and thus the biggest winner of the three.
Usually in a contest of this kind, particularly this close to its end, a clear favourite emerges.
That is partly because the degree of secrecy surrounding what is still classified as a “black programme” has remained high.
Only the rough outlines of the aircraft’s specification have been revealed.
It will be stealthy, subsonic, have a range of around 6,000 miles and be able to carry a big enough payload to destroy many targets during a single sortie.
But most of all, picking a winner is hard because both competitors are highly credible-and each has different strengths.
When innovative firms flout the law For daily coverage of business, visit Economist.com/business-finance cancelled two years later because its excessive technological ambition was causing costs to soar.
They decided to team up again in 2013 to prepare for a new request for proposals that the air force quietly released last summer.
Boeing is the team leader and will build the aircraft if their bid is successful; Lockheed will take the main responsibility for its design.
Lockheed can draw on its “skunk works”, an autonomous design team that works on radical new aircraft technologies; and on its experience developing radar-beating stealth technologies for the F-22 and F-35 fighter planes.
Northrop, on the other hand, built the revolutionary b-2 stealth bomber that entered service in the early 1990s.
It was conceived as a deep-penetration nuclear bomber at the height of the cold war.
Only 21 were eventually built, leading the programme into a “death spiral” in which declining orders pushed up the unit price of an aircraft to absurd levels.
Once its development, engineering and testing costs were added, each b-2 ended up costing more than $2 billion.
But it was hardly Northrop’s fault that the cold war ended sooner than expected.
The plane it built has since proved its capabilities in numerous conflicts, from Kosovo to Libya.
Updated versions of the once-radical technologies that made the b-2 so expensive will find their way into the new bomber.
Another possible advantage for the air force in choosing Northrop is that it might be better ►► 56 Business The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► able to focus on the programme.
Boeing is not only grappling with its hugely demanding, and rapidly expanding, civil-aviation business; it is also struggling to deliver the K-46 tanker plane by the target date of 2017.
Lockheed, for its part, also has its hands full ramping up production of the late and over-budget F-35.
The target for the plane to come into operation is the mid-2020s-if possible, even earlier.
In part this is because of fast-emerging new threats and in part because the average age of America’s current bomber fleet, consisting of 76 geriatric B-52S, 63 b-is and 20 B2 S, is 38 years.
None of these, except the b-2s, can penetrate firstrate air defences without carrying cruise missiles-and the missiles are of little use against mobile targets.
In the kind of one-sided wars that America and its allies fought in the years after the September nth 2001 attacks, such deficiencies were not a problem.
But during that period China, in particular, has invested heavily in “anti-access/area-denial” capabilities.
These include thousands of precision-guided missiles of increasing range that could threaten America’s bases in the Western Pacific, and any carriers sailing close enough to shore to launch their short-range tactical aircraft.
Critics of the huge F-35 programme (the Pentagon is planning to buy 2,457 aircraft at a cost of around $10 om each) argue that its limited range was a growing problem even before it entered service.
A new long-range bomber that can penetrate the most advanced air defences is thus seen as vital in preserving America’s unique ability to project power anywhere in the world.
If getting the new bomber into service fast is a priority, so too is keeping the price low enough to be able to build it in sensible numbers, and thus keep it safe from political ambush.
Budget caps imposed by Congress in 2013 have ushered in a decade of defence-spending austerity, and the B-3 will be the first major weapons system to be designed and produced in this new era.
To stay on budget and avoid the risk of having its orders cut, the programme will have to rely on technologies adapted from earlier projects; and any temptation to “gold-plate” its specification with showy but not strictly necessary features will have to be resisted.
The B-3 will be a bit smaller than the b-2, and be able to use the same engines as the F-35.
The option of being able to fly the bomber pilotlessly, by remote control, seems to have been dropped, as have some highly sophisticated surveillance sensors that were proposed earlier.
The first is by designing the planes with what the Pentagon’s acquisitions chief, Frank Kendall, describes as an “open architecture and modular approach”, in which companies will compete to provide future upgrades that can be easily plugged in as and when needed.
The other is that, despite its stealthiness, the B-3 will be fully connected to a range of “offboard capabilities”, such as electronic countermeasures and the collection of targeting data, provided by other aircraft and orbital reconnaissance satellites, instead of having to carry everything on board.
In keeping with the secrecy surrounding the plane, neither of the two competing teams is prepared to discuss their bids or A BATTLE over voting rights, pitting the state against company boards and many investors, is raging among French companies.
The biggest fight of all involves Renault, a carmaker with global ambitions.
According to the so-called Florange law adopted in 2014, after March 2016 listed French firms must begin granting double voting rights to investors who have held registered shares for at least two years-unless two-thirds of shareholders have voted why they should prevail in any detail.
Although the air force is striving to make its decision as protest-proof as possible, neither Boeing nor Northrop is likely to take defeat quietly.
Northrop is still smarting from Boeing’s lobbying triumph over the ic-46 tanker programme, in which a plane that many military analysts considered superior ended up losing.
The Pentagon likes to share work around so as to ensure there is continued competition for contracts to provide military gear, especially complex ones such as this.
In the case of the B-3 it has explicitly ruled out taking such concerns into account when choosing between the two contenders.
That may be because it realises that whichever it selects, it will deal a devastating blow to the other.
The days when America had a choice of combat-plane suppliers are coming to an end. ■ against this rule.
The provision aims to counter “short-termism” by encouraging more loyalty between investors and companies.
It will also, fortuitously, allow a government intent on selling down some of its stakes in domestic companies to retain its influence over them while banking the cash.
PARIS Enhanced rights for loyal investors are increasingly touted as a way to make companies think for the long term The Economist May 2nd 2015 Business 57 ► its Japanese partner, Nissan, which holds 15% of Renault’s capital but no voting rights.
The government, determined to defeat the board’s resolution to retain one vote for one share, has temporarily raised its stake from 15% to 19.7% in time for a meeting of Renault shareholders on April 30th.
Even before the passage of the new law, 22 of the companies in the CAC-40, the French blue-chip index, had such arrangements, according to PhiTrust, an investment fund that, along with Proxinvest, a proxy-advisory service, has helped to organise opposition to the Florange law.
Various ways of altering the proportionality between voting rights and the underlying share of ownership are common across Europe and elsewhere, even though many pundits, and most institutional investors, think that this short-changes some shareholders.
What is new in France is that double voting rights are suddenly the default position.
The remaining, French-domiciled CAC-40 firms that have up to now had one vote per share are scrambling to sort themselves out before the law’s provisions come into force.
Of those firms in which the state has no stake, only one has so far ended up with double voting rights for long-term investors.
On April 17th over half of the shareholders in Vivendi, a media conglomerate, voted to stick with one vote per share, but they were short of the two-thirds majority required.
Vincent Bollore, Vivendi’s chairman, increased his holding from just over 10% to almost 15% for the event, reinforcing his control over the group.
In contrast, at Vinci, a construction firm, L’Oreal, a cosmetics giant, and Unibail Rodamco, a property firm, shareholders have seen off the introduction of double voting rights, bnp Paribas and Credit Agricole, both banks, are likely to do the same in May, as are Air Liquide, an industrialgases company, and Capgemini, a consulting firm.
Things are different at companies where the state has a stake and can throw its weight around to ensure its new law is applied.
Shareholders at Veolia, a water utility, failed to secure the supermajority needed to override Florange on April 22nd.
Engie, an energy giant that is changing its name from gdf Suez, went the same way on April 28th; the state owns a third of the capital and Engie is thought to be near the top of its assets-for-sale list.
Few expect Orange, France’s biggest telecoms company which is 25%-owned by the state, to vote down Florange at its shareholders’ meeting on May 27th, whatever happens in Renault’s vote.
For those who thought the French government had thrown off its old interventionism in appointing a more liberal economic team in 2014, the zeal with which it is pursuing double voting rights and its own interests, especially at Renault, is alarming.
But France is not alone in questioning whether the governance rules in their current form are producing robust companies able to plan for the future, or desperate ones sucking up to short-term investors who are apt to trade and run.
Italy adopted its own, much milder Florange law in 2014, removing a decades-old prohibition on multiple voting rights (though Italy allows plenty of other mechanisms for big shareholders to enhance their control) and letting companies give long-term shareholders extra voting power.
Its “growth decree” was designed mainly to persuade owners of family firms that they could list on the stockmarket, and thus raise capital to expand, without having to give up control.
A number of Italian companies, including Campari, a drinksmaker, have changed their statutes to give extra votes to long-term investors.
On May 7th a committee of the European Parliament will debate changes to the Shareholders’ Rights Directive of 2007.
But Mylan dislikes its suitor and runs away to declare its love for Perrigo, while seeking a poison pill in case it is forced to marry Teva.
With many suitors, Perrigo is holding out for a better offer-perhaps even from Teva itself It may not be quite midsummer but the unfolding drama featuring three generic-drug makers could well run until then.
To be on the safe side it has enacted a poison-pill defence against hostile takeover.
Combining the world’s largest generic-drug maker, Teva, with the third-largest.
Reuters; European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations Mylan, would create a company with around $30 billion in annual revenues and, Teva says, $2 billion in cost savings.
As part of its plan to escape Teva’s clutches, Mylan has made three successive takeover offers to Perrigo, a smaller Irish rival, only to be spurned each time.
For Teva the merger would, besides bringing many economies of scale, allow it to put more effort into copying hard-tomake “biologics”-an increasingly important class of drugs that are manufactured inside animal cells or micro-organisms such as bacteria.
The merger proposals have triggered speculation that consolidation could cause the price of generic drugs to rise.
All around the world, health-care providers are keen on buying cheaper generic copies of branded drugs whose patents have expired.
In big emerging markets such as India, spending on drugs in general is growing fast, because of a combination of population growth, programmes to increase public access to health care and new medicines, and governments’ economicstimulus measures.
But prices are a topic of great concern in the rich world, too, especially in America, thanks to some surprising spikes in the cost of some generics.
According to Express Scripts, a drug wholesaler, the price of digoxin, a treatment for congestive heart failure, went up by 1,127% last year.
Pricing concerns have triggered a recent congressional investigation as well as a forthcoming review by the Department of Health and Human Services.
Michael Waterhouse at Morningstar, an investment-research firm, says the risk of consolidation leading to higher prices for generics is low, because the barriers to entry are too small.
So far, at least, the overall trend for generics prices has been downwards.
Express Scripts’ prescription-price index shows that whereas the average price for branded medications in America has risen by 127% over the past seven years, the average for generics is down by 63% over that period.
Washington, an investment-management firm (which holds a position in W HY Volkswagen’s chairman, Eerdinand Piech, failed to remove its chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, is unclear.
What is obvious is that, in his 22 years as the firm’s ceo and then chairman, Mr Piech’s obsession with making it the world’s biggest and best carmaker has left it with some significant weaknesses, in its original vw brand and in the American market.
Having got rid of the group’s previous CEO, Bernd Pischetsrieder, in 2006, through a combination of a public snub and a behind-the-scenes campaign, Mr Piech probably reckoned the same trick would work again.
In a recent interview in Der Spiegel, a news magazine, he said he was “at a distance” from Mr Winterkorn.
Mr Piech’s defeat leaves Mr Winterkorn in pole position to succeed him as chairman of the supervisory board, a powerful body which appoints the carmaker’s executives and must approve big decisions on strategy.
By building factories across the globe and making a string of acquisitions, from Bentley, a maker of luxury Perrigo), observes that consolidations in the generic industry are an effort to create both scale and negotiating power with purchasers of drugs.
This is why, he says, the markets have rewarded consolidators through increases in their share prices.
Ms Davenport, meanwhile, thinks a Teva-Mylan merger has the potential to lead to higher generic prices in the short-to-mid term.
Generics have succeeded in bringing down the overall cost of medicines, by providing competition to branded drugs.
Although the barriers to entry for new generics firms are low, they are not non-existent.
Getting the approvals needed to make and market drugs is not a trivial matter.
So it is important for antitrust authorities to keep an eye on the generics firms, to ensure their romancing does not go too far. ■ cars, to Scania, a lorry-builder, he has made Volkswagen the second-largest vehicle maker in the world, behind only Toyota.
Attention will turn instead to tuning some underperforming bits of the business. vw relies heavily on its premium Audi and Porsche ranges for its profits, and thus is vulnerable to a downturn at the top end of the market.
Eirst-quarter results published this week showed that operating margins on the humbler cars that bear the vw badge-which account for almost half of the group’s sales by volume-were a worse-than-expected 2%. vw hopes to boost these margins to 6%, around the group’s average.
A €5 billion cost-cutting plan for vw-branded cars is under way, and the company is introducing across the group the mob, a modular “platform” that will allow it to make the underpinnings of two-fifths of all its cars from one set of parts.
That should eventually save money, though it is proving more expensive than expected to implement.
But shifting work from vw’s German factories to foreign ones, or cutting the group’s huge research budget, would be almost impossible for Mr Winterkorn, and whoever succeeds him as ceo, to push through.
The state of Lower Saxony has a 20% share of the votes on the supervisory board, and thus a veto on strategic decisions under a law passed when the firm was privatised in i960.
Eixing its problems in America will be just as tough, vw’s share of the world’s second-biggest market, already paltry, is falling.
Changing perceptions of the brand in America will be a longer and more difficult task.
Investors hoping that Mr Piech’s departure signals an even more radical shift in strategy look set for disappointment, however.
The board may simply have chosen to back Mr Winterkorn, in his late 60s, rather than Mr Piech, over a decade older, because the younger man is a better longterm bet on things carrying on as before.
After decades of rising sales and high popularity, makers and sellers of processed food are under pressure not just from comedians but from policymakers, campaigners for “real” food and an increasingly sceptical public.
In February Michelle Obama said she had long banned processed food from the presidential family’s table, in particular Kraft’s macaroni and cheese, one of its biggest sellers.
Last month the company said it would remove the artificial colouring that gives the product its neon-orange glow.
On April 28th it announced flat sales and a 16% fall in net profits, year on year, in the first quarter.
McDonald’s, having replaced its boss in March because of poor sales, said on April 22nd that they were still falling.
Just as restaurants promising more “natural” ingredients have been winning customers from McDonald’s in recent years, Kraft and other American processed-food makers have lost out to smaller food firms peddling healthier fare.
PepsiCo has just finished a threeyear process to cutup to 8,700 jobs, or 3% of its global workforce.
Americans’ growing interest in healthier, simpler fare is providing opportunities for all sorts of startups.
Family farms had been going out of business for decades, but now new ones are being founded, promising organic, locally grown produce.
Kind, which makes fruit and nut snacks, has gone from nothing to annual sales of more than $ioom in ten years.
Even more impressively, Chobani, a maker of Greekstyle yogurt, has gone from nowhere to sales of $1. billion in the same period.
Credit Suisse * Ranked by retail sales One way in which the processed-food giants are reacting is by reformulating their products to answer worries about synthetic ingredients.
More recently PepsiCo said it would remove aspartame, an artificial sweetener, from Diet Pepsi sold in America.
Its arch-rival Coca-Cola is promoting Coke Life, a fizzy drink that contains stevia, a natural, no-calorie sugar substitute.
Stevia has a slightly bitter aftertaste that may put off some drinkers.
And in 2010, when Campbell’s reduced the salt in its soup, customers rebelled, forcing it to add some back.
An increasingly popular, albeit expensive, alternative for the food giants has been to buy small but fast-growing healthy-food brands.
In 2012 Campbell’s bought Bolthouse Farms, which makes organic juices; a year later it took over Plum Organics, a maker of baby food.
If the decline in processed foods’ popularity continues, two further strategiesconsolidation and cost-cutting-will become more prevalent.
Since they bought Heinz for $28 billion in 2013, Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway and 30 Capital, an investment firm with Brazilian roots, have swung the axe at its head office and factories.
In March Mr Buffett and 3G announced that they were buying Kraft for $50 billion to merge it with Heinz.
Although the talk in public is about the potential for boosting the sales of both firms’ brands, there will surely be a drive to apply the same “zerobased budgeting” approach to cost-cutting at Kraft that Heinz has undergone.
Heinz and 3G say they are planning to cut the debt on their balance-sheet to three times ebitda in two years.
Last month Nestle’s chairman, Peter Brabeck-Letmathe, told his shareholders that the two investors have “pulverised the food-industry market, particularly in America, with serial acquisitions,” and that their ruthless cost-cutting is having a “revolutionary impact” on other firms in the industry.
They are not the only ones showing how much scope there is for trimming financial fat as well as the culinary sort from the processed-food business.
Two years ago Dean Metropoulos and Andy Jhawar, two entrepreneurs, bought Hostess, the collapsed maker of Twinkles cakes.
They got rid of inefficient factories and pumped investment into automated production and an improved distribution system.
Now Americans are stuffing their faces with the gooey snacks once more.
Hostility from regulators, campaigners and the media; declining popularity; consolidation and cost-cutting.
Processed food sounds like it has much to learn from tobacco, an industry that has been shrinking for more than 50 years.
As the cigarette-makers have consolidated and cut costs, they have managed to keep profits up and share prices rising.
Processed food may also become a steadily declining but still lucrative business offering guilty pleasures to those who cannot resist.
America’s ruthless 19th-century “robber barons” believed it was easier to go ahead and do something, and seek forgiveness later, than to ask permission first.
The first carmakers had to battle against rules of the road that had been designed for the horse and cart.
Britain’s “pirate” radio stations in the 1960s had to retreat to international waters to bring pop music to the masses.
The tension between innovators and regulators has been particularly intense of late.
Uber and Lyft have had complaints that their car-hailing services break all sorts of taxi regulations; people renting out rooms on Airbnb have been accused of running unlicensed hotels; Tesla, a maker of electric cars, has suffered legal setbacks in its attempts to sell directly to motorists rather than through independent dealers; and in its early days Prosper Marketplace, a peer-to-peer lending platform, suffered a “cease and desist” order from the Securities and Exchange Commission.
It sometimes seems as if the best way to identify a hot new company is to look at the legal trouble it is in.
The first is that many innovative companies are using digital technology to attack heavily regulated bits of the service economy that are ripe for a shake-up.
Uber and Lyft let people turn their cars into taxis; Airbnb lets them rent out their spare rooms; Prosper lets them lend out their spare cash.
Conventional taxi firms, hoteliers and banks argue, not unreasonably, that if they have to obey all sorts of regulations, so should their upstart competitors.
Benjamin Edelman of Harvard Business School argues that YouTube owes its success in part to this strategy.
When it launched in 2005, it was one of dozens of video sites competing for both content and viewers.
Some, such as Google Video, diligently screened each video for copyright infringement.
YouTube was more risk-taking, waiting for copyright owners to complain before taking down videos.
Google bought it for $1.65 billion in stock in 2006; and YouTube, which has just celebrated its tenth anniversary, is now huge, whereas many early rivals have faded away.
Advocates of the strategy calculate that, by providing a better service than incumbents, and by portraying their critics as defenders of vested interests, they can mobilise public opinion and get the rules changed, or interpreted, in their favour.
Last year Eric Pickles, a British government minister, announced the scrapping of restrictions on short-term lettings in response to the rise of Airbnb and similar services.
Innovative companies that put growth before legal niceties have money to spend on pr and lobbying.
Napster, an early music-sharing site, was crushed by lawsuits, even though its efforts paved the way for Apple’s legal downloading service, iTunes.
It is particularly perilous in financial services, where regulators will crack down at the merest whiff of impropriety.
Prosper was once America’s biggest peer-to-peer lender, and Lending Club a distant second.
Prosper dashed for growth, initially ignoring the sec’s warnings, whereas Lending Club shut down its operations for months while its founder figured out a way to comply.
That helped Lending Club, which is now a listed firm, to overtake Prosper, whose fortunes revived only when its founder was ousted.
There is also the risk that those who do business with the ruleflouting companies may suddenly decide that it suits them to uphold the law after all.
On the straight and narrow Such legal perils mean that companies need to be capable of pivoting rapidly to a new strategy if they cannot get the law changed in their favour.
There may be a lot of such pivoting ahead as disrupters are forced to explain themselves in court.
Uber and Lyft are probably now well-enough established to be able to compete on the basis of convenience and quality even if they are forced to treat their drivers as employees.
But for more fragile firms, it would be better still if legislators and regulators responded to the emergence of so many innovative, law-testing businesses by revving themselves up to internet speed and adapting their rule books for the digital age.
The first bet was that the euro would still exist a century from now No bookie would give short odds on that.
Mexicans, whose country has, as one economic historian puts it, lived longer in moratoria than with access to capital markets, reacted with bemusement.
A typically gloomy columnist predicted that, since Mexico will have run out of oil by 2115, it will have to sell off the country’s extremities to repay the bondholders.
It is the only country to have tapped the so-called centennial market since China and the Philippines in the 1990s, and it has done so at relatively low yields-of 6.1% on its dollar bond in 2010 and just 4.2% on its euro bond last month.
Those are extraordinarily good terms given Mexico’s distinctly spotty credit record , which raises two questions.
The answer to the first question is a combination of salesmanship and timing.
The finance ministry’s bright, Americaneducated technocrats know how to attract attention from investors who may not have considered Mexico before.
The eurodenominated bond, for instance, was sold largely to insurance companies and annuity firms.
One advantage of its long life, for borrower and creditors alike, is that it helps avoid the sort of overcrowded redemption schedules that contributed to Mexico’s debt crises in 1982-83 and 1994-95.
But in an era when the yields on the bonds of many rich countries are negative, Mexico’s main selling-point is a relatively high return for a borrower that last year received an “a” rating from Moody’s.
On the day Mexico issued its euro-denominated centennial bond, Switzerland sold a tenyear bond at a negative yield-a first.
Global Financial Data; Thomson Reuters; Haver Analytics *First new bond issued for 50 years 62 Finance and economics The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► emerging markets in several ways.
Although the halving of the oil price has hurt the public finances, the peso has done better than many of its peers.
Agustin Carstens, the governor of the central bank, says Mexico has an “arsenal” of $195 billion of international reserves and a $70 billion credit line from the imf in case of financialmarket volatility.
The government has further impressed investors by tightening its belt before times get tougher.
It has cut spending in an election year and is attempting to implement a string of reforms aimed at bolstering competition in areas like energy and telecommunications that have the potential to attract large sums of foreign direct investment.
It is one of the few countries that has been fixing the roof while the sun shines,” says Andrew Stanners of Aberdeen Asset Management, a big investment fund.
Gerardo Esquivel of El Colegio de Mexico, a university, describes the government’s approach with a different home-improvement analogy.
The problem, he says, is that the 20 years of macroeconomic stability and flexible exchange rates that have endeared Mexico to foreign creditors have been accompanied by meagre, narrowly based growth that depends heavily on exports.
President Enrique Pena Nieto initially promised his reforms would bring annual growth of 5-6%; his government has since had to lower its forecasts repeatedly.
Private-sector ►► Buttonwood Fifteen years of hurt Tech stocks were a bubble in 2000 but they are not this time-yet S tocks are the best investment for the long run.
But the recent record high for the nasdaq, America’s tech-heavy equity index, ought to give investors pause.
Even so, that counts as a sprightly performance compared with Japan’s Nikkei 225, which still trades at only half its 1989 peak.
Such statistics make it hard to argue that “there are no such things as bubbles”, as the occasional economist still contends.
A very high stockmarket valuation implies the expectation of rapid growth in future profits.
The average price-earnings ratio of the nasdaq back in 2000 was more than 150.
In other words, if profits did not rise, a shareholder would have had to wait for well over a century to recoup his original investment.
Perhaps investors were thinking of their great-great-great-grandchildren, but that was not how it seemed at the time.
Technology companies were expected to take over the world and drive “old economy” firms out of business; their profits would soar as a consequence.
Some tech companies have indeed performed fantastically well, as Apple’s latest set of bumper profits show.
The problem in 1999-2000 was that everyone thought they were going to make money out of the internet.
This prompted lots of bright graduates to set up their own dotcom company with a plan to exploit some niche.
But it also meant that some sectors were extremely crowded and competitive.
Earnings crashed after 2000, rather than rising as investors had anticipated.
It was not until 2010 that the earnings per share at nasdaq companies regained the level recorded back in 1997.
Ealtering firms were bought up by their competitors; three-quarters of the companies that made up the nasdaq at the end of 1999 are no longer listed.
Two of NASDAQ’S current giants, Google and Eacebook, had not even gone public by 2000.
Another “rational” explanation for high stockmarket valuations is that investors are prepared to accept lower returns going forward, as values revert to the mean.
The nasdaq rose by 86% in 1999 and investors piled in, hoping to get a piece of the action.
Russ Koesterich, a strategist at BlackRock, a fund-management group, points out that tech stocks comprise only 20% of the overall American market by value, compared with 30% back in 2000.
Biotech is one sector where there are signs of overenthusiasm (up by more than 50% over the past 12 months), although this in part reflects the emergence of some genuinely promising new drugs.
Many of these drugs are specifically intended to replace expensive alternative treatments.
The maker of one such drug, Celgene, told investors that its earnings would increase by 23% a year all the way to 2020.
It may already have emerged in the world of startups and venture capital.
A few more years of zero interest rates and negative bond yields, which force investors to seek higher returns from riskier assets like equities, and who knows what might happen.
But as yet, there is nothing like the sense of euphoria that marked out 19992000.
Investors are not focused on financial news (cNBC’s 2014 ratings were the lowest since 1995); workers are not quitting their jobs to indulge in day trading.
Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood The Economist May 2nd 2015 Finance and economics 63 ► economists think growth will average 3.8% over the next decade, according to a poll from the central bank.
The strength of Mexico’s exports to America-especially cars-has not translated into booming domestic demand due to decades of miserly wages, economists say A huge, unproductive informal sector and general lawlessness also drag the economy down.
The “pressure cooker effect” of low growth, low wages and rising inequality of income and opportunity could explode, according to Mr Esquivel.
Moreover, he argues, the lessons learned from Mexico’s past booms and busts are so embedded among politicians and officials that there is little chance of a slide back into financial chaos.
He points to Mexico’s independent central bank, open financial markets and free-trade agreements as guarantors of stability.
Luis de la Calle, an uncharacteristically upbeat Mexican economist, says this alone could turn Mexico into one of the world’s biggest economies within the next few decades.
Whether countries repay their debts comes down to questions of political will as much as economic performance, however.
The country inherited a habit of default from the Spanish empire, which reneged on its debts more than a dozen times between the 16th and 20th centuries.
Mexicans have also alternated repeatedly between an embrace of globalisation and a reversion to an inward-looking nationalism.
For the first decade of the 20th century, for instance, international bankers threw money at Mexico because of its macroeconomic stability, its railway boom and a global liquidity glut.
Then came the murderous revolution of 1910, which erupted partly because the fruits of that prosperity had not been shared.
For bondholders to get their money back in 2115, Mexico must defy its history and remain open to trade and foreign capital.
If consumers were even marginally more demanding, they could earn tens of billions of dollars in extra returns.
That is the premise behind MaxMyInterest, a year-old electronic service aimed at slothful but yield-hungry savers.
It offers to move money from banks that want to shed deposits, and that therefore pay savers low interest, to ones in need of them, and so willing to pay more.
At the same time, it makes sure that each account holds no more than $250,000, the maximum amount insured by the government, providing not just higher returns, but risk-free ones.
The average interest paid on deposits in America is a microscopic 0.09% a year, according to BankRate, a data firm.
That may seem small, but it amounts to $2,000 a year for every $250,000 account, and should rise considerably whenever the Federal Reserve starts to raise rates.
So far JPMorgan Chase, Citibank, First Republic, Wells Fargo and Bank of America-all titans of American banking-are working with MaxMyInterest to shift excess cash out of the accounts of willing customers.
MaxMyInterest allows them to raise money cheaply, and therefore to make more loans, without having to build a network of branches.
The incentive to co-operate for the banks relinquishing cash is more complex.
They fear that a customer with more than $250,000 in his account might open a new one elsewhere, to benefit from deposit insurance.
The second bank, in turn, might start offering the customer lucrative services such as wealth management.
To avoid such competition, the first bank would rather steer the extra cash to less threatening internet-only outfits.
Regulators require big banks to hold especially high amounts of liquid assets against uninsured deposits.
But banks earn next to nothing on these investments, making such deposits unprofitable.
In response, big banks have begun discouraging them by levying fees and the like.
Steering such deposits through MaxMyInterest allows the banks to save money while appearing more concerned with their customers’ fortunes than their own.
The idea of getting around the cap on deposit insurance is not a new one.
A firm called Promontory Interfinancial Network distributes companies’ cash in $250,000 chunks to banks throughout America, for instance.
But if outfits like MaxMyInterest succeed in steering a significant amount of deposits to the specialist lenders in need of them, it could spell trouble for money-market funds in particular.
They only came into being, after all, thanks to the caps on deposit rates that applied until the 1980s.
They are not explicitly insured, and currently offer minuscule returns.
They may benefit at the moment, but the spread of such services will make it easier for savers to shop around for higher rates.
That would squeeze banks’ margins, and perhaps even change their funding models.
As oil prices collapsed and Western sanctions bit, export revenues slumped.
The Central Bank of Russia has been cutting interest rates-an unthinkable prospect just a few months ago.
All this, some say, is proof that investors are too pessimistic about the Russian economy.
That is helpful for an economy where the stuff provides half of all exports.
A new deal to end the Russian-backed insurgency in Ukraine, signed in February, has also made investors less jittery.
Nonetheless, the rouble’s strength is a puzzle, since in many ways the Russian economy looks worse than it did in December.
Inflation, at 16.9%, is 5. percentage points higher, a jump that would normally spur depreciation.
The foreign-exchange reserves of the CBR have fallen by about $30 billion so far this year, and by $130 billion since this time last year.
The imp thinks that the economy will shrink by 4% in 2015-and it is a relative optimist.
Economic fundamentals cannot explain the rouble’s strength, but the cbr’s behaviour may do.
Last year, as the rouble collapsed, it launched a $50 billion scheme to lend dollars to companies at a concessionary rate.
Thomson Reuters; Central Bank of Russia ‘Latest December, when Russian firms faced a mound of debt repayments.
This year Russian firms, with fewer foreign bills to pay, have used the cheap dollars to invest in much higher-yielding Russian assets, says Timothy Ash of Standard Bank.
On April 20th, however, the CBR put a stop to this “carry trade” by making the loans more expensive, halting the rouble’s appreciation.
Russian firms still have around $100 billion of external debt maturing this year.
Since the rouble remains weak, and their cash reserves have dwindled, repayment may be difficult.
Wonks at Capital Economics, a consultancy, think that the Russian state will have to help out again.
However, Anders Aslund of the Peterson Institute, a think-tank, estimates that the cbr only has about $150 billion of liquid foreign-exchange reserves at its disposal.
Add in a big government deficit and high capital outflows, and within a few months reserves will be much lower.
The Kremlin may then be tempted to try to pay off foreign debt by printing roubles to buy foreign currency.
But neither upheaval in the Middle East, nor the travails of the euro zone, nor startlingly loose monetary policy in the rich world is brightening the spirits of those who swear by bullion.
After a big rally during the financial crisis, the price has sagged to about $1,200 an ounce, a third below its peak in 2on.
The biggest pressure on the gold price comes from the expectation that interest rates in America will rise later this year.
Matthew Turner of Macquarie, a bank, says that low interest rates cut the opportunity cost of owning gold.
Higher interest rates, by contrast, raise the cost of holding non-interest-bearing assets.
Mr Turner thinks expectations of rising rates are already built into the gold price; if they do An ever more marginal existence not materialise as quickly as expected, there could even be a rally.
Nikolai Zelenski, the boss of Nordgold, which has mines in Africa and the former Soviet Union, says that half of all producers have negative cashflow.
If the price does not rise, production could fall on a scale not seen since the two world wars.
Gold is priced in dollars, so the fact that it stayed stable while America’s currency was rising (making gold more expensive for buyers in foreign currencies) is cause for cheer.
Chinese consumers are buying more gold, after a sharp decline sparked partly by an anti-corruption campaign.
So are Indians, the world’s biggest consumers of gold, after the government removed restrictions on imports last year.
Humble citizens who distrust their own currencies can buy assets ranging from shares to bitcoins.
Laurence Fink, the chairman of BlackRock, the world’s biggest asset-management firm, said in March that gold had “lost its lustre”, thanks to the wider availability of property and even contemporary art.
The main exception to the trend is Russia, where the central bank has been a notable buyer of gold, tripling its holdings since 2005.
It bought 30 tonnes in March alone, bringing its hoard to 1,238 tonnes.
The Kremlin’s growing stockpile does not so much reflect a belief in gold’s prospects, however, as a distaste for the American dollar.
Whatever Vladimir Putin’s other qualities, most investors would hesitate to take him on as a financial adviser.
Yields on ten-year government bonds average 7.8% for Indonesia, 6.7% for Vietnam, and around 4% for Malaysia and the Philippines-far above what is on offer in the rich world.
Inflation is low and budget deficits are either manageable or non-existent.
Local currencies have lost less value against the dollar than most in emerging markets.
Erom 2005 to 2014 annual bond issuance from Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam rose from $38 billion to $109 billion, according to Dealogic, a financial-data firm.
Corporate-bond issuance more than tripled, from $20 billion to $78 billion, although most firms in the region still rely on banks for borrowing.
Home-grown institutions such as pension funds and insurers are starting to emerge and invest.
The first is the effect of a strengthening dollar, which will make servicing dollar-denominated debt more expensive, and could push foreign investors in local-currency bond markets to demand higher yields to offset any losses from sliding exchange rates.
Germany’s biggest bank tweaks its strategy C ORPORATE bosses hope for a bump in their share price when they present a new five-year plan.
Postbank, a German retail bank it only finished buying in 2012, will be spun off through a relisting.
On the face of things that should have appealed to regulators, who have pushed lenders to isolate “casino-like” activities from their deposit-taking arms.
Their refusal to allow Deutsche to use Postbank’s deposits to fund its investment bank undermined the entire rationale for its purchase-hence the reversal.
But regulators do not seem to like the idea of a European version of Goldman Sachs, either.
Even fans of the idea admit that a stand-alone investment bank would probably have struggled to pass stress tests designed to gauge banks’ when their dollar debts became too expensive to service as local currencies fell.
Philipp hotter of Moody’s, a rating agency, notes that South-East Asian firms issuing dollar-denominated debt tend to be well hedged, either naturally, through dollar-denominated revenue, or with financial instruments.
Many have issued bonds without trouble over the past few months, even as the dollar leapt.
The average emerging-market corporate bond currently yields 5.6%, according to Bloomberg, another data firm-a full percentage point below last year’s high.
In 2013, after Ben Bernanke, then the chairman of the federal Reserve, raised the prospect of tightening monetary policy, emerging markets saw sell-offs, sharply higher yields, volatility in their currencies and reduced capital flows.
Regulators are not keen on banks with too little diversity in earnings, and income from investment banking is especially volatile.
Other concerns are also weighing on them, not least the opening of a trial on April 28th in which Jurgen Eitschen, Deutsche’s co-chief executive, is among those facing prison for allegedly misleading a court over the bank’s role in the collapse of the Kirch media empire in 2002.
On April 23rd Deutsche agreed to pay $2. billion to settle American and British regulators’ claims it had fiddled libor, a key interest rate, for six years until 2010.
Anshu Jain, Deutsche’s other boss, was a higher-up at the investment bank at the time, but was not ousted as part of the deal, as other bank bosses have been.
But putting the fine behind it does not mean a rosier financial future for Deutsche.
The bank is cutting its target for return on equity by about a third, amid hints that regulators are giving it less leeway in the way it assesses the riskiness of its assets.
Whichever way you look, regulators’ desires are trumping those of managers and investors.
Among South-East Asian markets, Indonesia was hit particularly hard in 2013; its heavy reliance on external finance and declining exports due to weak commodity prices leave it vulnerable.
Indonesia’s foreign-currency reserves are higher and its current-account deficit lower now than they were then.
What is more, the Eed has given ample warning that rate rises are coming; it has signalled that they will probably be modest and gradual.
Jahangir Aziz of JPMorgan Chase, a bank, believes there will be less disruption than in 2013.
Yields on Indonesia’s ten-year bonds have risen from 6.9% to 7.5% since March, and foreign ownership of government bonds in general has fallen by two percentage points.
The state government invoked a colonial-era law to forcibly acquire the plot in 2006 from 13,000 landholders, many of them unwilling sellers.
Protests against the purchase continued even as the factory was being built.
Narendra Modi, then the chief minister of Gujarat, offered it a way out by providing it a factory-ready plot there.
The Singur protests have come back to haunt Mr Modi, who is now India’s prime minister.
They led to a new law in 2013 which set arduous terms for coercive land purchases.
Mr Modi is trying to relax these rules for certain categories of project, such as rural infrastructure, industrial parks and low-cost housing.
Yet if India is to become richer, it needs to be able to build roads and factories.
The economic case for allowing the state to acquire property by coercion starts with the Coase theorem, named for Ronald Coase, a Nobel prize-winning economist, which says that private bargaining should produce ideal results for society if property rights are well defined.
This is all the more so where property is fragmented, as it was at Singur.
New medicines and electronic gadgets can also be delayed or never made because of “patent thickets”, a term coined in the 1970s to denote clusters of intellectual-property rights.
Economists and legal scholars have justified forced purchases when the transaction costs of stitching together many small properties are too high for a deal to be reached by consensus.
More precisely, it can be used to overcome the power of so-called holdouts.
Landholders know the project cannot proceed unless the buyer acquires all the plots he needs.
Because of the holdout problem, investments that have big public benefits will often be stymied unless a sale is forced.
Laws in many countries, therefore, allow for the compulsory purchase of property , as long as those affected are justly compensated.
But in developing countries, where markets for land in particular are often more regulated, less liquid and more corrupt than in the rich world, determining the appropriate compensation can be difficult.
A transaction is efficient in the strictest sense only if it makes some better off while leaving no one worse off.
In company takeovers, after all, shareholders are usually paid a premium to give up their rights.
India’s current land-acquisition law is simultaneously too strict to pave the way for desirable projects and too lax to protect property owners.
Eorced land purchase requires the consent of at least 70% of affected landholders and must also pass a social-impact test.
Compensation must be twice the market value for urban plots and four times for rural land.
Mr Modi wants to ditch the consent and social-impact clauses for certain projects because of the delays involved.
As Maitreesh Ghatak of the London School of Economics and Parikshit Ghosh of the Delhi School of Economics point out, if farmers are adequately compensated, consent is largely irrelevant.
The price is wrong Yet compensation in India is based on recent land sales, which are likely to be far lower than the true value of a property due to India’s distorted market.
The direct sale of farmland to industry is banned in several states and tricky in many others; instead, land is often sold by a farmer in distress to another farmer.
A study of the Singur purchase by Mr Ghatak and others found that, though compensation was on average close to market value, landowners with superior plots were offered too little.
As long as farmers in India believe they might be ripped off, protests against land purchases by the state are likely to continue.
A way to counter this, say Messrs Ghatak and Ghosh, is to invite offers to sell from landholders in a plot required for development, but also from landholders close by.
A farmer within the bounds of the development who did not accept the price determined by such an auction could instead be given a nearby plot as compensation.
These nearby plots would not be subject to the holdout problem as they are not essential to the project.
I bathroom detoched off plan vtia kxated between holes 1 0 & 1 8 within the Apes Hdl Oob.
With ponofamic West Coast & Coribbeari Sea viewi on rdeol vocouon home or investment opportunity.
Grand Cayman from $2,950,000 Unique to Cayman, an intimate community of 3-tt bedrocm detoched villos riestled oround 0 pnvotebeochcove.
Bnnging the best of Conbbean livinig & Tuscan inspired orchitectufe. residents enjoy on idylhc blend of beochfiont bUss St prtvocy of lush londscoped grounds. 20 3040 8210 lnternaUonal@'chestertons.com f ra a ® p chest ertons* i n ter n at i onal .com RiSIOENTIAL We see the future We sell the listed buildings of the future.
For sound residential property investment register with us today, and see London's largest portfolio of new homes before they even exist.
Our privileged members enjoy the privacy and comfort of home, plus the lifestyle benefits associated with one of the most desirable addresses in London.
Marriott Vacation Club International and the programs and products provided under the Grand Residences by Marriott brand are not owned, developed, or sold by Marriott International, Inc.
Marriott Vacation Club International uses the Marriott marks under license from Marriott International, Inc. and its affiliates.
Sdence and technology The Economist May 2nd 2015 69 Dealing with rogue drones Copping a ’copter In the hands of criminals, small drones could be a menace.
Now is the time to think about how to detect them and knock them down safely O N APRIL 22nd a drone carrying radioactive sand landed on the roof of the Japanese prime minister’s office in Tokyo.
It was the latest of a string of incidents around the world involving small drones.
In February and early March several were spotted hovering near the Eiffel tower and other Parisian landmarks.
Later in March someone attempted to fly one full of drugs (and also a screwdriver and a mobile phone) into a British prison.
The employment of drones for nefarious, or potentially nefarious, purposes thus seems to have begun in earnest.
It is only a matter of time before somebody attempts to use a drone, perhaps carrying an explosive payload, to cause serious damage or injury.
The other sort was quadcopters-miniature helicopters that have four sets of rotors, one at each corner, for stability.
Such drones are slow-moving and often low-flying, which makes it awkward for radar to pick them up, especially in the clutter of a busy urban environment.
You might be able to jam its control signals, to direct another drone to catch or ram it, or to trace its control signals to find its operator and then “defeat” him instead.
But all of this would need to take place, as far as possible, without disrupting local Wi-Fi systems (drones are often controlled by Wi-Fi), and it would certainly have to avoid any risk of injuring innocent bystanders.
Bringing down quads One company which thinks itself up to fulfilling the detection part of the process is DroneShield, in Washington, dc.
This firm was founded by John Franklin and Brian Hearing after Mr Franklin crashed a drone he was flying into his neighbours’ garden by accident, without them noticing.
He realised then how easily drones could be used to invade people’s privacy and how much demand there might be for a system that could warn of their approach.
DroneShield’s system is centred on a sophisticated listening device that is able to detect, identify and locate an incoming Also in this section 70 Drones and the law 71 Germ-line gene therapy 71 Genes and the placebo effect 72 Tracking baseball games with radar For daily analysis and debate on science and technology, visit Economist.com/science drone based on the sound it makes.
The system runs every sound it hears through a sonic “library”, which contains all the noises that are made by different types of drone.
If it finds a match, it passes the detected drone’s identity and bearing to a human operator, who can then take whatever action is appropriate.
Blighter Surveillance Systems, based near Cambridge, Britain, is having a go.
Conventional radars, which search for things by looking for shifts of position, are not good at spotting slow-moving objects like drones.
Blighter’s approach, based on a radar developed to spot human intruders who are crawling along the ground to evade detection, employs the Doppler effect instead.
It can tell how fast, and in which direction, something is moving by comparing the frequency of the radar beam it emits with that of any reflection it receives.
The Doppler effect means the beam’s frequency rises when it bounces off an approaching object and falls when it returns from a receding one.
Once the radar notices something moving, it passes the information to a human operator who can take a look with a camera or a thermal-imaging device, to determine whether the object is a drone or a bird.
A crude but effective one is to flood the radio frequency the drone is operating on-or even the entire radio spectrumwith a signal of high enough power to cancel out the drone’s control signal and ►► 70 Science and technology The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► cause it to crash.
Such a crash, though, would be uncontrolled and so might result in damage or injury.
A more sophisticated approach, drone spoofing, involves the spoofer sending fake GPS signals specifically to the drone.
If these are more powerful than the real thing, they can be used to feed false navigation information to the drone’s computer, causing the craft to change course or crash in a place of the spoofer’s choice.
An even cleverer idea is to hijack not just a drone’s navigation but its entire control system.
Skyjack, the result of Mr Kamkar’s drone-related deliberations, subverts the controls of one of the most popular sorts of drone, the Parrot quadcopter, of which more than 700,000 have been sold.
It is a Parrot modified by the addition of a specially programmed Raspberry Pi (a commonly available miniature computer), a battery and two wireless transmitters.
It seeks the signals of any other Parrot in the neighbourhood and hijacks that drone’s wireless connection by issuing a command to disconnect from the device controlling it.
The hijacker can then fly the zombie wherever he wishes, and also watch its video feed.
If a target drone’s controls prove unsubvertible, though, it may be necessary to apply brute force.
But shooting drones down, or knocking them out of the sky with interceptor “killer drones” comes up, once more, against the problem that you do not know where a disabled drone is going to land.
Net benefits An alternative is to try to catch and retrieve the target.
Malou’s hexacopter, the mp200, can be fitted with a dangling net that entangles its prey (see photograph) and brings it back for examination.
Doing this requires a skilful ground controller, but Malou has set up a drone school to train people in the art.
Even better, though, would be to retrieve the human operator behind a drone-and that is what eca Robotics, in Toulon, is trying to do.
This means that even if the operator is able to make a getaway, there will still be evidence that may identify him and which can be used in court if he is prosecuted.
Whether any or all of these ideas will prove good enough to set up real air defences against drones remains to be seen.
But the only other approach on offer at the moment is to create areas of restricted airspace around obvious targets and require manufacturers to incorporate them into the software of commercial drones as prohibited GPS locations.
So far, prison-smuggling aside, the irregular use of drones seems to have been intended mainly to carry out slightly anarchic protests.
In part of the United States, however, politicians propose to go after drone operators too, by making the use of a drone to commit a felony an aggravating action.
So far, Mrs Roach’s proposal has passed votes in both houses of the legislature, winning the support of Democrat representatives and senators as well as that of her fellow Republicans.
If she can succeed in attaching it to a forthcoming vote on the state’s budget, it could become law within weeks.
If that happens, anyone convicted of using an unmanned aerial vehicle to plan or carry out a felony would automatically have a year in prison tacked onto his sentence.
Mrs Roach fears drones may be used to smuggle drugs into prisons, to help burglars scout empty houses or to enable poachers to track the state’s protected herds of Roosevelt elk.
Arguing against it, Paul Strophy a local defence lawyer, notes that, unlike carrying weapons or travelling at speed to escape a police car, drones do not themselves create much additional risk to the public, so their mere involvement in a crime should not be a reason for additional punishment.
Nor would the penalty apply to crimes that were misdemeanours, rather than felonies.
Yet that would exclude many illegal activities in which drones might play a part, such as the surreptitious recording of conversations.
Conversely, the law could have perverse effects in some not particularly serious offences that happen to count as felonies.
At the moment, for example, peeping toms in Washington typically get a sentence of ten weeks.
Mrs Roach’s answer to the misdemeanour question is that she hopes, if her proposal does pass, that it will be extended in the future to cover them, too.
Drone operators whose aircraft inadvertently take pictures of skinny-dipping neighbours had better be prepared for the worst.
The Economist May 2nd 2015 Science and technology 71 Germ-line gene therapy To the crack of doom Scientists in China have just crossed one of biotechnology’s red lines ABOLISHING beta thalassaemia is a no/^ble goal.
This inherited blood disease, which can cause severe anaemia and consequent organ damage, sometimes fatal, is a scourge to those who suffer it.
And abolished it could be, if the broken gene that causes it (which is called hbb and encodes part of the haemoglobin molecule) were itself to be abolished.
A newish DNA-editing technique called crispr/ Cas9 is able, at least in principle, to make precise changes in particular genes.
By modifying hbb in a fertilised egg (known technically as a zygote), and letting that zygote develop into a human being, you would abolish the disease not only in the resulting individual but also in his or her “germ line”-the line of descent.
That controversial prospect has just been the subject of a real experiment.
But it yielded lessons that might make a subsequent try more successful.
CRiSPR/Cas9 is a large bit of molecular machinery derived from a bacterial defence system that chops up the DNA of invading viruses.
In nature, it recognises DNA sequences that are foreign to the bacterium, but the recognition mechanism can be modified to search for any given sequence and cut the dna there.
If this is done to a gene in an animal or plant cell, the cell will try to repair itself using the other copy of the gene present (for there is one from each parent) as a template.
That process can be subverted by injecting an artificial template of the desired dna sequence, which is then used as a model for repair.
Dr Huang and his colleagues tried this on HBB with 86 zygotes they had obtained from local fertility clinics.
These zygotes were unviable because each had been fertilised by two sperm.
Of the 86, 71 survived the procedure and 54 of these were tested to see if it had worked.
In 28 the dna had indeed been cut by CRiSPR/Cas9 and then repaired by the cell.
In only four of these cases, though, had the artificial template been used for the repair.
Dr Huang found that there were many “off-target” mutations in other parts of hbb, or in other, similar genes, which would have caused serious damage if expressed in an actual human being.
Knowing which bits of DNA are susceptible to off-target modification, for example, might allow the approach to be refined.
A report in Nature says at least four groups in China may be working on human germ-line modification.
The controversial nature of the work also led to the paper’s actual publication being a cloak-and-dagger matter.
Though neither journal has commented, rumours suggest Dr Huang offered it to Nature and Science (generally regarded as the world’s premier research journals), but both turned it down.
Meanwhile Protein & Cell, the work’s eventual home, labels it as having been received on March 30th and accepted on April 1st.
The eflfectiveness of a placebo may depend on someone’s DNA G ive someone who is sick a sugar pill that you have told him is a powerful drug, and it will often make him feel better.
The placebo effect, as this phenomenon is knownfrom the Latin for “I shall please”-is one of the strangest things in medical science.
It is a boon to doctors and a bane of those running clinical trials, who must take account of it in their designs.
If placebos could be exploited rationally, perhaps in conjunction with functional drugs, better treatments might be effected.
Drug testing, too, would be simplified, as trial designers were able select those more and less susceptible to the effect as the needs of the trial dictated.
One thing that is known about the placebo effect is that it involves several brain systems, each under the control of a particular type of messenger molecule, called a neurotransmitter.
These systems, like everything else in the body, are regulated by genes.
Dr Hall looked for links between the placebo effect’s strength and certain mutations, known as single nucleotide polymorphisms , in which a single DNA “letter” in a gene is changed.
Altogether she found 11 genes, in four neurotransmitter systems, where snps made a difference.
Eive were in the system mediated by dopamine, which includes the brain’s reward centres.
As their names suggest, these two systems are affected respectively by opium and its derivatives, and by cannabis and its.
The other two are affected by cocaine, which blocks the retrieval of dopamine into nerve cells, thus increasing its power as a messenger; and Prozac, which has the same effect on serotonin, and is used as an antidepressant.
It is not hard to imagine a similarity between the workings of these drugs and what happens in the brain ►► 72 Science and technology The Economist May 2nd 2015 ► when the placebo effect is operating.
The genes for which most placebo-related SNP evidence exists encode enzymes called catechol-o-methyltransferase and monoamine oxidase.
Both of these are parts of the dopamine system, and both are responsible for metabolising dopamine, and thus regulating the amount of it around.
People with different versions of either of these genes experience the placebo effect to different degrees.
Instead of relying on the instincts of scouts, he and his deputy Paul DePodesta, a statistically astute Harvard economics graduate, crunched candidate players’ numbers.
Baseball is awash with such numbers, and the two men applied simple statistics to them to identify valuable players whom scouts had rejected, and who could thus be hired cheaply.
Despite having one of the league’s lowest payrolls, it qualified for the post-season tournament run by Major League Baseball , the professional game’s organiser, for four years running.
This success, which was the subject of a book called “Moneyball”, caused others to copy the method.
Before long, teams had extracted all the information they could from the game’s traditional statistics.
To produce even more accurate predictions, they would need better data.
And the means to gather those numbers have now arrived, in the form of a system called Statcast developed specifically for baseball by mlb.
Statcast can, pretty much, follow and record everything that happens in a baseball game.
It builds on earlier game-tracking technology, such as the Hawk-Eye system used in cricket, but is far more sophisticated.
It constantly logs the position of the ball and of every player on the field.
It calculates the speed and curvature of a pitch, how rapidly the ball spins and around what axis, and how much faster or slower than reality that pitch appears to be to the placebo perception may be widespread.
The studies Dr Hall drew on are all preliminary, so they are better regarded as pointers for further investigation than as prescriptions for action.
But if such investigations confirm these results, it may be possible to predict, on the basis of a genetic test, whether someone will experience a strong placebo effect or not.
That could allow a doctor to lower the prescribed dose of a drug, if a strong placebo effect is expected.
It could also permit drug companies conducting trials to exclude the placebo-susceptible, and thus to get a better sense of the underlying efficacy of what is being tested. ■ hitter, based on the length of the pitcher’s stride.
When the ball is hit, the system measures how quickly it leaves the bat and how its path is affected by atmospheric conditions.
It then tracks how long fielders take to react before moving, and the efficiency of their routes to the ball’s eventual landing spot.
Statcast captures the information it needs by fusing data from two pieces of equipment.
The player-following system is a stereoscopic camera array Track that, sucker developed by ChyronHego, an American graphics company.
It cannot, however, track the ball as reliably as it tracks the players, for baseballs (which are white) are hard to see when they fly in front of similarly coloured backgrounds.
To follow the ball, including measuring its spin using the Doppler effect (see “Copping a ’copter” earlier in this section), the mlb therefore turned to TrackMan, a Danish radar firm.
Their system had a hiccup when it turned out that the giant video screens without which no major-league baseball ground is complete were jamming it.
In theory, following the players and following the ball in this way should provide all the data needed for statistical purposes.
But Statcast is designed, in part, for television, and for that purpose yet another camera needs to be added to the mix.
This watches the field as a whole, providing coordinates that map the radar and optical data onto broadcasters’ video feeds.
It permits commentators to illustrate replays with dazzling visual displays.
It was used this way for the first time on April 21st, by mlb Network, the sport’s proprietary cable channel.
It is, though, the trove of information Statcast’s all-seeing eye delivers about how players play that most interests teams.
They can use such data to make players better-for example, by telling a pitcher who cannot impart sufficient backspin to try a different grip-and to allocate resources more efficiently, such as moving a fielder with lightning-quick reflexes to third base, a position where such people are particularly valuable.
In 2013, for example, the Houston Astros employed an analysis based on the TrackMan system to acquire an unaccomplished pitcher called Collin McHugh, because of his fast-spinning curveball.
They then told him to throw that pitch far more often during the next season, and he blossomed into a star.
Who will have the opportunity to dig into Statcast’s numbers does, though, remain to be decided.
When a prototype version was launched in 2007 , mlb allowed anyone to download the raw data.
That open-source approach led to a flurry of discoveries, many of which have become accepted wisdom.
Now, those teams with good analysts have an incentive to pull up the ladder.
They fear weaker rivals will free-ride on the work of the next generation of amateurs, reducing the edge that employing professionals gives.
Rob Manfred, mlb’s commissioner, has promised fans “very good access” to Statcast.
He shrank the state, rescued the economy and won the cold war; all Republican candidates must pay homage.
The left dismisses him as malign and moronic-a B-movie actor who floated into the White House on an updraft of phoney charm, a man who snoozed during meetings, blew up the deficit and propped up unsavoury third-world despots from Argentina to Zaire.
Brands’s new biography tells the story as well as you could ask for in a single volume.
A lucid and witty writer, Mr Brands lays out the facts in short chapters that bounce along like one of the “bare-fisted walloping action” films that Reagan once starred in.
They include not only politicians and Reagan himself, but also his children, who were as neglected as those of any famous parent.
Invited to speak at his adopted son Michael’s boarding school, Reagan failed to recognise his boy under a mortar board.
The book covers Reagan’s acting career-a love affair with the camera that lasted a lifetime.
Reagan grew up a Democrat, in the Irish tradition, before drifting to the right.
As his film career faded, he was paid to host a television series sponsored by America’s biggest industrial firm and to give speeches at ge factories.
As he toured the country by train, he read books about economics and history.
Everywhere he went, people told him stories of government meddling and how it hurt their businesses.
He incorporated these stories into his act, and eventually came to realise that he was a Republican.
Reagan was 69 years old when he became president-slightly older than Hillary Clinton will be in January 2017.
He was, if anything, a more experienced politician, having run for president three times and served two terms as governor of California.
Jimmy Carter, the sitting president he beat in 1980, presided over stagflation at home and humiliation abroad.
In California he compromised with Democratic lawmakers to pass a moderate budget, welfare reform and a bill legalising abortion.
As president, he raised taxes when he had to, despite vowing to cut them.
He tussled with Democrats in Congress but eventually reached deals to patch up Social Security , reform the immigration system and simplify the tax code.
After leaving the Oval Office, he even backed a gun-control bill named in honour of his press secretary, James Brady, who was crippled by an assassin’s bullet meant for Reagan himself Reagan’s foreign policy was straightforward.
He knew that the Soviet state was rotting from within, and understood the power of ideas to hasten its demise.
The killing in places like Lebanon was about local grievances, both ancient and modern, and could not be fitted neatly into a cold-war template.
Without his attention to detail, the Camp David peace deal between Egypt and Israel would never have been signed.
The Life” contains little that will surprise professional historians, but lay readers will find it illuminating.
Mr Brands recounts Reagan’s triumphs and the scandals even-handedly, and concludes that the Gipper’s achievements were comparable to those of Eranklin D Roosevelt, the president who led America most of the way towards winning the second world war.
Between 1776, when America declared independence, and 1804, when Haiti at last threw off the yoke of Erench rule, the compartments and divisions of established power became everyone’s target.
This book assiduously describes how, just as the doctrine of the universal rights of man seized the Western world, so too did an irrepressible iconoclasm.
Instead of telling the usual heroic national story, she ranges wherever her wayfaring revolutionaries take her-to Paris and Washington, but also to Poland, Sierra Leone and the Caribbean.
Instead of confining herself to the deeds of valiant men, she also gives the stage to women and slaves.
The result is a spectacle that conveys the thrill of the Enlightenment as well as the delirium of revolution.
Ordinary people were hungry for new ideas and many of those ideas travelled on paper.
Ms Polasky loosely marshals her material by type-one chapter is based on pamphlets, another draws on newspapers, a third is taken from diaries and so on.
In 1788 politics filled only 5% of Erench journals; a year later the share was two-thirds.
And yet, although news was sought after, it would take weeks or months to reach far-flung outposts, which fuelled rumour and insubordination by commanders and diplomats unsympathetic to the line at home.
Ms Polasky demonstrates how wandering radicals were also vital to the spread of ideas.
She includes familiar names, like Thomas Paine, the Englishman who fomented revolt in the Americas before returning across the Atlantic to fight the good fight in continental Europe, but also lesserknown figures, such as Equiano Olaudah, who bought his freedom and wrote about the slave trade; Thaddeus Kosciuszko, who waged war in the Americas and returned to lead a doomed revolution in his native Poland; and Anna Maria Ealconbridge, chronicler of the miseries of the black pioneers who, with the backing of British abolitionists, tried to settle in Sierra Leone.
This book is at its best in describing the effect of revolution on the slaves and free men and women in the Americas and the Caribbean.
Slaves were not literate-the only one in Guyana who could read and write was executed in 1796-so the historical record comes down from whites.
Some whites tried to find reasons why universal theories did not apply or, failing that, lived in stunning contradiction.
Yet notions of liberty and of the rights of man were intoxicating both to those suffering in bondage and also to non-whites, who, although free, enjoyed fewer rights than white landowners.
Most of the slaves in Saint-Domingue, for instance, had been on the island for less than a decade and many had fought in African armies.
When they rose up in 1791, they seemed to the whites to be alarmingly well organised.
Chapters based on novels and intimate letters are designed to show how the revolutionary spirit also spread inward-to marHitting back riage and family life.
The Erench Directoire, which ruled from 1795 until it came increasingly under the sway of Napoleon Bonaparte, dispensed with the revolution’s universal character.
Its armies in parts of Belgium, Germany, Italy and Switzerland became just another occupying force.
In America the counter-revolutionaries ensured that the country was hostile to figures like Paine.
As the walls went up again, Ms Polasky’s wandering revolutionaries were left with nowhere to call home.
Atlantic; £12.99 B etrayal, secrecy and memory are the haunting themes of Soft Oksanen’s accomplished new novel.
Like her previous work, “Purge”, it features the history of Estonia at the moment when it was caught between Stalin’s hammer and Hitler’s anvil in the second world war.
Most readers will start the book with only a hazy grasp of the intricacies of Baltic history-a brief but traumatic Soviet annexation followed by a selectively lethal German invasion, and then renewed Soviet occupation which lasted until 1991.
The political and personal dilemmas are elegantly echoed in a subplot involving sexual identity.
The title comes from the bitter winter when hungry German soldiers ate even the pigeons in the capital, Tallinn.
The abandoned and sex-starved Juudit takes a seemingly sympathetic Nazi lover.
The ghastly and mendacious Edgar starts life as an anticommunist resistance fighter, collaborates enthusiastically with the Germans, and then becomes a Soviet propagandist, expertly libelling the anti-communist emigres for crimes which they did not commit, but which he did.
Unlike “Purge”, “When the Doves Disappeared” does not stretch to the present day.
Readers are left wondering what happened to the surviving characters, and whether justice and truth ever triumphed.
Some Estonians regard her rather sniffily as an outsider, but Ms Oksanen’s insights and intuition mean she is fast becoming one of the foremost voices in the ex-communist world.
Grandiose openings like this are often a warning sign in popular science books, a signal that the author is trying to gussy up a collection of unremarkable observations.
His latest book is a persuasive, demanding attempt to answer some of the most fundamental questions in biology.
Science offers a broad overview of how life works, but many intriguing details remain unclear.
Mr Lane tackles some of them, including the origins of life, the connections between sex and death and what, if anything.
The book’s overarching argument is that life is a natural, chemical process, and therefore faces constraints imposed by the iron laws of physics or chemistry.
Despite its spectacular surface diversity, those constraints restrict its chemical underpinnings, and that affects how life develops.
Such considerations, says Mr Lane, can shed light on some of biology’s most profound questions.
The most accessible of those is how life got started in the first place.
Mark Essig, a historian residing in the hoglands of North Carolina, would agree.
These farmers can turn a profit only by selling every inch of their animals to adventurous chefs and gourmets.
Mr Essig’s broad, well-researched book highlights that this is merely the latest stage in man’s on-off-and-on-again relationship with pigs.
The curly-tailed animals have proven extraordinarily useful to human development and have been present from the earliest permanent dwellings to modern metropolises.
The porcine ability to turn waste of almost any description into protein-thanks to “a simple gut and multipurpose teeth”, which means it can eat almost anythingensured that in the ancient Near East, Anglo-Saxon England and the Americas it was the perfect beast to sustain rapidly growing and colonising populations.
Not for nothing is there a Chinese character, qing, that designates both “pigsty” and “outhouse”, and the idea of consuming a beast fed on communal waste has appalled societies from the ancient Egypearly oceans contained enough organic chemicals to form spontaneously some kind of primitive self-replicator.
But biology has moved on, and Mr Lane gives a convincing account, based on basic chemical principles, of why this theory is almost certainly wrong.
There is simply not enough energy available in such a system, he points out, to produce complicated chemicals at anything like the required rate.
Mr Lane’s preferred idea is that life got its start in warm vents at the bottom of the ocean, in which hot, mineral-infused water wells up from beneath the sea floor.
As the water cools, the minerals precipitate out, forming intricate, honeycombed structures.
Pigs have also been beset by snobbery, given that pork has regularly provided calories to the poorest members of society.
After the Black Death carried off a third of Europe, demand for meat plummeted and so did prices.
Peasants started eating pork; uppity nobles chewed on birds and beef instead.
Mr Essig’s main point is that the better people treat pigs, the more they like them.
Romans lavished love and attention on their pigs, allowing them to wander in the woods, eating nuts and grains.
Post-war America industrialised pig production, inventing indoor cages and “a litany of horrors” for their sows, and found the meat was mushy and tasteless.
For him, such intelligent, efficient companions should command a much higher price.
That, in turn, allowed the formation of a strong voltage gradient across their boundaries.
Those gradients were the forerunners of the voltage differences that enable modern cells to manufacture the thousands of chemicals they need to functionand which therefore provide the vital spark for every living thing on the planet.
Although the other questions are perhaps more obscure, they are just as profound.
Then, suddenly, something new arrived on the scene, complicated “eukaryotic” cells, complete with nuclei, tightly packed chromosomes and all kinds of specialised compartments.
Mr Lane posits that the crucial step was the unlikely development of symbiosis between an archaeon and a bacteria.
The hyper-specialised descendants of those ancient bacteria, the mitochondria, form the “power plants” inside the cells of all complex life today.
Occasionally it sparkles-“the universe is not pregnant I N AVANT-GARDE art, as in polar exploration, it’s getting there first that counts.
The history of modernism is often viewed as a series of discoveries with the glory going to whomever made the next conceptual breakthrough.
As that story is usually told, for the first half of the 20th century the innovative centre was Europe, before the old world was overtaken in the aftermath of the second world war by America.
It was founded in 1954 by Jiro Yoshihara, a Japanese painter who encouraged his followers to challenge the conformity that had contributed to the authoritarianism of the preceding decades.
Like Dada, an artistic and literary wave that began in Switzerland in 1916, Gutai was a movement formed in response to the trauma of war.
The radical approaches it favoured-including a preference for non-art materials, spontaneity over mastery, ephemeral performances, exhibiting in non-traditional spaces such as city parks and department stores, and a with the idea of ourselves,” he writes, discussing his view that, thanks to the implausible rarity of the symbiosis necessary to give rise to complex life, it is probably rare in the cosmos.
But although his ideas are somewhat simplified for a lay audience, they are never dumbed down.
Erequent trips to the glossary in the back may help those without a biological background to make sense of some passages.
Mr Lane never patronises his readers, and those willing to make the effort to think about what he is saying will be rewarded with one of the deepest, most illuminating books about the history of life to have been published in recent years. ■ general rej ection of traditionwere intended to undermine art’s complicity with systems of wealth and power.
Given Gutai’s Utopian philosophy, the current market buzz about its work is not without irony.
Splendid Playground” at the Guggenheim Museum and “Tokyo 1955-1970: A New Avant-Garde” at the Museum of Modern Art , as well as a new exhibition now at the Dallas Art Museum, “Between Action and the Unknown: the Art of Kazuo Shiraga and Sadamasa Motonaga” , prices for work by the best-known Gutai practitioners have increased dramatically.
The most spectacular example has been Shiraga, who died in 2008 and whose paintings have recently become the object of something of a feeding frenzy.
Since 2009 the average price of Shiraga’s work has risen more than six times.
Last June one of his most famous paintings, “Gekidou Sum Aka” (“Dynamic of Red”-pictured), which served as Gutai’s manifesto when it was unveiled at Expo 70, the world fair in Osaka, sold at Sotheby’s in Paris for $5.3m.
The sudden star power of Shiraga is both understandable and a little disquieting.
His paintings are an almost perfect combination of radical aspiration and traditional form-high-mindedness that can easily be packaged and hung on a wall.
Dispensing with the manual skill normally associated with painting, Shiraga adopted a technique in which he painted with his feet, manipulating gloopy puddles of pigment while suspended by ropes over paper, canvas and more exotic materials like the hide of a wild boar.
But Shiraga pumps up the volume, turning Pollock’s ethereal drips or Kline’s slashing brushwork into cosmic geological formations that writhe and bubble as if extruded from a volcanic caldera.
They have a presence that blows away much of today’s thin, ironic, media-saturated confections.
They not only ooze, they ooze authenticity-a precious commodity in an increasingly jaded global art world.
The spectacle of a Utopian movement seduced by market capitalism is an old one.
The chasm between Gutai’s antimaterialist goals and the world of luxury commodities that has become ubiquitous is made explicit by a video (included in both the Dominique Levy show and at the Dallas Museum of Art) of Shiraga’s famous performance, “Challenging Mud”, which was first realised in 1955.
In it the almost naked artist battled with a recalcitrant pile of sticky goo to create a work that was both temporary and emphatically unmarketable.
Here was an inspiring affirmation of an artist refusing to succumb to the demands of capitalism, throwing himself fully into something that could not possibly be bought or sold, that offered nothing but the spectacle of a heroic struggle against meaninglessness.
It seems that many wellheeled collectors today find such total commitment irresistible.
The World Gold Council is the market development organisation for the gold industry.
Working within the investment, jewellery and technology sectors, as well as engaging in government affairs, our purpose is to provide industry leadership, whilst stimulating and sustaining demand for gold.
The primary focus will be on promoting the role of gold as a reserve asset to the world's central banks, based on rigorous analysis of the way that gold interacts with other reserve assets and macroeconomic variables.
You will assist the World Gold Council in developing public policy positions to support an orderly gold market, free fair and unfettered access for all individuals and transparency and good governance.
You will also continually monitor the global financial, macro-economic, and policy and regulatory environment to help identify new roles for gold.
CONSULTING & COACHING FOR CHANGE Rethinking change ++EC Th> rnsr* kMm, SAilJ KhOPi.
Through its four business divisions of Private Banking, Investment Banking, Asset Management and Corporate Banking, the owner-managed bank is able to offer a broad range of services into corporations, investment institutions and private individuals.
Last date and time for submission of EOls is 1600 hrs 1ST on 30.05 2016.
High Commission For The Development Of Arriyadh invites tiJorld Class Operators, specialized in operating and maintaining unattended transit systems and related facilities , to apply for Prequalification for the Riyadh Metro Operation and Maintenance Tender.
The Economist May 2nd 2015 Economic and finandal indicators 81 Markets % change on Dec 31st 2014 Index Apr 29th one week in local in $ currency terms United States 18,035. nil +1.
Global soyabean stocks have risen by 55% from last season, after an 11% increase in output.
Other markets % change on Dec 31st 2014 Index one in Local in $ Apr 29th week currency terms United States 2,106. -0.
The Pakistani Taliban denied all responsibility The Inter-Services Intelligence, isi, promised all possible help to the police.
Nawaz Sharif’s government ordered the police to find the perpetrators within three days.
Here in the midst of anarchic, dysfunctional, crammed, crazy, noisy Karachi was a woman who was even more anarchic, crazy, noisy and in-your-face.
She was at the heart of every disturbance, from supporting rank outsiders in the local elections to organising flash protests on social media, and spiced up every organisation she belonged to, which was any outfit committed to challenging discrimination or injustice.
She’d give you a straight, cool stare, equally straight talk, an easy laugh, and a philosophy of absolute fearlessness.
The centre of all she did was the Second Floor , the cafe/bookshop/ performance space she founded in 2007.
She had a pittance in the bank at the time, but a reckless dream of copying the old Pak Tea House in Lahore where radicals used to meet.
By working on tech projects all the hours she could, maxing out her credit cards and begging money from relations, she gave Karachi a place where talk-about art, science, politics, anything-could flow freely, and citizens could get online and organise.
Two years later, when the nervous landlord kicked her out, the cafe had become such a lifeline for Karachi’s freethinkers that she easily found a better place.
There, in a comparatively shabby street in the posh Defence district, poets on open mic advocated revolution; people sat around for hours discussing life on Mars; musicians tried out their pieces, artists hung weird stuff on the walls, home-made films were screened, and anyone could wander in and shoot the breeze, no matter what their creed or disposition or labelPunjabi, Bihari, or whatever.
In 2007, when President Pervez Musharraf fired some SuThe Economist May 2nd 2015 preme Court judges, Ms Mahmud invited lawyers to plot their protests there.
In 2013 she organised a hackathon, Pakistan’s first, where for a whole weekend people brainstormed new ideas and apps to make Karachi work better.
No one paid to belong to t2f, though you could buy good coffee and brownies, as well as alternative books.
Those takings covered about half the costs and gave her a salary, not that she cared much.
She ran her own media-and-tech consulting firm and was president for a time of the Karachi outpost of an organisation that fostered tech entrepreneurs, but didn’t want to make money.
The point was to fight the “horrible stuff” going on in Pakistan and the world.
She blamed her mother, Mahenaz, for instilling “mad ideas at a young age” and supporting her ever after.
But she was spurred on just as much by anyone who told her she could not or must not do a thing.
When a computing teacher belittled her at school she decided to master computers by herself, falling in love at 14 with a Macintosh Plus that had Pink Floyd and Lenny Bruce in it, and teaching herself to solder wires and write programs.
Small wonder she believed, first, that formal education was stultifying, and second that computers, especially Macs, could shake everything up in the way she longed to see.
Her school, Karachi Grammar, didn’t let girls play cricket, so she played it at home with any spare passing males she could find.
A bat, stumps and proper hard ball went with her to the office-to whack assailants over the head, apart from anything else.
Other dissidents left Karachi, but she loved it too dearly to live anywhere else.
Friends said she should put a security guard on the cafe door; she preferred to invite her enemies in, to eat panini and join the conversation.
In 2007 she hosted a talk by an author who had uncovered army finances; ISI people were invited, and some came.
On April 24th she had just held a meeting to “un-silence” Baluchistan, Pakistan’s most neglected and separatist province, where hundreds of activists and students had been abducted, probably killed.
Not half as sorry as the artists, poets and thinkers of Karachi, who suddenly found it hard to breathe.
