Ukraine’s navy will take possession of the two United States patrol boats.
Having occupied Crimea , it now aims at occupying the Sea of Azov between Ukraine and Russia,” Poroshenko said to the United Nations General Assembly on Wednesday.
The Russian harassment operations became so pervasive that by July many Ukrainian and American officials said it was tantamount to a blockade.
For its part, Moscow denies any wrongdoing and claims it has a legal right to conduct such naval operations to defend its “exclusive economic zone” in Crimea.
The twin American Island-class cutters due for delivery to Kyiv—the Drummond and the Cushing—are typically armed with a 25 mm machine gun, two .50-caliber machine guns, and other small arms.
The United States Coast Guard used the patrol boats for myriad operations, including drug interdiction missions.
The Coast Guard cutters will undergo an extensive five-month refurbishment at the Coast Guard yard in Baltimore, Pentagon spokesman Eric Pahon told The Daily Signal.
Following this refurbishment, the Coast Guard will provide approximately three months of training, including at sea, for two Ukrainian crews totaling about 35 sailors.
Williamson said the move was meant to help train the Ukrainian military as well as to build up its naval forces, British agencies reported.
The defense secretary also said the U.K. would conduct more naval patrols in the Black Sea in 2019.
Nolan Peterson, a former special operations pilot and a combat veteran of Iraq and Afghanistan, is The Daily Signal’s foreign correspondent based in Ukraine.
Read the remainder of this article for a better understanding of the challenges Ukraine faces in defending itself against the aggressions of Russia.
There, for four and a half years Ukrainian forces have been in daily combat against a combined force of Russian regulars, Russian-backed separatists, and foreign mercenaries.
Despite a 2015 cease-fire, known as Minsk II, the war stills simmers with daily shelling and small arms gunfights.
Last week alone, international cease-fire monitors recorded more than 5,500 cease-fire violations along the Donbas front line.
Each violation, it should be said, does not comprise a single shot fired but can comprise an artillery barrage or a gun battle.
Beginning in July, President Poroshenko kick-started a plan to build up Ukraine’s naval strength and harden its coastal borders.
Ukraine has since announced the creation of a new Marine brigade to defend its southern coastlines.
And on Sept., Kyiv unveiled a plan to stand up a new naval base on the Sea of Azov to “repel the aggressive actions in the region by the Russian Federation,” Kyiv said in a statement.
The only way for ship traffic to enter the Sea of Azov is from the Black Sea through the Kerch Strait.
True to form, Russian President Vladimir Putin drove a big rig over the new bridge to mark the unveiling.
The bridge created a land transportation route from mainland Russia to Crimea, the Ukrainian peninsula that Russia invaded and annexed in 2014.
Prior to the bridge’s opening, land traffic could only enter Crimea through Ukrainian territory.
For one, the bridge was too low—some Ukrainian vessels have had to cut down their radio antennas to pass under it.
More of a concern for Kyiv, however, was the uptick in Russian harassment against Ukrainian ships passing under the bridge.
Once through the Kerch Strait, the two Ukrainian navy ships were met by a pair of armored Ukrainian Gyurza-M class gunboats, the Kremenchuk and the Lubny, which served as escorts.
On Sept., the four vessels steamed into the Ukrainian port of Mariupol.
The whole exercise underscored the burgeoning crisis between the two erstwhile Soviet allies over the right of free movement through the Sea of Azov.
News of the Ukrainian ships’ Kerch Strait crossing lit up across Ukrainian social media throughout the week.
Ukraine has also embarked on a diplomatic push to shed light on Russia’s aggression in the Sea of Azov.
Speaking before the United Nations General Assembly on Wednesday, Poroshenko called for more Western sanctions on Russia for its aggression in the Sea of Azov.
Ukrainian and Western military experts alike worry that tensions in the Sea of Azov could widen or escalate the ongoing land war in the Donbas.
EP is an online English-language independent newspaper launched in 2014 by Ukrainian volunteers.
EP focuses on events covering Ukraine and provides translations of Ukrainian news and expert analysis as well as independent research.
Through its work, EP strives to bridge Ukraine with the English-speaking world.
