UKRAINE AND THE NEW DIVIDE DMITRI TRENIN | J U LY 2 0 1 4 The political crisis that erupted in Ukraine in early 2014 has ended the period in Russian-Western relations that began with the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989.
The crisis marks the end of a generally cooperative phase in those relations, which even included a failed effort at Russia’s integration with or into the West on its own terms.
Instead, the Ukraine crisis has opened a new period of heightened rivalry, even confrontation, between former Cold War adversaries.
On the face of it, this new period is broadly reminiscent the United States.
Not that the gestation of the crisis and of the Cold War, but it differs from it in important ways. the steadily worsening environment in Russia’s relations Today’s situation has a values component to it but is not nearly with the West had been overlooked.
Rather, many Ukraine as focused on ideology as the conflict between communism watchers who continued to believe that “the more the country and liberal democracy was.
It has a traditional military dimenchanges, the more it stays the same” were caught off guard by sion too, but this aspect is not—as yet—dominant.
In late February 2014, Ukraine rent crisis has global implications, but, in and of itself, it is not moved too far and too abruptly to the West and lost balance. central to the global system.
Most importantly, unlike the Cold Just before that, United States policy in support of democratic change War, the present crisis is not the organizing principle of either in Ukraine had steered past safe limits.
Russia felt cornered, world politics or even the foreign policies of the conflict’s main and its reaction surprised many Russians, not to speak contestants, particularly that of the United States.
If historical of Ukrainians and Westerners. analogies are of any use, parallels to the nineteenth-century Great Game for supremacy between the Russian and British This new battle for influence is very real and will have major Empires would be more to the point, except, of course, that ramifications beyond just Ukraine.
The confrontation will the present U.S.-Russian rivalry is asymmetrical. take some time to lead to an outcome, and neither the time frame nor the result can be clearly foreseen at this point.
The severity of the crisis came as a surprise to many, What is clear, however, is that the Euro-Atlantic region has in Ukraine itself, Russia, the European Union , and entered a different epoch.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR Dmitri Trenin, director of the Carnegie Moscow Center, chairs the research council and the Foreign and Security Policy Program.
ORIGINS OF THE UKRAINE CRISIS the country’s international and domestic balance.
Yet, for The Ukraine crisis was immediately preceded by competithe Europeans there was no question of talking to a third tion between the EU and Russia for the future geoeconomic country about Ukraine’s association.
The roots of the crisis lie in the 2008 and the EU came to see Ukraine’s choice as a zero-sum game war between Russia and Georgia, which ended the prospect and worked hard to influence the outcome. of enlargement of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization for both Georgia and Ukraine, and in the beginning Ukraine itself, ruled from 2010 to 2014 by then president of the global financial crisis, which seemed to give more creViktor Yanukovych and his supporters from the eastern dence to regional economic arrangements.
Then, the EU and region of Donetsk, was habitually maneuvering between Russia drew different conclusions from the war and the crisis. the EU and Russia, always in search of a better deal.
In the run-up and enhance these countries’ Western orientation. to presidential election originally scheduled for early 2015, the need for such a cushion became crucial.
The Russian Federation, for its part, tried to attract Ukraine and most of the rest of the former Soviet Union to its flagship At the same time, Yanukovych had to factor in the pressure project of a customs union, also energized in 2009, which by exercised by Russia.
Moscow first showed Ukraine, in the form May 2014 led to the signing of the treaty establishing a Eurof trade barriers, what it would lose from choosing the EU over asian Economic Union.
Rather than re-creating the Soviet Russia and, later, in the form of an aid package, what it would Union, as suspected in the West, Moscow began building gain if it made the “right” choice.
The following month, he instead accepted a generous neighbors—the EU to the west and China to the east.
Yet at testers were ordinary people who suffered from poverty and the same time, Putin remained wedded to his master concept were deeply incensed by runaway official corruption, includof a “Greater Europe from Lisbon to Vladivostok,” which he ing in Yanukovych’s family.
To those people, EU association first outlined in 2010 and has reiterated since. appeared as a way out of this undignified situation, and the abrupt and unexpected closure of that door produced Thus, Brussels and Moscow each saw Ukraine as an impora painful and powerful shock. tant element of their own geopolitical project.
The Russians have also made an effort to explore the possibility of associThis essentially civic protest, which became known as ating Ukraine with both economic units and thus keeping the Maidan, was joined by nationalist groups, hailing mainly 2 from western Ukraine, who always insisted on a Ukrainian government and opposition leaders to that effect.
No sooner national identity that was clearly separate from, and even inimihad it been signed than the deal was rejected by the Maidan, cal to Russia.
To them, Yanukovych, an easterner, was hijacking whose more radical members demanded the president’s the country to merge with Russia, which many in the country’s immediate resignation.
Yanukovych fled from Kiev, the police west viewed with deep suspicion and outright hostility.
Finally, disappeared from its streets, and the Maidan revolution could the Maidan protests were supported, funded, and exploited celebrate victory. by Ukraine’s oligarchic clans, which were unhappy with Yanukovych and his Donetsk allies wielding too much power RUSSIA’S POLICIES and aggressively expanding their business interests at other These dramatic developments were most traumatic for oligarchs’ expense.
From a Russian perspective, Ukraine had for two an early presidential election and unseat Yanukovych. decades been a weak, fragile, and often unreliable state, chronically creating problems for Russian energy giant In the United States, the top echelons in the administration Gazprom’s transit to Europe.
However, to most Russians, of United States President Barack Obama were not initially focused the country was anything but foreign.
Ukraine was not a foreign suddenly turning into a country led by a coalition of propolicy priority for the United States president, who was heavily preocWestern elites in Kiev and anti-Russian western Ukrainian cupied with wars and revolutions in the Middle East, Iran’s nationalists.
This shift, in the Kremlin’s eyes, carried a dual nuclear program, the United States military withdrawal from Afghanidanger of Kiev clamping down on the Russian language, stan, America’s relations with China, and developments in East culture, and identity inside Ukraine and of the country itself Asia.
However, the United States had long supported projoining NATO in short order.
Putin reacted immediately by Western democratic movements in Ukraine, for both ideoapparently putting in motion contingency plans that Moscow logical and geopolitical reasons, and it looked with a wary eye had drafted for the eventuality of Kiev seeking membership on the Kremlin’s attempts at Eurasian integration.
Washington in the Atlantic alliance. abhorred the idea of Ukraine becoming part of the Russian sphere of influence.
To stymie that, it was working on helping Russia’s Ukraine policy, which until then had been publicly pro-Western opposition leaders hold on to power in Kiev and low-key and heavily focused on top-level interaction with openly encouraging them in their efforts. the Ukrainian president, immediately went into high gear.
Defense and maneuvering stopped, to be replaced by a counIn mid-February 2014, the situation in central Kiev degenteroffensive.
The main goal became to keep Ukraine from erated into violence and reached a denouement.
It first joining NATO and, ideally, to win back the country for appeared that Yanukovych was resolved to win by using the Eurasian integration project, the core element of which is force to disperse the Maidan, which by that time had formed the reunification of what Moscow sees as the “Russian world.” a capable fighting force built around a nationalist organizaIn pursuing its new, proactive approach, Russia had two main tion called the Right Sector.
However, Yanukovych stopped objectives. the police advance in its tracks and opened talks with the opposition leaders.
Those talks soon became negotiations The first was to make Crimea off limits to the new postabout the concessions his government was prepared to make Yanukovych authorities in Kiev.
This was executed by means and ended on February 21, 2014, with the president’s de of Russian special forces physically insulating the peninsula facto capitulation, which was to be delayed by a few months. from mainland Ukraine, neutralizing the Ukrainian garThe foreign ministers of EU member states France, Germany, rison in Crimea, and helping Crimea’s pro-Russian elements and Poland co-signed an agreement with the Ukrainian take control of the local government, parliament, and law CAR NEGI E M OSCOW CENT ER | 3 enforcement agencies.
Russia also encouraged those elements the central government’s control.
Moreover, the interim govto hold a referendum on Crimea’s status and pursued an allernment launched an “antiterrorist operation” in Donetsk and out campaign in favor of Crimea’s reunification with Russia.
Luhansk, which led to numerous casualties on both sides, and The vote, held on March 16, 2014, overwhelmingly endorsed provoked a humanitarian crisis, but did not result in a Russuch a union.
Two days later, a treaty was signed in Moscow sian military intervention. to incorporate Crimea and the city of Sevastopol into Russia.
Moscow refused to recognize the Maidan-backed government, Moscow’s second objective was to achieve a new federal settleeven though it dealt with its officials.
The United States, for ment in Ukraine, which would forestall complete domination its part, gave well-publicized political support to Kiev, as eviof the country by Kiev and western Ukraine and thus make denced by the visits there by Vice President Joe Biden, Secreany move toward NATO structurally impossible.
On March tary of State John Kerry, Central Intelligence Agency Director 1, 2014, Putin had already sought and received powers John Brennan, and a number of other United States officials.
Russian from the Federation Council, the upper house of the Rusmedia claimed that Washington was directing the Ukrainian sian parliament, to use Russian armed forces inside Ukraine. authorities’ actions.
Russian forces began exercising along the Ukrainian border, appearing ready to invade, but no crossborder invasion hapOn May 25, 2014, Ukraine successfully held an early presipened.
The Kremlin was putting pressure on the new authoridential election that led to the clear victory of Petro Poroties in Kiev, making them nervous and indecisive; deterring shenko, an oligarch and the principal sponsor of the Maidan.
Washington and Brussels from intervening by dramatically raising the stakes; and encouraging Moscow’s political friends THE WESTERN RESPONSE in the Russian-speaking parts of Ukraine.
Within a few weeks, measures taken in response to Russia’s actions abruptly reversed the twenty-five-year-old trend toward Indeed, in the largely Russophone eastern and southern expanding contacts between former Cold War adversaries.
Ukraine, mass rallies began to demand regional autonomy, Moscow’s policies met with a strong negative reaction from including rights for the Russian language.
Seen as an aggressor, Russia was later followed by reasonably well-organized militant groups effectively expelled from the G8 group of leading industrialized seizing government buildings, arming themselves, and taking nations, which returned to being the G7.
In the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, the miliits relations with Russia, while NATO froze its cooperation tants held regional referendums and proclaimed their own with Moscow.
Western leaders suspended their bilateral sum“republics” independent from Kiev.
Faced with to protect them. near-universal condemnation, Russian delegates had to suspend their participation in the Parliamentary Assembly of the CounHowever, Russia failed in rousing resistance to Kiev across cil of Europe.
Russia’s accession process to the Organization for the entire southeast of Ukraine.
The hope that predomiEconomic Cooperation and Development was also nantly Russian-speaking Novorossia, “New Russia,” encomput on hold. passing Ukraine’s entire southeast, would break away from the new revolutionary authorities and form a federation did In material terms, the United States led its allies in imposing not materialize.
The key cities of Dnepropetrovsk, Kharkov, sanctions against Russian officials, companies, and potenKherson, Nikolayev, Odessa, and Zaporozhye remained under tially whole sectors of industry.
The goal is to hurt Russia so 4 much that it backs down on Ukraine, ideally creating enough Russia is openly challenging the U.S.-dominated order, pain within Russia to effect a regime change—that is, Putin’s having seen its own vital security interests challenged by ouster.
Successive waves of sanctions, in conjunction with U.S.-friendly forces in Ukraine.
Moscow will not back off efforts to isolate Russia politically, immediately caused a deep on issues of principle, and Washington cannot be expected plunge of the Russian stock market, a massive capital flight to recognize Russia’s sphere of influence in Ukraine and elseout of Russia, and a further weakening of the ruble.
The United States will also refuse to treat though the energy relationship between Russia and Europe Russia as an equal.
Most importantly, the elements of trust is too vital to many EU economies for it to be wound down that existed in U.S.-Russian relations in the 1990s and that immediately, there is now a much stronger trend toward reemerged briefly in the 2000s have been fundamentally shatenergy diversification away from Russia.
The relationship has become essentially adversarial, as also put on notice about the potential dire consequences in the days of the Cold War or the Great Game. of a deepening confrontation with the United States.
Unlike in 2008 in the South Caucasus, the current conflict In military terms, Russia has been redesignated as an adverwill not be a bump in the road that will soon lead to a new sary of the West.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has scored a huge original late-1940s mission of “keeping the Russians out.” success by returning Crimea to Russia, simultaneously creatThe temporary deployments of relatively small Western coning a major obstacle to future accommodation not only tingents in Poland, Romania, and the Baltic states are likely with Ukraine but also with the United States and Europe. to turn into a permanent basing of NATO’s forces—includNo lasting settlement will be possible without resolving ing United States troops—along the alliance’s eastern border.
Bracketing off Crimea from consideration ballistic missile defenses, which are now being installed in the relations between Russia and the West—unlike the sucin Europe, will be openly targeting Russia’s nuclear forces. cessful bracketing off of Abkhazia and South Ossetia during Neutral countries such as Sweden and Finland are considthe 2009 reset of U.S.-Russian relations—is unlikely. ering joining NATO and would be welcome there should they decide to pursue membership.
A major NATO summit The Ukrainian situation, despite the country’s May 2014 in September 2014 in Wales is thus likely to present a “new presidential election, is far from stable and has a potential for old face” of the alliance to Europe and Russia. social unrest, political upheaval, and territorial fragmentation.
Donbas, an industrial area that includes two oblasts in eastern In political, economic, and military terms, the European conUkraine, has turned into a battlefield where militias supporttinent is again divided—with Russia to the east, NATO and ed by Russia are fighting against Kiev’s military forces.
Great-power war in Europe, thought to be safely local armed conflict onto a new, more dangerous level. consigned to the history books since the start of the 1990s, It will be years before Ukraine acquires a modicum of stabilhas made a stunning comeback as a possibility.
Even ground between Russia to the east and the EU and NATO though Russia and the United States had a close brush with to the west.
Such neutrality, however, may have an insufconfrontation in 2008 in Georgia, that episode was brief and ficient number of supporters in Ukraine itself and may left few traces.
Ideally, Russia would want Ukraine, Ukraine did. which it sees as belonging to the same Orthodox Christian/ CAR NEGI E M OSCOW CENT ER | 5 Eastern Slavic civilization, to join its Eurasian union.
The trust needed to start conflicts in Ukraine will stoke U.S.-Russian confrontation. moving toward accommodation and building a new relaTo reassure Eastern European allies, Obama has initiated tionship will be unavailable on either side.
When and how a series of measures to restore a “holding line” against Rusthe U.S.-Russian conflict will end is impossible to predict. sia in Europe along the eastern borders of the Baltic states, Poland, and Romania.
Sandwiched between these countries NOTES and Russia, however, will be Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia.
This is These states will be the battleground in the U.S.-Russian fight in contrast to the term “Ukrainian crisis,” which is centered on the domesfor influence that will be the essence of the new Great Game. tic developments in that country.
A number of other countries, including Armenia, Belarus, 2 Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, and Moldova.
Kazakhstan, the Russian North Caucasus, and the Baltic states themselves, may also be affected by this competition.
Under a treaty signed in May 2014, the Eurasian Economic Union of Russia, Kazakhstan, and Belarus will be launched on January 1, 2015, It will be some time before the geopolitical status and orientaif the treaty is ratified by the three countries’ parliaments.
In particular, unmeetings.org/media2/2498292/voting-record.pdf. the confrontation may affect SinoUnited States relations by creating a highly uneven United States-China-Russia triangle in which This article was adapted from “The Ukraine Crisis and the Resumption of GreatChina, rather than the United States, will be the central Power Rivalry,” a paper published by the Carnegie Endowment. player.
Since the early 1990s, Western analysts have been routinely dismissing any significant impact of a Sino-Russian CARNEGIE MOSCOW CENTER rapprochement on United States interests, pointing to Russia’s evident Founded in 1994, the Carnegie Moscow Center brings together senior weakness and its purported fear of China.
Besides China, Russia will be reaching out The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace is a unique global network to other non-Western players to diminish United States global power of policy research centers in Russia, China, Europe, the Middle East, and influence. and the United States.
Our mission, dating back more than a century, is to advance the cause of peace through analysis and development of fresh policy ideas and direct engagement and collaboration with decisionmakers Even if the Western sanctions regime imposed on Russia in government, business, and civil society.
Working together, our centers bring is not too strict, it will not be lifted soon either, marring the inestimable benefit of multiple national viewpoints to bilateral, regional, the relationship with the United States for a long time. and global issues.
This will stimulate Russian patriotism and nationalism focused on the United States The Carnegie Moscow Center and the Carnegie Endowment do not take as an external adversary.
More sanctions will probably only institutional positions on public policy issues; the views represented here are the author’s own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Endowment, its enhance this feeling and aid the government’s mobilization staff, or its trustees. efforts.
