Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington VA 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME AND ADDRESS Congressional Research Service,The Library of Congress,101 Independence Ave, SE,Washington,DC,20540 8.
DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 13.
The government’s effort in November 2013 to violently disperse pro-European Union protests backfired, resulting in mass demonstrations in Kyiv and elsewhere in Ukraine.
For over two months, the government alternated between attempted crackdowns against the protestors and conciliatory gestures.
The violence led to a collapse in support for the government of President Viktor Yanukovych, who fled from Kyiv, as did many of his supporters, and the seizure of power by opposition parties, with the support of the protestors.
The parliament is expected to approve a new, pro-reform, pro-Western government by early March.
The parliament has scheduled new presidential elections for May 25, 2014.
Ukraine has long-standing problems in attracting foreign investment, in part due to rampant corruption and other shortcomings in the rule of law.
In the near term, the government’s dwindling foreign exchange reserves have raised the prospect of a default on sovereign debt later this year, unless the government can secure new loans quickly.
The Obama Administration reacted positively, but cautiously, to the revolution in Kyiv, saying it could be a step forward to the United States goal of a strong, prosperous, unified, and democratic Ukraine.
The Administration is working with the EU, the IMF, and other international financial organizations to support a new Ukrainian government committed to reforms.
Fast year, the Obama Administration requested $95,271 million in United States bilateral aid for Ukraine for FY2014.
President Obama and Administration officials have made statements that appear to be aimed at dissuading Moscow from seeing the situation in Ukraine as a geopolitical competition between the United States and Russia.
However, this effort has met with limited success, judging by the harsh public reaction from Moscow over the fall of the Yanukovych regime.
Although it formally expresses support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity, some experts have expressed concern that Russia may take steps to “punish” the new leadership in Kyiv by imposing economic sanctions or encouraging separatism in Ukraine’s Crimea region.
The resolution urges the United States and EU to work together to promote a peaceful resolution of the crisis that moves Ukraine toward a future in the EuroAtlantic community and states that, in the event of further government violence against peaceful protestors, the President and Congress should consider targeted sanctions, including visa bans and asset freezes, against individuals responsible for ordering or carrying out the violence.
The resolution expresses support for the visa bans that the United States has already imposed on Ukrainian officials responsible for violence against protestors, and urges the Administration to consider additional sanctions against those responsible for the use of force.
After the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, congressional action may shift from a focus on possible sanctions to how the United States should aid the new Ukrainian government to achieve stability and conduct reforms.
Policy Background Ukraine, comparable in size and population to France, is a large, important, European state.
The fact that it occupies the sensitive position between Russia and NATO member states Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania adds to its geostrategic significance.
The United States and European view is that a strong, independent Ukraine is an important part of building a Europe whole, free, and at peace.
From the mid-1990s until 2004, Ukraine’s political scene was dominated by President Leonid Kuchma and oligarchic “clans” (groups of powerful politicians and businessmen, mainly based in eastern and southern Ukraine) that supported him.
His rule was characterized by fitful economic reform, widespread corruption, and a deteriorating human rights record.
Ukraine’s 2004 presidential elections were marred by electoral fraud, which triggered massive street protests.
The oligarchs chose Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych as their candidate to succeed Kuchma.
The chief opposition candidate, former Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko, was a pro-reform, pro-Westem figure.
After a November 21 runoff vote, Ukraine’s Central Election Commission proclaimed Yanukovych the winner.
Yushche nk o’s supporters charged that massive fraud had been committed.
Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians took to the streets, in what came to be known as the “Orange Revolution,” after Yushchenko’s chosen campaign color.
They blockaded government offices in Kyiv and appealed to the Ukrainian Supreme Court to invalidate the vote.
The “Orange Revolution” sparked a good deal of interest in Congress and elsewhere.
Some hoped that Ukraine could finally embark on a path of comprehensive reforms and Euro-Atlantic integration after years of half-measures and false starts.
However, subsequent events led to disillusionment among Orange Revolution supporters, both in Ukraine and abroad.
President Yushche nk o soon fell into squabbling with Yuliya Tymoshenko, his main backer during the Orange Revolution and his first prime minister.
Yanukovych, who also served briefly as prime minister during this period, also was involved in this infighting.
As Ukrainian leaders engaged in this three-sided political battle, an overwhelming majority of Ukrainians grew disgusted with the Ukrainian political class, according to opinion polls.
What little remained of the ideals of the Orange Revolution came to an end with the victory of Yanukovych over Tymoshenko in the presidential election of February 2010.
As in past elections, the results showed a sharp regional split, with Yanukovych winning in Russian-speaking eastern and southern Ukraine, while Tymoshenko prevailed in central and western Ukraine, where Ukrainian nationalism is stronger.
In particular, United States and EU officials expressed strong concern over the government’s targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution.
In the most prominent case, in October 2011 Tymoshenko was convicted of abuse of power arising out of her role in signing a natural gas supply agreement with Russia and sentenced to seven years in prison.
Ukraine’s October 2012 parliamentary elections fell short of international standards, according to international election observers.
Ukrainian commentators noted that the new government formed after the election included several new figures that were part of the personal entourage of the President and his son, Oleksandr These analysts claimed that these moves marked the “Family’s” consolidation of political power, which has in turn assisted the group’s ongoing efforts to seize control of a large share of Ukraine’s economic assets.
Until a few months ago, many observers have believed that, despite growing dissatisfaction with the government, there was little likelihood of public unrest in Ukraine, given widespread disillusionment with the outcome of the Orange Revolution.
On November 21, the government made a last-minute decision to not sign an Association Agreement with the European Union, due to Russian pressure.
The first demonstrations in Kyiv in late November were relatively modest in size.
Flowever, on November 30, Ukrainian special police attacked and viciously beat peaceful protestors in Kyiv’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square.
The action outraged many Ukrainians, and resulted in a massive upsurge in participation in the protests in Kyiv.
According to some observers, the turnout in Kyiv at times even exceeded those during the Orange Revolution.
Observers noted that demonstrators were not just protesting against Ukraine’s failure to sign the Association Agreement, but against the government’s lack of respect for the basic human dignity of Ukraine’s citizens, as exemplified in the November 30 beatings, but also in other areas, such as the rampant corruption among government officials.
An attempt by riot police to clear the square on December 10 failed due to the resistance of the protestors.
By mid-January, the Maidan protests were continuing, but with fewer protestors than at their peak in early December.
Another law requiring all organizations receiving foreign funding to register as foreign agents appears to be based on a similar Russian law.
After their adoption, violence between the most militant of the protestors and police increased sharply.
At least four persons were killed in the violence, while scores of others were brutalized by police.
Several government ministry buildings in Kyiv were either blockaded or seized by protestors.
In addition, protestors seized control of or blockaded government buildings outside of Kyiv, mainly in western and central Ukraine, but also in some places in the east.
After this setback, the government again appeared to adopt a strategy of backpedaling and playing for time.
On the same day, the Ukrainian parliament voted to repeal the “dictatorship laws” and adopted a law to give amnesty to the protestors.
Policy Current Political Situation After pausing for several weeks to gather its forces once again, on February 18 the government embarked on its most violent crackdown attempt against the Maidan, one that quickly resulted in the regime’s own demise.
Many casualties were caused by firearms, mainly used by the police, including by snipers.
The government reportedly had plans to use snipers much more extensively and also unsuccessfully tried to order the army to join the crackdown.
The death toll may have caused support in the Ukrainian parliament for the crackdown and the regime to collapse.
On February 20, it approved a resolution calling for the pullout of the Interior Ministry and military forces from Kyiv to their bases and a ban on the use of firearms.
Once the police and military complied with the resolution, groups of protestors seized key government buildings.
Yanukoyvch and scores of his supporters in the government and parliament fled the capital by the 21 st , many heading for the eastern and southern parts of the country, while others continued into Russia.
The Ukrainian parliament, now composed mainly of opposition deputies, has rapidly passed sweeping measures with little or no opposition.
The parliament deposed Yanukovych as President on February 22 for abandoning his duties.
The parliament also voted to make Turchynov acting president until new presidential elections are held, which the parliament set for May 25.
The parliament restored the provisions of the 2004 Ukrainian constitution, eliminating changes made by Yanukovych to strengthen the presidency.
Ex-President Yanukovych and dozens of other top officials of the former regime are being sought by police for their part in killing and injuring Maidan protestors and other regime opponents.
Until February 2014, the party of the ruling regime and by far the largest faction in the Ukrainian parliament.
It has drawn its support from eastern Ukraine, where suspicion of Ukrainian nationalism is high and support for close ties with Russia is strong.
It defends the economic interests of powerful oligarchic business groups.
Since the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, scores of deputies have fled from Kyiv or left the party, with most of the rest apparently unwilling or unable to offer serious resistance to the new leadership, at least for now.
Founded by Yuliya Tymoshenko, Fatherland has run on a populist, anti-corruption platform.
It draws its support from western and central Ukraine, where Ukrainian nationalism is strongest.
After the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, Fatherland effectively became the leading faction in Ukraine’s parliament.
Its platform, while expressing opposition to the former regime’s corruption, has been criticized for lacking in specifics.
A party espousing extreme Ukrainian nationalism and economic populism, Freedom receives its support from western Ukraine, where Ukrainian nationalism is strongest.
Some observers have attributed its success to disillusionment with the Fatherland and other opposition groups rather than a surge in support for extreme Ukrainian nationalism.
Its activists played a key role in fighting against riot police in the Maidan protests.
Meanwhile, Yanukovych-appointed governors and other local officials have resigned in many regions of Ukraine, although mainly in western and central Ukraine.
The parliament has dismissed the members of the former government, and parties in the parliament are putting together a “government of national trust” to govern the country, at least until a new president is elected.
The proposed choices for a new government were presented to a crowd of tens of thousands in the Maidan on February 26.
They include both representatives of the opposition parties and Maidan activists.
One is maintaining the support of the social and political forces that have emerged from the Maidan.
Throughout the protests, the opposition parties have been playing catch-up with sentiment on the streets.
Observers have witnessed expressions of scorn at times from demonstrators as opposition party leaders spoke at the Maidan.
On February 21, the foreign ministers of Poland, Germany, and France brokered an agreement between the regime and the main opposition party leaders that appeared to Maidan protestors to allow the regime to play for time yet again, frustrating the protests’ main objective, which was to oust Yanukovych and his government.
The agreement was almost instantly rendered moot when the regime collapsed and armed protestors took over central Kyiv.
Many Maidan protestors view the opposition parties very skeptically, suspecting that they are nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the Yanukovych regime, as demonstrated by the failure of the Orange Revolution 10 years earlier.
Yatsenyuk was reportedly booed on the Maidan when his name was read out as Prime Minister-designate.
Due to their key role in defending the Maidan and even taking the fight to the regime, and therefore suffering a significant number of deaths and injuries, they are highly respected among many protestors.
Some members of the former regime have alleged intimidation and even violence at their hands.
As is the case in many revolutions, it is unclear what role the most determined revolutionaries can play when the fighting is or should be over and a return to stability could potentially marginalize them.
Another issue is possible separatism in the eastern and southern regions of the country, where the former regime drew most of its support.
Top leaders from eastern and southern Ukraine met in Kharkiv on February 22 and issued a statement declaring that they did not recognize the new authorities in Kyiv and that they would assume responsibility for their regions.
Clashes between pro and antiMaidan forces in these regions, although relatively small-scale so far, could also inflame tensions.
The veiled threat of separatism may be a bargaining chip local leaders and oligarchs in the east and south could try to use against the new authorities to secure immunity from prosecution and guarantees for their property.
Some observers believe the situation in Crimea could pose the biggest threat, due to what may be somewhat greater support among ethnic Russians in Crimea for union with Russia, and the stated willingness of Russia to “support” its citizens in Crimea.
Previous efforts by Crimean leaders to promote union with Russia were headed off in part by deploying “ Berkut ” and other special forces to the peninsula.
Flowever, the current Ukrainian government is disbanding the Berkut, and the perceived weakness of the authorities in Kyiv could potentially be exploited by Crimea and Russia.
Policy Current Economic Situation Ukraine is much poorer than other European countries, despite advantages such as rich soil, a strategic location, and a substantial heavy industrial sector.
In 2011, Ukraine’s Gross Domestic Product per capita in purchasing power parity terms was only 21% of that of the EU average and only 43% of Russia’s.
In 2010 its foreign direct investment per capita was $979, less than half of that in Russia and about a quarter of Poland’s FDI per capita.
Foreign companies often cite such issues as rampant corruption and serious shortcomings in the rule of law as key stumbling blocks to foreign investment.
The privatization process under the Yanukovych administration apparently served mainly as a division of spoils among the oligarchs and the “Family” of Yanukovych.
Due in part to these shortcomings, Ukraine was hit very hard by the global economic crisis.
The economy soon rebounded, growing by 4.2% in 2010 and by 5.2% in 2011.
However, growth slowed to 0.2% in 2012, due to a downturn in the EU and Russia.
In 2010, the International Monetary Fund approved a $15.15 billion standby loan for Ukraine to support its reform efforts.
Two tranches of the loan were disbursed, but the IMF declined to release additional ones, due to Ukraine’s refusal to take politically unpopular steps such as increasing energy prices for domestic consumers and devaluing Ukraine’s currency, the hyrvnia.
Ukraine received loans from Russia and China to try to make up for the suspension of the IMF loan.
Ukraine also raised large additional loans on the Eurobond market and on domestic debt markets.
However, this policy appeared to have reached a dead end in late 2013, even before the political turmoil that started in November 2013.
Ukraine’s foreign exchange reserves dropped to dangerously low levels, raising fears that Ukraine could default on its sovereign debt in 2014.
Efforts to seek additional money on the Eurobond market in mid-2013 failed, due to a lack of confidence in Ukraine’s economic policies and the global impact of the United States Treasury’s decision to taper its bond-buying program.
In December 2013, Russia took advantage of this situation to offer to buy up to $15 billion in Ukrainian bonds at a favorable interest rate.
Given the fall of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, it appears unlikely that Russia will make further bond purchases.
Ukraine’s political crisis has exacerbated the country’s economic problems.
Ukraine’s currency has slid by nearly 30% between the start of the crisis on November 21, 2013, and late February 2014.
Tax receipts have plunged, and the government is running out of money to pay pensions and government salaries.
Ukraine’s acting finance minister had called for international donors to supply $35 billion in macroeconomic financing over the next two years.
However, the IMF, the EU, and other potential donors have warned that Ukraine must have a new government in place and provide assurances that it is willing to engage in needed reforms before funding can be made available.
Policy Ukraine's Foreign Policy Since achieving independence in 1991, conflict between Ukraine’s political forces has led its foreign policy to appear incoherent, as the contending forces pulled it in pro-Western or proRussia directions or simply neglected foreign policy as less important than domestic political combat and the division of the spoils of victory.
Ukrainian leaders gave lip service to joining NATO and the European Union, but did little to meet the standards set by these organizations.
Ukrainian leaders also promised closer ties with Russia in exchange for Russian energy at subsidized prices, but balked at implementing agreements with Russia that would seriously compromise Ukraine’s sovereignty, such as ceding control over Ukraine’s energy infrastructure to Moscow.
President Yanukovych’s foreign policy appeared to fit into this pattern, although he broke with previous Ukrainian presidents by formally rejecting NATO membership for Ukraine.
However, Yanukovych’s last-minute decision in November 2013 to decline to sign an Association Agreement with the EU, due to Russian pressure, caused many observers to express concern about the independence of Ukraine’s foreign policy.
His failure to do so touched off a popular revolt that led to the collapse of his regime three months later, and the emergence of what is likely to be a pro-EU, pro-Westem government.
A new government will have to be installed before Ukraine’s new foreign policy course is formally determined.
However, it is likely that Ukraine will sign the Association Agreement in the next few weeks or months.
The new government may face a backlash from a furious Russian leadership.
Russian responses could involve de facto trade sanctions, manipulation of energy prices and debts, harassment of Ukrainian citizens working in Russia, and even support for separatist activity in southern and eastern Ukraine.
European Union Ukraine seeks eventual EU membership, but most EU countries have opposed raising this issue, in part due to the huge burden a large, poor country like Ukraine could place on already-strained EU coffers.
The Association Agreement is the EU’s main instrument to promote European values in these countries and deepen economic ties with them.
Although the DCFTA further opens potentially lucrative EU markets to Ukraine, it also requires it to adopt EU legislation and standards and to expose its own firms to tough competition from EU imports.
Under intense pressure from Russia, which strongly opposed Ukraine’s intention to sign the AA, the Ukrainian government announced on November 21 that it would not sign the agreement at the Vilnius summit, the start in a series of events that led to the regime’s demise three months later.
EU officials and officials of EU member governments condemned violence by the Ukrainian government and their allies against peaceful protestors.
They called on the Ukrainian government to quickly adopt the steps needed to end the political crisis in Ukraine peacefully.
Policy German Chancellor Angela Merkel and European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso reportedly combined with Vice President Joseph Biden to press Yanukovych on these issues by near-daily telephone calls.
On February 21, the foreign ministers of France, Germany, and Poland came to Kyiv and brokered a peaceful settlement of the crisis, which was almost immediately rendered obsolete by the collapse of the regime.
The EU at first refrained from imposing sanctions against Ukrainian leaders responsible for the violence, due to divisions among its member states.
Some countries, such as Lithuania, have supported the adoption of sanctions to deter the government from further violence.
Other countries, including Germany, have called for caution, believing the deterrent effect of the prospect of sanctions is sufficient for now, but that actually applying sanctions could lead Ukraine’s leaders to cut off talks with the EU and United States on a peaceful solution.
However, after a sharp escalation of the violence on February 18 and 19, the EU decided to impose a visa ban and asset freezes on Ukrainian officials responsible for violence.
The EU budgeted €470 million in aid for reforms in Ukraine for 2011-2013.
Funding totals for Ukraine’s reforms for 2014-2020 are expected to be determined soon.
This amount would be in addition to any macrofmancial aid that may be provided by the EU as part of a possible emergency program to stabilize Ukraine’s finances.
Parliament speaker and acting President Turchynov has called for Ukraine to sign the Association Agreement soon after the new government is formed.
However, a spokesman for the European Commission has suggested that the signature should wait until after a new president is elected in May or June.
In any case, EU officials are working with the United States, the IMF, and other international financial institutions on an aid package for Ukraine, part of which could go into effect soon after a new government is formed.
Russia Ukraine’s closest, yet most difficult and complex, relationship is with Russia.
Ethnic Russians make up 17.3% of Ukraine’s population, according to the 2001 Ukrainian census.
They form a majority in the Crimea , where they make up 58.3% of the population.
In the Crimean city of Sevastopol, the home base of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, 71.6% of the population is Russian.
In addition, ethnic Ukrainians in the east and south also tend to be Russianspeaking, are suspicious of Ukrainian nationalism, and support close ties with Russia.
Soviet leaders concentrated important heavy industries in eastern Ukraine, which tied them to Russia economically and fostered what many analysts have viewed as a lingering Soviet-style mindset there.
This is particularly true of the Donbas region, from which many key figures of the former Ukrainian government come.
Russian officials have often tried to play on the ethnic, cultural, and economic ties between Russia and these regions, but not always successfully.
Russian officials have urged Ukraine to join the Customs Union it has created with Belarus and Kazakhstan.
Many experts in Russia and elsewhere have claimed that the Customs Union and a Eurasian Union planned for 2015 would be economically much less attractive to Russia without the participation of Ukraine, the second-largest country in the region.
Russian officials asserted that if Ukraine signed the Association Agreement, the Customs Union would have to put up customs barriers against Ukrainian products to prevent their own markets being flooded by EU goods.
Moscow claimed that the effect of the customs barriers in the east and a surge of EU imports from the west would devastate the Ukrainian economy.
In addition to economic concerns, Russian leaders may also fear the impact of the possible expansion of EU standards of democracy and human rights in the region on the long-term stability of the current Russian regime.
Given this situation, it is perhaps not surprising that Russia did not limit itself to verbal warnings.
Starting in August 2013, Russia banned imports of Ukrainian chocolates from Roshen, a company owned by a strong supporter of the Association Agreement.
Russian officials also briefly held up steel and other key Ukrainian exports to Russia at the border for detailed customs checks.
After Ukraine bowed to Russian pressure and declined to sign the Association Agreement, Russia moved to reward Ukrainian leaders.
On December 17, Ukrainian officials announced that Moscow had granted a large aid package to Ukraine, including an offer to purchase up to $15 billion in Ukrainian government bonds and cut the price of Russian natural gas supplied to Ukraine by one-third.
Ukraine’s energy minister estimated the yearly savings to Ukraine of the price cut at $7 billion.
The terms of the package seemed to indicate that Moscow wanted to keep Ukraine on a short leash.
The first $3 billion purchase of Ukrainian bonds was made in December 2013.
However, Russia declined to make additional bond purchases due to the unstable situation in Ukraine.
The collapse of the regime in February 2014 will likely put an end to the bailout package.
Russia reacted with hostility to the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014 and the emergence of a new, more pro-Western leadership.
He said the situation in Ukraine posed a threat to the lives of Russian citizens there.
A Russian foreign ministry statement on February 24 claimed that “terroristic methods” were being used to suppress dissent in the Russian-speaking regions of the country.
Although Russia officially supports Ukraine’s territorial integrity, before the collapse of the Yanukovych regime, a key advisor to President Putin called for Ukraine’s “federalization,” which many Ukrainian observers fear is a code word for the breakup of the country.
In February 2014, before the collapse of the Yanukovych government, a Russian diplomat in Ukraine claimed that a de facto federalization was already taking place in Ukraine, prompting a rebuke from the Ukrainian government.
Policy Some analysts expressed concern that Russia may now step up support to separatist elements in Ukraine, particularly in Crimea.
This could involve speeding up the issuing of passports to those in Crimea desiring Russian citizenship.
On February 26, Russia announced that its army and naval forces would hold readiness exercises on Ukraine’s borders starting February 28.
Even if it stopped short of military intervention, given its prior record in Ukraine and other postSoviet countries, Russia could attempt to pressure, punish, or destabilize Kyiv by imposing de facto trade sanctions against Ukraine; expelling or harassing the large number of Ukrainian citizens working in Russia; or manipulating Ukraine’s dependence on Russia for energy.
In the recent past, about 80% of its oil and natural gas consumption came from Russia.
In 2012, according to EU Energy Commissioner Gunter Oettinger, about 60% of Russian natural gas destined for Europe transited Ukraine.
Until the Yushchenko presidency, Russian firms supplied energy to Ukraine at prices far below market rates.
Energy sales have been conducted by non-transparent intermediary companies, offering the elites of both countries opportunities to profit.
Russia’s efforts to greatly increase gas prices for Ukraine provoked a crisis that resulted in cutoff of Russian gas to Western Europe for several days in January 2006.
Russia has sought control of Ukraine’s natural gas pipelines and storage facilities.
Its efforts have been unsuccessful so far, due to Kyiv’s refusal to cede control of one of its key economic assets.
This fact, as well as the 2006 and 2009 gas cutoffs, has led Russia and some European countries to plan and build pipelines to bypass Ukraine.
Gazprom has developed gas pipelines under the Baltic Sea and through the Balkans to Western Europe.
South Stream has started construction, with first deliveries projected for 2015.
Ukraine’s reduced share of gas transport to Europe could give Russia more leverage to demand that Ukraine sell it control of its gas pipeline system at a lower price than it otherwise could.
Russia could also feel it would have a freer hand to put greater pressure on Ukraine on other issues, including political ones.
Key Western European countries could feel they have less of a stake in Ukraine’s future, if they, like Russia, were no longer dependent on Ukrainian gas transport infrastructure.
The Yanukovych regime was supported by oligarchs who control gas imports and own energyhungry steel and chemicals industries.
Yanukovych sharply criticized the gas agreement between Russia and Ukraine, signed by then-Prime Minister Tymoshenko in 2009, saying that the gas was far too expensive for Ukraine.
Underlining the political nature of Russia’s natural gas pricing policy, after Ukraine announced that it would not sign the Association Agreement with the EU, Russia announced in December it would reduce its natural gas prices for Ukraine by one-third.
Policy The collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014 may lead to the termination of the gas price cut agreement and the intensification of Russian pressure on Ukraine over energy prices and debts owed or allegedly owed to Gazprom by Ukraine.
United States Policy After Yanukovych’s election in 2010, United States policy makers focused on improving cooperation with Ukraine in such fields as nuclear non-proliferation and energy.
However, they expressed increasing concern about backsliding in the country’s democratic development.
After a meeting on the eve of the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, DC, in April 2010, President Obama and President Yanukovych agreed that Ukraine would rid itself of its entire stock of highly enriched uranium by the time of the Nuclear Security Summit in March 2012.
The United States agreed to help Ukraine to develop its nuclear research capabilities and diversify its sources of fuel supply for its nuclear reactors.
The United States also pledged to continue to cooperate with Ukraine on nuclear safety issues, including the cleanup of the Chernobyl nuclear reactor site.
United States officials have repeatedly stressed that Ukraine’s security depends on diversifying its energy supplies and increasing energy efficiency.
The statement said that the trial and other incidents raised “serious concerns” about the government’s commitment to democracy and the rule of law.
In a brief meeting with President Yanukovych at the March 2012 Nuclear Security Summit, President Obama praised Ukraine for removing all of the highly enriched uranium from its territory.
President Obama stressed that Ukraine should hold free, fair, and transparent parliamentary elections in October, and expressed concerns about selective prosecutions of the political opposition.
After the October 2012 parliamentary election, the State Department issued a statement saying that the Ukrainian election was a “step backward” from the progress made during previous elections.
United States Reaction to Anti-Government Protests The United States has strongly urged Ukraine to sign the Association Agreement with the EU, and has worked closely with the EU to promote the region’s democratic development, rule of law, and closer integration with Western countries.
On December 5, 2013, United States Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland visited Kyiv to participate in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Ministerial conference, but also discussed the situation in Ukraine with government officials and protestors in the Maidan.
She stressed United States support for those in Ukraine who see the country’s future aligned with Europe and called on the government and protestors to resolve the country’s problems peacefully.
She reportedly received government assurances that force would not be used against the protestors.
After Ukrainian authorities attempted to clear the protestors from the Maidan on December 10, Secretary of State John Kerry issued a statement expressing the United States’ “disgust” with the Ukrainian government’s actions.
On January 27, Vice President Biden called President Yanukovych to underline United States support for peaceful negotiations to solve the crisis and condemn the use of violence by any side.
He warned Yanukovych against taking harsh security measures and urged the government to ensure the repeal of “anti-democratic laws” by Ukraine’s parliament.
On February 4, Biden made his fourth call during the crisis to reinforce the need for a peaceful solution to the crisis.
At the Munich Security Conference on February 1, Secretary Kerry said that Ukrainians were “fighting for the right to associate with partners who will help them realize their aspirations.
And they have decided that that means their futures do not have to lie with one country alone, and certainly not coerced.
The Administration responded sharply to the Ukrainian government’s attempted crackdown on February 18.
Vice President Biden called Yanukovych on February 18 to urge him to pull back government forces in the streets and exercise maximum restraint.
On February 19, Secretary Kerry said that Yanukovych had a choice between “compromise and dialogue versus violence and mayhem.
Perhaps in an effort to assuage Russian suspicions about United States motives in Ukraine, President Obama stressed “our approach as the United States is not to see as some Cold War chessboard in which we’re in competition with Russia.
However, as noted above, the agreement was rendered moot within hours by the collapse of the Yanukovych regime.
The Administration reacted positively, but cautiously, to the collapse of the Yanukovych regime.
Administration officials have said the United States is working with the new Ukrainian leadership, the EU, and the IMF and other international financial organizations, on an aid package to support the new government in Kyiv to stabilize its finances in the short term and move forward with reforms in the longer term.
According to the FY2014 Congressional Budget Presentation for Foreign Operations, Ukraine received $103,593 million in United States aid in FY2012.
According to other State Department figures, the United States allocated $102,576 million in aid for Ukraine in FY2013.
For FY2014, the Administration requested $95,271 million in aid for Ukraine.
Of this amount, $53,957 million is in the Economic Support Fund account; $4. million is in Foreign Military Financing; $28,704 million is in AI D and State Department Global Health Programs; $1. million is in International Military Education and Training funding; $4. million is in INCLE law enforcement aid; and $2.41 million is in the NADR account, for non-proliferation, antiterrorism, demining, and other programs.
Policy A significant portion of United States aid to Ukraine in the ESF account is dedicated to improving the safety of the Chernobyl nuclear facility, including finishing the construction of the containment structure over the damaged reactor and securing and storing spent nuclear fuel.
Other ESF programs are aimed at improving governance and increasing the accountability and effectiveness of the justice system.
Global Elealth funding helps Ukraine fight its EIIV/A1DS crisis, which is the most severe in the region, as well as Ukraine’s serious tuberculosis problem.
Security assistance for Ukraine is aimed at helping Ukraine’s defense reform efforts, improving interoperability with United States and NATO forces, and boosting the capabilities of Ukraine’s armed forces.
Law enforcement aid will help Ukraine implement its new Criminal Code and other legal reforms.
United States aid also helps Ukraine deal with its serious problems with trafficking in persons and cybercrime.
United States assistance has helped Ukraine destroy its stock of SCUD short-range missiles and make progress toward the elimination of its stock of propellant for SS-24 ICBMs.
It is also helping Ukraine strengthen its export controls and dispose of excess conventional weapons.
Among other provisions, the resolution sponsored by Senator Murphy urges the United States and EU to work together to promote a peaceful resolution of the crisis that moves Ukraine toward a future in the EuroAtlantic community; encourages all parties to avoid violence and engage in dialogue; and states that, in the event of further government violence against peaceful protestors, the President and Congress should consider whether to apply targeted sanctions, including visa bans and asset freezes, against individuals responsible for ordering or carrying out the violence.
The resolution, introduced by Representative Eliot Engel on December 16, 2013, contains provisions broadly similar to those of S.Res.9, including raising the possibility of sanctions against Ukrainian leaders if they use violence against protestors.
The House Foreign Affairs Committee approved an amended version of H.Res. on January 29.
The new version takes into account the events that had occurred since the resolution’s introduction.
The resolution says the President should increase democracy and human rights assistance to Ukraine, while halting any security assistance to organizations in Ukraine engaged in repression.
The resolution says the Department of State should “immediately consider” sanctions, including visa bans and asset freezes, against “perpetrators of state-sanctioned violence” in Ukraine.
Western officials agree that the United States and EU should not provide massive aid to a Ukrainian government that is not clearly committed to reform, merely for geopolitical reasons.
Most observers agree that the IMF, other international financial institutions, and the European Union will play the largest role in providing grant aid and loans to Ukraine, but there is also the question of what the United States can or should do bilaterally to help Ukraine.
On the other hand, some experts are skeptical whether the United States should play a key role in resolving Ukraine’s crisis.
Others note that the country is divided politically, that a large minority in Ukraine doesn’t appear to favor a Western orientation and that therefore a strong United States and EU push for a pro-Western Ukraine could exacerbate that split.
Some analysts also believe that a high-profile United States and European role could further irritate Russia, for which Ukraine is a highly sensitive issue.
As Moscow has many powerful means of pressuring Ukraine, this could have a negative impact on the situation in Ukraine and on Western relations with Moscow generally, they claim.
Others are skeptical that close cooperation with Russia on Ukraine, while perhaps desirable in theory, can work well in practice.
Moscow, they claim, aims at subordinating Ukraine, or at least the eastern and southern parts of it, to its control.
They note Russian official statements since Yanukovych’s ouster have made it clear that Moscow views itself to be involved in a zero-sum competition with the West over Ukraine and is deeply suspicious of United States and EU motives.
