This precipitated an international crisis due to concerns over a potential invasion.
Satellite imagery showed movements of armour, missiles, and heavy weaponry.
The troops were partially withdrawn by June 2021, though the infrastructure was left in place.
A second build-up began in October 2021, this time with more soldiers and with deployments on new fronts; by December over 100,000 Russian troops were massed around Ukraine on three sides.
Despite the Russian military build-ups, Russian officials from November 2021 to 20 February 2022 repeatedly denied that Russia had plans to invade Ukraine.The crisis was related to the ongoing War in Donbas, itself part of the Russo-Ukrainian War, ongoing since 2014.
In December 2021, Russia advanced two draft treaties that contained requests for what it referred to as ""security guarantees"", including a legally binding promise that Ukraine would not join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and a reduction in NATO troops and materiel stationed in Eastern Europe, and threatened unspecified military response if those demands were not met in full.
NATO rejected these requests, and the United States warned Russia of ""swift and severe"" economic sanctions should it further invade Ukraine.
The crisis was described by many commentators as one of the most intense in Europe since the Cold War.
International affairs analyst Fiona Hill later commented on 28 February 2022 Russia's invasion of Ukraine was another sign that World War III was already underway.On 21 February 2022, Russia officially recognized the two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine, the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic, as independent states, and deployed troops to Donbas, in a move interpreted as Russia's effective withdrawal from the Minsk Protocol.
The breakaway republics were recognized in the boundaries of their respective Ukrainian oblasts, which extend far beyond the line of contact.
On 22 February, Putin said that the Minsk agreements were no longer valid.
On the same day, the Federation Council unanimously authorised the use of military force in the territories.On the morning of 24 February, Putin announced that Russia was initiating a ""special military operation"" in the Donbas, and launched a full-scale invasion into Ukraine.
Recognition of the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics by Russia 4.2.
Despite being recognized as an independent country since 1991, as a former USSR constituent republic, Ukraine was perceived by the leadership of Russia as part of its sphere of influence.
In 2009, Romanian analyst Iulian Chifu and his co-authors opined that in regard to Ukraine, Russia has pursued an updated version of the Brezhnev Doctrine, which dictates that the sovereignty of Ukraine cannot be larger than that of the Warsaw Pact's member states prior to the collapse of the Soviet sphere of influence during the late-1980s and early-1990s.
This view is built upon the premise that Russia's actions to placate the West in the early 1990s should have been met with reciprocity from the West, without NATO expansion along Russia's border.Following weeks of protests as part of the Euromaidan movement , pro-Russian Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych and the leaders of the Ukrainian parliamentary opposition on 21 February 2014 signed a settlement agreement that called for an early election.
The following day, Yanukovych fled from Kyiv ahead of an impeachment vote that stripped him of his powers as president.
Leaders of the Russian-speaking eastern regions of Ukraine declared continuing loyalty to Yanukovych, causing the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine.
This unrest was fomented by Russia as part of a coordinated political and military campaign against Ukraine, Amidst that Russia invaded and subsequently annexed Crimea in March 2014, followed by the War in Donbas, which started in April 2014 with the creation of the Russia-backed quasi-states of the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics.
The Minsk agreements allowed the fighting to subside in Donbas, leaving separatists in control of about a third of the region.
Since 2019, Russia has issued over 650,000 internal Russian passports among an unconfirmed overall population, which is considered by Ukrainian government as a step towards annexation of the region.
American historian Timothy Snyder described Putin's ideas as imperialism.
British journalist Edward Lucas described it as historical revisionism.
Other observers have noted that the Russian leadership has a distorted view of modern Ukraine and its history.Russia has said that a possible Ukrainian accession to NATO and the NATO enlargement in general threaten its national security.
The announcement was made following the Ukrainian government's crackdown on Viktor Medvedchuk earlier that month.
Medvedchuk was a leading pro-Russian Ukrainian opposition politician and tycoon with close personal ties to Vladimir Putin.
On 16 March, the SBGS border patrol in Sumy spotted a Russian Mil Mi-8 helicopter trespassing approximately 50 metres into Ukrainian territory before heading back to Russian airspace.
Ten days later, Russian troops fired mortars at Ukrainian positions near the village of Shumy in Donbas, killing four Ukrainian servicemen.
Russia refused to renew the ceasefire in Donbas on 1 April.On March 24, Zelenskyy announced Ukraine's intent to take back Crimea, mentioning among others military means.
The next day Russia sent troops to the Ukraine border.Beginning from 16 March, NATO began a series of military exercises known as Defender Europe 2021.
The military exercise, one of the largest NATO-led military exercises in Europe for decades, included near-simultaneous operations across over 30 training areas in 12 countries, involving 28,000 troops from 27 nations.
Russia criticized NATO for holding Defender Europe 2021, and deployed troops to its western borders for military exercises in response to NATO's military activities.
The deployment led to Russia having a sizable troop buildup along the Russo-Ukrainian border by mid-April.
A Ukrainian estimation placed the deployment at 40,000 Russian forces for Crimea and the eastern portion of the Russo-Ukrainian border.
It was estimated that 60,700 Russian troops were stationed at Crimea and Donbas, with 2,000 military advisors and instructors in eastern-Ukraine alone.
According to Komchak, the buildup, expected to increase to 53 battalion tactical groups, posed ""a threat"" to the military security of Ukraine.Dmitry Peskov, a spokesman for Vladimir Putin, disagreed with the Ukrainian statements, claiming the military movements ""are not of any concern"" for neighbouring countries.
Between late March and early April 2021, significant quantities of weapons and equipment from various regions of Russia, including as far away as Siberia, were transported towards the Russo-Ukrainian border and into Crimea.
It was emphasized by the original sources that the flight had allegedly taken place on the Russo-Ukrainian border.
On 5 April, Ukrainian representatives of the Joint Centre of Control and Coordination sent a note to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine regarding pro-Russian intentions to falsify the accusations.
The next day, the mission confirmed the death of a child in Russian-occupied Donbas, but failed to establish a link between the purported ""Ukrainian drone strike"" and the child's death.On 6 April 2021, a Ukrainian serviceman was killed as a result of shelling of Ukrainian positions near the town of Nevelske in Donetsk.
As a result of the shelling, the water pumping station in the ""gray-zone"" between the villages of Vasylivka and Kruta Balka in South Donbas was de-energized, cutting off the water supply to over 50 settlements.
Shortly after the annexation of Crimea in 2014, Ukraine blocked the flow of the Northern Crimean Canal, which had supplied 85 percent of Crimea's water.
Crimea's reservoirs were subsequently depleted and water shortages ensued, with water reportedly only being available for three to five hours a day in 2021.
Interfax reported on 8 April that the crews and ships of the Caspian Flotilla would perform the final naval exercises in cooperation with the Black Sea Fleet.
Ukraine's initiative was supported by several countries, but the Russian delegation failed to appear at the meeting and refused to provide explanations.
On 13 April 2021, Ukrainian consul Oleksandr Sosoniuk was detained in Saint Petersburg by the Federal Security Service , allegedly while ""receiving confidential information"" during a meeting with a Russian citizen.
In response, Yevhen Chernikov, a senior Russian diplomat of the Russian embassy in Kyiv, was declared a persona non grata in 19 April in Ukraine and was forced to leave the country within 72 hours.
The Ukrainian artillery boats were escorting civilian ships when the incident occurred.
It was reported that Ukrainian ships threatened to use airborne weapons to deter provocations from FSB vessels.
The incident ended without any casualties.The following day, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine reported that Russia had announced the closure of parts of the Black Sea to warships and vessels of other countries until October, under the pretext of military exercises.
The Ministry condemned the decision as a ""gross violation of the right of navigational freedoms"" guaranteed by the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
According to the convention, Russia must not ""obstruct maritime passages of the International strait to ports"" in the Sea of Azov.According to John Kirby, Pentagon Press Secretary, Russia had concentrated more troops near the Russo-Ukrainian border than in 2014.
Russia reportedly imposed temporary restrictions on flights over parts of Crimea and the Black Sea from 20 to 24 April 2021, as stated in an international report for pilots.On 22 April 2021, Russian Minister of Defence Sergey Shoigu announced a drawdown of military exercises with troops from the 58th and 41st Army, and the 7th, 76th, and 98th Guards Airborne Division returning to their permanent bases by 1 May after inspections in the Southern and Western military districts.
Equipment at the Pogonovo training facility was to remain for the annual military exercise with Belarus scheduled in September 2021.
Medvedev concluded that Russia should do nothing in regard to Ukraine and wait until a Ukrainian government comes to power that is genuinely interested in improving relations with Russia, adding ""Russia knows how to wait.
Senior officials of the United States Department of Defense reported on 5 May 2021 that Russia had only withdrawn a few thousand troops since the previous military buildup.
Despite withdrawals of several Russian units back to their native barracks, vehicles and equipment were not withdrawn, leading to fears that a re-deployment might occur.
Senior United States Defense Department officials in early May estimated over 80,000 Russian troops still remained at the Russo-Ukrainian border.In early November 2021, reports of Russian military buildups prompted American officials to warn its European allies that Russia could be considering a potential invasion of Ukraine, while a number of experts and commentators believed that Putin was seeking a stronger hand for further negotiations with the West.
The Ukrainian military intelligence estimated that the figure had risen to 90,000 by 2 November, composing of forces from the 8th and 20th Guards, and the 4th and 6th Air and Air Defence Forces Army.On 13 November 2021, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy announced that Russia had again amassed 100,000 troops near the Russo-Ukrainian border, higher than an American assessment of approximately 70,000.
On the same day, in an interview on Russia-1, Putin denied any possibility of a Russian invasion of Ukraine, labelling the notions as ""alarmist"", while simultaneously accusing NATO of undergoing unscheduled naval drills at the Black Sea. days later, the chief of the HUR MOU, Kyrylo Budanov commented that Russian troop deployment had approached 92,000.
Reznikov estimated that the Russian military buildup consisted of 94,300 troops.
In early December 2021, an analysis conducted by Janes concluded that major elements of the Russian 41st Army and the 1st Guards Tank Army had been re-positioned to the west, reinforcing the Russian 20th and 8th Guards armies that were already positioned closer to the Russo-Ukrainian border.
Additional Russian forces were reported to have moved to Crimea, reinforcing Russian naval and ground units that were already deployed there.American intelligence officials warned that Russia was planning an upcoming major military offensive into Ukraine scheduled to take place in January 2022.
Russia began a slow evacuation of its embassy staff at Kyiv beginning in January 2022.
The motives of the evacuation remain unknown and were subjected to multiple speculations.
By mid-January, an intelligence assessment produced by the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence estimated that Russia was in its final stages of completing a military buildup at the Russo-Ukrainian border, amassing 127,000 troops at the region.
Among the troops, 106,000 were land forces, the remainder being naval and air forces.
There were 35,000 more Russian-backed separatist forces and another 3,000 Russian forces in rebel-held eastern Ukraine.
The assessment estimated that Russia had deployed 36 Iskander short-range ballistic missile systems near the border, many stationed within striking distance of Kyiv.
The assessment also reported intensified Russian intelligence activity.
An analysis conducted by the Atlantic Council in 20 January concluded that Russia had deployed additional critical combat capabilities to the region.In late-January 2022, major Russian military units were relocated and deployed to Belarus under the auspices of previously planned joint military exercises to be held in February that year.
Namely, the headquarters of the Eastern Military District was deployed to Belarus along with combat units drawn from the District's 5th, 29th, 35th, and 36th Combined Arms Army, 76th Guards Air Assault Division, 98th Guards Airborne Division and the Pacific Fleet's 155th Naval Infantry Brigade.
On 28 January, Reuters reported that three anonymous American officials had revealed that Russia had stockpiled medical supplies.
Two of the three officials claimed that the movements were detected in ""recent weeks"", adding to fears of conflict.
In an interview with The Washington Post in January 2022, Zelenskyy warned that Russian forces could invade and take control of regions in eastern Ukraine.
He also argued that an invasion would lead to a large-scale war between Ukraine and Russia.On 5 February 2022, two anonymous United States officials reported Russia had assembled 83 battalion tactical groups, estimated to be 70-percent of its combat capabilities, for a full-scale invasion on Ukraine, and predicted that a hypothetical invasion would result in 8,000 to 35,000 military casualties and 25,000 to 50,000 civilian casualties.
The officials anticipated that the possible launch window could start on 15 February and persist until the end of March, when extremely cold weather would freeze roads and assist in the movement of mechanized units.
The Kaliningrad, a Ropucha-class landing ship, was among the six landing ships departed for Sevastopol on 8 February 2022.
On 8 February, a fleet of six Russian landing ships, namely the Korolev, the Minsk, and Kaliningrad from the Baltic Fleet; and the Petr Morgunov, the Georgiy Pobedonosets, and the Olenegorskiy Gornyak from the Northern Fleet, reportedly sailed to the Black Sea for naval exercises.
The first was a naval exercise on the Black Sea, which was protested by Ukraine as it resulted in Russia blocking the naval routes at the Kerch Strait, the Sea of Azov, and the Black Sea; the second involved a joint military exercise between Belarus and Russia held in regions close to the Belarusian-Ukrainian border, involving 30,000 Russian troops and almost all of the Belarusian armed forces.
Responding to the latter, Ukraine held separate military exercises of their own, involving 10,000 Ukrainian troops.
Both exercises were scheduled for 10 days.Referring to unspecified intelligence, National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan, stated an attack could begin at any moment prior to the conclusion of the 2022 Winter Olympics at Beijing on 20 February.
Separately, the media published several reports based on acquired United States intelligence briefed to several allies with specific references to 16 February as a potential starting date for a ground invasion.
Following these announcements, the United States ordered most of its diplomatic staff and all military instructors in Ukraine to evacuate.
Numerous countries, including Japan, Germany, Australia and Israel also urged their citizens to leave Ukraine immediately.
The next day, KLM suspended its flights to Ukraine, while other airlines shifted their flight schedules to limit exposure across the country.
A Russian military helicopter heading south from Minsk, 23 February 2022.
According to Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba, no response had been received from Russian authorities within the required 48-hour deadline.
On 11 February 2022, United States President Biden warned Americans in Ukraine should leave as soon as possible, as a Russian invasion could begin on 16 February 2022.
On 13 February, Ukraine requested that an emergency meeting within the OSCE be held within the following 48 hours, at which Russia was expected to provide a response.On 14 February 2022, a telephone conversation was made by Reznikov and his Belarusian counterpart, Viktor Khrenin, where they agreed on mutual confidence-building and transparency measures.
The emergency meeting of the OSCE requested by Ukraine was held on 15 February.
However, the Russian delegation to the OSCE was absent from the meeting.On 14 February 2022, Shoigu said units from Russia's Southern and Western military districts had begun returning to their barracks following the completion of ""exercises"" near Ukraine.
However, in a press conference held the subsequent day, Biden commented that they could not verify such reports.On 16 February, the Secretary General of NATO, Jens Stoltenberg refuted Russian claims of retreating troops and said that Russia had continued the military buildup.
The Russia Foreign Ministry called earlier Western warnings of a Russia invasion on this day ""anti-Russian hysteria"" while President Zelenskyy called for a ""day of unity"" in anticipation of Russian threats.
On 17 February 2022, top officials from the United States and NATO stated that the threat of an invasion remained, as Russia was still actively looking for a casus belli for an invasion against Ukraine, with attempts being made to conduct a false flag operation.
On 18 February, Biden announced that he was convinced that Putin had made a decision to invade Ukraine.
On 19 February, two Ukrainian soldiers were killed while another five were wounded by artillery fire from separatists.On 20 February 2022, the Belarusian Ministry of Defence announced the continuation of the Allied Resolve 2022 military exercises, decided Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko and Putin.
On the same day, several news outlets reported that United States intelligence assessed that Russian commanders had been given orders to proceed with the invasion.
On 10 January 2022, the SBU announced that it had arrested a Russian military intelligence agent who was attempting to recruit operatives to conduct attacks at Odessa.
It was later suspected that Russian hackers might be responsible for the incident.The HUR MOU accused Russian special services of preparing ""provocations"" against Russian soldiers stationed at Transnistria, a breakaway unrecognized state internationally considered part of Moldova, to create a casus belli for a Russian invasion of Ukraine.
The Biden administration later revealled that the Russian government deployed Russian operatives, trained in urban warfare and explosives, as saboteurs to stage a fabricated attack against Russian proxy separatists at eastern Ukraine, to provide Russia with another pretext for an invasion.
The Russian government denied the claims.On 22 January 2022, the British government said Russia was preparing a plan to supplant Ukraine's government via military force and install a pro-Russian puppet administration in the country, potentially led by Yevheniy Murayev, a former member of the Ukrainian parliament.
Both Murayev and the Russian government denied the allegations, with the latter blaming NATO member-states ""led by the Anglo-Saxons"" for the crisis.
On 3 February, the United States said that Russia was planning to use a fabricated video showing a staged Ukrainian ""attack"" as a pretext for a further invasion of Ukraine.
The Russian government denied any plans to orchestrate a pretext for an invasion.US intelligence sources warned in mid-February that Russia had compiled ""lists of Ukrainian political figures and other prominent individuals to be targeted for either arrest or assassination"" in the event of an invasion.
Humanitarian situation during the war in Donbas and Misinformation in the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis § Claim of genocide in Donbas On 9 December 2021, Putin spoke of discrimination against Russian speakers outside Russia, saying: ""I have to say that Russophobia is a first step towards genocide.
Several international organizations, including the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights ,OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, and the Council of Europe found no evidence supporting the Russian claims.
The main geopolitical goal of the United States is to push Russia back to the East as far possible.
To that end, a policy to force the Russian-speaking population out of their current places of residence is needed.
Ukrainian defences In preparation for a possible renewed Russian invasion, the Ukrainian Ground Forces announced a meeting in April 2021 regarding territorial defences to strengthen and protect the nation's borders and critical facilities, and to combat sabotage and reconnaissance groups in southern Ukraine.
During the same month, Zelenskyy visited Ukrainian defensive positions in Donbas.
According to Russia, Ukraine deployed 125,000 troops to the Donbas conflict zone in December 2021.
The United States estimated in December 2021 that Russia could assemble over 175,000 troops to invade Ukraine.
Oleksii Reznikov, Ukrainian Minister of Defense, stated that ""we have 250,000 official ... members of our army.
Reznikov claimed that Russia could launch a large-scale attack on Ukraine in late-January 2022.
Ukraine's Territorial Defense Forces recruited additional citizens and trained them in urban guerrilla tactics and firearms use.
Foreign support A United States airman of the 436th Aerial Port Squadron at Dover Air Force Base prepares FGM-148 Javelins to be delivered to Ukraine, 21 January 2022.
In response to expectations of a renewed invasion following the military buildup of over 100,000 Russian troops near the Russo-Ukrainian border, some NATO member nations in January 2022 began providing military aid, including lethal weapons, with the United States giving approval to its NATO allies to send anti-armor missiles and other US-made weapons.
The first United States shipment of some 90 tonnes of lethal weapons arrived in Ukraine on 22 January 2022.
The United States provided FGM-148 Javelin antitank missiles, anti-armor artillery, heavy machine guns, small arms, ammunition, secure radio systems, medical equipment and spare parts.US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley threatened United States support for an anti-Russian insurgency within Ukraine, similar to the CIA's assistance to anti-Soviet mujahideen rebels in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
In December 2021, the United States government approved additional defense aid of US$200 million to Ukraine.
This was in addition to previous aids to Ukraine, making the total defense aid in 2021 worth US$650 million.
Deliveries of lethal weapons from the United States started the following month and included .50 BMG caliber ammunition, M141 Bunker Defeat Munition and Javelin systems.
The United States also intends to transfer Mil Mi-17 helicopters to Ukraine, previously flown by the Afghan Air Force.The Biden administration approved deliveries of American-made FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missiles to Ukraine.
In January 2022, the Biden administration granted permission to the Baltic nations to transfer American-made equipment to Ukraine.
Estonia donated Javelin anti-tank missiles to Ukraine, while Latvia and Lithuania provided Stinger air defense systems and associated equipment.Other NATO members also provided aid to Ukraine.
Pre-existing British and Canadian military training programs were bolstered in January 2022.
The British deployed additional military trainers and provided light anti-armor defence systems, while the Canadians deployed a small special forces delegation to aid Ukraine.
On 17 January, British Defence Secretary Ben Wallace announced that Britain had supplied Ukraine with 1,100 short-range anti-tank missiles.
On 20 January, Sky News reported that 2,000 short-range anti-tank NLAW missiles had been delivered via numerous Royal Air Force C-17 transport aircraft between the UK and Ukraine.
On 21 January, the UK Defence Journal reported that there had been an increase in Royal Air Force RC-135W Rivet Joint surveillance aircraft being deployed to monitor Russian forces on the Russo-Ukrainian border.On 16 January 2022, the Danish government announced they would provide Ukraine with a €22 million defense package.
He explained that Ukraine had asked the Netherlands for arms assistance on 20 January, and a parliamentary majority supported it.On 31 January 2022, Poland announced its decision to supply Ukraine with lethal weapons.
It intended to provide significant quantities of light ammunition, artillery shells, light mortar systems, reconnaissance drones, and Polish-made Grom surface-to-air missiles.On 17 February 2022, a tripartite format of cooperation was launched between Poland, Ukraine and the United Kingdom, to respond to threats to European security and to deepen Ukraine's relationships with the two other European nations in matters of cyber security, energy security and countering disinformation.
NATO Enhanced Forward Presence and Operation Atlantic Resolve United States paratroopers of the Immediate Response Force were deployed to eastern Europe to reinforce NATO's eastern flank amid the crisis in February 2022.
On 20 January 2022, Spanish Defence Minister, Margarita Robles announced that the Spanish Navy was being deployed to the Black Sea.
The patrol vessel Meteoro, acting as a minesweeper, was already en route and the frigate Blas de Lezo departed on 22 January.
She announced that the Spanish government was considering deploying the Spanish Air Force to Bulgaria.
Timeline of the war in Donbas Alleged clashes between Russia and Ukraine Fighting in Donbas escalated significantly on 17 February 2022.
While the daily number of attacks over the first six weeks of 2022 was 2 to 5, the Ukrainian military reported 60 attacks on 17 February.
Russian state media also reported over 20 artillery attacks on separatist positions the same day.
For example, the Ukrainian government accused Russian separatists of shelling a kindergarten at Stanytsia Luhanska using artillery, injuring three civilians.
The Luhansk People's Republic said that its forces had been attacked by the Ukrainian government with mortars, grenade launchers and machine gun fire.On 18 February, the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic ordered mandatory evacuations of civilians from their respective capital cities, although it has been noted that full evacuations would take months to accomplish.
Ukrainian media reported a sharp increase in artillery shelling by the Russian-led militants in Donbas as attempts to provoke the Ukrainian army.
Separately, the press service of the Southern Military District announced that Russian forces had in the morning that day killed a group of five saboteurs near the village of Mityakinskaya, Rostov Oblast, that had penetrated the border from Ukraine in two infantry fighting vehicles, the vehicles having been destroyed.
Ukraine denied being involved in both incidents and called them a false flag.
The Ukrainian News Agency said that it was forced to shut down as a result.
International recognition of the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic President Putin, alongside Denis Pushilin and Leonid Pasechnik, signs decrees recognizing the independence of the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics on 21 February 2022.
Concluding the extraordinary session of the Security Council of Russia held on that day, Putin said that the decision on recognition thereof would be taken that day.The request was endorsed by Minister of Defence Sergey Shoigu.
Additionally, treaties ""on friendship, co-operation and mutual assistance"" between Russia and the republics were inked.
The recognition decision was promptly condemned by President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen and the president of the European Council Charles Michel in identical statements on Twitter.
International sanctions on Russia In response to the recognition of the two breakaway republics, Western countries rolled out sanctions against Russia.
On 22 February 2022, UK Prime Minister Johnson announced sanctions on five Russian banks, namely Rossiya Bank, Industrialny Sberegatelny Bank, General Bank, Promsvyazbank, and Black Sea Bank, and three billionaire associates of Putin, namely Gennady Timchenko, Boris Romanovich Rotenberg, and Igor Rotenberg.
German chancellor Scholz announced a halt to the certification process of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline.EU foreign ministers blacklisted all members of the Russian Duma who voted in favour of the recognition of the breakaway regions, banned EU investors from trading in Russian state bonds, and targeted imports and exports with separatist entities.
Japan – Japan said that it would strengthen its sanctions against Russia to also include financial institutions and military equipment exports.
New Zealand – New Zealand is prohibiting export of goods to the Russian military and other related security forces.
Singapore – Singapore will block certain Russian banks and financial transactions.
It will also control the export of items that could be used as weapons against the people of Ukraine.
South Korea – South Korea's government decided to tighten export controls by banning shipment of strategic items.
United Kingdom – Prime Minister Johnson revealed that the UK would employ sanctions to target banks, members of Putin's closest circle, and wealthy Russians.
Later on the same day, several independent media outlets confirmed that Russian forces were entering Donbas.
On the same day, the Federation Council unanimously authorised Putin to use military force outside Russia.
Ukrainian President Zelenskyy ordered reservists called up, while not committing to general mobilization yet.On 23 February 2022, an unidentified senior United States defense official was quoted by news media as saying that ""80 percent"" of Russian forces assigned and arrayed along Ukraine's border were ready for battle and that a ground incursion could commence at any moment.
On the same day, the Ukrainian parliament approved the decree of President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on the introduction of a state of emergency from 00:00 on 24 February 2022 across the territory of all Ukraine, except Donetsk and Luhansk regions, for a period of 30 days.
Moscow time on 24 February 2022, President Putin announced the beginning of a ""special military operation"" in the Donbas region.
Shortly after, reports of big explosions came from multiple cities in central and eastern Ukraine, including Kyiv and Kharkiv.
The United States was swift to announce that it would not send United States combat troops into Ukraine to intervene militarily.
The United States repeated its commitment not to send ground troops into Ukraine for fear of provoking war between the United States and Russia.
Many observers believed that Russian military operations in Ukraine would inevitably lead to the capitulation of the Ukrainian government and end to the country's national sovereignty.
Pre-invasion day panorama from southeastern Ukraine, February 23, 2022.
Minsk Protocol and Normandy Format United States President Joe Biden holds a video call with Russian President Vladimir Putin on 7 December 2021 Between 2 and 3 November 2021, CIA director William Burns met with senior Russian intelligence officials in Moscow to convey to the Kremlin Biden's concern about the situation on the Russo-Ukrainian border.
CNN reported that Burns spoke by phone with Zelenskyy following the meeting in Moscow.
At the same time, Pentagon Press Secretary John Kirby confirmed that the United States continued to observe ""unusual military activity"" by Russia near the Russo-Ukrainian border.US Secretary of State Antony Blinken discussed reports of ""Russian military activity"" in the area with Le Drian.
A week later, the Office of the President of Ukraine acknowledged that Russia was building up ""specific groups of troops"" near the border.
Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba urged the French and German governments to prepare for a possible military scenario of Russia's actions against Ukraine.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg in Brussels, 16 December 2021 Ukraine has intensified diplomatic efforts.
The new Ukrainian defense minister, Oleksii Reznikov, went to Washington D.C., where on 18 November he met with United States secretary of defense Lloyd Austin.
On 16 November, British defence secretary Ben Wallace visited Kyiv.Israel maintains strong relationship with both Ukraine and Russia, and sometimes acts as an interlocutor between the two.
In April 2021, Zelenskyy asked the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to mediate the situation between himself and Putin.
In a meeting at Kyiv in October with Zelenskyy, Israeli President Isaac Herzog told Zelenskyy that the new Israeli government under Prime Minister Naftali Bennett was willing to resume efforts at Ukrainian-Russian mediation.
Bennett raised the idea in a meeting with Putin two weeks later at Sochi, but Putin declined.In late January, the United States was again discussing sanctions with European allies in case of a Russian invasion.
Biden said the sanctions would be ""swift and severe, including a ""game over"" strategy of targeting Russian banks, bond markets and the assets of elites close to Putin.
This approach was also been criticized, and the proposed cut-off of Russian banks from the Visa, Mastercard and SWIFT payment systems was withdrawn.
Putin promised Macron not to carry out new military initiatives near Ukraine.
Russia–NATO relations United States Deputy Secretary of State Wendy Sherman meets with Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov in Geneva on 10 January 2022 United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken meets with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov in Geneva on 21 January 2022 On 7 December 2021, United States President Joe Biden and Russian President Vladimir Putin talked by videoconference.
According to Putin's aide, Biden told Putin that the United States did not plan to deploy offensive weapon in Ukraine.
Biden also warned that if Russia continued aggression against Ukraine, it would lead to ""serious costs and consequences"" such as the United States imposing additional economic sanctions on Russia, increasing United States military presence in the eastern members of NATO, and increased assistance to Ukraine.
According to Putin's aide, Putin responded by saying that it would ""cause a total severance of relations"" between Russia and the United States as well as the West at large.The following day, Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov addressed the question about what Russia expected in response to its ""security guarantees"" proposals by saying that ""we will not allow anyone to drag out our initiatives in endless discussions.
The United States delivered a formal written response to Russia's security demands on 26 January 2022.
On 1 February 2022, Putin said the United States response had failed to address Moscow's ""three key demands"", namely the non-expansion of NATO, refusal to deploy offensive weapon systems close to the Russian borders, and bringing back NATO's military infrastructure to the status quo of 1997.
On 17 February, as the risk of Russian invasion of Ukraine was being assessed by the United States and NATO as very high, Russia handed a letter to the United States ambassador that blamed Washington for having ignored its main security demands.
United Nations Security Council A UN Security Council meeting was convened on 31 January 2022 to discuss the ongoing crisis.
Russia tried to block the meeting, but the request was rejected with ten votes for the meeting to go ahead, two against and three abstentions.
Russia's ambassador to the UN, Vasily Nebenzya, accused the West of ""hysterics"" and of ""whipping up tensions"" over Ukraine.
According to him, Ukraine was not abiding by the Minsk Protocols of 2014 and 2015 to end the conflict with the separatists, and Western nations were ""pumping Ukraine full of weapons"" contrary to the Minsk Protocols.
Ukrainian permanent representative at the UN Sergiy Kyslytsya said Russia had deployed 112,000 troops near Ukraine's borders and in Crimea, with 18,000 deployed at sea off Ukraine's coast.
China's permanent representative, Zhang Jun, said the meeting was counterproductive and ""quiet diplomacy, not megaphone diplomacy"" was needed.
No resolution was agreed at the meeting.Later, the 21 February intervention in Donbass was widely condemned by the UN Security Council, and did not receive any support.
Russia invaded Ukraine during this UN Security Council emergency meeting aiming to defuse the crisis.
Russia invaded while holding the presidency of the UN Security Council for February 2022, and has veto power as one of five permanent members.
Responses from NATO and the United States in January 2022 referred to NRC, the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe , the United States–Russia Strategic Stability Dialogue , the Helsinki Final Act, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe , the Normandy Format and other treaties and forums.
Reactions to the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis It has been suggested that this article be merged into Reactions to the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis.
Please consider summarizing the material while citing sources as needed.
Ukraine In an interview with the French newspaper Libération in April 2021, Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said that Russian troops' build-up on the north-east border with Ukraine, in Ukraine's eastern war zone, and in Crimea, and the deterioration of the situation in eastern Ukraine were the gravest since the attack on Ukrainian sailors in the Kerch Strait in November 2018.
In November 2021, Kyrylo Budanov, the chief of Ukraine's military intelligence, said that Russia was preparing for an attack by the end of January or beginning of February 2022.
On 25 January 2022, defence minister Oleksii Reznikov said he saw no immediate threat of a full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine.
On 28 January 2022, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy called on the West not to create a ""panic"" in his country over a potential Russian invasion, adding that constant warnings of an ""imminent"" threat of invasion were putting the economy of Ukraine at risk.
Zelenskyy said that ""we do not see a bigger escalation"" than in early 2021 when Russian military build-up started.
On 12 February 2022, Zelenskyy said of the White House's warnings about the ""imminent"" threat of the Russian invasion that ""the best friend of our enemies is panic in our country.
On 19 February 2022, speaking at the Munich Security Conference 2022, Volodymyr Zelenskyy criticized the ""policy of appeasement"" towards Russia and called on the Western countries to help.
He also said that Ukraine would not respond to provocations by the Russian-led militants in Donbas, following the escalation and death of two Ukrainian soldiers.
On 22 February 2022, Zelenskyy said he will consider severing Ukraine's diplomatic relations with Russia.
Russia Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov meets with United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken on 2 December 2021 Despite the Russian military build-ups, Russian officials over months repeatedly denied that Russia had plans to invade Ukraine.
Nothing like this is going to happen"", and blaming ""malicious propaganda by the United States State Department"" for the situation.
On 30 November, Putin stated that an expansion of NATO's presence in Ukraine, especially the deployment of any long-range missiles capable of striking Russian cities or missile defense systems similar to those in Romania and Poland, would be a ""red line"" issue for Russia.On 19 January 2022, Russian deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov said that Russia does ""not want and will not take any action of aggressive character.
On 12 February 2022, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov accused the United States and its allies of waging a ""propaganda campaign"" about Russian invasion of Ukraine.
On 21 February, President Putin signed a decree recognizing the two self-proclaimed separatist republics in Donbas as independent states.
International community Albania and Kosovo – Albanian Armed Forces Colonel Ardian Lulaj and Kosovar Head of Strategic Communication Colonel Sefer Isufi both stated in early December 2021 that their respective countries would be willing to deploy Albanian Armed Forces and Kosovo Security Forces in a putative future mission in Ukraine should the United States decide to lead such an endeavor.
Argentina – On 22 February 2022, Argentina's government issued a statement condenming the use of force in Ukraine and called for diplomatic negotiations, in order to maintain international peace and security.
The statement appealed to all parties involved to resolve their differences through dialogue, in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter and International Law, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and the non-use of force between states, with full respect for human rights.
Armenia – Armenia called on Russia and Ukraine to solve all problems through diplomatic dialogue, negotiations, in accordance with the norms and principles of international law and the UN Charter.
Australia – On 24 January, the Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne offered assistance to Ukraine in combating Russian cyber attacks.
She also called on Russia to ""de-escalate"" tensions and urged Australians living in Ukraine to evacuate.
Similar sentiments were expressed by Finance Minister Simon Birmingham, who warned that Australia would raise financial sanctions against Russia in the event of hostilities.
Belarus – President of Belarus and Chairman of the Supreme State Council of the Union State, Alexander Lukashenko, on 21 January 2022 said the Union State ""d not want war"", but all those who would threaten Russia and Belarus would find themselves in difficulty.
On 18 January 2022, the Digital Forensic Research Lab of the Atlantic Council expert group published a review of the arrival of Russian troops in the Republic of Belarus.
In particular, it was about unloading Russian BM-27 Uragan multiple rocket launchers at the Rechytsa station in the Gomel Oblast north of Kyiv.
On 17 February, when asked by a journalist whether Belarus was ready to offer military assistance to Russia should the latter decide to help the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic, Lukashenko said, ""We will provide any support to Russia, both military and, if necessary, economic support.
We will share the last piece of bread with them and with people who suffer in Donbass.
Belgium – On 24 January 2022, Belgian Chief of Defence Michel Hofman said that Belgian forces were on standby in the Baltic, and prepared ""to intervene within a certain amount of time, but today it is too early to say where and how"" should the situation escalate.
Putin and Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro on 16 February 2022 Brazil – Brazil's president Jair Bolsonaro arrived in Moscow for trade talks with Putin on 16 February 2022.
Bulgaria – In early January, Bulgarian Minister of Defense Stefan Yanev responded to a parliamentary question on the deployment of additional military units in Bulgarian territory that Bulgaria opposes ""escalation of military measures before all other diplomatic means are used"" and that Bulgaria had as of yet ""no national position"" on the situation.
Canada – In January 2022, the Prime Minister of Canada, Justin Trudeau stated that Canada would provide Ukraine with a CDN$120 million loan, but would not transfer military equipment.
On 14 February 2022, Trudeau announced that Canada would provide a $500 million loan and send $7. million in lethal equipment to Ukraine.
Under this timeframe, the proposed truce resolution would thus begin on 28 January 2022 and conclude on 20 March 2022.
Colombia – On 13 February 2022, Colombia's President Ivan Duque instructed its Chancellery to contact all Colombians registered as residing in Ukraine to offer them repatriation assistance.
On 15 February 2022, Ivan Duque stated that Colombia will accompany the international community imposing sanctions in case of military aggression against Ukraine.
On 25 January 2022, Croatia's President Zoran Milanović, noting what he called NATO's military build-up in the region and the Biden administration's ""inconsistent and dangerous conduct"" in international security affairs and stressing his role as Croatia's commander-in-chief, told the press, ""We do not have any bearing on this and we will not have anything to do with this.
Cuba – Miguel Díaz-Canel expressed his support for Vladimir Putin during the crisis.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania – On 10 January 2022, Lithuania's State Defense Council convened to discuss the Russian-Ukrainian tensions.
In response to the aggressive Russian military behaviour, the council decided to increase the number troops and speed up military modernization plans.
On 17 January, Latvia increased its military presence in the eastern part of the country.
On 19 January, the Prime Minister of Estonia announced an extraordinary increase in defense spending by €380 million for the current fiscal year.
The Baltic states also decided to accelerate their own weapons acquisitions, including a joint rocket artillery system.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania also requested increased military deployments of NATO and American troops in the Baltics to deter aggressive Russian behaviour.
Finland and Sweden – Russian proposals that NATO not accept new members received strong criticism from Sweden and Finland, who had been maintaining neutrality.
In January 2022, both President of Finland Sauli Niinistö and Prime Minister Sanna Marin insisted on Finland's right to decide what alliances it would join.
Russian threats sparked a debate in both countries about applying for NATO membership.
On 13 January, the Swedish Armed Forces announced that they were deploying troops to the strategic island of Gotland, as a response to unusual Russian military activity.
Putin and the French President Emmanuel Macron during a meeting in Moscow, on 7 February 2022 France – In April 2021, French Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian, during a phone conversation with Ukrainian Minister for Foreign Affairs Dmytro Kuleba, noted that France was anxiously monitoring the movement of Russian troops to the Ukrainian border and the temporarily occupied territories.
He assured Kuleba of France's continued support for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Germany – In April 2021, during a telephone conversation with Russian President Vladimir Putin, German Chancellor Angela Merkel demanded that Russia reduce its military presence near Ukraine's borders.
In December 2021, German chancellor Olaf Scholz warned of ""consequences"" for Nord Stream 2, a Russian natural gas pipeline project operated by Gazprom, which delivers natural gas to Germany.
Germany had maintained a policy of not providing Ukraine with lethal weapons.
On 21 January 2022, Germany reportedly blocked Estonia from exporting weapons of German origin.
On 26 January, Germany announced that it was going to ship 5,000 helmets to Ukraine, while reaffirming that it would not supply lethal weapons.
Hungary – Hungarian Defence Minister Tibor Benkő declared that there was no need for NATO to deploy its troops in Hungary.
India – On 28 January 2022, a spokesperson for the Indian Ministry of External Affairs Arindam Bagchi stated that the situation in Ukraine and the high-level discussions between Russia and the United States were being closely monitored.
On 29 January the Indian Embassy in Ukraine asked all Indians living there – mostly students in medical colleges – to register so that it could provide information in a swift manner.
On 31 January, India abstained from the procedural vote at the United Nations Security Council ahead of a meeting to discuss the situation on the Ukraine border.
The Indian Embassy in Ukraine, prompted by ""high levels of tensions and uncertainties"", released two advisories on 15 and 20 February asking all its nationals, especially students, to temporarily leave Ukraine if their stay was not essential.
Indonesia – Indonesian president Joko Widodo issued statements to urge both Ukraine and Russia sides to de-escalate and avoided war at all costs.
He also urged the countries to focus on ongoing COVID-19 pandemic rather intensifying the political rivalry.
On 24 February, after the Russian invasion, Widodo tweeted urging an end to the war as it endangered the world and humanity suffered.
In a separate statement, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs emphasized the obligation of nations to respect international law and the UN Charter on territorial integrity, and condemned a clear aggression against the territory and sovereignty of a nation.
Iran – Iran's Foreign Ministry urged all parties to avoid escalation, while blaming NATO and the United States for provocation.
Israel – In late January 2022, Israel considered airlifting thousands of Jews out of Ukraine.
On 11 February 2022, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement urging Israeli citizens and diplomats to consider leaving the country.
In February 2022, the Ukrainian Ambassador to Israel claimed Israeli Foreign Minister Yair Lapid ""reiterates rhetoric of Russian propaganda"", after Lapid said that Israeli officials ""don't see a violent confrontation soon"" between Ukraine and Russia.
The Israeli Foreign Ministry subsequently summoned the Ukrainian Ambassador for an official reprimand.
On 13 February 2022, The Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs has stated that Israel's official policy in the crisis is in support of Ukraine and the West.
Israel refused to provide Ukraine with batteries for its Iron Dome's missile-defense system over worries it would damage Israel–Russia relations.
On 23 February, Israel issued an official statement in support of Ukraine's territorial integrity, and stated its readiness to provide humanitarian aid to Ukraine.
Following the Russian invasion, Israel provided an official condemnation of Russia's action in the crisis and once again said it was ready to provide humanitarian aid to Ukraine.
Prime Minister Mario Draghi underlined the importance of working towards a de-escalation of tensions, in light of the serious consequences that an aggravation of the crisis would have.
On 13 February, the Italian government declared itself ready to deploy 1,000 soldiers to NATO's Eastern border.
Foreign affairs minister Luigi Di Maio travelled to Kyiv on 15 February 2022 to meet his Ukrainian counterpart Dmytro Kuleba, and on 17 February met with Russian foreign affairs minister Sergey Lavrov.
On 22 February, Draghi described Russia's recognition of separatist republics as an ""unacceptable territorial violation of the democratic sovereignty of Ukraine"", while on the following day he stated that Italy could not tolerate Russia's prevarications and abuses.
On 11 February 2022, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs advised Japanese citizens to leave Ukraine immediately and avoid traveling there under any circumstance.
Kishida at a press conference on February 25 condemned Russia's military attack as a violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and said Japan would impose additional sanctions targeting Russia.
Kazakhstan – Amid reports of a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev stated that the Russian president personally assured him that the territorial integrity of Kazakhstan will not be questioned by Russia.
Kenya – The country's representative to the UN, Martin Kimani, abstained from a vote about Russia's conduct in Ukraine to hope for diplomacy.
However, after Russia's recognition of the breakaway republics on 22 February 2022, Kimani condemned Russia and said it ""breaches the territorial integrity"" of Ukraine.
Malaysia – On 24 February, after the Russian invasion, Prime Minister Ismail Sabri Yaakob expressed sorrow over the situation in Ukraine and expressed hope for a peaceful solution.
Opposition Leader Anwar Ibrahim later issued a statement condemning the Russian agresssion.
Moldova – President of Moldova Maia Sandu on 21 January 2022 said that the Moldovan authorities were closely watching into the situation in Ukraine and preparing for potential outcomes of the crisis.
She also demanded the withdrawal of Russian troops from Transnistria, a breakaway territory legally and internationally considered part of Moldova.
Sandu also called for calm from the citizens of Moldova in the face of the developments in Ukraine and expressed her confidence in the possibility of a diplomatic solution.
Later, Sandu met with Prime Minister of the Netherlands Mark Rutte and discussed with him the tensions in the Russia–Ukraine border.
During the meeting, Rutte expressed his support for Moldova's territorial integrity in regard to Transnistria.
New Zealand – On 12 February 2022, Minister of Foreign Affairs Nanaia Mahuta stated that the New Zealand Government was concerned about the Russian military buildup on the Ukrainian border and in Crimea, and supported Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
She urged New Zealand citizens in Ukraine to evacuate while commercial means were still available.
She called on Russia to reduce tensions in accordance with international law.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern echoed Mahuta's remarks, stating that New Zealand was considering targeted sanctions against Moscow.
It was announced on 22 February 2022 that Pakistan would make a high-level visit to Moscow.
Poland – Polish President Andrzej Duda announced that Ukraine could count on Polish support if Russia attacks, and called for a unified stance in Europe.
On 21 January, the head of National Security Bureau Paweł Soloch stated that ""supporting Ukraine is one of the key priorities of President Andrzej Duda's policy"", while Duda and Zelenskyy discussed the possibility of further Polish and NATO defensive equipment deliveries.
Romania – The Minister of National Defence of Romania, Vasile Dîncu, said that, in the event of a new Russian–Ukrainian war, Romania would not be militarily involved but would remain in a strategic relationship with NATO and react together with the alliance.President of Romania Klaus Iohannis urged the Romanian Armed Forces to be prepared for any aggression in the region, stating that the situation in Ukraine showed that measures of modernization and preparation of the Romanian military were necessary.
Iohannis also called for a greater presence from NATO, the United States and other allies in the Black Sea region as a result of the tensions between Russia and Ukraine.
Serbia – The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Serbia recommended that citizens of Serbia in Ukraine consider temporarily leaving the territory of that country.Prime Minister of Serbia, Ana Brnabić, assessed that a possible more serious aggravation of the relations between Ukraine and Russia would have serious economic implications for Serbia as well, and emphasized hopes that dialogue will win.
Singapore – On 22 February 2022, a spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that ""Ukraine's sovereignty, territorial integrity 'must be respected'"" and that all parties concerned should continue to pursue dialogue, including diplomatic means.
South Korea – President of South Korea Moon Jae-in ordered government ministries to prepare for the safe evacuation of Koreans in Ukraine, and draw up measures to mitigate damages to Korean companies, citing the threat of a looming Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Korea is eyeing the building crisis over Russia's military build-up near Ukraine and stands ready to cooperate with its allies, Defense Ministry said.
On 11 February 2022, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has decided to ban its nationals from traveling to all regions of Ukraine and urged those staying there to evacuate immediately amid brewing tensions in the region.
The statement called for Russia to withdraw its forces from Ukraine immediately, while it called for peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Slovakia – The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Slovakia, Ivan Korčok, stated that the ceasefire and the announcement of an increase in Russia's military power on the border with Ukraine are a matter of concern and called for de-escalation of tensions.
Switzerland – On 21 January 2022, Switzerland continued to facilitate direct negotiations between Russia and the United States to avert an armed confrontation in Eastern Europe.
Swiss President Ignazio Cassis explained during a press conference in Geneva ""Switzerland is concerned over growing tensions.
On 27 February 2022, the Swiss Federal Council announced adherence to all sanctions imposed by the European Union against Russia.
Furthermore, Switzerland will not allow direct shipments of arms to the war zone and only support humanitarian missions during the crisis.
Syria – On 22 February 2022, Syrian Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad announced its country's support to the Russian recognition of the republics' independence.
Furthermore, a commercial Turkish-owned vessel was hit by a Russian bomb off the coast of Odessa.
Turkish authorities said there were no casualties and the ship safely arrived in Romania, a NATO ally.
On 27 February, Turkey referred to the invasion as a ""war,"" rhetorically bringing the conflict under the 1936 Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits and permitting Turkey to prohibit Russian as well as other foreign warships in the Bosporus and Dardanelles.
United Arab Emirates – The United Arab Emirates largely remained silent on the issue.
One of the UAE's major allies, the US, called for the Emirates to vote for the UN Security Council resolution condemning Russia's invasion of Ukraine and demanding Moscow to withdraw its troops.
The Emirati decision was perceived as an independent foreign policy approach, after it depended on the United States for such decisions for a long time.
Consequently, Russian oligarchs started viewing the UAE as a safe place to move their assets and wealth to.
Investigations revealed that the Russian oligarchs and businessmen moved their yachts to Dubai.
Their private jets were also found travelling back and forth between Moscow and Dubai.
In their search for safe havens, rich Russians began shifting hundreds of millions of dollars into UAE banks from the sanctioning countries like the UK and Switzerland.
Crypto companies in the Emirates received multiple requests from the Russians to liquidate billions of dollars of virtual currency.
While some wanted to use cryptocurrency to invest in the Emirati properties, others wanted to turn the virtual money into hard cash and to store it elsewhere.
Deputy Prime Minister Dominic Raab said that there was ""a very significant risk Russia w invade Ukraine"" and threatened ""very significant economic consequences"" if it did.
On 7 February 2022, Prime Minister Boris Johnson said Britain would not ""flinch"" as he prepared to deploy Royal Marines, RAF aircraft, and Royal Navy warships to eastern Europe.
British citizens were being told by the Foreign Office to evacuate while commercial means were still available.
On 14 February 2022, Johnson warned that an invasion of Ukraine could take place within 48 hours.
United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken gave a speech in Berlin about a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine, 20 January 2022 United States – On 2 April 2021, President Biden had his first telephone conversation with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
On 19 January 2022, President Biden said that he believed Russia would invade Ukraine.
On 22 January 2022, the United States Embassy in Kyiv requested the evacuation of non-essential personnel along with their families by the United States Department of State.
On 11 February 2022, Biden's national security advisor Jake Sullivan publicly warned of the likelihood of a Russian invasion of Ukraine prior to the end the 2022 Winter Olympics.
Uruguay – On 23 February 2022, Uruguay's Ministry of Foreign Relations condemned the use of force and urged all parties to reduce tensions and achieve a political agreement.
The Uruguayan government expressed ""concern"" about the recognition of the separatist republics of Donetsk and Luhansk as sovereign states by Russia and the displacement of military troops, in violation of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
In addition, it said that the country considers that the United Nations Security Council Resolution 2202 ""provides the way for the application of the Minsk agreements, leading to a peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict"", and that the solution should ""respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity"" of Ukraine.
Venezuela – Nicolás Maduro expressed his full support for Vladimir Putin in a Russian diplomatic delegation visit in the Miraflores presidential palace, ratifying the way for military cooperation.
Maduro further expressed ""all his support"" after Putin's recognition of the Donetsk and Luhansk and the Russian mobilization into the territories.Juan Guaidó, on the other hand, described the action as an ""illegal recognition"" and ""unilateral action of intervention"", and rejected the deployment of troops in the territories.
Vietnam – Vietnam on 25 February 2022 said it was seriously concerned about the armed conflict in Ukraine and called for restraint.
The spokesperson said Vietnam is paying special attention to the Vietnamese community in Ukraine, asking for the protection of life, safety, assets, legitimate rights and interests of Vietnamese citizens and businesses here.Entities with limited recognition Abkhazia – On 22 February 2022, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs published a statement welcoming the recognition of independence of the Donetsk and Lugansk People's Republics by Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Taiwan – On 28 January 2022, President Tsai Ing-Wen suggested the National Security Council establish a task force to monitor events in Ukraine.
She compared Russia's military buildup around Ukraine to China's repeated invasion of Taiwan's ADIZ, stating that ""Taiwan has faced military threats and intimidation from China for a long time.
Therefore, we empathize with Ukraine's situation, and we also support the efforts of all parties to maintain regional security,"" and pleaded for peaceful dialogue.
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Ukrainian President Zelenskyy in Kyiv on 2 February 2022In February 2022, following warnings from Western nations that a Russian invasion could be near, more than a dozen countries encouraged their nationals to leave Ukraine.
The United States, the United Kingdom, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Germany are among the countries that have advised their citizens to leave.
Intergovernmental bodies European Union – On 24 January 2022, due to the conflict, the European Commission proposed €1. billion financial aid for Ukraine in grants and loans.
The European Union negotiated for possible liquefied natural gas supplies with the United States, Qatar and Azerbaijan anticipating Russia stopping gas exports to Europe.
NATO – NATO had repeatedly called on Russia to respect Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity and condemned Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea and support of separatists in eastern Donbas, and called for a resolution of the Donbas conflict via the Minsk agreements.
In December 2021, as Russia continued a military buildup in and around Ukraine, the NATO Parliamentary Assembly met with Ukrainian leaders to reaffirm the alliance's support for Ukraine, call upon NATO members to enhance delivery of defensive weapon systems to Ukraine, and counter Russian disinformation.
NATO and the United States re-affirmed NATO's ""open door"" policy, maintaining that countries should freely choose whether to join NATO or not.
Russia has a choice to either engage in dialogue with NATO and Western allies or choose confrontation.
We need to be clear-eyed about the prospect that Russia will — once again — use military force against Ukraine.
Furthermore, they embedded Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft senior fellow Anatol Lieven's paper ""Ending the Threat of War in Ukraine"" at the defacement page and called for a referendum on whether to presumably follow the existing Minsk Protocol or hand over the separatist-controlled territories to a UN peacekeeping administration.
Later, a second referendum in the separatist regions would then ask voters to choose to reunite with Ukraine, gain independence, or join Russia.
Belarusian opposition – On 24 January, Belarusian hacktivists stated that they had disrupted Belarusian Railway ""servers, databases and workstations"" using ransomware, while leaving automation and security systems in place.
They promised to decrypt the systems if 50 political prisoners were released and Russian soldiers were prevented from entering Belarus.
Dzmitry Bandarenka, coordinator of the European Belarus civil campaign, told Charter 97 on 26 January 2022, that he believed that in the event of Russian aggression, tens of thousands of Belarusians would fight against the Russian Federation on Ukraine's side and defend their country's independence.
Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople – Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople Bartholomew on 13 January 2022 called for peace in Ukraine.
Metropolis of Bessarabia – Representants of the Romanian Orthodox Metropolis of Bessarabia in Moldova announced that it was closely looking at the situation at the borders of Ukraine.
The metropolis also published a statement saying that it was praying for peace.
Russian intellectuals – On 30 January 2022, 90 Russian intellectuals, including Lev Ponomaryov and Svetlana Gannushkina, issued a public statement on Echo of Moscow urging the Russian government to avoid starting an ""immoral, irresponsible, and criminal"" war between Russia and Ukraine.
As of 7 February 2022, the statement had been signed by 5,000 Russian intellectuals.
On 31 January, retired Colonel General Leonid Ivashov published a statement on behalf of the All-Russian Officers' Assembly that opposed the ""criminal policy of provoking a war"" and calling for Putin to resign.
On 20 February, Ponomaryov and seven others, including Yuri Samodurov, held solitary street protests in Pushkinskaya Square in Moscow.
Ukrainian citizens – On 5 February 2022, from two to five thousand people in Kharkiv protested against the Russian threat to invade Ukraine.
On 12 February, two thousand people protested in Kyiv to show unity in opposition to the threat of a further Russian invasion of Ukraine.
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement – The ICRC deployed one of its largest contingents to Ukraine, where the organization has been active since 2014, working closely with the Ukrainian Red Cross Society.
The ICRC was active primarily in the disputed regions of the Donbas and Donetsk, assisting persons injured by armed confrontations when open hostilities between Russian and Ukrainian armed forces broke out on 24 February 2022.
Thereafter the fighting moved to more populated areas in the Eastern Ukraine.
The head of the ICRC delegation in Kyiv warned on 26 February 2022 that major cities were becoming the frontline with significant consequences for their populations, including children, the sick and elderly.
The ICRC urgently called on all parties to the conflict not to forget their obligations under international humanitarian law to ensure the protection of the civilian population and infrastructure and respect the dignity of refugees and prisoners of war.
Elon Musk announced 26 February 2022 that he had activated Starlink internet service in Ukraine as the country suffered power outages and gaps in internet service due to Russia's invasion.
Ukrainian refugee crisis Charity representatives based in Kyiv reported movements of Ukrainian population away from the front lines upon the beginning of the invasion on 24 February 2022.
Moldova, Slovakia, and Poland pledged to keep their borders open to Ukrainian refugees.
On the first day of the invasion, the Moldovan government reported 4,000 Ukrainian refugees, for whom tents were set up by the authorities.
The following day, Ana Revenco, the Interior Minister of Moldova, 15,800 Ukrainian civilian arrivals.
The Romanian Ministry of Internal Affairs reported around 10,000 Ukrainians refugees in their country upon the start of the invasion.
There were minimal applications for refugee status in Moldova and Romania.
In Romania, out of 10,000 Ukrainian refugees, only 11 applied for refugee status, reflecting most refugees' decisions to head for the Czech Republic and Poland instead.In Poland, politician Paweł Szefernaker said that approximately 100,000 people had crossed the Poland–Ukraine border within two days.
Poland was admitting children from Ukraine with birth certificates instead of passports.
By February 28, more than half-a-million refugees had departed Ukraine.
Poland had 281,000, 84,500 were in Hungary, 36,400 in Moldova, 32,500 in Romania, and 30,000 in Slovakia.
By the end of the second week , there were 2. million refugees abroad.Since the beginning of the refugee crisis, both the United States and the UK have admitted relatively few refugees and continental Europe had to deal with the mass exodus from the war zone.
Currently, only family members of Ukrainians already residing in the UK can be admitted as refugees to Great Britain.
Likewise, the United States has only admitted 4,264 refugees in 2019 from the Ukraine as most of them are barred from entry by lengthy immigration application protocols.
DEFENDER Europe 21 included a greater number of NATO ally and partner nations conducting activities over a wider area than what was planned for in 2020, which was severely restricted due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
More than 28,000 multinational forces from 26 nations conducted near-simultaneous operations across more than 30 training areas in a dozen countries.
DEFENDER Europe 21 also included significant involvement of the United States Air Force and United States Navy.
The exercise utilized key ground and maritime routes bridging Europe, Asia and Africa.
The exercise incorporated new or high-end capabilities including air and missile defense assets, as well as assets from the United States Army Security Force Assistance Brigades and the recently reactivated V Corps.
Defender Europe 21 was one of the largest U.S.-Army, NATO-led military exercises in Europe in decades.
It included ""nearly simultaneous operations across more than 30 training areas"" in Estonia, Bulgaria, Romania, Kosovo and other countries.
The two 'people's republics' carved out over the past seven months by pro-Russia rebels have not been recognised by any countries, and a rushed vote to elect governments for them on Sunday was declared illegal by Kiev, Washington and Brussels.
Croatia will send weapons worth €16. million to Ukraine and provide health care to refugees from the country, and the necessary medical assistance to the wounded, Croatia's defence and health ministers said on Monday.
Croatia has decided to grant Ukraine's request for weaponry and will send infantry weapons and protective equipment in the amount sufficient for four brigades, Defence Minister Mario Banožić told the press.
Hrvatska će, na zahtjev Ukrajine, poslati toj zemlji pješačko oružje i zaštitnu opremu u količinama dovoljnima za opremanje četiri brigade, izjavio je ministar obrane Mario Banožić u ponedjeljak.
Retrieved 13 February 2022. ... the government decided to donate 4,000 artillery shells to Ukraine for about CZK 37 million.
Defence Minister Jana Černochová , who proposed the donation to the cabinet, sees it as a significant act of solidarity.
The Czech Republic wants to use the donation to strengthen Ukraine's defense capabilities.
American officials had expected additional Russian troops to stream toward the Ukrainian border in December and early January, building toward a force of 175,000.
Russia has amassed more troops on the Ukrainian border than at any time since 2014.
Photographs by Maxar Technologies ^ ""Satellite Images Show Military Buildup In Russia, Ukraine"". rferl.org.
Ukrainian estimates provided to the OSCE in June 2021 show that only 12,000 Russian forces were removed from the border, and the rest remain in place.
And the ""swift and severe"" response that United States officials have promised could roil major economies, particularly those in Europe, and even threaten the stability of the global financial system, analysts say.
The lesson of the past year may be that while the Cold War is long over, Cold War-like behavior lives on.
And in the three decades since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the tension between the world's two principal nuclear adversaries has never been worse — making the pathway to a peaceful de-escalation harder to discern.
This practice lost favor, perhaps not coincidentally, right around the time the Soviet Union's sphere popped like a balloon in a Chuck E Cheese brawl.
Now, with the growing shakiness of the Pax Americana as Chinese and Russian powers grow, this ugly game is rebooting yet again, Andreas warns.
A trilateral cognitive institutional approach of the crisis decision-making process.
Conceptually, Russia sees Ukraine within the sphere of own 'privileged interests'; in fact, it means a modernized version of Brezhnev's doctrine of 'limited sovereignty', realized after the occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1968.
Putin makes a statement following the Security Council meeting on Donbass recognition on YouTube.
Russia fulfilled all its obligations, we withdrew troops from Germany, from the central and European countries, and it made a huge contribution in overcoming the legacy of the Cold War.
Open support of the terrorists in North Caucasus; Ignoring our demands and our concerns in the security area; Withdrawing from the arms treaties, and so on and so forth.
At that point, his own party abandoned him and called for a vote to take place.
Underscoring Ukraine's regional divisions, leaders of Russian-speaking eastern provinces loyal to Yanukovich voted to challenge anti-Yanukovich steps by the central parliament.
Retrieved 1 February 2022. ... their top aim is federalization of the country through all-Ukrainian referendum, one step from secession from the nation.
During the recent Direct Line, when I was asked about Russian-Ukrainian relations, I said that Russians and Ukrainians were one people – a single whole.
Historically speaking, the idea that a dictator in another country decides who is a nation and who is not is known as imperialism.
But that fear has gone hand-in-hand with chauvinistic bluster that indicates Moscow has a distorted view of modern Ukraine and the goals it wants to achieve there.
Vladimir Putin's inaccurate and distorted claims are neither new nor surprising.
The result heightened Kremlin's fears of encirclement and of losing the strategic depth that enabled Russia to prevail over Western invaders twice ... no amount of assurances that NATO is not a threat to Russia, that its purpose is purely defensive or that none of its weapons would ever be used except in response to an attack could assuage Moscow.
He wants to rebuild the former Soviet sphere of influence that extended from Central Europe through Central Asia, and views this effort as a restoration of Russian greatness.
Retrieved 26 February 2022. ays after the Inauguration of President Joe Biden, America's allies in Kyiv decided to get tough on Medvedchuk.
The Ukrainian government took his TV channels off the air, depriving Russia of its propaganda outlets in the country.
NATO warships are entering the Black Sea ever more frequently; the number of such visits increased by one-third last year.
On April 22, the Russian government appeared to turn down the heat on these deployments, with Minister Shoigu announcing a drawdown of the exercise and ordering troops to return to their permanent bases by May 1, to include the 58th Army of the Southern Military District, the 41st Army of the Central Military District, as well as the 7th and 76th Airborne Assault and 98th Airborne divisions, according to the statement.
Importantly, the equipment and weapons of the 41st Army are to remain at Pogonovo, a military training ground 17 kilometers south of Voronezh.
The Russian military did order some units back to their barracks by May 1 — and they did move from the border — the officials said.
But many of the units left their trucks and armored vehicles behind, a signal that they could go back if President Vladimir V Putin of Russia decided to deploy them again.
In Washington, senior American officials believe that an incursion to secure the water supply remains a real threat, though the costs and difficulty of such a move appear to have been sufficient to dissuade Russia for now.
The Kremlin said later Monday that Medvedev's article ""runs in unison"" with Russia's view of the current Ukrainian government.
Photograph by Fabrice Cofferini , Oksana Manchuk , and Bloomberg News; article updated 1 December 2021.
In recent weeks, Russian tanks have been moving west towards Ukraine once again, prompting fresh, even starker warnings from United States intelligence circles that a cross-border offensive could be on the cards.
Ukraine's president has said some 100,000 Russian troops are amassed near his country's border.
While Ukrainian assessments have said Russia has approximately 94,000 troops near the border, the United States map puts the number at 70,000.
Indeed, the United States and their NATO allies are presently conducting an unscheduled, and I want to stress that it is unscheduled, drill in the Black Sea.
Photo by Russian Ministry of Defence Press Service via Associated Press.
Ukraine's defense minister estimated Friday that Russia has amassed more than 94,000 troops near their borders and said there is a probability of a ""large-scale escalation"" in late January.
Retrieved 30 December 2021. hese units include elements of the 41st Combined Arms Army's 74th and 35th Motorised Brigades, 120th Artillery Brigade, and 119th Missile Brigade, as well as limited elements of the 90th Tank Division's 6th Tank Regiment.
Janes has identified the likely deployment of several new units to the Crimean Peninsula since the start of the October buildup.
This includes elements of the 247th Airborne Regiment, at least one 42nd Motorised Division T-72B3 battalion, a Buk-M2 battalion likely from the 90th Air Defence Brigade, and a 34th Motorised Brigade battalion tactical group.
Subsequent video footage indicates at least some of this equipment has since returned to its base in the Caucasus Mountains.
United States intelligence officials have determined that Russian planning is underway for a possible military offensive against Ukraine that could begin as soon as early 2022 and would include an estimated 175,000 personnel, according to an administration official.
Additionally, Russia recently deployed other critical combat capabilities to the region.
Numerous sources indicated Russian troops' movements in various parts of Russia, in Belarus and in occupied Crimea.
Ukrainian officials have warned that Russia could launch an attack on Ukraine from various directions, including from its ally Belarus.
Contribution by Aamer Madhani and Ellen Knickmeyer , Geir Moulson , Lorne Cook , and Yuras Karmanau ; Photograph by Associated Press.
A senior Biden administration official said the Russian troop deployment to Belarus raises concerns that Moscow may be planning to stage troops there to stretch Ukraine's defenses with an attack from the north.
Yes, I think he will, but I think he'll pay a serious and dear price for it that he doesn't think now will cost him what it's going to cost him.
I will say realistically if Russia decides to enhance their escalation, of course they are going to do this on those territories where historically there are people who used to have family links to Russia.
If we are going to protect ourselves against one of the most powerful armies in the world, then this will be war.
And if this will be war, it's going to be a very strong war, and everyone will lose.
Ukraine has accused Russia of blocking its access to the sea as Russia prepares for naval exercises next week amid spiralling tension in the region.
According to a United States official familiar with the findings, the United States acquired intelligence that Russia is looking at Wednesday as a target date.
Many countries, including Australia, Italy, Israel, the Netherlands and Japan have told their citizens to leave Ukraine.
They are present in Donbas, and we have seen attempts to stage pretext, false-flag operations to provide an excuse for invading Ukraine.
Photographs by Alexander Zemlianichenko Jr., Vadim Ghirda, Patrick Semansky, Richard Drew, Shamil Zhumatov, Evgeniy Maloletka, Emilio Morenatti, and Geert Vanden Wijngaert.
Photograph by the Press service of the State Security Service of Ukraine.
The White House accused Moscow on Friday of sending saboteurs into eastern Ukraine to stage an incident that could provide President Vladimir V Putin of Russia with a pretext for ordering an invasion of the country.
Report contribued by Frank Jordans and Aritz Parra contributed to this report; Photographs by AP Photo.
Retrieved 23 January 2022. hat the Russian government was considering trying to make a Russia-leaning former member of Ukraine's parliament, Yevhen Murayev, the country's new leader.
Retrieved 23 January 2022. ^ a b ""UK warns of Russian 'plot' to replace Ukraine government"". dw.com.
Four people familiar with United States intelligence said that Russia has drafted lists of Ukrainian political figures and other prominent individuals to be targeted for either arrest or assassination in the event of a Russian assault on Ukraine.
Retrieved 4 March 2022. e have credible information indicates Russian forces are creating lists of identified Ukrainians to be killed or sent to camps following a military occupation. ussian forces will likely use lethal measures to disperse peaceful protests or otherwise counter peaceful exercises of perceived resistance from civilian populations.
Photographs by Sergei Supinsky ^ a b ""US accuses Moscow of creating Ukraine invasion pretext with 'genocide' claims"". france24.com.
Photograph by Andrew Harnik ^ ""Report on the human rights situation in Ukraine"" . ohchr.org.
There is proof that Ukraine is committing atrocities against its Russian-speaking population in the country's east.
Allegations that Ukraine is attacking its own territory and persecuting its own citizens are absurd.
The programs are part of the country's strategic defense plan in the event of a potential invasion by Russia — to foster a civilian resistance that can carry on the fight if the Ukrainian military is overwhelmed.
He described how the volunteers might resist based on the tactics of Islamist militias in Aleppo, Syria.
Photographs by Nikolai Petrov and Russian Defense Ministry Press Service via Associated Press.
The Baltic countries of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia also have received permission from the Biden administration to send U.S.-made weapons Canada also has a military training program with Ukraine, and Ottawa recently sent a contingent of special forces to assist Kyiv.
He pointed to American support for the mujahedeen in Afghanistan against the Soviet invasion there in the late 1970s and 1980s, before the rise of the Taliban.
The level of military support"" for a Ukrainian insurgence, Stavridis said, ""would make our efforts in Afghanistan against the Soviet Union look puny by comparison.
French President Emmanuel Macron said Tuesday that Russian President Vladimir Putin told him that Moscow would not further escalate the Ukraine crisis.
Macron also said it would take time to find a diplomatic solution to the rising tensions, which represent the biggest security crisis between Russia and the West since the Cold War.
The Israeli position is like the position of the entire West – everything must be done to avoid an armed confrontation with Ukraine.
Reuters. million refugees fleeing Ukraine in just 12 days, mainly into five neighbouring countries.
Agreement on measures to ensure the security of The Russian Federation and member States of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Treaty between The United States of America and the Russian Federation on security guarantees.
