Alexander Zakharchenko believes Victoria Nuland's visit to Kiev was the result of the monstrous shelling of Elenovka . The head of the DPR believes that the shelling caused the death of innocent people . He believes the shelling was caused by the visit of
 The leader of the republic stated this in a briefing to a correspondent of Novorossiya Information Agency . The leader said this in an interview with a correspondent .
 Ukraine does not want to pass the laws which they are obliged to according to the Minsk Agreements . Ukraine is obliged to pass laws such as elections to local self-government bodies, the special status, and a new Constitution .
 The Kremlin counted the silver before the U.S. delegation left .
 Nuland, Tefft and company, no telling what they would lift as souvenirs . The company has no idea what they will lift as a souvenir .
 Vladimir Putin met with U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry after his talks in Moscow with Russian foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov . The President of Russia met with United States Secretary of state John Kerry .
 The Russian side was also attended by the Russian presidential aide Yuri Ushakov . The meeting lasted more than three hours .
 The parties agree to continue work on compiling the list of terrorist organizations operating in Syria . The parties agreed to continue working on compiling a list of terrorists operating in the country .
 The parties agreed that the agreements reached in Vienna on Syria were approved by a UN resolution . The parties agree that the agreement was approved by the UN .
 U.S. President Barack Obama said Russia's isolation was caused by the situation with the Crimea .
 The parties expressed unanimity in commitment to the Minsk agreements on settling the situation in Ukraine . Also the parties expressed unanimity in commitment to settling the Ukraine situation .
 The U.S. assistant secretary of state for Europe and Eurasian Affairs, Victoria Nuland, has arrived in Ukraine . She has traveled to the security Service of Ukraine .
 Joseph Biden will speak in the Verkhovna Rada during his visit to Ukraine . Biden will visit the country on December 8th .
 Poroshenko was also quoted there as saying, ”It is important not to give Russia a chance to break the world’s pro-Ukrainian coalition,’ which indirectly insulted Kerry for his criticism .
Right now, the Minsk II ceasefire has broken down and there are accusations on both sides that the other is to blame .
 Poroshenko has repeatedly promised to invade Crimea, which wasn’t even mentioned in the Minsk II agreement . He was also promising to re-invade Donbass, something that is explicitly prohibited in this agreement .
 President Barack Obama did not fire Kerry's subordinate, Nuland, for her contradicting her boss on this important matter .
 Kerry was reaffirming the position of Merkel and Hollande, the key shapers of the Minsk II agreement . Nuland was nullifying them, saying they were not part of the agreement .
 Poroshenko can continue ignoring Kerry and can blatantly ignore the Minsk II agreement . Obama tacitly sides with Poroshenko and Nuland, against Kerry .
 Obama is telling the EU that they can get anything they want signed, but that he would still move forward with his own policy . In effect, Obama told the EU they could get anything he wants signed .
 Kerry, for his part, now faces the decision as to whether to quit . Kerry has been so blatantly contradicted by his subordinate on a key issue of United States foreign policy .
 Kerry is being cut out of policymaking on Europe and Asia altogether . EU needs to communicate directly with Obama on everything, or else to communicate with Nuland as if she and not Kerry were the actual Secretary of State .
 John Kerry would be embarrassed by resigning from the U.S. State Department . This would be far more embarrassing to those leaders than John Kerry's resignation .
 Minsk II accords could force Ukrainian Government to follow through with all of its commitments . It might even turn the tide and force the Ukrainian government to follow up with all its commitments under the Minsk accords .
 The nations of Europe already know everything they need to know about Barack Obama . Obama is the president of the United States .