 All civilians will be declared collaborators and subjected to excesses were hidden somewhere in it . All the other assessments come down to bogeyman stories that articles about the Ukrainian army will now legally go into the offensive .
 Ukraine adopted the law ""on the reintegration of Donbass" Ukraine withdrew from the Minsk process . The fact of inevitable offensive of the Ukrainian army and subsequent ""clearing operations in accordance with the new law on the occupation of Don Bass"
 separatist media cites Russian publicist Nikolai Starikov . In fact, Poroshenko announced the withdrawal from the Minsk process, according to reports .
 No one was bothered to confirm allegations that Ukraine chose the war . People of Donbass expect persecution and repression by the quotes from the law .
 Novorossia separatist news agency publishes comment of its beloved author . Andrei Purgin is the "founder of the Donetsk People's Republic"
 Ukrainian rulers constantly said that the Donbass residents are third-rate people . The fact of signing this law is of no account for ""Minsk"" as a negotiation platform .
 Luhansk historian Dmitriy Krysenko is the top position on the nonsense of this very name-calling . The top position is for sure awarded to Krysenkos .
 Ukraine, living according to the laws of the theatre of the absurd, disposes of the things which do not belong to it in fact by its regular legislative initiative .
 Luhansk media cite his senseless messing. Anyway, all other orders of Kyiv junta are illegal, as it runs the country illegally.
Even under the conditions of the most favored regime, he is not able to become a doctor of historical sciences . By the way, this "cicero" in the ""republics"" is known for the fact that even under the most favoured regime, the
 The Donbass reintegration was discussed with the UN, the USA and Europe . Russia is about to steal the initiative with the adoption of a sensational law by Ukraine and become the main player in the negotiations . The other extreme aspect of discussion was that Russia stole or is
 Russian adviser to the leader of the "DNR" Alexander Kazakov was the author of this conception . Kazakov is a former head of the Russian government .
 Russia will submit a draft resolution condemning this law to the UN Security Council . I think that a strong political counterblow is being prepared .
 The Security Council will propose the Security Council to set aside its resolution . It confirmed the Minsk agreements as an international legal act, on the ground that the law on the occupation of Donbass virtually abolishes the M Belarus process .
"We have to use it and bring the issue to the highest international level," he sums up . He sums up the issue with a number of words .
 The only truly analytical material was published by NEWSFRONT separatist resource .
 Russian political scientist Oleg Ignatov notes in it that by recognizing part of the Donbass as an occupied territory, Ukraine legally secures the refusal to recognize the DNR and the LNR as parties to the conflict .
Kyiv will use this law not to enter into direct negotiations with representatives of the republics . Kyiv will not enter intodirect negotiations with republics. The republics will not be able to negotiate with representatives.
 The author puts questions to Ukrainian politicians . In that respect, he puts questions, which he would like to hear from politicians .
 Ukrainian negotiators still conduct a dialogue there with representatives of Donetsk and Luhansk through the mediation of the OSCE and Russia .
 "There is a reasonable question how is the very fact of Ukraine's participation in the Contact Group accordance with Ukrainian legislation?" "The Russian asked," the Russian asked .
 He is worried about the changed status of the Russian Federation in the Minsk process . He is also worried about changing the status of Russia's Russian Federation .
 The number of mutual claims between Moscow and Kyiv will only increase, he writes . That is, he says, "that is, that is, the number of Mutual claims between the two will only rise"
 Russia will tolerate all the "whims" of Ukraine and remain the main factor in establishing peace in the Donbass . The author of this publication, says Russia will be the main player in the conflict .
 Oleg Ignatov draws the image of Russia as a peacekeeper . Despite the dead end that exists in the Minsk agreements, Russia will continue to participate in the process as long as there are any chances that they will be fulfilled .
 separatist publications advocate the preservation of a fragile peace in eastern Ukraine . However, not all authors of separatist publications say the peace should be preserved .
 Terrorist Igor Girkin predicts that after Ukraine adopts the law ""on the reintegration of Donbass" Russia itself will declare about the refusal to implement the Minsk agreements and will revive the project of rejection of the so-called "Novorossia"
 The militant, who unleashed a war in the Donbass in 2014, hopes that the conflict will break out with renewed vigor .
 It is ordered to get the term "Novorossia" from the trash can and start promoting it to the consumers again .
 "It was possible to frighten Ukraine with this one and a half or two years ago, not now," the terrorist is sure .
 Ukraine's leader says it is necessary not to frighten the leadership of Ukraine . In order to avoid complete surrender in the Donbass issue, prepare for a new war, he says .
 The choice is between unconditional surrender and the war, he reflects . He reflects on the choice of "un unconditional surrender"
 Another militant the creator of the Vostok terrorist battalion Alexander Khodakovsky also urges to use force against Ukraine . Another militant urges the use of force against the Ukraine .
 Strelkov and Khodakovsky openly dislike each other . But their views on the future of the Donbass are very similar .
 Khodakovsky urged Russia to recognize the "DNR/LNR" and after that to deploy military bases in the Donbass . So, Khodkovsky urges Russia torecognize the 'DNR'
 The militant writes that he doesn’t like diplomatic statements of Russian leaders on the integrity of Ukraine and on adherence to international norms .
 Khodakovsky believes that after the occupation of Crimea, all the talk about a referendum in the Crimea is hypocrisy .
 The referendum in the Crimea is a "political formulation" of the normal and the only possible step Russia has committed under the pressure of circumstances"
 He expects Russia to behave in a similar way in relation to the occupied Donbass . He expects that Russia will behave in the same way.
 The militant hopes Moscow will recognize the ""republics" and will legally introduce its troops there . The militant wants Moscow to recognize the "republic's" and to introduce troops there.
 The "republics" are doomed without intervention of the Russian Federation, he says . But in today's realities, he fears that without the intervention of Russian Federation.
 I'm afraid for the people who believe in Russia and us, I do not want them to be thrown under the Ukrainian blow. I'm not afraid for them, I don't want them. I am afraid for people who think in Russia. I do NOT want them
 Ukrainian ruling elite lost its mind so that it can give an order to destroy everything in its path . That is why we can only rely on Russia, says David Cameron .
 It is not just a sympathetic party anymore... "He convinces himself and his readers," he says . "It's not just the sympathetic party now," he adds .