 Akiva Hager's great-great-great grandfather was in some way related to the Hager rabbis of Viznitz . Even in the 19th century, no-one in the family could actually put their finger on the blood link .
 The Hager family was always aware of how distinguished the Hager name was and sharing the name meant that they commanded respect .
 The Viznitzer rabbis were one of the most famous and revered dynasties in Hassidic Judaism . They were known as the "Viznitzer Jews"
 The sect was founded in the mid-1800s by Rabbi Menachem Mendl Hager in Viznitz, a village in the foothills of the Carpathian mountains .
 Mordechai Hager was born in 1922, in Oradea, Romania, known in Yiddish as Grosswardein .
 His father, Chaim Meir Hager, was the fourth grand rabbi of Viznitz . He moved the dynasty to Grosswardein during the First World War . His father was a rabbi in the city .
Hager's forefathers dropped the name of Hager in order to save his great-great-great grandfather Akiva from conscription . Akiva was named after his grandfather, Hager .
 The happers were supposed to take boys aged between 12 and 18, but often recruited younger children, some as young as eight or nine, to fulfil their quotas .
 Military service lasted a full 25 years, but most did not survive that long . Most did not live that long, according to a report from the Pentagon .
 It took only days for Jewishness of new recruits to be squeezed out of them like water from a sponge .
 They were barred from following the kosher laws or keeping the Sabbath . They were also barred from speaking Yiddish .
 Any boy who refused to eat pork or soup made with lard was beaten with a rod or deprived of drinking water . Anyone who insisted on holding fast to the dietary laws was deprived of water .
 The boys were unable to avoid marching or performing drills on the Sabbath . The boys' Jewish resolve was firm .
At the end of a ten hour march, the young recruits would arrive exhausted at their destination and were forced to kneel until they agreed to convert to the Orthodox Christian faith .
 Others would be beaten and starved and died from fever or exposure before ever setting eyes on a battlefield . Others would also die from fever, exposure or exposure .
 Jewish boys who tried to enrol in a Russian ‘shkole’ could find themselves offered up as recruits for the army . Akiva's family refused to let him attend school or any other formal institution .
 By the time Akiva was in his late teens, Tsar Nicholas upped the conscription rate still further as Russia headed towards the Crimean War .
 Wealthier families tried to bribe the conscription officers to stop them from taking their sons . There was no guarantee of success .
 Akiva’s family didn’t have the money to pay a bribe . Instead they sent him to the dentist to have all his teeth extracted . The procedure must have been horribly painful in the days before anaesthetic .
 Akiva's teeth were successful in keeping him out of the army . But the loss of his teeth was not the case, and had not been the case .
 The moves come four years after the EU and U.S. first imposed sanctions in the wake of Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 Crimea held a referendum on its status on 16 March 2014, and two days later it became a constituent part of Russia .
 The referendum was declared to have achieved an overwhelming majority, with more than 80% in favour of annexation by Russia . More than 80 per cent of the vote was in favour.
 No Western observers were able to monitor the ballot and it attracted widespread criticism . But no Western observers could monitor the vote .
 Turnout figures were thought to have been massively inflated, with the number of citizens voting for a Russian takeover possibly closer to the 30% mark .
 Kiev and the leaders of the Tatar community urged their citizens to boycott the vote . Both Kiev and Tatar leaders urged their people to boycott.
 The annexation of Crimea, while shocking from a legal and human-rights perspective, should not have surprised observers . Crimea's annexation should not be surprised observers, they say .
 The Ukrainian capital, Kiev, has been beset by months of unrest . The unrest has spread across the country, tipping the situation into civil war .
 The dismissal of a compromise deal on 21 February by the leaders of the revolt, the flight of President Viktor Yanukovych and the formation of a so-called ‘unity’ government were factors in the increasing radicalism taking hold in Ukraine .
 statues of Lenin toppled, provoking a counter-mobilisation in Russian-speaking areas such as Crimea and the Donbas .
 Sections of society opposed to pro-Western and nationalist forces that had occupied Kiev’s central Maidan, or square, since November .
 Anti-Maidan sentiment was strongest in Crimea . Russia's takeover of the region passed so peacefully given the state of confrontation elsewhere in the country .
 Crimea was transferred from Russia to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic only in 1954 . Crimea was under the Ukrainian republic's jurisdiction at that time .
 Crimea was home to the Russian Black Sea Fleet at Sevastopol . At the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, Crimea was treated as a special case .
 Sevastopol was recognised as having ‘all-union significance’ and would normally have reverted to Russia when Ukraine gained independence . Russia’s role as the ‘continuer state’ of the Soviet Union, assuming the former country's obligations and privileges
 At the time Russia did not pursue the idea that the relationship between the two countries would continue as before under the newly formed Commonwealth of Independent States .
 The events of early 2014 prompted Russian fears that it would be evicted from Sevastopol . The events in 2014 prompted fears that the Russian city would be ousted from the city .
 On 28 February, soldiers took control of the local airport at Simferopol, under the pretext of protecting Russians in Crimea from Ukrainian nationalism .
 Russia officially denied sending in forces, but armed military seized control of strategic areas . Russia officially denies sending in troops .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin denied any intention of annexing Crimea . He said residents should have the right to determine the region’s status by means of a referendum .
 The status of Sevastopol was just one of the factors behind the Russian annexation of Crimea . The status was just a factor behind the annexation of the region .
 The Kiev protests began after President Yanukovych failed to sign an Association Agreement with the EU in November 2013 . The protests began when President Yanukovych didn't sign the Association Agreement .
 Putin feared that Russia would continue to lose status and influence in the Ukraine region it had once called its own .
 I recently came across a surprisingly interesting series of articles about Jewish surnames from the Russian Empire .
 It turns out that there’s much more to this dry-sounding subject than meets the eye . It's more to the dry- sounding subject than meet the eye.
 In Eastern Europe, Jews acquired their last names between the end of the 18th century and the middle of the 19th . The laws forced them to adopt hereditary names .
 Before that, only Jews with surnames were those belonging to certain rabbinical dynasties .
 For the rest of us, our ancestors would have been known by their name and patronymic, their father’s name .
 Surnames across the Russian Empire have their roots in several different sources . The Russian Empire has its roots in many different sources, including the Roman Empire .
 Those derived from towns or cities in western Germany, such as Auerbach, Epstein, Ginzburg, Halpern, Landau and Schapiro, were particularly prestigious .
 The high frequency of the name Epstein, for example, results from its old age . The earliest reference, from Frankfurt, dates from 1392, and the migration of a rabbi bearing this name to Eastern Europe .
 It is testimony to the prestige of his lineage rather than a large number of migrants from the town of Eppstein .
 Belkin, Dvorkin, Malkin, and Rivkin are all derived from women’s first names . Many were derived from Russian first names, such as Belka . Belka was born in Belka, DVorka, and Malka .
 Jewish women were outwardly facing in areas like commerce and the marketplace . Their menfolk studied in Yeshiva or worked from the home as craftsmen .
Many women would have been better known to the inhabitants of a locality than their husbands . Many women would be betterknown to the residents of the locality than husbands .
 A tradition already existed in Eastern Europe before the 19th century of giving men 'nicknames' based on female first names . The famous Polish rabbis Samuel Eidels and Joel Sirkes both ended in the Yiddish possessive suffix -s.
 naming tradition could have had a direct influence on the names adopted at the turn of the 18th-19th centuries in Ukraine and Bessarabia .
 Once Jews were required by law to adopt surnames varies from place to place . Just how common these matronymic names were once common is not known .
 Almost all of them were created by using the East Slavic possessive suffix –in. The East Slavs used the suffix -in .
 The naming process was administered by the Jewish administration, the Kahal . Some chose to follow matronymic lines, others opted for other patterns .
 In the Novogrudok district of Minsk province, one third of Jews received names derived from male given names . For another third surnames were drawn from local place names .
 In a number of districts of Volhynia and Podolia, artificial surnames with attractive meanings like Goldberg ‘gold mountain’ and Rosenthal ‘valley of roses’ One quarter of names indicated the occupations of their first bearers .
 Two thirds of Jews received names ending in -sky based on local towns . In the area southeast to Kiev, two thirds of Jewish names ended in-sky .
Alexander Beider is a linguist and expert on the subject of Jewish names . Beider says it's common that Jews paid money for the best names – the attractive ones .
 The widespread nature of attractive-sounding names, and the relative scarcity of derogatory ones supposedly assigned to those too poor to pay a bribe, would appear to debunk this myth .
 Beider says the existence of a list of names and bribe price across a wide area is not feasible . In addition, he says, there is no way to find out what bribes are for bribes .
 Alexander Beider is a linguist and the author of reference books about Jewish names and the history of Yiddish . This post is based on a series of articles in The Forward .