 On December 23, 2015, control centers of three Ukrainian electricity distribution companies were remotely accessed .
 malicious actors opened breakers at some 30 distribution substations in Kiev and Ivano-Frankivsk region . More than 200,000 consumers lost power in the region .
 A single transmission substation in northern Kiev lost power on December 17, 2016 . Nearly a year later, the same substation lost power .
 These instances of sabotage took place on the tail of a political revolution in Kiev, the annexation of Crimea, and amid military clashes in eastern Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 Governments and cybersecurity companies have attributed the hacks to Russian groups with suspected, although unclear, associations with the Russian government .
 Russian hackers have a long history of participating in political and military conflicts in Eastern Europe . They regularly carry out espionage operations around the world in support of Russian interests .
 These attacks represent a growing category of hacks intended to sabotage critical infrastructure . These attacks are aimed at sabotaging critical infrastructure, say experts .
 International norms and laws to address nation-state sponsored hacking are in their infancy . Investigators are rarely able to trace hacks back to individuals .
 Investigators point to faceless hacking collectives and nations they live in . Instead, investigators point tofaceless hacking.
 It is difficult to connect hackers to governments, despite evidence indicating such connections . It is also difficult to link hackers to government officials .
 attribution difficulties give victim countries pause before they name an attacker or retaliate, and create plausible deniability .
 The Ukrainian grid hacks have served Russian interests in at least two ways . However, in spite of the challenges attribution poses, the hacks have been good for Russian interests .
 Ukraine is part of a destabilization campaign aimed at Ukraine as it reduces its dependence on Russia . Ukraine leans west toward the European Union and NATO economically, politically, and militarily .
 Second, the attacks were meant to demonstrate the offensive capabilities of Russian hackers . Russian hackers were also meant to prove their effectiveness on a country that cannot retaliate .
 Ukrainian and U.S. government officials have attributed grid hacks to Russia and cybersecurity firms have linked the malware present in the effected systems to Russian cyber criminals .
 In March 2016, Ukrainian investigators stated the attackers were Russian speaking . One claimed that the Russian group known as APT28 may have been involved .
 APT28 is thought to have ties to the Russian government . It has a history of high profile hacks with targets that include the Pakistani military, Ukrainian Election Commission and the U.S. Democratic National Committee .
 A major component of attribution has been the presence of a malware trojan named ‘BlackEnergy3’ It has helped confirm the Sandworm Team as responsible for the outages .
 Ukrainian officials made their attribution, blaming Russian security services and the group behind the BlackEnergy malware .
Sandworm Team has a growing profile of sophisticated and high impact operations that will likely keep growing . Sandworm Team is a growing team of high-impact operations that have a sophisticated profile .
 The group’s long life, technical skills, and politically oriented operations suggest some affiliation to the Russian government . The group's long life and technical skills suggest some connection to the government .
 Espionage and sabotage operations cannot be monetized on black markets in the same way as credit card or bank account numbers can be, making them harder to track and attribute .
 In the case of espionage and sabotage, the primary beneficiaries are governments . The primary beneficiary is governments, according to experts .
 The Sandworm Team’s targets are organizations in which the Russian government has a strategic interest . From NATO to Ukrainian energy companies, they are targets .
 The Sandworm Team and the tools they use have a long developmental record . The Sand worm team has a long development record .
 The original BlackEnergy malware was used as far back as 2007 for Distributed Denial of Service attacks . The second version was tailored to target the human-machine-interfaces that control industrial processes .
BlackEnergy3 is more general and modular because of its diverse plugins . However, BlackEnergy3 has more general, modular and modular features .
 Delivered in attachments to spearphishing emails, it creates a backdoor in systems giving the Sandworm Team an entry point to steal information and work through further reaches of a network .
BlackEnergy3 was also used to deliver Killdisk malware that wipes files and makes computers unable to reboot . BlackEnergy3 also delivered Kill disk malware that wiped files and made computers impossible to reboot.
 Both have been found in the networks of other companies that use industrial processes, including a Ukrainian mining company and state owned railway operator .
Sandworm Team’s first hacking campaign began as early as May 2014 with phishing emails and reconnaissance . Sandworm Team's first hack campaign began in May 2014.
 BlackEnergy3 was likely installed on utility company systems six months before hackers caused the blackouts on December 23, 2015 . In this case, Black energy3 was most likely installed six months earlier .
 Phishing emails with infected attachments were sent to the companies’ offices . The emails had infected attachments .
 When attachments were opened, macros enabled hackers to gain remote access . When the attachments were open, macros allowed hackers to get remote access.
After they gained access they began harvesting credentials for the virtual private networks used by grid operators to access the control centers remotely . After they gain access they begin harvesting credentials.
 Using the VPNs, they explored control center networks and connected devices . They explored control centers and control centers using VPNs .
 The Sandworm Team explored methods to extend the blackouts . In addition to opening breakers at substations, the team explored ways to extend blackouts.
 The call center was flooded with fake calls to stop company personnel from identifying the blackout area . They carried out a denial of service attack against one company's call center .
 At other control centers, supporting equipment was tampered with to slow recovery operations . At other Control centers, support equipment was tampering with to speed recovery .
 These appear to be exploratory elements of a campaign that was as much about learning as causing a single blackout . The campaign was more about learning than causing a blackout .
Sandworm Team developed new malware before taking down transmission substation on December 17, 2016 . Sandworm Team took down the substation in December 2016 .
 Industroyer is significantly more advanced than BlackEnergy3 . It is tailor made for manipulating industrial control systems .
 Industroyer can directly control remote equipment without having to rely on the software grid operators use . With built-in knowledge of communication protocols used in electric grid equipment, the company can control the equipment without relying on software .
Russian hacker groups continue to be successful in espionage and sabotage operations around the world . As the Ukrainian case illustrates, Russian hacker groups are still successful .
Post-Soviet countries serve as a testing ground for new kinds of cyber operations . In particular, post-Soviet nations serve as testing ground.
 Cyberwarfare is only one aspect of a broader hybrid warfare strategy that Russia is using in Ukraine and other Eastern European countries . Russia is also using cyberwarfare in Ukraine, other Eastern Europe countries .
 Russia has used cyber operations alongside traditional military force and political and economic pressure to exert control over, and destabilize countries along its western border . For more than a decade, Russia has been using cyber operations with traditional military and political force .
 Ukrainian grid hacks are the first of their kind, they are typical of Russia’s engagement with former Soviet countries .
 The Russian government has accused the Russian government of having organized cyberattacks . In response, the targeted states have accused the government of a useless effort .
 Russia has attempted to combine conventional and cyber tactics to achieve its national goals . Since the late 2010s, Russia has tried to combine traditional and cyber techniques to achieve national strategic goals .
 Russia has combined cyber warfare tactics with traditional strategy to create a new type of hybrid warfare . Russia relies on proxies and surrogates to prevent attribution and intent .
Sophisticated campaigns combine low-level conventional and special operations with offensive cyber and space actions . Social and traditional media are used to influence popular perception and international opinion .
 The purpose is to alter, alter, falsify or delete date, or cause the disruption of or damage to a computer or network, or the objects a computer system controls, such as SCADA-system . The unauthorized conducting of a penetration by, on behalf of,
 The official Russian government stance is that it does not engage in offensive cyber activities . The official Russia government stance was that it doesn't engage inoffensive cyber activities.
 At the end of 2011, the Russian government released its first official statement on the role of the Russian military in cyberspace .
 This document is entirely defensive in tone, focusing on force protection and prevention of information warfare . The document is written in tone and focuses on the prevention of Information warfare .
 The document seems intended to suggest that Russia does not pursue offensive cyber activities . The document does not discuss any hybrid warfare activities .
 Russian military has tried in recent years to conduct hybrid warfare, consisting of conventional and cyber operations, to maintain political leverage on post-Soviet areas near its western border .
 The concept of Russian hybrid warfare is not new one, but an upgraded version of classic military strategy . It is strengthened by cyber capability, which is stronger by cyber capabilities .
 In general, advancement in military science and technology has been recognized as an important condition for countries or armed groups to win wars – especially against comparatively weak opponents .
 In response, weaker actors adapt – creating new strategies that maximize their advantages, such as guerilla warfare . However, in response, weak actors adapt, creating new strategy that maximize advantages, like guerillas .
 Such strategies allow actors to overcome weaknesses that would lead to defeat in an all-out war . Such strategies can be used to overcome the weaknesses of actors .
Spanish militia groups formed guerilla units during the Napoleon War . The use of “irregular tactics by weaker actors has been prominent since the Napoleon war .
 In the Chinese Civil War, Mao Zedong defeated the United States supported Kuomintang by applying an upgraded asymmetric guerilla warfare strategy to his forces .
 North Korea also has developed a mixed tactics strategy that focuses on combining regular strategy with innovative cyber tactics . The strategy is based on the classic concept of hybrid warfare . North Korea has also developed a hybrid strategy to achieve strategic goals against its comparatively strong enemies .
 Russian hybrid strategy could be recognized as another version of strategy innovation . It includes both guerrilla strategy and cutting-edge information technologies to achieve political and economic goals .
 Russia has pursued its aims against Ukraine with several irregular strategic methods, including sending its own soldiers to Crimea without Russian insignia, spreading misinformation, and encouraging pro-government hackers to threaten Ukrainian critical networks .
 These tactics are being used everywhere – ranging from Ukrainian eastern border to the center of Ukraine . The tactics are also being used in Ukraine .
 In April 2007, the newly-elected Estonian government moved a memorial statue honoring Soviet World War II dead out of the heart of the nation's capital .
 The Russian government’s initial response was to pressure the Estonian government to put the statues back . The state-owned Russian Railway announced it would cancel certain passenger trains .
 Some experts and Estonian officials believe Moscow was involved in drumming up patriotic hackers .
 Russian government used cyber operations against Estonia to maintain its leverage on Estonia . Estonia is heavily wired by the heavily wired nature of the country .
 In Georgia, cyber operations were well coordinated with Russian conventional military movements . The Georgian government was not able to respond to Russian physical maneuvers .
 Georgia was the first manifestation of a hybrid war strategy that drew on cyber warfare tactics . Georgia was first place in the world to use cyber warfare techniques .
 The Russian government has attempted to dominate neighbors and bring them back into its sphere of influence using cyber warfare .
 Russian hybrid warfare strategy has been an optimal means to achieve this desire . Russia has also received relatively low pushback from the international community .
 Moscow enjoyed the plausible deniability for its actions that often originates from hybrid warfare cyber operations . The strategy represented in cyberattacks on Estonia in 2007 and Georgia in 2008 .
 Since 2014, Russia has been conducting cyber warfare and kinetic operations against Ukraine . Russia is trying to halt Ukraine's turn to Europe, prevent Ukraine from joining NATO, and promote Russia’s economic and geopolitical goals .
 Russia is concerned about Ukraine turning to the West, it is also concerned with Ukraine’s moves to end its dependence on Russian energy .
 Ukraine has discovered natural gas sources in its own territory . Russia has faced the loss of a major policy lever in Ukraine .
 The central reason for Russia’s military intervention in Ukraine in 2014 hinges on Ukrainians’ desire to turn to the West . The move is incompatible with Russia's national interests, according to the Kremlin .
 The successful anti-governmental revolutions in Ukraine demonstrated collective resistance against Russian-leaning policies, and rampant corruption in the public sector of Ukraine .
Pro-Western moods in Ukraine are alarming to the Kremlin because they undermine Russia’s hegemony in the region . The Kremlin wants to be the counterbalancing influential power to the United States on the global arena .
 The anti-governmental protests in Ukraine presented a direct threat to Putin’s regime in Russia in the context of “color revolutions’ in the region at the time .
 Ukraine’s uprisings were viewed as contagious, according to a report . Ukraine and Ukraine share a close cultural and historical connection .
 Russia aims at slowing down Ukraine’s development, and the realization of benefits from “Westernization” there . Russia aims to slow down Ukraine's development and realize benefits from Westernization .
 Ukraine's desire to end its dependence on Russia’s gas also threatens Moscow . It means Russia loses a powerful policy lever in Ukraine.
 Russia used its monopoly on Ukraine’s gas supply as a coercive policy tool . The Orange Revolution began with the 2004 Ukrainian Orange Revolution .
 In 2006 and 2009 Russia cut the gas supply to Ukraine in response to Ukraine’s president Victor Yushchenko .
 During the presidency of pro-Russian Victor Yanukovych, the gas supply to Ukraine flowed freely . During the president's distancing from Europe, Ukraine's gas supply flowed freely.
 The new ‘Revolution of Dignity’ in 2013-2014 that ousted pro-Russian Victor Yanukovych brought about yet more gas cuts from Moscow . In 2013- 2014, Victor Yanukovych was ousted from the Kremlin .
 Ukraine has begun searching for ways to gain energy independence from Russia . Unwilling to have Russia control its politics through gas supply, Ukraine is seeking energy independence .
Vast deposits of shale oil and gas were discovered in the Black Sea basin off the Crimean shelf . Prior to the annexation of Crimea, vast deposits were found in the Eastern Ukraine's Yuzivska shale block .
 Ukraine’s shale gas deposits were third largest in Europe, according to U.S. Energy Information Administration .
 Ukraine’s prospects for becoming the energy center in Europe are feasible, according to the government . Ukraine's prospects for being a energy center are feasible .
 Russia sells 75% of its natural gas resources to Europe and satisfies 30% of Europe’s gas demand . Currently, Russia sells over 75 per cent of its gas resources.
 Ukraine's gas exports would undermine Moscow's economic interests in Europe, but also the political influence Russia’s gas monopoly grants the Kremlin there .
 Ukraine signed a production contract with Royal Dutch Shell for an investment in tapping the shale gas resources in Yuzivska in 2013 . Some estimates could produce up to 20 billion cubic meters of gas annually by 2030 .
 That amount alone would satisfy over half of what Ukrainians consumed in 2015 . That would satisfy more than half of that amount alone .
 The U.S. energy giant also signed an agreement to develop shale gas deposits in the Western Ukraine’s Olesska shale block the same year .
 Shell and Chevron froze their shale-developing activities when Ukraine plunged into military conflict with Russia . The conflict was undermining the security of their investments, they said .
 The annexation of Crimean Peninsula in 2014 was not just a decision to keep Russia’s Black Sea Naval fleet stationed in Sevastopol . It was a demonstration of Russian power in the region overall .
 Heavily dependent on the export of its energy resources, Russia preserved its influence and income by taking Ukraine’s gas prospects out of equation .
 Moscow put heavy focus on pipeline building, ensuring its uninterrupted gas supply to Europe . Moscow put focus on building pipeline building to ensure uninterrupted supply of gas supply directly to Europe.
 The discovery of shale deposits has prompted Russian attempts to stall their developments and sabotage business deals for Ukraine’s foreign capital economy .
 Russia’s military operation on the ground solved the prospects of Ukrainian energy competition problem for Russia, albeit partially . Russia's military operation solved the prospect of Ukraine's energy competition problems .
 The warzone in the Eastern Ukraine covers the Donetsk region part of the Yuzivska shale bloc, and thus, closed it to development . The war zone in the eastern Ukraine is also part of a shale bloc .
 The Kharkiv region has been subject to destabilizing activities . In addition, the Kharkov region is subject to instability and destabilizing activity .
 Ukraine’s defense minister Poltorak says explosions at an arms warehouse in Balaklia, in the Kharkiv region, were staged by Russia .
 At the beginning of the unrest in the Eastern Ukraine, there were numerous attempts to create Russia-backed third separatist enclave in Kharkiv region .
 Moscow has employed various methods to destabilize the region, including attacks on the electrical grid . To prevent the development of energy sources in Ukraine’s west, Moscow has used various methods, such as attacks on electricity grid .
 Russian-led cyberattack on Prykarpattyaoblenergo distribution center created enough uncertainty to hurt the prospects of setting up industrial fracking operations in that region . On December 23, 2015, the cyberattack was carried out on December 23.
 Prykarpattyaoblenergo is responsible for supplying electricity to the Ivano-Frankivsk region that hosts part of Olesska’s shale block .
 The map below illustrates the locations of the major attacks on the electrical grid . The map also illustrates the location of the attacks on electrical grids .
 The methods Russia uses to manipulate Ukraine’s vulnerable developing economy have proven to be very effective . Russia has been very effective in manipulating Ukraine's vulnerable developing economies .
 Cyberattacks on Ukraine’s critical infrastructure impose damages and economic loses to the country . Ukraine's entire territory is submerged into a state of hybrid warfare and social instability .
 Ukraine appears to have become a test ground for new cyber-offensive technology Russia can use elsewhere . Ukraine has become a testing ground for cyber weapons by world powers .
 Ukraine's crisis is ultimately a part of a larger system of events in the East-European region . Ukraine’s crisis is part of the larger system in the region.
 Russia is conducting its foreign policy in the region chiefly based on its perception of the ongoing events there and their impact on Russia’s foreign and domestic interests . Russia's foreign policy is based on perception of ongoing events and its impact on the region .
 Russia is using various methods to influence the course of development that its neighbors choose to pursue . To achieve its goals, Russia is trying to influence its neighbors' development .
 The methods now appear to include the combination of covert military operations on the ground and in cyberspace . The methods include the spread of pro-Russian and anti-Western disinformation domestically and internationally .
 The Kremlin seems to retaliate in increasingly aggressive ways in cyberspace and on the ground against Ukraine . The West’s economic sanctions against Russia are working .
 Russia may intensify its hybrid warfare operations in the region, especially if Russia's internal affairs follows current unstable trajectory . Russia's presidential elections are around the corner .
 The pattern in Ukraine could be a foreshadowing of the future for all states . The pattern could be the same in Ukraine and other states .
 The number of cyberattacks is on the rise and the most sophisticated among them have been attributed to nation-state actors . The most sophisticated attacks are attributed to the nation-states .
 Nation-states have the resources and the intelligence available to conduct multilayered and well-orchestrated attacks over long periods of time .
 The evolving security threats from cyberattacks led by nation-states range from espionage to cyberattacks on critical infrastructure .
 The motivation to use cyberspace as a fifth domain of conflict is driven by relatively low costs, the covert nature of cyber operations, and the strategic advantage they present, as opposed to conventional warfare .
 Through cyberattacks nation-states strive to achieve geopolitical and economic goals that otherwise might seem unattainable to them .
 The Russian attacks on Ukrainian electricity distribution companies perfectly captures the nature of this new landscape and how embedded it is in existing geopolitical relations .