 Vladimir Putin’s re-election for a fourth presidential term in May 2018 has enshrined his position as the dominant personality of the post-Soviet era . Vladimir Putin is re-elected to a fourth term for the Russian president in 2018 .
 Over the next six years, there will be few major changes to Russia's foreign policy .
 There is broad consensus in Moscow that this has been outstandingly successful, and that Russia has emerged as a formidable power . There is also a broad consensus that this is a success.
 There is an overall sense of confidence, but there is also caution and even anxiety . There is also a sense of fear and anxiety, but it's also a good sign of confidence .
 Putin recognises the importance of tactical flexibility in an international environment that is increasingly fluid and unpredictable .
 Russia faces considerable obstacles in its quest to become a rule-maker in a new, post-American world order . Russia’s foreign policy gains are fragile and potentially reversible, he says .
Over the past 18 years, he has become synonymous with power and policy in contemporary Russia . He has been a key figure in Russia's political and economic policies .
 The association between leader and country as intimate as that between Stalin and Soviet Union more than six decades ago . It is commonplace today to speak not just of ‘the Putin system’ or the quasi-ideology ‘Putinism’
 Many observers expect Putin’s current presidential term to be his last . At the same time, many observers expect him to be Putin's last .
 Dmitry Medvedev remained in power as prime minister during the nominal presidency of his acolyte between 2008 and 2012 . Staying beyond the next six years would require a change to the Constitution .
 Putin will be 72 in 2024, when the next presidential election is scheduled . The next presidential elections are scheduled for the next year .
 He has already stated that he does not intend to be president-for-life . He is wary of unflattering comparisons with Soviet leaders of the late Soviet era .
 It is counter-intuitive to give up office in a country where a voluntary transfer of power is virtually unknown . But it is also counter- intuitive to give-up office in such a country .
 The tension between the ultra-concentration of authority in one individual, and heightened speculation about a post-Putin succession . The next few years could be truly defining for Russia’s relations with the outside world .
 Putin's previous presidential term has already given rise to a remarkable transformation . Putin’s previous presidentialterm has already been a remarkable change .
 As recently as March 2014, President Obama dismissed Russia as a mere “regional power’s” U.S. President Barack Obama said Crimea was a sign of weakness not strength .
 That narrative has since been demolished, not least in the United States . The narrative has now been demolished.
 There is growing talk of a ‘new Cold War’ and even of a possible military confrontation between Russia and the West .
 The 2017 United States National Security Strategy and 2018 National Defense Strategy and Nuclear Posture Review identify Russia as the most significant threat to America's national interests . China is the most important threat to the United States, along with Russia, to America’s national interests.
 Policymakers in Moscow condemn the ‘demonisation’ of Russia, but revel in the knowledge that it is back on the world stage .
 Russia may aim to position itself as a game-maker in the post-Western world of the twenty-first century . Russia has gone global, having gone global.
 This Analysis argues that Putin’s foreign policy will be defined by strategic constancy allied to tactical flexibility . This Analysis is based on the analysis of Putin's foreign policy .
 It will remain grounded in long-standing assumptions about Russia, the West, and international order . It will continue to be based on long- standing assumptions about the West .
 Russia, despite its problems, is a rising power, but also a certain caution and even anxiety . It will be infused with a sense of relative confidence, according to Russian media .
 Putin will seek broader international respectability and legitimacy, yet his goals will remain essentially the same . Putin's goals will continue to be the same, with any changes being stylistic rather than transformative .
 Kremlin policymaking will be opportunistic and tactically alert, as in previous presidential terms . Russia's domestic circumstances, or the actions of others, will be on the agenda .
 Putin’s personal interpretation of the national interest; ideology and notions of identity; Russian strategic culture; and improvisation in response to events . Putin's personal interpretation.
 Russia's leaders since Tsarist times have been guided by a clear understanding of its national interests . It has become axiomatic that Russia’s leaders are guided by clear understanding.
 The motherhood goals of national security, political stability, and economic prosperity are near-abstractions that can be stretched to mean almost anything, and nothing .
 An ‘objective’ national or even state interest is an artificial construct, and nowhere more so than in today’s Russia .
 Putin is the ultimate arbiter of what constitutes the national interest . In the personalised authoritarian system over which Putin presides, he is theultimate arbiter .
Unlike in liberal democracies, competing interpretations are either suppressed or marginalised . Unlike in liberal democracy, competing interpretation is either suppressed and marginalised.
 Putin is inspired by a selfless and immaculate vision of the national interest . That does not mean that Putin is inspiration, however, that he's inspired by selfless vision .
As with many leaders, his agenda is as much personal as it is political and national . As with many leader's agenda, it's as personal as political .
 The distinction between the ‘Putin interest’ and Russian national interests is illustrated by events in Ukraine .
 Moscow's annexation of Crimea and subsequent military intervention in the Donbas region have been counterproductive in many respects . Moscow’s annexation of the Crimea has been counterproductive, according to CNN .
 Kyiv has alienated Kyiv and driven Ukraine further towards integration with an EU-centred Europe . They have alienated Ukraine and driven it further towards Europe .
 Russia has incurred Western sanctions, aggravating Russia’s economic problems . Russia's economic problems have been exacerbated by the sanctions .
 Putin's actions in Ukraine have been vindicated by the criteria that matter most to Putin . Putin's personal self-respect and political authority have been judged most by a judge .
 He has succeeded in conflating his personal and the Russian national interest, to the extent that in many people's eyes they have become indistinguishable from one another .
 The Russian public has largely bought into the regime narrative that the annexation of Crimea was at once an act of national regeneration . The annexation was a response to Western subversion, Ukrainian lawlessness, and the purported threat of NATO enlargement .
 Politically, it scarcely matters that such narratives bear little relationship to the facts, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin's credibility has become entwined with Russia's, and Russia’s subsequent ‘triumphs’ have cemented his popular legitimacy .
 Putin clearly underestimated the strength of the Western reaction to events in Ukraine . Putin also underestimated the resilience of the transatlantic consensus on sanctions .
 There is no reason to believe that he would behave very differently in future given similar circumstances to 2014 . But there is no evidence that he will behave very different in future .
 There would be less complacency towards Germany and France, and more care given to some of the optics . There would perhaps be less Complacency. There would also be less care given.
 Russian foreign policy would continue to be based on the primacy of the Putin interest . But Russia's foreign policy is based on a premise that the regime is the highest good from which all other objectives flow .
 This intense personalisation of the Russian national interest will remain in place as long as Putin sits in the Kremlin . It will probably long after, and probably long afterwards .
 It is fashionable to claim that Russian foreign policy is non-ideological. It's fashionable to say that Russia's foreign policy isn't a problem .
 ‘pragmatism’ is said to characterise Moscow’s international relations today .
 The West's universalising mission and moral hubris have destabilised the international system, says David Cameron .
 In reality, the notion that Russian foreign policy is without ideological bias is bogus . The notion that Russia's foreign policy has ideological bias in Russia is bogus, says the author .
 Putin’s approach to international politics is more ideologically driven than most, says Peter Bergen .
 This is not de-ideologisation so much as re-ideologyisation, but it is a highly eclectic in its inspiration . This is a very eclectic, highly eclectic idea .
 Putin’s foreign policy is influenced by belief systems from the Tsarist and Soviet past .
 These concepts are almost as influential today as they were in the mid-nineteenth century . The concepts are now almost as important today as the early 19th century .
 An increasingly authoritarian Putin is Tsar in all but name, with some regime voices calling him vozhd . Some regime voices even call him Vozhd, denoting a ruler of exceptional power and authority .
 The Russian Orthodox Church is more prominent than it has been in a century . The 'moral-spiritual values' it propagates have become ubiquitous, not least as keynotes in the government’s major foreign policy statements .
 ‘Patriotic’ education of the young, and popular mobilisation, has become a mass political and cultural phenomenon . ‘nation-mindedness’ reflected in resurgent historical narratives, ‘patriotic' education of young .
 The Kremlin regards Western notions of liberal democracy and the rule of law with acute suspicion .
 The Cold War ideological confrontation between communism and capitalism is defunct, but in its place we are witnessing a new normative struggle . This time between conservative nationalism and liberal internationalism, says John Sutter .
 Putin has positioned himself as ‘defender of the faith’ — not only of Russian values, but also of the essence of European civilisation .
 Putin’s brand of conservative nationalism rests on two core assumptions particular to Russia .
 In the context of foreign policy, this translates into a belief that Russia is not some ordinary nation, but a civilisation unto itself as well as an integral part of European civilisation .
 The U.S. has adopted an exceptionalist attitude towards ‘universal’ rules and norms .
 Russia's economy is heavily dependent on natural resources and that growth is sluggish, or that by a number of metrics Russia ranks poorly in world terms . It is of secondary importance that its economy is highly dependent on its natural resources .
 The criteria of economic performance and technological sophistication are seen as less relevant than the innate sense of being a great power, historical tradition, geographical extent, and permanent membership of the UN Security Council .
 The Kremlin and the Russian public could hardly care less. Such assets may not be very ‘twenty-first century’, but the Kremlin may not care less .
 Russia’s great power identity is an enduring legacy of its imperial past . Russia's great power name is a legacy of the imperial past.
 It is nearly three decades since the Soviet Union collapsed, but the allure of empire remains .
 The Kremlin's post-modern version of imperialism is evident in its approach towards Ukraine . The Kremlin’s post-Modern version of Imperialism is evident.
 Putin has no interest in annexing the Donbas region in the southeast of Russia . This would be both unpopular in Russia and hugely expensive in Russia .
 He has sought to leverage the conflict for wider purposes, exploiting the volatility and uncertain status of the region to pressure Kyiv and undermine support for it in the West . Instead, he has tried to use the conflict to pressure the region and undermine West support .
 Ukraine occupies a strategic position on the European continent, but the ideological component is central . Putin is partly motivated by geopolitical and security considerations .
 Kyiv refuses to acknowledge existence of a distinct Ukrainian identity, let alone Kyiv’s right to pursue a sovereign foreign policy .
 Ideas and ideology will continue to influence Putin’s foreign policy over the current presidential term .
 Russia is free to act as it, or rather its rulers, see fit . They will serve a vital legitimating role, sanctifying self-interest by tapping into particular conceptions of identity and civilisation .
 At times, Moscow may choose to underplay traditional beliefs and instead emphasise more cosmopolitan themes . Russia's integration into the twenty-first century globalised community.
 ideology will remain compelling, whether as an instrument for projecting power, something ‘higher’ to believe in, or in mobilising the people on behalf of the regime .
 The centrality of geopolitics in Russian foreign policy owes much to the strategic culture in which successive generations of leaders have been raised .
 This culture is based on realist assumptions that borrow, in spirit at least, from Thomas Hobbes and Niccolò Machiavelli .
 The end-goal is not to be liked by others, but to win by whatever means necessary . The goal is to win, not be like others, and to win.
 Western condemnation of Russian actions in Ukraine and Syria has had so little effect on Moscow . Such an attitude helps explain why Western condemnation has so little impact on Moscow.
 The political elite sees only that Putin has been able to realise many of his aims . In stark contrast to his predecessor, Boris Yeltsin, he has been more popular but thoroughly ineffectual .
 The Kremlin’s realist outlook on the world has been reinforced by events since the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Over the past 25 years, an official narrative has grown in which the principal tropes are Western ingratitude and perfidy, and Russian good faith amounting at times to gullibility . The principal trope has grown to be Western ing Ratitude, and good faith is at times gullibility
 In the immediate aftermath of the Cold War, Russia put its trust in a new world order in which it would be afforded equal status .
 Western powers took advantage of its weakness, ruining its economy through ‘shock therapy’ reforms, expanding NATO into Eastern Europe, and generally treating it as a defeated power .
 Moscow has attempted to establish strategic cooperation with the U.S. and Europe, but each time it has been let down . At various times since then Moscow has tried to establish Strategic cooperation with U. S. and EU .
 The motif of Western betrayal has become an article of faith in Putin’s foreign policy . While much of this grievance narrative is ill-founded, the narrative of betrayal is well-founded .
 The mentality this reveals is not necessarily zero-sum, since it accepts that gains can sometimes be made by more than one side . The mentality of the world's most powerful is not always zero- sum .
 The Kremlin is prepared to absorb pain rather than surrender to others . But for the Kremlin, the key lies in negotiating from strength, using leverage where this is available .
 It means playing to Russia’s principal assets, in particular its military might and geopolitical reach . It also means Playing to Russia's principal assets.
 Major military exercises, such as Vostok-2018, are intended to convey the message of Russian power and self-confidence . Russian military exercises are intended above all to convey a message of Russia's power .
The result is a foreign policy that blends ideological biases with cold calculation . The result is the result of an ideological bias with cold calculations .
 Russia must operate in an increasingly fluid and unpredictable international environment, he says . But he also recognises that Russia needs to operate in a fluid, unpredictable environment .
 Understanding this does not obviate ideological inclinations but requires that they be adapted to circumstances . Understanding this doesn't obviated ideological inclination but requires adaptation to circumstances.
 Sometimes it pays to underplay their influence, for example when establishing military deconfliction arrangements, or in the past, concluding nuclear disarmament agreements .
 At other times, ideology and strategic calculus are mutually reinforcing . At other time, ideology is mutually reinforcing, but it's also mutually reinforcing.
 Russia’s ‘specialness’ reflects both genuine conviction and an awareness of its utility . Russian interests deserve special consideration from others, says the author .
 Despite this sense of self-entitlement, Russian strategic culture is nevertheless characterised by doubts and contradictions .
 Russia demands that it be treated as an equal, that is an equal to the U.S. and China .
 The U.S. has shown little desire to become the ‘go-to’ power along the lines of the United States and the Soviet Union .
 The assertiveness of Moscow’s words and actions masks an anxiety about the limitations of Russian power . Moscow's assertiveness masks anxiety about the limited power of Russia .
 When the Kremlin talks up threats facing Russia it does so partly to mobilise public support for the regime .
 The Putin system is also an allergic response to real vulnerabilities, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin's system is far more dangerous, he says .
 It is unrealistic to expect any major change in the strategic culture of the Putin political generation. It is unlikely to expect a major change.
 The resort to traditional constructs of power and influence is a ‘national humiliation’ complex founded in a deep sense of grievance towards the West . Russia’s natural state is that of a global great power; a lasting sense of insecurity — these are attitudes that will remain in place
 The Foreign Policy Concept and the National Security Concept suggest long-term strategic thinking is often driven by unforeseen events .
 Putin saw an opportunity to achieve a rapprochement with Washington after 9/11, for example .
 He was the first foreign leader to phone George W Bush . He hoped to position Russia as a global partner of the U.S. He was first to phone Bush, and hoped to place Russia as global partner .
 In the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis, he intensified the partnership with China . He alarmed by the extent of Russia’s economic dependence on the West .
 In 2014, the overthrow of Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych prompted the annexation of Crimea . The overthrow of Yanukovych prompted Crimea's annexation .
 contingency plans had been in place for some time, but they remained dormant as long as there was a Moscow-friendly administration in Kyiv .
 It was more important to influence Ukrainian behaviour than to acquire territory . It is more important than to gain territory, says the Ukrainian government .
 Kremlin decision-making is also susceptible to domestic political and economic pressures . Kremlin is susceptible to political, economic pressures.
 Putin’s emphasis on national-patriotic themes after 2012 was not, as some commentators have claimed, an inevitable response to NATO and EU enlargement and missile defence .
Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in the spotlight since 2011 and 2012 . He has been forced to defend his domestic position after large protests against him in several Russian cities .
Economic stagnation and the subsequent recession undermined what had been the principal basis of his legitimacy for more than a decade . The regime ensured rising living standards in return for the public’s political acquiescence .
 The Kremlin has packaged its decision-making in terms of long-standing national interests . In all these cases, the Kremlin has taken a nationalistic turn in the aftermath of the anti-Putin protests .
 In the process, it has persuaded many observers in the West as well as in Russia that what looks like tactical improvisation is the product of strategic insight and firm principle .
 Putin may seem like the ‘man with the plan’ but the conduct of Russian foreign policy is more ad hoc and reactive than it often appears .
 Decision-making is shaped by core ideas and strategic culture. Events play a vital role, skewing more ‘rational’ foreign policy choices .
 The Kremlin has a need for tactical flexibility in pursuing strategic goals, according to the Kremlin . They also serve as a constant reminder of the need for strategic flexibility .
 The unpredictable nature of events is likely to strengthen existing trends in Russian foreign policy . The unpredictable events are likely to strengthening existing trends.
 The fluidity of the contemporary international environment likewise reinforces the appeal of strategic constancy . Russia’s comparative advantages and key partnerships, notably with China, are among key partnerships .
 Putin’s personal interest, ideological preconceptions, strategic culture, and events have resulted in the Russian foreign policy we see today . Putin's personal interest and ideological preconception, ideological preceptions, and strategic culture have led to his foreign policy .
 Moscow's behaviour has been pilloried in the West, and even non-Western perceptions are often negative . Moscow’s behaviour is often blamed for its behaviour .
 Putin has absorbed the lesson and is intending to alter the trajectory of Russian foreign policy . There is no sign that Putin has taken the lesson .
 The most compelling reason for maintaining his present course is the conviction that it has been overwhelmingly successful, says the author .
 This is not just the view of the Kremlin and the Russian political elite . It is not only the Kremlin's view of Russia's political elite. It is also the views of the Russian government .
 It is also shared by some liberal critics of the regime, the public, and many commentators in the West .
 Russian successes are not only apparent in their own right, especially in the Middle East and the partnership with China, but are accentuated by the contrast with the failures of Western policymaking .
 Russia has emerged as a formidable power, and Putin himself has acquired the status of a global player . In the vacuum left by the abdication of U.S. leadership, Russia has become a powerful player .
 Despite these successes, there is unfinished business. Yet despite these successes there is still a lot to do .
 The strategic course of Russia's foreign policy may be set, but recent gains are fragile and potentially reversible .
 The next few years are likely to prove critical in defining Russia’s role in global governance . Russia is expanding its footprint in Asia and consolidating its position in the Middle East .
 The biggest challenge Russia faces is to reinvent itself as a rule-maker in a new world order . Russia's biggest challenge is to become a rulemaker in the world.
 This is self-evidently a long-term project, well beyond the time frame of the current presidential term . This isself-evolved project, according to the author .
 The US-led order is imploding, the West is losing its monopoly on ‘universal’ norms and values . The centre of gravity in world affairs is shifting to the non-West .
 In practice, the obstacles to such a transformation are formidable, but they are formidable . In practice.
 Putin has succeeded in raising Russia’s international profile, but this has been at significant cost to its reputation . Putin has been raising Russia's international profile.
 It has demonstrated little capacity to act as more than a spoiler, it has shown . Of greater importance is that it has been shown little capacity for acting as a spoiler . It has shown that it is not a spoiler.
 The U.S. has rarely been able to implement a positive program of its own, let alone take the lead on global governance . It can undermine the interests of others, most obviously the United States, but it can undermine others .
 Beijing has become increasingly influential in addressing twenty-first century challenges, such as economic globalisation, free trade, and climate change . Under Xi Jinping, Beijing has been increasingly influential.
 Putin in his fourth term is to address this policy deficit, which, crucially, is also a great power deficit . So the first task for Putin is to tackle the problem .
 Moscow has pushed the idea of a Greater Eurasia over the past two years . The region is extending from the Pacific Ocean to Europe . Russia has pushed for a greater Eurasia in recent years .
 Greater Eurasia is about promoting a non-Western international order, with its own rules, norms, and institutions . But ultimately it is less about Eurasia than it's about promoting its own rule, norms and institutions.
 China and India have been involved in a series of tensions between the two countries . China has proved too unwieldy to be credible, and hamstrung by growing strategic tensions between India and China .
 Moscow will not abandon the BRICS, given its symbolic importance . Russia was the driving force behind its transformation from a Goldman Sachs idea into a structured format . We are already seeing a shift of emphasis to Greater Eurasia .
 Moscow will pursue a dual-track approach to global governance . In general, Moscow will pursuit a dual track approach to international governance .
 Iran will proclaim its scrupulous adherence to international agreements, most topically the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran's nuclear program .
 Moscow will continue to prioritise bilateral relationships. At the same time, Moscow will be prioritising bilateral relationships .
 This is consistent with its long-time belief in the primacy of state actors in international politics . This is similar to its belief in its primacy in theprimacy of international politics.
 The Greater Eurasia vision centres on the partnership with China . China is the largest region in the world .
 A political settlement of the Syrian conflict hinges on Russia’s separate relations with key regional players . The Astana peace process, initiated in December 2016, was initiated as an alternative to Geneva talks .
 Moscow pays far greater heed to individual countries than it does to NATO and the European Union . Moscow regards the West as mere instrumentalities of the major Western powers .
 Moscow seeks a return to traditional constructs, such as a de facto Concert of Great Powers . For all the talk about a new “polycentric world, Moscow seeks to return totraditional constructs, like the Concert of great Powers .
There are differences from the original nineteenth-century Concert, particularly in its composition . There are differences in the composition of the Concert .
 In the twenty-first-century version envisaged in Moscow, multilateral institutions would provide a legitimating framework that enshrines the decisions of the great powers . smaller states would accept the implicit limitations on their sovereignty .
 Russia’s system-building capacities are limited compared to those of the United States or China . In today's increasingly anarchic international environment, such ideas appear more unrealistic than ever .
 The Kremlin's great power-centred view of the world is not likely to alter the world's view . But such truths are likely to change the Kremlin’s great power.
 Russia is an indispensable power, without whom there can be no geopolitical equilibrium or real security in the world . But above all he will be unrelenting in his efforts to promote Russia .
 The defining feature of Russia's relations with the West will be their disaggregation . Russia's relationship with West is expected to be a key factor in its relations with West .
 For the Kremlin, the West no longer exists as a coherent political and normative entity . For the West, the Kremlin is no longer a coherentpolitical and normative entities .
 There are only individual Western countries, most of them weak, and all of them devoted to pursuing their own selfish agendas . There are just a handful of Western countries that are weak, but many are weak .
 Moscow's propensity to bilateral interaction with U.S., France, Germany and Germany has increased . This perception has reinforced Moscow’s propensity to engage in bilateral interaction, according to Russian media .
 The United States under Donald Trump presents Russia with major problems, but also significant opportunities . The U.S. under Trump presents the United States with major issues, but other opportunities .
 A hostile Washington has the capacity to inflict serious damage on Russian interests almost anywhere in the world . On the one hand, a hostile Washington can also damage Russian interests .
 The United States is also the one country with military capabilities superior to Russia’s . The U.S. has the capacity to destroy it altogether .
 The ongoing crisis in their relations is of existential concern to Putin, Putin says .
 The Trump presidency has caused enormous harm to the transatlantic alliance, to America’s international reputation, and to the very idea of a liberal world order, has enhanced Russia's room for geopolitical manoeuvre .
This is most evident in the Middle East, but it is also true across the board . This is most apparent in the Mideast, but also across the world .
 Such destructive behaviour would be much more palatable to Putin and the Russian political elite . Such destructive behavior reinforces the case for a post-American world, says Peter Bergen .
 The Putin–Trump summit in Helsinki on 16 July 2018 signalled the Kremlin’s likely approach to the United States over the next few years .
 He suggested a referendum in the Donbas to break the stalemate over Ukraine . He also suggested ideas for humanitarian relief in Syria and the return of refugees .
 He suggested extending the Strategic Arms Reductions Treaty for five years beyond its current expiry date of 2021 . Most importantly, he suggested extending it to five years more than the current date .
First, they were an attempt to achieve some movement, however modest, on contentious issues in the relationship . First, they tried to achieve a movement, but they were a little more than a few years ago . Now, they are trying to make a difference in their relationship .
 The development of new bilateral mechanisms might establish a better basis for cooperation . The development could defuse some of the tensions with Washington .
 The proposals were intended to showcase Russia as strong but also constructive, says CNN's John Sutter . Second, the Kremlin’s leaking of them, was meant to showcase the country as strong and constructive .
 The attempt to gain the moral and political high ground was directed more to America’s allies and the wider international audience than to the United States .
 The Helsinki summit could hardly have gone better for Putin. Viewed in these latter terms, the summit could not have gone worse for Putin . The summit could have been better for the Russian president .
 Foreign Minister Lavrov was referring above all to optics of the meeting and the joint press conference . Lavrov described its outcomes as ‘better than super’
 Putin appeared fully in command, formidable in pursuit of his country’s interests . There, next to an uncharacteristically meek Trump, Putin appeared full in command .
 Trump's apparent inclination to believe Putin rather than his own intelligence agencies on the question of Russian interference in the U.S. democratic process marked him out as Putin’s patsy .
 Trump will look to maintain a personal rapport with Trump, in the hope that the president will rein in the hawks in his own administration and Congress .
 Putin may choose to exercise strategic patience nonetheless, says Putin . Trump’s actions have already done much to discredit the United States in the eyes of its allies and partners .
 The imbalance between the two presidents is so stark that it has resulted, paradoxically, in a hardening of U.S. policy . Trump’s failure to call Putin to account for Russian actions has led to a hardened policy, he says .
 The disjunction between the Putin–Trump bromance and the widening policy divide between the two governments could become more serious still .
 Putin might conclude that he had little to lose by upping the ante in Ukraine, the Middle East, and northern Europe .
 This would substantially increase the chances of confrontation between Russian and American/NATO forces . This would significantly increase the chance of confrontation with Russia and U.S. forces .
 The evaporation of any last hopes in the Trump factor could also see a sharp escalation in Russian cyberattacks and other forms of informational warfare, says CNN .
 Putin will portray Russia as pragmatic and hitherto misunderstood partner. In Europe, Putin will be seen as pragmatic.
 He has already taken some steps in this direction, moving from overt support for far-right parties to re-engaging with the political mainstream in Paris and Berlin . He has also taken steps in the direction.
 Emmanuel Macron was the guest of honour at the 2018 St Petersburg International Economic Forum . France's President was at Russia's equivalent of Davos .
 Kremlin has intensified its lobbying of the German Government to ensure early completion of the Nordstream II gas pipeline through the Baltic Sea .
 In both cases, changing external circumstances foreshadow new possibilities . Changing external circumstances Foreshadow new opportunities .
 Macron’s desire to project France as a global player could improve the chances of an eventual accommodation over Ukraine, lead to a gradual easing of EU sanctions, and pave the way to economic burden-sharing in Syria .
 Chancellor Angela Merkel’s weakened position following the September 2017 Bundestag elections has made it more likely that German self-interest will eventually prevail over moral principle .
 There are signs that German elite opinion is already wobbling towards a softer stance on Russia . But a return to business as usual is said to be unlikely .
 The prospects appear quite promising viewed from Moscow. Add to this the emergence of well-disposed governments in Italy and Austria .
 The Kremlin’s hopes of an unravelling of transatlantic and European unity may not be realised .
 The West has a customised approach to the West, even in the face of setbacks . We can expect it to persevere with a customising approach to West .
 France reacted relatively mildly to French participation in retaliatory air strikes against the Assad regime in April 2018 . It sees France as the most reasonable of the Western powers .
Germany will continue to seek ‘compromises’ in its dealings with German politicians and business .
 Moscow’s piecemeal handling of Western countries reveals that good or ‘normal’ relations are not ends in themselves, but are only valuable insofar as they advance concrete Russian interests .
 Getting Paris and Berlin onside will be pivotal in securing EU funds for post-conflict reconstruction in Syria . Russia’s strategic gains will consolidate Russia's strategic gains .
 Any hope of a political accommodation in Ukraine on Moscow's terms depends on some level of constructive engagement with France and Germany through the Minsk process .
 Ukraine is weak, susceptible to Russian pressure, and increasingly unattractive to Western partners . The goal here is not peace for its own sake, but the goal is to make Ukraine more attractive to the West .
 The Kremlin has no compunction in offending the United Kingdom, as the Skripal affair has highlighted .
Post-Brexit Britain is seen as both irremediably hostile and of diminishing relevance . A post-Brexit UK is seen by many as both a hostile and irremediable hostile Britain .
 Putin will not resile from core Russian foreign policy positions, and there will be few if any concessions to Western governments . There will be no concessions to West governments, but there will not be any concessions .
 The Kremlin will expend little effort in striving for a broader accommodation, much less a grand bargain, but will instead probe the anxieties and doubts of those EU/NATO members who subscribe to 'pragmatic' engagement with Russia .
 There are two major imponderables that could lead to a further and potentially catastrophic deterioration in Russia–West relations .
 If this regime unravels, then the ensuing arms race will have a multiplier effect on the many other crises that dot US–Russia relations .
 More fundamentally, it would see the removal of one of the last remaining commonalities between the world’s two nuclear superpowers .
 The second imponderable is that particular armed ‘incidents’ in Ukraine, the Middle East, may become more difficult to manage .
 Putin's foreign policy has been the transition from a largely cautious approach during his first two presidential terms to a mindset that seems to regard brinkmanship as a virtue and a weapon .
 Moscow’s reckless involvement in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, the Skripal affair, the stepping-up of hostile cyber activity, the tacit encouragement of Assad's use of chemical weapons, and the increasingly fashionable notion of ‘escalate to de-escalate
 Putin may well choose to face down Western leaders, fortified by the belief that he is tougher, smarter, and more committed than anyone else .
 Russia will significantly expand its presence in Asia over the next few years . Russia will be expanding in Asia in the coming years .
 Putin sees Asia-Pacific region as crucible of twenty-first century international politics and economics . This is partly because Putin sees the region as the crucible for 20th century internationalpolitics and economics.
 Trump’s unpredictability, and continuing difficulties in Europe leave Moscow with little alternative . More immediately, the dismal state of Russia–US relations, Trump's unpredictability.
Fully-fledged engagement with Asian countries and organisations may still be counter-intuitive to sections of the elite .
 Even the most avid Europhile recognises that it is essential to Russia’s future prospects . But even the most keen Europhiles recognise it is important to Russia's future prospects.
 Putin will continue to give particular attention to the Sino-Russian partnership . Putin will also continue to focus on Russia's relationship with Russia .
 There are a multitude of reasons why this should be so, including authoritarian empathy, shared threat perceptions, economic complementarities and personal rapport between the two presidents .
 The main motivation is the promotion of Russia, and Putin personally, as a global player . Putin personally is the main motivation for Russia .
 Moscow is wary about the growing asymmetry of Sino-Russian relations . But concern pales in comparison to the perceived benefits of association with the world's next superpower .
 Russia can hope to subvert the geopolitical primacy of the U.S. and normative dominance of the West . It stands as an independent and ‘equal’ power .
 In effect, the Sino-Russian partnership has become the primary instrument of Putin’s globalist foreign policy .
 China remains the cornerstone of Russia’s engagement with Asia . Putin has nevertheless sought to develop options elsewhere .
 Globally, that means preserving close economic ties with Europe and some level of functional stability with the U.S. Globally. That means preservingclose economic ties to Europe .
 Regionally, it entails diversifying Russia’s relations in Asia . It includes Japan and India, but also with two Koreas and Southeast Asia .
 Russia is a nuclear superpower and the pre-eminent security provider in Central Eurasia . Bilaterally with China, it translates into a focus on Russia’s comparative advantages .
 An independent Russian foreign policy is predicated on strategic flexibility . The principle is that an independent Russia is not beholden to no one, but disposing of multiple options .
 Putin has resisted subordination to a US-led world order . He will reject being relegated to the position of Xi Jinping’s loyal helper .
 The vision of a revived Kissingerian triangle between the United States, China, and Russia remains a fantasy . Russian influence in Asia is largely limited to the post-Soviet space and the Near East . The vision is a fantasy.
 The growing asymmetry of the Sino-Russian partnership undermines Moscow’s capacity to pursue a truly independent foreign policy . Let alone be a ‘swing’ player between Washington and Beijing, let alone be an 'swing' player .
 Xi will still call the shots in the Sino-Russian partnership, while being careful to give ‘face’ to Putin .
 The Kremlin may envisage Greater Eurasia as a joint enterprise, but the reality is that it will take shape, if at all, on Beijing's terms .
 Putin will struggle to put Russia’s relations in Asia on a more balanced footing . Putin will also struggle to putting Russia”s relations with Asia on more balanced ground .
 His conspicuous prioritisation of the Sino-Russian partnership has constrained the growth of political and economic ties with Japan and India . He has limited Russia's capacity to pursue an independent policy line on North Korea, maritime issues in the western Pacific, and counterterrorism .
 The growing assertiveness of Chinese foreign policy, evident in the BRI among other things, has encouraged New Delhi to move closer to Washington . New Delhi is cutting across Moscow's goal of a non-aligned, sympathetic India .
 Putin will be anxious to avoid the spectre of a new bipolarity in Asia, with China and Russia on one side, and the United States and leading Asian powers on the other .
 Russia is caught in the middle of a potential confrontation between the U.S. and China . This is not only geopolitically unpalatable, but would incur the risk of dangerous entanglements in East Asia .
 disputes over freedom of navigation in the South China Sea have revived tensions over Taiwan . Concerns about the future of the Korean Peninsula have become more pertinent against the background of the escalating trade war between Washington and Beijing .
 Putin will persist with an ‘all-fronts’ policy in Asia. Despite the obvious difficulties, then, Putin will continue with an 'all- fronts' policy .
 He will intensify contacts with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and other Asian leaders .
 There will be more active Russian participation in Asian multilateral structures, such as the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, APEC and the East Asia Summit .
 Moscow will strive to expand the Greater Eurasia idea from a de facto Sino-Russian condominium into something larger and more inclusive in which Chinese influence would be mitigated by other major players .
Russian state corporations will continue to hawk arms, oil and gas, and nuclear technology across the continent . Russian state corporations are also focusing on nuclear technology .
 Russia is critical to its self-identification as a resurgent global power. All this will be pursued, not in the expectation that Russia will become a real force in Asia-Pacific imminently .
 Putin has enjoyed some of his greatest foreign policy successes in the Middle East . Putin has been in charge of foreign policy in the region for more than a decade .
 Russia has once again become a central player. After decades on the outer, Russia has become a major player .
 In Syria, it has realised its principal aims while exposing the feebleness of Western decision-making .
 Iran, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Israel and Israel have maintained good or reasonable relations with the main regional players . Israel has managed to do so while maintaining good orreasonable relations with Iran and Turkey .
 It has used events in the Middle East to project itself as a good regional citizen . It has been promoting a peace settlement in Syria through the Astana process .
Saudi Arabia has worked with other oil-producing countries to push up global energy prices . It has also worked with the Saudis and other oil producing countries .
So far there has been little to impede Russia’s smooth progress to real influence in the Middle East . However, so far, there have been no obstacles to Russia's smooth progress .
 Putin is intent on consolidating Russia's gains. Now that he believes the war in Syria is won, he believes that he has won .
 The last significant anti-Assad enclave in the northern province of Idlib. In the first instance, that means completing military operations .
 Longer term, consolidation implies a comprehensive political settlement and large-scale economic reconstruction, the latter to be mainly financed by others . The longer term implies a complete political settlement .
 Cooperation here might offer an additional path to normalising relations with France and Germany . Cooperation here may also offer an extra path tonormalising relations.
 Putin will back Assad for the time being, and will certainly not give him up in response to Western pressure . Putin will not give up on Assad, but he will not back him up, says Putin .
 Russian support for Assad is not unconditional, and there are circumstances in which this could be reduced or even withdrawn . For example, if he became too beholden to the Iranians, provoked Israel into a major military intervention .
 Putin will aim to expand Russian influence across the Middle East, but cautiously and as cheaply as possible . More broadly, Putin will try to expand his influence in the region .
 Moscow’s approach will be largely reactive, shaped in particular by how various rivalries and confrontations play out . Iran and Saudi Arabia, Iran and Israel, Israel, Turkey and the Kurds, and the United States and Iran.
 We are likely to see a policy of flexible game management rather than an attempt to implement a grand vision . We are most likely to be more open to flexible management.
 Moscow will try to avoid being sucked into wider and long-term conflicts in the region . Moscow will also be trying to avoid a wider and longer-term conflict with Russia .
 It will seek to exploit commercial and security opportunities as they arise, notably in arms sales and the development of energy infrastructure . It will also seek to exploited commercial andSecurity opportunities .
 It will strive to maintain good relations with all state parties while being careful not to overcommit to any one side . Most importantly, it will be trying to maintain a good relationship.
 This events-driven and relatively conservative approach points to the limits of Putin’s ambitions in the Middle East . This is an event-driven approach to Putin's Middle East ambitions .
 He is keen to parlay Russia’s increased involvement in the region into larger gains . He wants Russia to be an independent centre of global power.
 There is little evidence of any desire to replace the U.S. as the leading power in the Middle East .
 The disasters of U.S. decision-making over the past 15 years stand as a salutary lesson .
 Putin’s best intentions could be overtaken by fast-breaking developments, such as a major conflict between Israel and Iran .
 Russia might be forced to take on additional diplomatic and military commitments or face the prospect of losing the ground it has worked so hard to regain . Russia may also face additional diplomatic, military commitments .
 The first is that the supreme foreign policy goal of the Putin regime is domestic, namely its own self-preservation . The Putin regime's goal is that it is to protect itself from the threat of violence .
 This goal is timeless and all-encompassing, and comes with its own iconology . This goal, which is timeless, is also timeless, and has its own Iconology .
For Putin, international relations, good or bad, are ultimately an extension and a subset of domestic politics and his personal interest . For Putin, the international relations are an extension of his personal interests .
 Putin's legitimacy is bound more tightly than ever with the quasi-mystical ideal of Russian greatness . Second, Putin’s legitimacy is tied more tightly to his quasi-Mystical ideals of greatness .
 The old social contract between state and people has become obsolete . New compact based on the mobilisation of national pride and self-belief in the face of Russia’s enemies .
 Putin is the incarnation of this mindset, at once its symbol and its messenger . Putin is a symbol and messenger for Putin .
 It implies Putin is preparing to leave, when there is no sign of this at all . It implies that Putin is prepared to leave.
 Tellingly, the cult of personality surrounding him has become more pronounced in recent years . The cult of personalities surrounding him is more pronounced than ever .
 He has taken great pains to establish himself as indispensable and even infallible, a leader whose fate is indistinguishable from Russia’s . He has been taking great pains. He has become a leader who has been seen as indispensable.
 Putin sees himself as Russia’s future, whether as president or in some ‘father of the nation’ capacity .
 Putin believes he has little to prove, at least in foreign policy . But evidence indicates that he has no evidence to prove .
 Russia has become an increasingly prominent and influential international actor . Russia has been an increasingly influential and influential actor .
There is strong domestic support for the Kremlin’s management of foreign relations . There is strong support for Russia's foreign relations.
 A renascent nationalism has become one of the pillars of regime legitimacy . It has become a key part of the regime's legitimacy .
 The liberal world order has self-detonated, opening the way to a new international system more favourable to Moscow . Moscow has become a more favourable place for the Russian capital .
 All that remains is to build on them, polish them, safeguard them, and ensure that others recognise them . All that is to be built on them.
Russian foreign policy is an organic phenomenon, requiring constant attention and frequent modifications . Russian foreign policy requires constant attention.
 For Putin and the political elite, these are matters of detail, not of principle or strategic direction . But for Putin and political elites, these were matters of details, not principle, not strategic direction, he says .
 Over the next few years, then, the chances of substantive change in Russian foreign policy are minimal . The chances of change in Russia's foreign policy is minimal .
 Putin will indulge his penchant for tactical surprises, both to realise specific objectives and as a matter of sound operating practice .
 He will project himself as an international statesman, a voice of moderation and wisdom in a world lacking in either . He will be an international stateman, and he will be a voice for moderation and wise .
 Russian actions should always be seen in the context of a world view that regards Russian actions as invariably justified . But such fluctuations should always been seen in a world views that are always justified .
 The Kremlin’s conviction in its own righteousness may become diluted and give way to a more open-minded and questioning attitude .
 Putin remains the dominant political figure in Russia, and certainly not during the current presidential term . But this will not happen as long as Putin remains a dominant politicalfigure in Russia .