Navy Postgraduate School Monterey, California, is a Naval Post Graduate School . The school is located in the Monterey Bay area .
Distribution is unlimited 12b. DISTRIBUTION is unlimited .
 This thesis compares the irredentist and revanchist actions of Nazi Germany and the contemporary Russian Federation with regard to violent changes of borders as an element of statecraft .
 It presents an analytical comparison of Nazi Germany's 1938 Anschluss with Austria and Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea . The comparison is based on nationalist sentiment and geopolitical aims in Germany .
 The nationalist movements, political goals, and methods of annexation differ significantly . Although the revanchist moves share striking similarities, the nationalist movements are different .
 Hitler comparison is a frequently used political mechanism to simplify issues and galvanize support . The Hitler comparison has been used as a political tool to simplify problems .
 Using the comparison for Vladimir Putin's behavior impedes serious strategic analysis and frustrates diplomatic dialogues .
 Such hasty and ill-founded analogies should be avoided in the interests of analytical clarity and the formulation of effective responses and solutions, says author .
Germany, Austria, Crimea, Hitler, Nazi Germany, Putin, revanchism, Russia 15.
 This thesis compares the irredentist and revanchist actions of Nazi Germany and the contemporary Russian Federation with regard to violent and coercive changes of borders as an element of statecraft .
 This thesis compares irredentism and revanchism in the cases of Nazi Germany and Russia . It also compares the celebration of war and soldiers as an element of statecraft .
 Nazi Germany's Anschluss with Austria in 1938 and Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 . It conducts a critical analysis of the comparisons often made between Nazi Germany and Russia .
 The analysis has relevant implications for U.S. national security policy through the evaluation of revanchist tendencies in an area with United States national security interests .
 Russia's intervention in the 2008 crisis in Georgia raised eyebrows and provoked international criticism . Russia did not annex any Georgian territory, but erected puppet states that, nonetheless, compromised Georgian sovereignty .
 Russia occupied two Georgian provinces and recognized them as independent states . In other words, Russia occupied the Georgian provinces .
 The Russian Federation's annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 sparked a slew of comparisons between Adolf Hitler and President Vladimir Putin of Russia .
 The comparisons were made not only by opinion makers and other journalists, but also by high-ranking politicians and public figures .
 The Crimean annexation was compared by many in Europe and America to Germany’s Anschluss with Austria in the years 1921-1938 . The phrase ‘Weimar Russia’ and portrayals of a Hitlerian Putin gained traction in the West .
 The comparison shifted from one regarding a government with weak democratic 1 traditions and antagonistic political movements to that of an authoritarian leader with a revanchist political program .
 The comparisons between Hitler's Pan-German aspirations and Putin's pan-Russian ones have grabbed attention . They could imply that the Russian case might escalate into further territorial and political expansion and eventually a large-scale war .
 Hitler comparisons are easy to make and carry with them a powerful polemical impact with both general and academic audiences . On the other hand, Hitler comparisons can have a powerful impact with the general and Academic audiences .
 The Crimean annexation and the Austrian Anschluss are not the only territorial acquisitions based on irredentist claims . Putin is not the first leader since Hitler to exhibit authoritarian tendencies coupled with the use of force and integral nationalism .
 The comparison of neighboring land accessions is nevertheless significant and warrants critical analysis . The comparison is still significant.
 The objective of this thesis is to evaluate rigorously a contemporary interpretation of a potential threat to the Euro-Atlantic security order from a revanchist power by comparing these two cases .
 The body of literature that addresses the proposed thesis topic directly is limited in academic sources .
 comparisons between Nazi Germany and contemporary Russia are made frequently in both the media and scholarly articles . The analogies are brief and typically address only the broader characteristics of the leaders and their territorial acquisitions .
 The fall of the Soviet Union sparked analysis and debate over the similarities and differences between the Weimar Republic in the inter-war years (1919- 1933) and the post-Soviet Russian Federation .
 The chronological continuation of this comparison leads to one between Hitler and Putin . The chronological comparison is the same as the comparison between Putin and Hitler .
 Such comparisons have become increasingly prevalent in commentaries concerning recent Russian foreign policy . Such comparisons are becoming increasingly prevalent.
The literature comparing Weimar Germany and post-Soviet Russia is extensive . The literature comparing the two countries is extensive.
 A number of scholars agree about certain similarities between post-imperial democracies . But there is disagreement over the particulars and validity of the analogy .
 Most of the literature from the 1990s following the collapse of the 2 Soviet Union concentrated on striking similarities between the two post-imperial democracies . The Weimar Republic was the end result of the Weimar republic .
Research into the political landscape of the post-Communist Russian Federation has evaluated the threat of a revanchist regime with certain characteristics similar to fascism taking power .
 Hitler and Mussolini comparisons abound in the literature as well as in the rhetoric referring to the German and Italian fascist icons that emerged after the Soviet regime .
 More recent analyses of post-imperial democracies address party ideologies in fledgling democracies . They expound on the lack of ideologies other than nationalism and an assertion of moral superiority in post-Soviet Russia .
 These analyses minimize the potential for a shift to fascism but acknowledge the authoritarian tendencies of Putin’s regime .
 Weimar Russia comparisons expound on the myth of the internal enemy that was infamous in Weimar Germany .
 Revanchists in Russia have asserted that there was a betrayal from within by the democrats with the aid of Western forces .
Pro-Western sentiments branded as anti-patriotic have further parallels with the Weimar Right . Anti-Western sentiment in rhetoric among nationalist groups in Russia has spread into wider politics .
 The comparison to Germany’s aspirations toward Czechoslovakia and Austria is particularly limited . The comparison is not well developed .
 Following the 2008 invasion of Georgia by Russian forces, the Anschluss analogies abounded . After the 2014 annexation of Crimea, the analogies were abounded.
 The Moscow Times ran an article calling the annexation ‘Putin’s Crimean Anschluss’ in 1938 . Hillary Clinton, Wolfgang Schauble, Prince Charles, and several other notable figures publicly compared Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler .
 Analysis of metaphorical mentions relating Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler in Western media shows that the frequency of use of the analogy directly corresponds to aggressive Russian foreign policy actions .
 The scarcity of official information regarding the invasion and annexation of Crimea makes a comprehensive comparison to the Nazi Anschluss with Austria difficult .
 The political implications and similarities of each land grabs are relevant in analyzing the nature of the land grabs . Nevertheless, the outward political implications of each are relevant .
 The reinterpretations of the collapse of the Soviet Union and pan-Slavic Russian nationalist rhetoric among Russian politicians 11 are comparable to the ideas expressed by certain post-1918 Pan-German political movements .
 Both cases involved international agreements that banned the reunification of territories and were disregarded . Both cases involve international agreements.
15 much like pro-Russian sentiment in Ukraine is geographically confined to Crimea and the Donbass . The regional distributions of supporters of pan-national movements are similarly parallel as Pan-German sentiment in Austria was limited to Tyrol .
 The preceding political struggles in the capitals (Vienna and Kiev) summon comparable, although divergent, paths . The previous political struggles are comparable, but divergent.
 The Eurasian Geography and Economics 53, no. 53, is the latest edition of the book .
 Popular Sentiment in the Nazi Era, 1938-1945 (Chapel Hill, NC: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 200), 6.3-1945 .
 5 pressure from the Nazis as a part of Operation Otto, the invasion of Austria 17 . Putin's seizure of institutions in Crimea with unmarked Special Forces appeared to be a reaction to Moscow’s waning influence in Ukraine following the Orange Revolution .
 Popular Sentiment in the Nazi Era, 1938-1945 and Rolf Steininger’s Austria, Germany and the Cold War . From the Anschluss to the State Treaty, 1938 -1955, Brigitte Hamann's Vienna.
 Roy Allison has contributed an extensive account in his article in International Affairs . He has written about the Russian annexation of Crimea .
 The March 2014 address by Russian President Putin on the annexation of Crimea stands out . Among the primary sources, the address by Putin on Crimea is not the first .
 A small swath of literature has made early comparisons of the two fragile post-imperial democracies . The comparison has not been applied to the current Ukraine crisis and its further implications .
 This thesis evaluates the validity of the comparisons between Nazi Germany and contemporary 17 Steininger, Austria, Germany, and the Cold War . The thesis is based on historical works on Nazi Pan-German actions leading to World War II .
 International Affairs 90, no. 10, 10.1111/1468-2346.12170 .
 This analytical comparison may throw light on broader issues, including nationalism, militarism, and foreign policy goals . This analysis may also focus on the decision-making of the top leaders .
 The first and most extreme possible explanation and hypothesis is that the fall of the Soviet Union begat a scenario similar to that of Weimar Germany in the inter-war years . That was conducive to the rise of authoritarian rule.
 Russian politico-military campaigns for territorial expansion are possible in the future . This suggests that, in conjunction with other causative factors, additional Russian politica- military campaigns for Territorial Expansion are possible .
 The nationalistic pan-Slavism rhetoric in modem Russian politics and Putin's security guarantees to Russian-speaking minorities suggest an aspiration to future conquests that may resemble Hitler's acquisition of Austria and the Czech Sudetenland prior to his invasion of Poland .
Despite striking resemblances between Hitler's and Putin's undertakings in states in similar socio-political situations, the resemblance are merely indicative of pan-national dictators in general .
 The recent references and comparisons to Hitler in the media are effective in portraying authoritarian leaders as aggressive due to the near-universal recognition of the Nazi dictator .
 This thesis proposes to investigate the related hypothesis that Putin's recent ambitions and actions in Russia’s ‘near abroad’ are the result of neo-pan-Slavism and nationalism . The thesis is based on the idea that Putin is trying to regain some of the Soviet
 The annexation of Crimea and the 7 Austrian Anschluss bear similarities, but do not necessarily indicate a Russian potential for global revisionism . The annexation is not the first time Crimea has been annexed .
 This thesis conducts case studies of pivotal territorial acquisitions by post-Soviet Russia and post-imperial Germany . It is designed to substantiate or discredit the popular comparisons in the media and political discourse of these regimes .
 The thesis compares the Pan-German movements leading up to the Nazi acquisitions of Austria before World War II to pan-Slavic and pan-Russian movements . In other words, the thesis investigates the actions of the Russian Federation in Crimea .
 The character of modern Russian movements is evaluated with regard to rising nationalism and the potential for further territorial acquisitions . Thecharacter of modern Russia is evaluated.
 The Austrian Anschluss and the annexation of Crimea is investigated in order to assess to what extent the comparison is valid . In particular, the sharp rise in analogies in the media and political discourse is investigated .
 The thesis concentrates on studies that evaluate the popular sentiment in Austria prior to and following the Anschluss and the political events leading to the AnSchluss .
 The body of work regarding Russian pan-Slavism and recent turmoil is less extensive and more fragmented, but available in academic journals and periodicals .
 Chapter II offers a case study of Nazi Germany’s Anschluss with Austria . The book is based on the book's first edition of the book .
 Chapter III presents a case study of Russia’s annexation of Crimea . It includes factors such as the resurgence of Russian nationalism .
 In Chapter IV, Crimea's annexation is analytically compared to the Austrian Anschluss . In Chapter 4, Crimea is analyzed to be compared to Austria's annexation .
 The Nazis sought the union of those lands that the Prussians had expelled from the German state in the 19th century . The Nazis longed for unity as a goal of statecraft, not solely limited to National Socialists .
 When this goal was achieved in March 1938, it constituted the most aggressive move of Nazi irredentism since Hitler's chancellorship began in 1933 .
 The Republic of Austria was annexed by Nazi Germany in a surprise coup de main in March 1938 . It followed five years of more or less cold or hybrid war oriented to accomplishing this end .
 The crowds of cheering Austrians that greeted the invading German troops in Salzburg and Vienna and the plebiscite less than a month later suggest an outcome other than simple victimhood .
 A vast majority of Austrians embraced the Anschluss as righting an old wrong worked by Bismarck and corrected by Hitler, Mein Kampf .
 Austria was half-voluntary incorporation into Hitler’s Germany in the spring of 1938 . Irredentism and revanchism make no sense without taking into account the case of Austria in the inter war period .
In order to make sense of this story, one must assess a longer record of nationalism in central Europe . In order to making sense, one should assess the longer history of nationalism.
 This chapter elucidates the evolution of the idea of Pan-Germanism within the Habsburg Empire and the territories of the First Austrian Republic . It analyzes the popular and political sentiment concerning a greater Germany .
 This chapter shows how these factors affected the ultimate political actions that resulted in the successful invasion and annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany . This chapter also shows the factors involved in the success of the Nazi invasion of Austria .
 The Habsburg Empire emerged as the leading power of Central Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries . Despite the efforts of the House of Bourbon and the Porte in Constantinople over a period of centuries until the 18th century, the Habsberg Empire emerged.
 The Habsburg Empire symbolized the continuation of the 1st German Reich . In the wake of the Ottoman retreat from the Danube after the 17th century, the Habsberg Empire was the first German Reich.
 The empire focused on the estates of the church, the court, the army and its administration . It also comprised the nations and nationalities along the Danube and the Balkans .
 The Josephine epoch of reform despotism in Enlightenment Europe included the steps of administrative reform and administrative reform . The French Revolution gave energy to nationalities conflicts.
Central Europe became nation states after 1648 in the early modern period to the modem order of nation states in central Europe . These phenomena were especially fateful in Central Europe .
 Greater Germany became a central idea in the process 10 of folklore, propaganda, and mass movement associated with the practice of the cultural nation .
 In 1784, Emperor Joseph II issued a linguistic decree making German the official language of government and commerce in the Hapsburg Empire . The decree was made in 1784 .
 This edict concerned the estates of administration and economics as well as culture . But it was devoid of the nationalist meaning that came to be associated with such a measure in politics a century later .
 The use of German in this regard was akin to the contemporary use of English in the globalized computer or aviation activities . German had no political meaning, per se, and had nopolitical meaning .
 The decree was a measure to increase the efficiency of a multilingual empire . German was spoken in more provinces than any other language . The decree is aimed at increasing the efficiency.
 In the decades that followed the French Revolution, the process of folklore, propaganda, and mass movement operated among those social and political groups who identified with the nation as a cultural entity .
 Vienna had more or less been the leading metropole until 1806, and spread after 1815 to Budapest, Prague, Warsaw, Belgrade and beyond . This process unfolded in French-occupied western Germany and Tyrol .
 The idea of the nation and nation state on the cultural foundation was repressed for a generation by the post-1815 Congress Europe led by Prince Metternich in the Habsburg attempt to crush the French revolution .
 Popular Sentiment in the Nazi Era, 1938-1945 (Chapel Hill, NC: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 2000), 5; 5; Berend, 5.
 The Klein Deutschland concept emerged as an option for German unity with the advent of Bismarck’s chancellery in 1862 . National movements developed among the Italian, Czech, and Hungarian minorities of the empire .
 They were now lodged among Slavs and Magyars, with a united Germany towering over them . They are now lodged in the same group of Slavs.
 The Habsburg Empire had been divided into its western and eastern halves with the recognition of Hungarian national status . The hunger of the subject peoples of the crown lands for their own nation states only became more intense after the Ausgleich of 1866 .
 In waning years of the Habsburg Empire after 1866, the presence of pronational German attitudes was evident in day-to-day life .
 Pan-Nationalist displays were surreptitiously celebrated with the adornment of cornflowers . The singing of “Deutschland Uber Alles’ instead of the imperial anthem, and the display of red, black, and gold colors .
 Hitler was scolded by Habsburg teachers for arranging his red, black, and gold pencils in a show of nationalist pride . The empire resisted integral nationalism as it manifested itself after 1880 .
 The vibrant and vicious Pan-German political movement in Vienna from the late 19th and early 20th centuries had a lasting impact on the civil consciousness of and the future architect of the Anschluss —Adolf Hitler .
 Georg Ritter von Schonerer was the most influential personality in the Pan-German movement of the fin de siecle . He was a prominent figure in the Fin de Siecle.
 Schonerer notably joined anti-Semitic dogma with Pan-German rhetoric in Habsburg Austria after 1890 . Sch onerer notably join anti-Semitism with pan- German rhetoric.
 Schonerer’s use of ethnic hatred as an explanation for the social and political tribulations of a multi-ethnic empire made anti-Semitic and xenophobic attitudes central to the Pan-German movement .
 Hitler was witness to the demagogue’s cult of personality in Vienna of the turn of the century . Schonerer lost his parliamentary seat in 1907 and likely never met the future dictator .
 Schonerer’s influence persisted as his young disciples went on to dominate municipal life in multiple provinces as civic figures .
 These individuals ensured that xenophobia as the lowest common denominator became a leading feature of political life . The answer resting with union with the German Reich .
 Wolf was a journalist-turned-politician whose successes and view of Czechs as ‘the main enemy’ 41 would eventually distance him from his original patron in Schonerer 42 Stein . Wolf was known for blatant attacks on the Habsburgs in favor of the annexation
 The politicians would frequently hurl insults at each other publicly and in propaganda as they vied for similar electoral districts . They would often hurl insult at each each other in propaganda.
 Adolf Hitler was deeply influenced by these political figures and the anti-Semitic, xenophobic, Pan-German doctrine they espoused . Living in Vienna from 1908 to 1913, Hitler lived in Vienna between 1908 and 1913 .
 Hitler would carry these convictions through the rest of his political career . A young, impressionable painter in the men’s hostels, Hitler would have been a young painter .
 The Radical Right in the Red City, 1918-1938 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ. U.S. University)
 The dissolution of the Habsburg Austro-Hungarian Empire presented a brief moment of promise for an Anschluss of German nation .
 The polyglot empire’s death throes proved hopeful for Pan-Germans . The only force keeping German-Austria from unification with the German Reich .
 Allied security concerns about a resurgent Germany stymied these aspirations quickly and decisively . Allied, particularly French, were concerned about the threat of Germany's resurgence .
 The economic crises of the interwar period served to exacerbate the German nationalist sentiment in Austria .
 radical right in Austria was by no means a united front for an Anschluss with Germany . It fostered an environment that was not hostile to the concept .
 The transition from an Empire to a small state aggravated the Austro-German identity crisis and resulted in the deepening of political rifts concurrent with economic discord . The transition to an Empire from a smallState aggravated theAustro- German identity crisis .
 Tyrol and Vorarlberg severed diplomatic ties with Vienna and sent embassies to Switzerland . The two countries severed diplomatic relations with Vienna .
 Tyrol, Salzburg, and Styria all held plebiscites to join the German Reich . Tyrol and Salzberg all held Plebiscite in Germany with staggering results .
 Furthermore, despite reaffirming the Treaty 50 Gehl, Austria, Germany, and the Anschluss, 2.2. Despite reaffirm the treaty, the treaty remains in place .
Germain received loan from League of Nations, Austria coordinated railroad, traffic, probate law, and visa regulations with the German Republic . Germain was in order to receive a loan from Austria .
 The Austrian Army also changed its traditional green uniforms to emulate the German field gray . The change comes in light of a general admiration of the German military’s prowess .
 Austria and Germany sought a customs union under the auspices of Pan-European economic cooperation . It was met with resistance from the League of Nations and led to devastating results .
 Austria's “inability to be self-sufficient’’ economically was reflected in its loan request from the League of Nations . Austria’s pursuit of customs union arrangements until 1931 was also reflected in the request .
 Lrance withdrew all its assets from the Austrian Creditanstalt and precipitated a ruinous economic crisis . 60 resulted in the near-collapse of the Austrian banking sector, and greater than 30 percent unemployment .
 The Pan-German sentiment of the late 19th century was imbued with a heavily xenophobic and anti-Semitic conviction . The conservative icons championed the German nationalist movement in Vienna and in provinces with markedly German culture .
 Adolf Hitler grew up on the periphery of the Austro-Hungarian Empire . He was exposed to Pan-German influences from an early age and later immersed in these political circles .
 European security concerns over a resurgent Germany prohibited any political or economic unions following World War I . German political will from the left and right is from the right and left .
 The dogma of the fiercest advocates of a united Germany and Austria does not necessarily explain the outpouring of support as Nazi vehicles rolled across the border .
 In 58 Bukey, Hitler’s Austria, 11; Steininger, Austria, Germany, and the Cold War, 4.4. The Cold War was 4.3.5 .
 Images of masses in Austria waving Swastika flags as they welcomed goosestepping soldiers abounded in Nazi Germany .
 The majority preferred independence to German rule, but deep political divisions, domestic unrest, and economic strife left Austrians envious of German progress .
 The small German Austrian state was not viewed as a viable polity by most Austrians . unification with Germany was a desired goal in the years from 1918 to 1938 . Some Austrians tried to secure support for a new national identity .
 A vicious domestic struggle just short of civil war left the First Republic of Austria vulnerable to its dominant neighbor .
 The People Demographic shifts in the late 19th and early 20th centuries instilled a xenophobic attitude in borderlands and the capital that only heightened with the onset of the interwar economic crisis .
 As many citizens’ employment was threatened by foreigners, contempt for the political system grew . Social unrest from embattled paramilitary groups and labor organizations grew .
 Most Austrians did not subscribe to the tenets of National Socialism . They welcomed change and hoped for prosperity .
 The long-standing history of xenophobia and ethnic hatred in Austria was evident as the minority embraced Nazi principles with disproportionate involvement in the regime’s institutions .
Between 1857 and 1910, the Jewish diaspora grew to comprise 8.63 percent of the Austrian population . Between 1857 to 1910, it grew to 8. 63 percent of Austria's population .
 Since the Jewish migrants were typically skilled and well educated, they grew to resent their competitors almost instantaneously .
 The Austrian working class faced a similar migrant flow due to the growing industrial sector .
 With the rise of railroads and modem transportation, the migrant flow has increased sharply . The migrant flow, particularly of “unskilled Czechs,’s, is increasing sharply .
 Deutsche Arbeiterpartei was founded on the Bohemian-Silesian border . This perceived threat led to the founding of the DeutscheArbeiter Partei .
 The discord between German nationalist and Czech politicians in the decades prior to the fall of the Habsburg dynasty was calamitous, routinely escalating to violent brawls in Parliament .
 Czechs grew to comprise one-fifth of the population of Vienna by 1910 . German-Austrians began to fear the “Slavization’ of their homeland, 68 .
Much of Austro-Hungarian empire's wealth was generated from trade . High tariffs among successor states and broken pattern of regional commerce after war devastated the economy .
 The withdrawal of French assets from the Creditanstalt mentioned earlier plunged the banking sector toward collapse in 1931 .
 Germany was a country whose military might and culture were admired and shared . The rural and working classes of Austria pined for similar achievements .
Political rifts were deepening and social unrest was rising toward civil war . In Vienna, political rifts in Vienna were deepening .
 The Politics Although Pan-Germanism was a goal on both the left and the right in Austria following the World War I . The Little Entente with the Versailles and St.
Germain treaties and affiliation of Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Yugoslavia with French statecraft in Central Europe. Germain treaties, Czechoslovakian treaties and the affiliation of Poland, Poland and Yugoslavia .
Political struggle for control between 1918 and 1938 was vicious, bordering on near-civil war . The ensuing political struggle between 1918- 1938 was fierce .
 In-fighting not only between the left and right, but also within the conservative right would eventually pave the way to invasion . The left and the right would soon be able to enter the country .
 Politicians vied for parliamentary majorities and intellectuals to support their ideologies . Politicians have long been seen as the most powerful politicians .
 The right bestowed the moniker of ‘Red Vienna’ in order to portray the city as a bastion of socialism and as a caution against Marxist and Bolshevist forces .
 Austrian politics were certainly left-leaning in the interwar period, but conservatives maintained a powerful and dynamic opposition .
 The early inter-war years were fraught with confusion as the former Habsburg Empire tried to adjust to national identities and new borders set out .
 Of the ten and a half million German Austrians in the empire, only six and ahalf million would remain in the new republic .
 The Treaties saw the provincial plight of self-determination in Vorarlberg, Tyrol, Salzburg, and Styria .
 Both left and right parties had been organizing paramilitary forces since the early 1920s .
 A clash between a veterans’ group and the Social Democrats’ Schutzbund in the village of Schattendorf in the eastern province of Burgenland left a veteran and a child dead .
 In response, massive Socialist demonstrations and protests set fire to the Vienna Palace of Justice . Police opened fire on the crowds, killing 73 Steven Belter, Concise History of Austria .
 This violence opened a phase of civil war that only ended in March 1938 with the Anschluss . The violence opened the phase of the war that ended in 1938 in a brief period .
 Social Democrats called for a state-wide strike . They used paramilitary organizations like the fascist Heimwehr .
 Rising authoritarianism in Austria saw the growth of a cancerous movement within it, Nazism .
 It started to gain electoral victories in Vienna, Lower Austria, Salzburg, Styria, and Carinthia by 1930 . In 1933, it won 41 percent of the vote in Innsbruck in 1933 .
 The Austrian SA and SS 79 resorted constantly to methods of terrorism to reach Nazism’s goal to undermine the government .
 The threat from Nazism and the schism it created among conservatives served to accelerate the transition to authoritarianism after 1932 . The threat of Nazism in the 1930s was the biggest threat among conservatives .
German Nationalists, Nazis, and Social Democrats all called for new elections . League of Nations, German Nationalists and Nazis called for elections after an unpopular loan .
 Dollfuss suspended the parliament and slid further into fascist rule . The parliament was suspended in the face of an impending defeat .
 Dollfuss attempted in 1933-34 to suppress the leftist opposition domestically at the behest of his main supporter and patron—Benito Mussolini . Mussolini was the main supporter of the Italian dictator .
 Pressures on the left broke in February 1934 when Heimwehr forces provoked a socialist uprising in Linz .
 Schutzbund forces opened machine gun fire on police in protest of a search for arms . Police say they were searching for weapons in a bid to stop the search .
 socialist leaders in Vienna called for a general strike . Government armed forces and police joined in the violence across the nation .
 Vicious fighting ensued for four days, especially in the capital, where more than a hundred government troops and more than 1,000 socialists were killed . More than 100 government troops were killed in four days.
 The brief civil war resulted in the disbandment of the Social Democrats, the filling of concentration camps, and the drafting of a constitution that codified a fascist state in the so-called Standestaat .
 Berlin imposed a 1,000 RM tourist tax that brought the tourism industry to a standstill . The tourism industry is one of Austria's most lucrative .
 Dollfuss responded with the abolishment of the Nazi party in Austria in May 1934 . The Nazi party was abolished in the same month .
 Hitler ‘ordered an end to direct attacks on the Austrian government’ in March 1934 . Mussolini in Spa in June 1934 said he just wanted Dollfuss replaced, not Austria annexed .
 The Fiihrer could not control the actions of his Austrian compatriots, nor the plotting of his armed formations and a putsch was attempted by Austrian SA and SS in July . Still, the FiiHrer was not able to control his compatriots' actions .
 The goal of the coup was to storm the government building, take Dollfuss hostage, and form a Nazi-led government . The coup was led by Austrian Nazis in the ranks of the Austrian Army and police .
 Dollfuss was shot in the process of the seizure of power in his office . He was denied a doctor and a priest while he bled to death for two and a half hours .
 After the counter attack, the conspirators surrendered later that afternoon .
 Mussolini massed troops on the Brenner Pass border and pledged military support for Austria . The action was widely condemned by domestic and international observers .
 Mussolini’s reaction deterred any German opportunism, and Kurt von Schuschnigg succeeded Dollfuss .
 The Stcindestaat under both Dollfuss and Schuschnigg exhibited anti-Semitic undercurrents, albeit not radical measures prescribed by Schonerer and his disciples .
 May Constitution officially espoused religious equality . Many Jews lost their jobs or were denied promotions after February 1934 .
 Jews not only represented the outsider threat perceived by most Austrians and the right, but also tended to be leftleaning .
Several leading intellectuals who supported and advocated leftist policies were of Jewish descent . Sigmund Freud and Alfred Adler both fled the country in exile .
 While fascist Austria was better for Jews than the coming Nazi rule, it still had an intrinsic anti-Semitism that was deep-rooted .
 "Austrofascists" considered Austria a German state . Dollfuss, Schuschnigg, and other “AustroFascists’s’ consider Austria a state .
 It was conceived as 89 Gehl, Austria, Germany, and the Anschluss, 100 . However, they conceived it as 89Gehl, Austrian, Germany .
More than 1,000 municipalities granted honorary citizenship to the surviving heir . There was also a revitalization of Monarchist sentiment as many anti-Habsburg laws were repealed in 1935 .
 Monarchists also advocated further revanchist claims to former Habsburg territories . The Monarchists were resolutely against an Anschluss and a Prussian-dominated German Reich .
Much of the Austrian right advocated an anti-Republican, authoritarian, and anti-Semitic regime . But they were not satisfied with the Standestaat and demanded more radical measures .
 The Italian dictator's support gave Schuschnigg’s Standestaat resilience against increased pressure from Nazi Germany .
 In July 1936, Schuschnigg signed a “gentlemen’s agreement’ with Germany's Ambassador to Vienna . Franz von Papen was the ex-officer and man of intrigue who had helped Hitler into power a few years earlier .
 Mussolini promised non-intervention in exchange for South Tyrol in September 1937 . Germany gained the leverage it needed over Austria .
 Hitler ‘terrorized’ Schuschnigg and presented him with an ultimatum as well as plans to invade Austria if he was not compliant . Ambassador von Papen invited him to the Eagle's Nest just across the border .
 The ultimatum included the release and reinstatement of all Nazis in Austria and the appointment of Arthur Seyss-Inquart as Minister of Interior and Security .
 Schuschnigg scrambled for domestic support, but he was unwilling to hand over the government to Otto Habsburg . The alreadydiminished left declared that they would unite against Hitler, but not for Schus Schnigg .
 Schuschnigg's last effort in defiance of Nazi pressure would force Hitler’s hand and precipitate the invasion of Austria . The last effort would force Adolf Hitler's hand.
 Despite opposition from Mussolini, Schuschnigg announced a referendum to the Austrian people . The referendum will be held in the Austrian capital, Vienna .
 All three conditions were met by 11 o’clock that evening . Schuschnigg ordered the Austrian Army not to fire a shot and egress .
 Chancellor Seyss-Inquart held his office for only two days before signing the “Reunification of Austria with the German Reich’s into law on the 13th .
Glee was not ubiquitous throughout the country as different provinces and cities met the invading soldiers with detached apathy and outright scorn .
 Austria is preparing for a referendum on April 10 concerning the invasion and Anschluss . An extreme and concentrated propaganda campaign rolled out in Austria on March 12 .
 Catholic Bishops and Cardinals hailed the bloodless invasion and defense against ‘godless Bolshevism’ Former Chancellor and Social Democrat Karl Renner declared that he would be voting in support of the Anschluss despite his disapproval of its method .
 Austrians voted a resounding "yes" at the behest of their religious and political leadership . Austrians are frustrated with economic hardship and frustrated with their own political system .
 Austria was declared as the “first victim of Hitlerite aggression’ by the Allies in 1943 . It is evident that the majority of Austrians did not see themselves as such .
 The Austrian State was absolutely a victim in 1938, but many of its citizens actively participated in Nazi policies and endeavors .
 The Austrian people suffered under the Nazi regime . The suffering derived from the aerial bombing campaigns of the Allies, service in the Wehrmacht .
Austrofascist and foreign forces within the country battling for independence . The desire for political change and dissatisfaction with the status quo of the population resulted in a bloodless invasion and active participation in the Nazi regime .
 As Ukrainian nationalist movements rose and fell in modern times, different interpretations of the past emerged and vanished .
 The controversy as to whether there is a unique Ukrainian nation or whether Ukraine belongs in the Russian nation has led to a political and cultural rift in modem Ukraine and Russia .
 The situation has become confusing for Russians, Ukrainians and people of other nations . The situation is confusing for Russia, Ukrainians, and others .
 Russia's more powerful, but arguably ‘younger’ neighbor, Ukraine is Ukraine’s more powerful . Ukraine is within Moscow”s sphere of influence, according to the Russian media .
 Russia deems itself Ukraine’s national patron and thus of its blood and soil . Russia considers itself Ukraine's national patron .
Section B evaluates the history of the Crimean Peninsula and how it resulted in markedly different national sentiments and its role in Russian-Ukrainian relations . Section B evaluates history of Crimean Peninsula, how it led to markedly different sentiments .
 Section C chronicles and evaluates the 2014 annexation of Crimea in the context of the previous two sections . Section C also evaluates the Crimea annexation in thecontext of the earlier sections .
 Ernest Renan reminds readers of a shared destiny in the past and present is essential to form a nation .
 Both nations regard the Rus as their founding myth and medieval forebear . The Rus is considered the most important of the world's most ancient and ancient cultures .
 The centuries of Russian imperial rule of the Ukrainians have resulted in a perception of Ukrainians by the Russians that is central to their national destiny . Russia's singular mission of religion and culture.
Ukrainian identities developing asymmetrically, tangentially, or not at all, depending on the region . Various empires ruled the territory of modem Ukraine .
 Ukraine has a bifurcation between the western and eastern points of the compass . This evolution has resulted in significantly diverse political tendencies within Ukraine .
 The early medieval kingdom of the Kievan Rus is shared by Ukrainians, Russians, and Belarussians as a nascent entity from which these nation states have descended .
 The Rus covered western and central Ukraine, most of Belarus, and western Russia . The area ruled by the Rus covered eastern and western Ukraine .
 The Rus were a “loose union of principalities’ that were nearly perpetually at war with each other, particularly between the northern and southern domains .
 ‘The Lay of Ihor’s Host’ portrays the fall of Prince Ihor as he rallies the Kievan Rus to push back the Polovtsian steppe invaders, although unsuccessfully .
 The Rus language was closer to modern Ukrainian than to modern Russian .
 Since the lower two-thirds of the Rus lands were occupied by the invading Mongols of the Golden Horde, Moscow became the seat of the Grand Duchy and the eventual precursor of the Russian Empire .
 Russians consider the Rus to be their forebears and Kiev the “mother of Russian cities’s” Kiev . Moscow was the direct and only successor of Kiev .
 The Rus are central to Russia’s origins as a nation . The Russians project the ‘tsardom’ all the way to Volodymyr the Great of the 10th century, despite never using the title himself .
 Kiev, like Moscow, viewed itself as the successor to Kievan Rus . Nonetheless, Kiev still sees itself as a successor to Rus .
 Poland, Hungary, Serbia and Serbia have been fighting Ukraine’s Mongol occupants . Ukraine developed in this region, but it was slow to rebuild .
 The Hetmanate declared allegiance to the Russian Empire at the Council of Pereyaslav . In exchange for protection against the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1654 .
 Ukrainian elites became more integrated into Russian society due to relatively similar cultures . The result was an extremely Russified elite caste among the Ukrainian Cossacks .
Once the nobility of the Hetmanate became assimilated into Russian culture, the concept of any distinct Ukrainian culture did not exist among the Russian elites .
 Tsar Paul I, who reigned from 1796 to 1801, characterized his subjects as either Poles or Russians, Catholics or Orthodox . He reigned between 1796 and 1801 .
 Hetman Ivan Mazepa and 3,000 Cossacks defected to Charles XII of Sweden when Tsar Peter I would not allocate resources to defend lands from Poland . At the time of the Northern War, and the rise of Russia into the Pentarchy of the five great
 The Tsar's refusal to help defend Hetmanate lands was a violation of the Treaty of Pereyaslav . Mazepa's support for Sweden was viewed by the Tsar as the ultimate treachery against Russia .
 Russia’s rulers took action to ensure that the next two hundred years in the Russian empire were markedly anti-Ukrainian .
 The Ukrainian language was not taught out of fear of its subversive nature . Even though education in Ukraine was scarce outside of the increasingly Russified nobility, the language was scarce .
 A counterbalance to any Ukrainian nationalism was also the budding Pan-Slavic movement in Russia of the 19th century . A counter balance to any Ukraine nationalism was a counterbalance.
 Its multi-faceted perceptions and diverse agendas hurt and helped Ukrainian nationalist aspirations . The Ukrainian Nationalist Party has been accused of being anti-Ukrainian .
 The Decembrist uprising in 1825 and the suppression of the Polish rebellion in 1830 by Tsarist forces split the forces of Pan-Slavism into pro-Russian and anti-Russian camps .
 Leftist Pan-Slavists pursued a Slavic Federation free of the European and Russian dynastic ancien regimes . This policy was clear in the first Pan- Slavic congress in Prague in 1848 .
 Pro-Russian Pan-Slavism swung right with its dynastic foundation and transformed into the concept of a “Slavic Civilization’s” with Russia as its great protector . In contrast, pro-Russian pan-slavism swing right with
 This idea portrayed the Germans and the Austrians as the eternal opponents of the Slavs . It also strengthened Russian nationalism, state centrism, and imperialism in the 19th century .
 Ukrainians under Russian rule experienced a deliberate and coordinated effort to undermine the development of a Ukrainian national identity . Ukraine was unlike other Russian territories, according to Russian officials .
 The evolution under the Habsburgs resulted in something quite different . The evolution of the Habburgs was quite different.
 The Ruthenian nationalist movement in Habsburg Ukraine, particularly in the region of Galicia, had a mainly linguistic driving force . It was also a cultural and intellectual factor .
 Linguists such as Ivan Mohylnytsky maintained that the Ukrainian language was a separate language equal in standing to Czech, Polish, and Russian, instead of merely a dialect .
 Habsburg Emperor Joseph II’s political and social reforms made elementary schooling in vernacular languages mandatory in 1781 .
 The Habsburg system allowed for schooling in the “Slaveno-Rusyn’s’ language . The predecessor of modem Ukrainian was limited to the language .
 In Galicia, Polish rulers offered Polonization—assimilation into Polish culture — as the only options for Ruthenians . The only option is to assimilate into Poland.
 Higher education was offered only in Polish or German, so the small Ruthenian elite was quickly stratified into Polonophiles or Ruthenians . Most choosing the former nationalists .
Ruthenians in Galicia established a rather stalwart national identity by the turn of the 19th century . Despite this fragmenting effect, Ruthenians are still a relatively stable national identity .
 Many members of the RuthenianGalician elite saw themselves as one nation split between two empires . Many of the Eastern Orthodox clerical hierarchy saw “their kinsmen in the east” as a separate nation due to the preponderance of Russian Orthodoxy .
 Galician Poles and Ruthenians asked Austrian Minister of Interior to partition Galicia in 1848 . They said they could not live together in peace .
The modern state of Ukraine was a product of World War I and the dissolution of the empires that had ruled it . The modern state was a result of the dissolution.
 Ukrainians were not referred to as such until their official independence was won in 1918 . Ukrainians are not called Ukrainians until 1918 .
 Ukraine was able to gain its independence from Soviet Russia via the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk .
 The national movement leading up to this point was fractured between two distinctly different groups of people . It was almost exclusively confined to the elites that sought to further their socio-political agendas .
 The Central Rada became the parliamentary body of Ukraine . It was originally a coordinating committee of Ukrainian political and cultural organizations .
 In 1918, the Central Rada declared Ukraine’s independence in order to secure a peace treaty with Hohenzollern Germany and Habsburg Austria for protection from invading Bolsheviks .
 The Ukrainian People's Republic was a "Hetmanate" government that sought to establish a Ukrainian state close to modern Ukrainian borders . The Ukrainian people's republic was a “Het manate’s Republic, excluding Crimea and Western Galicia .
 The UNR claimed to represent the Ukrainian people despite the absence of any elected officials or a widely shared concept of Ukrainian identity .
National flag, currency, and language were established, but there was still a distinct internal division over language .
Several political forces were contending within the borders, including Poles, supporters of both the Red and White factions of the Russian Civil War . Also, anarchists and anarchists were in the mix .
UNR secured military alliances with Germany and Austria in exchange for grain to feed their armies . UNR was unable to organize its own military .
 The Germans dissolved the Rada out of fear of its socialist character . They installed a leader that favored the landowning class .
 The armistice signed on November 11, 1918, meant the withdrawal of the German and Austrian troops and the renewed vulnerability of Ukraine . It was also meant that Ukraine was at risk from the withdrawal .
 Ukrainian independence movement during the civil war and Ukrainian support for the invading Kaiser’s armies in World War I were not forgotten by Soviet leaders .
 Stalin’s collectivization of agriculture in the 1930s was ‘clearly premeditated mass murder on the scale of millions’ in Soviet Ukraine .
Stalin sent 1. million Soviet citizens to the Gulag, and 300,000 of them were Ukrainian .
State requisitioning and sealed borders would kill between six and eleven million Ukrainians . The “terror famine’s” would kill up to six to 11 million Ukrainians.
 Any peasant resistance was quashed viciously by Soviet agencies to ensure that no Mazepist tendencies could be fomented . Any peasant resist was quashes viciously.
 The Ukrainian capital was also shifted from the eastern city of Kharkiv to Kyiv . The move was to create a new bastion of the Soviet proletariat in Ukraine .
 The intelligentsia established a post-war cultural and civilizational symbol in the traditional Ukrainian capital as peasants were migrating to urban areas . This would eventually backfire as the intelligentsian became a cultural symbol .
 Soviet post-World War II policies concerning Ukraine would further contribute to an already existential rift in the population .
After the annexation of Western Ukrainian territories in 1940-1941 and 1944-1945 there was no resettlement of Russians to those lands . In contrast, after the annexation, there wasno resettlement of those lands.
 Southern and eastern Ukraine became a ‘multi-ethnic melting pot for all the peoples of the Empire’ with a distinctly Russian culture . The industrial Donbas region of Ukraine was a “multi- ethnic melting pot’ for the people of the empire .
 The Western Ukrainians’ deep-seated hostility toward Russia continued to develop well into the 20th century .
 A Ukrainian nationalist movement smoldered through the 1960s and 1970s in Kiev . Several leaders were imprisoned and sent to labor camps .
 Mikhail Gorbachev’s Perestroika reforms allowed for Popular Fronts and advocacy for the Ukrainian language through the 1980s .
 This contributed to the eventual disintegration of the Soviet Union and the subsequent independence of Ukraine and other former Soviet republics in 1991 .
 An informal coalition of Ukrainian Nationalists based in Western Galicia and “corporate lobbies and local barons’ dominate the right-center . The group sees internal Ukrainian divisions as unnatural .
 A borderland between different cultural and civilizational zones, it has seen its own proto-kingdom in the Kievan Rus . It has been under the control of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and ruled by a minority Cossack Hetmanate .
 Historians have portrayed Ukraine as the progenitor of Russian civilization . They have portrayed it as a multi-ethnic realm descended from the Rus .
 Ukraine’s history is rather that of a borderland between Eastern Europe and the Asian steppes it has spent its past shifting between .
 Ukrainians regard it as the ‘Cossacks’ outlet to the sea’ and within the sovereign borders internationally agreed upon . Ukrainians regard the “Cossack’ outlets to the Sea’
 The symbolic and strategic value of the peninsula has made it a historically contested territory between several groups . The peninsula has been contested by several groups for years .
 Ukraine achieved independence from the USSR in 1991 with the peninsula included . Crimea became a key aspect of Ukrainian-Russian foreign relations .
Crimea was inhabited by Greek and Italian trading colonies and nomadic peoples of the Eastern steppes . From Batu Khan to Brest-Litovsk in the 13th century by the Mongolian Golden Horde ofBatu Khan .
 During the period of Mongol rule, Turkic nomads of the European and Asiatic steppe called Tatars started settling in Crimea .
 These Tatars established their own Khanate state as the Mongol empire crumbled around it in the 1420s . They maintained autonomy until the Ottoman conquest in 1475 .
 The peninsula became the stage of a struggle for the next several centuries as the Ottomans repulsed attacks from the Poles and Russians who vied for the strategic territory until Crimea was eventually annexed by Catherine the Great after a successful invasion in 1783 .
 Background and Aftermath of 1994 Presidential Election . PostSoviet Geography 35, no. .
 The Tatars had also overwhelmingly adopted the Islamic religion of their Ottoman rulers . They had also adopted the Muslim religion of the Ottoman rulers.
 Centuries of conflict with Tatar raiders and the Ottoman Empire manifested itself in a particularly oppressive Russian occupation .
 The recently de-feudalized Christian Russians also had a different concept of land ownership than the Islamic nomads and land was seized by Russian settlers .
 Tatar emigration was first of several waves of emigration during Russian occupation . It was mainly to the lands of their ethnographic kin in the Ottoman Empire .
 By the turn of the century, the Tatars were only one-third of the Crimean population . The demographic shift continued to their disadvantage throughout the 19th century .
 Crimea was included in the territory of the briefly independent Ukraine recognized by the Central Powers . The Bolsheviks quickly re-annexed Ukraine into the Soviet Union in 1921 after the Russian Civil War .
 The Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic existed from 1921 to 1946 . Russian settlers continued to flow to the peninsula .
 Nazi and Romanian forces invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, and Crimea was to play a vital part in their strategy .
 Taking it would not only deprive the Soviets of their naval presence in the Black Sea and their access to the Mediterranean, but would also provide logistic support for the Nazi invasion of Russia .
 The siege of the city and the campaign on the Crimea were costly operations. The siege was costly operations, according to the Russian military .
 As many as 20,000 Tatars fought in the Soviet forces defending the peninsula . 17 percent of the partisans that resisted Nazi rule after the invasion were Tatars .
 Tatar leaders welcomed the Nazis and other Axis powers as liberators from an oppressive Soviet rule . Nevertheless, as did other subject nationalities in the Soviet realm, many Tatar leader welcomed them .
 Nazi occupation also resulted in brutal persecution of some of the peninsula’s other ethnic minorities, including the Turkic-speaking Krymchak Jews .
 In 1954, a relatively peculiar and seemingly inconsequential act by Soviet leaders would have major ramifications . It would have been a relatively unusual act by the Soviet leaders .
 The Crimean Oblast had been a part of the RSFSR since 1946 . It was transferred to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1954 .
 Ukraine is celebrating the 300th anniversary of the Treaty of Pereyaslav . Hetman Khmelnytsky declared allegiance to the Russian Empire .
 It is clear that the transfer was initiated at the highest levels of leadership . It took the form of an agreement between the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and the chairman of the Presidium .
 When the city councils of Simferopol and Sevastopol were consulted, there was no dissenting voice . The city councils were consulted by the city council .
 The transfer was regarded as an internal administrative affair, a transfer within a state without significant political or economic impact .
 The majority of Soviet settlers were ethnic Russians from either Russia or Ukraine . The majority were ethnic Russian settlers from either Russian or Ukraine.
 The Crimean Peninsula was a popular vacation destination for Soviet citizens in the 1950s . The stunning beauty and warm beaches of the Crimean Peninsula resulted in its transition to an "All-Union Resort"
 The substantial military presence in Sevastopol also contributed to Crimea becoming a retirement locale for high-ranking, mostly Russian, Soviet officers .
 The 1980s and 1990s were a tumultuous and multifaceted time for Crimea . Gorbachev’s reforms allowed the return of the deported minorities amid multiple referenda for independence .
 In 1989, Russians made up more than two-thirds of the population in Crimea . Ukrainians made up just over one-quarter of Crimea's population . Crimean Tatars made up only one and one-half percent .
 83 percent of Ukrainians use Russian as their first language . Almost half of the Ukrainians spoke primarily Russian .
 This ethnic makeup proved confusing and difficult for domestic and international policy-makers to agree upon as post-Soviet borders and politics took form .
 Crimeans seemed split and confused regarding their own destiny as well . Crimeans appeared to be confused about their destiny .
 Crimea declared itself independent in 1992 and Sevastopol declared itself a Russian Federal City and the stronghold of the Black Sea fleet thanks to the overwhelming Russian loyalty of the officer corps . Crimea declares itself independent from Crimea in 1992 .
 Despite Yeltsin’s stance, Russian politicians were divided on the issue at the time .
 Aleksandr Rutskoi, then the Russian Vice-President, spearheaded the movement to “restore’s Crimea to Russia. Rutkoi was then Russian President .
 minorities that had been deported or had emigrated over the last century started to return . Starting with Gorbachev’s social reforms in the 1980s, the minorities began returning .
 Armenians, Bulgarians, Germans, Greeks, Krymchaks, and Karaims. The largest group was Crimean Tatars, with the largest group being Crimean Tatar .
 Returning peoples formed squatter camps and had frequent clashes with local authorities as a result of anti-Tatar prejudices in daily life and political life .
 Thousands of Tatars protested the celebration of Catherine's 1783 annexation of Crimea in 1999 .
Pro-Russian crowds clashed with pro-Ukrainian Tatars in February 2014 . Two people were killed in protests following the seizure of the Crimean Parliament building in February .
 By the mid-1990s, the Crimean Tatar population in Crimea had increased three-fold to more than 250,000 inhabitants .
 Ukrainian economy disenchanted many on the Crimean Peninsula with the Ukrainian government .
 Crimea’s dependence on the Ukrainian infrastructure had developed dramatically in the decades since the 1954 transfer .
 Crimea received 80 percent of its water, 75 percent of the industrial goods, and 85 percent of energy from Ukraine . Crimea also received 80 per cent of the water and 75 per cent from Ukraine.
 Crimean Tatars constituted 70 percent of the unemployed populace and their financial hardships caused further marginalization . The socioeconomic divide caused little strife between the Russian and Ukrainian inhabitants .
 Minority populations in Crimea viewed the Ukrainian Government as the “guarantor of their cultural and political rights” and opposed Crimean separatism or reintegration into Russia .
 In 1994, Ukraine accepted the removal of Sovietmade nuclear weapons from its soil in order to guarantee its territorial borders . The removal of nuclear weapons was part of a deal to guarantee Ukraine's territorial borders.
 Crimea’s role as a strategic issue in Ukrainian-Russian foreign relations in contemporary history stepped from the political discourse and rhetoric of the 20th and early 21st centuries into the realm of military intervention . Russian troops started appearing in Crimea in 2014.
 The invasion and subsequent annexation of Ukraine were a direct corollary of events in Kiev . It was the culmination of more than a decade of tense political relations between Russia and the West .
 The events of the Orange Revolution in 2004, the possibility of NATO membership evoked by the NATO Allies at the Bucharest Summit in 2008 . Potential trade agreements with the European Union were rejected by President Yanukovych in November 2013, and his subsequent ouster in February 2014 directly led to overt Russian
 The Orange Revolution marked a sea change in Russian-Ukrainian relations in 2004 . It would start a struggle between pro-European Union and pro-Russian forces .
On November 21, 2004, nonpartisan exit polls showed the pro-European reformist Viktor Yushchenko ahead of the Eastern-Ukrainian-native and pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych had miraculously won by a margin of 2. percent . When the official results were released the next morning, Yanukovych had won by 2.% .
 Yushchenko was poisoned with dioxin a few months earlier . He was denied landing clearances at airports before rallies .
 A growing middle class in Ukrainian cities and drastic developments in civil society helped by U.S. and European governments, NGOs, and private philanthropists . A strong liberal opposition that quickly mobilized quickly mobilized.
 Yushchenko declared widespread fraud and convened a snap meeting in parliament . He had himself sworn in as president .
 On November 27, 2004, the cabinet, standing president Leonid Kuchma, and the parliament declared the runoff invalid . Six days later, the Supreme Court annulled the elections .
 Yushchenko won 52 percent of the vote, with a marked regional division . The next month, under heavy international monitoring, new elections were held .
 Yushchenko was elected president of Ukraine . He voiced a strong dedication to a democratic Ukraine and closer ties to the EU .
 disputes over the price of energy supplied by Russian-owned Gazprom and outstanding Ukrainian debts started shortly after the 2004 elections .
 NATO Allies welcomed the “Euro-Atlantic aspirations’ of Georgia and Ukraine . No Membership Action Plan was offered at the summit .
 Russian fears of further pro-European Union ambitions in Ukraine would be diminished in 2010 . Viktor Yanukovych to be elected to the presidency in 2010, though, with the election of Viktor Yanukovych .
 His administration was troubled by public political clashes with his Prime Minister, Yulia Tymoshenko, and a reeling economy . The global financial crisis began in 2008 .
 Yushchenko’s old opponent, Viktor Yanukovych, this time ran on a pro-democratic platform . He claimed that although the Orange Revolution had been “to weaken Russia,’ it was a popular call for democracy .
 Yanukovych's indecision about whether to sign EU Association Agreement would be his undoing . Yanukovych was able to block Ukraine’s movement toward NATO membership in 2010 .
 Narratives, Identity, Silences, and Energy, by Eurasian Geography and Economics 55, no. 1 .
 Putin promised Yanukovych a $15 billion loan if Ukraine joined a nascent Eurasian Customs Union in lieu of the EU agreement . Putin had promised Yanukovych $15billion loan if the Ukraine joined the union .
Small protests started on the Maidan Nezalezhnosti in Kiev. Upon rejecting the EU agreement, small protests started .
 President Yanukovych fled the country on February 21, 2014, and appeared days later in Russia . Government forces drew down resistance for fear of provoking wider rebellion .
 Yanukovych officially invited Russian military forces to help stabilize Ukraine, even though the Ukrainian Constitution only permits the parliament to make such invitations .
 The Ukrainian Parliament impeached Yanukovych and installed an interim government . The interim government until elections could be held .
 An Association Agreement with the EU will Transform Ukraine, and its President,” Foreign Affairs Special Collection: Crisis in Ukraine .
 Putin refused to acknowledge that these troops without insignia were Russian or had received any training or weapons from the Russian Federation . Despite the soldiers’ accents, weaponry, training, and blatant acts in the interest of military intelligence units of the Russia Federation, Putin refused.
 Russian forces were called “local self-defense units’ by President Putin . They were widely recognized throughout the world as Russian forces .
 Crimean Parliament held several closed sessions, barring and dismissing many representatives . Crimeans called "Little Green Men," local gunmen seized the Crimean Parliament .
 The Ukrainian military was ordered not to fire on or provoke the Russian forces in order to avoid further Russian involvement . The Russian forces were also ordered to stay away from Ukraine .
 Crimea declared independence from Ukraine and requested incorporation into the Russian Federation on March ll. Aksenov is a pro-Russian politician .
 Within the week, irredentist efforts staged a referendum for the secession of Crimea on March 16 .
 Crimea and Sevastopol signed a treaty for the accession of Crimea into the Russian Federation . President Putin and other Russian representatives also signed the treaty .
 Putin's speech repeated many of the Russian claims and narratives regarding the crisis . Putin’s speech repeats many of his claims about the Russian crisis .
 In the wake of the Russian annexation of Crimea, reports of human rights violations were abundant .
 Moscow declares that all Ukrainian citizens legally residing in Crimea and Sevastopol are Russian citizens . All residents who did not hold a Russian passport were considered aliens .
 Those who oppose annexation have been harassed and threatened, along with journalists . The annexation has been threatened by those who oppose it .
 Tatar public leaders have been exiled from the peninsula for refusing to acknowledge Russian authority . Tatar leaders have also been exiled.
Authorities also pre-emptively banned any public gatherings . In anticipation of the 1944 deportations of the Crimean Tatars, the authorities also banned public gatherings.
 Putin remarked in his March 18, 2014 speech at the Kremlin . ‘Each one of these places is dear to our hearts, symbolizing Russian military glory and outstanding valour’
 Putin emphasized the Russian character of the peninsula and the historic landmarks sacred to Russia .
 Putin lauded Russian military glory and lamented the downfall of the Soviet Union . Putin also lamented the demise of the USSR .
 Putin's claims that Moscow's motive was to protect the Russian minorities in Crimea. Putin’s reference to the invitation to use force by Yanukovych and the Crimean Parliament surfaced .
 The Russians employed terms like “Nazi,” “fascist,’ and “junta’s” to describe the revolutionary forces of the Euromaidan and its supporting agencies .
 Putin’s March 18, 2014, speech and the state-controlled Russian media reinforced the propaganda theme of a fascist invasion from the West that is common in some post-Soviet societies .
 Putin’s speech and the subsequent Kremlin doctrine and rhetoric concerning Russian intervention in Crimea essentially disregard the existence of a valid Ukrainian national concept and relapse into Tsarist and imperialist language .
 The invasion and annexation of Crimea in 2014 clearly resulted from President Putin's Russia pursuing a revanchist and irredentist agenda .
 Crimea and Sevastopol are framed as henceforth and eternally Russian territories to be reunified with the motherland after the collapse of the Soviet Union . Crimea and the Federal City of Sevastop are framed for reunification .
 Ukraine is deemed vital to Russia’s own national identity . While Russia considers other former Soviet republics with Russian-speaking minorities, Ukraine is considered vital to its identity .
 The 1954 transfer of Crimea to Ukraine was not detrimental to the USSR's strategic interests in an era when Ukraine’s loyalty to Moscow was undisputed . The 1954 move of Crimea.
 The patent rift in social and national identity within Ukraine produced a national movement that threatened to drag its future path away from Russia .
 Russia has managed to bar Ukraine’s accession to NATO, which Moscow considers to be an existential threat . At the same time, Russia regaining full control over its strategic naval bases in the Black Sea .
 The Russian majority and simmering separatist movements made the coup main relatively smooth and bloodless . The coup cle main was relatively smooth, bloodless.
Parallels between Russia and Germany did not start after the Russo-Ukrainian energy disputes in 2005-2009 . The Russo-Georgian War in 2008, the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014, or the War in Donbass since 2014 .
 Shortly after the fall of the Soviet Union and advent of the democratic Russian Federation, scholars and journalists identified likenesses between the young Russian democracy and the illfated Weimar Republic of Germany .
 Experts began preparing scholarly analyses of young democracies prior to the rise of Vladimir Putin . Experts were preparing analyses of these young democracies.
 Analyses ranged from concerns that Russia would quickly adopt another tyranny to discussions of neoimperialist Russian politicians . Analyses range from concerns about Russia's new regime to concerns that it would quickly adopted another tyranny .
 The comparison was illustrative and informative as to certain striking similarities . Despite the speculative nature of some analyses, the comparison was informative .
 Experts can point out implications of weak democratic norms and institutions in formerly powerful states with strong national histories . They can inform policymakers without jumping to sweeping and ill-informed analogies .
 The conspicuous similarities between the newly democratized countries were numerous and identifiable . The conspicuous similarity between the two countries were many and identifiable.
 Jews and capitalists in Weimar Germany, a clique of reformers funded by foreigners in Russia .
 Alsace-Lorraine, the Sudetenland, Austria, and Poland for Weimar Germany, and the Baltic states, Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, the Caucasus, and Central Asia for the Russian Federation .
 The Weimar Republic battled the rising Communists and Social Democrats on the left and German Nationalists and National Socialists on the right . Russia dealt with resurgent exCommunists and nationalist parties .
 The weight of these similarities, however disturbing and apt, diminishes when examined in a richer historical context .
 The late 1990s analysis of the analogy by Hanson and Kopstein appears optimistic in retrospect . The late 90s analysis by the pair appears optimistic.
 Kosovo conflict in 1998-1999 exacerbated and empowered Russian revisionism. Setbacks in NATO-Russia relations owing to events such as the Kosovo conflict .
Public support has galvanized behind Putin despite economic hardship. Paradoxically, public support is strong despite economic hardships .
 Putin’s lack of an overarching ideology has resulted in an “odd, hollow quality’ to his presidential authoritarianism .
 To compare the myth of an internal enemy in Weimar Germany and post-Soviet Russia is disproportionate and lopsided . To compare this myth of a internal enemy is disproportionate, lopsides .
 Hitler's pursuit of what he perceived to be internal enemies was central to his genocidal policies . Hitler’s pursuit of an internal enemy was key to his policies .
 Putin's intimidation and elimination of political opposition and restriction of human rights pales in scope when compared to Hitler’s behavior . Putin”s intimidation and Elimination of politicalOpposition and Restrictions of Human Rights pale in scope .
 Russian revisionism and resistance in the guise of revanchism for the sake of public support at home . Relatively modest international resistance and heavy indifference toward the former superpower’s status as a permanent member on the U.N. Security Council have resulted in Russian revision
 The comparisons fall flat when the implications are drawn out beyond the potential of young post-imperial democracies to relapse in to authoritarianism .
 The “Weimar Russia” analogy declined in popularity at the turn of the millennium . events in the 2000s would invoke another similar comparison .
 Several public figures made explicit comparisons to Hitler’s effort to unite the Reich with the German-speaking peoples of Austria and the Sudetenland .
 Not surprisingly, comparing people or their actions to Hitler or his actions is not unique to Putin’s annexation of Crimea .
 This section reviews the phenomenon of Hitler comparisons since World War II . It considers their potential effect on the general populace . This section also considers the potential effect of the Hitler comparisons .
 The dissemination of photos of the atrocities perpetrated by the Nazis had a distinct effect on the American psyche . It became a metaphor for evil itself .
 Through overuse, comparisons to Hitler became vague analogies for any evil acts . The comparisons were abundant in discussions on ethics .
 People had committed mass murder with massive territorial ambitions before, including Joseph Stalin, Genghis Khan, and Tamerlane . Nazis' vicious efficiency of industry and concentrated effort to completely eliminate an entire ethnicity .
 The Nazi comparison is used frequently and with great effect. As a result, the Nazi comparison has been used frequently .
 Politicians, journalists, and others invoke Hitler comparisons in a wide spectrum of circumstances . Politicians and journalists, including journalists, have used Hitler comparisons .
Several American presidents have used it, and to great effect. However, several presidents have been using it to help their own country .
 Lyndon Johnson compared the expansion of Communism in Southeast Asia to the aggression by Hitler in 1938 . In a 1965 speech, Johnson explained to the American people “why we are in Vietnam’s”
 Against Apocalyptic History (Berkeley, CA: Univ. of California Press, 1994), 158. The book was published in 1994 .
 Bush launched a barrage of direct and indirect comparisons of Hitler and Saddam Hussein in a campaign to vilify the Iraqi leader .
 Putin made remarks at a ceremony commemorating Soviet victory in the Second World War . The Cold War was reminiscent of the coldest days of the Cold War .
 Munich 1938, Nicaragua 1979,” Studies in Political Economy 23, no. 155, was published in 1987 .
 Political Studies 52, no. . 381.11 ll/j.l467-9248 .
 Media coverage of these public comparisons results in the transmission and amplification of these sentiments, says CNN . Media coverage has a direct impact on public opinion and support for specific policies .
 Bush’s Hitler-Hussein comparison amplified the message to the American public .
 comparisons of Putin to Hitler started immediately after his election into the presidency in 2000, but spiked following his gas disputes with Ukraine in 2005-2009 and the RussoGeorgian War in 2008, and nearly tripled following the annexation of Crimea .
 Putin and the Kre ml in have maintained a consistent counternarrative that neo-Nazis and fascists caused the Euromaidan ouster of Yanukovych and are currently in power in Kiev .
 Anti-Nazi rhetoric was a staple of Soviet doctrine since the fall of the Soviet Union . It has continued to be a part of the post-Soviet vernacular since the end of the USSR .
 In making these comparisons, policymakers influence the general public by associating a person or action with Hitler or the Nazis . The Nazis are almost universally decried as evil .
Political elites’ ability to influence the content of broadcasts and publications has a distinct effect on public opinion . Despite the media’s capacity to act as an independent influence on policymakers and the public, the media can influence public opinion.
 The Hitler comparison is often an example of political elites utilizing the mass media to influence public opinion in order to legitimize existing or desired foreign policy .
 The analogy evokes a common knowledge and association with evil widely attributed to Hitler . Regardless of any inherent inaccuracies in the analogy, the analogy is accurate .
 Policymakers and political elites are capable of evoking a strong emotional response from the public through the invocation of the Hitler metaphor .
Public associations with Hitler and the Nazis can quickly polarize public opinion . Public associations with the Nazis and Hitler can be quickly polarized .
 Toward a Theoretical Synthesis,’s Annual Review of Political Science 11: 41.1146 .
 It is imperative to analyze the differences and similarities between the invasions and annexations of Austria in 1938 and Crimea in 2014 . It is also imperative to analyse the differences between Austria and Crimea .
 Revanchism, Irredentism, and Pan-Nationalism are the most frequent and pertinent comparison between the German Anschluss with Austria and the Russian annexation of Crimea .
 A closer inspection of the pan-national movements in Austria prior to the Anschluss and in Crimea prior to 2014 annexation shows that they are of a markedly different character . However, a closer inspection shows that the movements are of different character.
 The dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 and the later fracture of relations between Prussia and Austria in 1866 led to the development of German and Austrian identities that often overlapped . The breakup of theHoly Roman Empire led to development of the German and Austria identities .
 The Pan-German movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries had its origins in xenophobic sentiment . The movement was formed from a high influx of Czech and Jewish immigrants .
 With the downfall of the German and Habsburg Empires after World War I, the victors feared a stronger revanchist power . After World War II, the Germans feared a strong revanchism power .
 Austrian citizens in the throes of economic hardship saw their German neighbors rising meteorically in prosperity in the mid-to-late 1930s .
 Crimea developed its patent Russian character as a result of mass-migration of ethnic Russians to replace emigrating Tatars and other indigenous ethnicities .
 Crimea is part of Ukraine’s sovereign territory . The vast majority of its residents speak Russian as their first language .
 Crimea has been prominently pro-Russian since 1991 . Crimea had a latent secession movement prior to the annexation in 2014 .
 Crimea is one of the former crown jewels in Russia’s empire and the home to its Black Sea Fleet . Crimea is an icon of nostalgia for prior Russian power .
 PanGermanism in Austria before the Anschluss and Pan-Russianism in Crimea before 2014 were drastically different . Pan Germanism before 2014 was drastically different.
 A revanchist or irredentist movement does not imply similar origins, dynamics, ends, or means . While historic and current cases may resemble one another in some ways, it does not mean one another .
 The Wehrmacht and "Little Green Men" have striking similarities . The actual events around the two annexations bear striking similarities, but certain key differences diminish the relevance of such comparisons .
 Aspects of the annexations resemble each other, but the greater implications of comparisons to Hitler's regime are absent .
 Both Hitler and Putin reacted militarily to unfavorable political developments in Austria and Crimea . The purpose and nature of the military involvement were drastically different .
 Austria’s did not require electoral fraud while the validity of the Crimean referendum is surrounded by significant controversy and skepticism . Both initiated referendums for reunification, Austria's did not need electoral fraud .
 Hitler’s failure to gain power through his political strong-arm tactics with Dollfuss and Schuschnigg pushed him to mobili z e Operation Otto to prevent a referendum on Austrian independence .
 The ouster of pro-Kremlin Ukrainian President Yanukovych impelled President Putin to mobili z e Russian Special Forces in Crimea to secure Moscow’s military interests in the Black Sea .
 As long as Ukraine remains firmly in the Russian orbit, Putin would recognize its territorial integrity and sovereignty .
 In 2010, the lease on Russia’s military bases in Crimea was extended for 25 years from 2017 . The lease on Crimea's military bases was extended in 2010 .
Full incorporation of Crimea by Russia removed restrictions on the fleet’s expansion . The Black Sea Fleet lease had been extended, but full incorporation was removed .
 Almost overnight Russia surpassed Turkey as the most powerful Navy in the Black Sea . In part to Russia’s seizure of Ukrainian ships, it was due to Russia's seizure of Ukraine ships .
 The nationalist doctrine espoused in official comments concerning Ukraine and Crimea after February 2014 does not explain the Kremlin's policies and actions of the Kremlin .
 The existing pan-German attitudes, the endorsement by major public figures, and the elimination and intimidation of the political opposition negated the need for any falsification of ballots, says the German government .
 The Crimean referendum, in contrast, has been shrouded in more controversy . The Crimean vote has been overshadowed by more controversy than the referendum .
 Within two weeks of the appearance of unmarked Russian forces, “local self-defense units’ stormed the Crimean Parliament .
 Parliament issued a declaration of independence and announced a referendum in five days’ time . Barring and dismissing several representatives during closed-door sessions, the Parliament issued the declaration ofindependence .
 President Putin alleged in his March 18, 2014 speech that there was an 82 percent voter turnout, with 96 percent in favor of reunification . President Putin said in March that the turnout was 82 percent .
 The Russian President's Council on Civil Society and Human Rights reported a 30 percent voter turnout with roughly 50 percent voting in favor of reunification . Other sources reported even slighter support .
 If the latter numbers are correct, reunification is the preference of only 15 percent of the Crimean population, instead of 78 percent claimed by President Putin .
 The Wehrmacht presence, SS arrests, and political intimidation absolutely did not encourage a safe and fair voting environment . The SS arrests and political intimidations absolutely didn't encourage a fair and fair vote .
 The conflicting reports of the Crimean referendum cast a skeptical shadow over an already condemned vote . The Crimean referendum has been condemned by an already internationally condemned vote.
 The Anschluss was the will of the majority, while Russia’s annexation of Crimea was probably not . Despite the aggressive and expansionist nature of the Nazis’ invasion.
 Policies of exclusion, exploitation, and extermination of Jews, Gypsies, homosexuals, Slavs, and others were central to the Nazis’ ideology and their pursuit of domination .
 A multitude of emperors, kings, and rulers have conquered lands, massacring and enslaving their inhabitants . The people have been enslaved by emperors and kings .
 Hitler and the Nazis were the first to do it with industrial efficiency and with the express goal of completely eliminating an entire ethnicity . The Nazis were first to achieve industrial efficiency .
 Putin's geopolitical agenda is absent from his geopolitical endeavors, despite the extreme expansionist views articulated by Aleksandr Dugin and other Kremlin advisors .
 The mysterious appearance in Crimea of Russian special forces without insignia in February and March 2014 initiated a sequence of events that resulted in a series of human rights violations .
 A genocidal agenda has never been a part of Russia’s occupation of Crimea .
 Since the declaration of independence and annexation of Crimea, Russian rule of the peninsula has resulted in a series of transgressions against the nonRussian minorities .
 Authorities prohibited public gatherings and exiled Crimean Tatar leaders that refused to acknowledge the annexation . Authorities banned public gatherings, exiled leaders refused to accept annexation .
 Putin’s rhetoric is completely void of any such verbiage. Nevertheless, while Hitler's dogma was centered around anti-Semitism and a deep racial hatred, Putin's rhetoric is not .
 The Russian President even acknowledged the mistreatment of the Crimean Tatar populace during Soviet times .
 Putin further stated, “We have great respect for people of all the ethnic groups living in Crimea’s Crimea .
 Hitler's and Putin’s annexations and territorial acquisitions show similarities to other irredentist land grabs in international history .
 Although Hitler and Putin exhibited revanchist actions, ill-informed comparisons polarize public opinion and inhibit dialogue . Although Hitler's actions, Putin's actions polarized public opinion, his actions did not affect dialogue .
 Nazi atrocities in the 1930s and 1940s remain in a singular category, and comparisons with the Nazis breed resentment and restrict diplomatic relations .
 Freud fittingly used an analogy of ethnic geography to explain the interactions of the id, the ego, and the superego .
 The Germans that herded cattle in the hills were not completely isolated, but intermixed with and influenced the Magyars that grew cereals in the plains and the Slovaks that fished the lakes .
 Inevitably, characteristics of the id, the ego, and the superego will diverge just as those of the Germans, the Magyars and the Slovaks will diverged .
 Ernest May demonstrates that when policymakers have used historical precedents to influence their decision-making, the results have often been flawed . May demonstrates when policymakers use historical precedent to influence decisions .
 In addition to distorting policymaking, the ill-founded comparison can have detrimental effects on diplomatic relationships .
 The massive casualties sustained by the Soviet Union while fighting the Nazis deepens the negative stigma in Russia . drawing such a parallel does not foster cooperation, says the author .
 Putin: “When people push boundaries too far, it’s not because they are strong but because they're weak.’ He says it's not because people are strong, but they are weak .
 Her use of the Hitler comparison could have drastically negative effects on the personal relationship between the presidents of the two largest nuclear powers . She could be elected president if she is elected president .
 The hypothetical nature of this conjecture is not clear . It suggests the possible adverse consequences of such superficial analogies .
 Putin on at least one occasion in 2007 compared the U.S. to the Third Reich . Putin also compared the United States to the third Reich .
 Such insulting comparisons do not foster the cultivation of constructive relations between Washington and Moscow, says U.S. ambassador .
 Russian characterizations of Kiev government as "fascist" and "neo-Nazi" do not promote positive relations and conflict resolution .
 The violent pursuit of nationalist agendas resulted in unprecedented devastation and suffering in the two world wars of the twentieth century . responsible governments should strive to prevent such a recurrence, says author .
 Perspectives from Social Anthropology. 2. 72 with potential outcomes will not be as effective as remedies adapted to new challenges .
 It is imperative that the nationalist character of each case be individually assessed when addressing foreign policy . It's imperative that each case is individually assessed.
 If modem neo-nationalism is analyzed with the model of fascist nationalism utilized by Hitler, then the successful conduct of foreign policy will inevitably be hampered .
Unnecessary barriers to dialogue and cooperation can only aggravate antagonism and postpone potential solutions to security issues . Unnecessary barriers can only increase antagonism, postpone solutions.
 Analogies to Hitler and the Nazis galvanize public opinion against a potential adversary by oversimplifying complex situations and vilifying the antagonist .
 If an ill-founded analogy leads to unsound conclusions, the consequences may be catastrophic . The consequences could be catastrophic, says author .
 Daalder, Ivo, Michele Flournoy, John Herbst, Jan Lodal, Steven Pifer, James Stavridis, Strobe Talbott, and Charles Wald .