 The Raw Egg Nationalist presents the best material from the years four ground-breaking issues, together with exclusive, new articles, and a whole lot more .
 A second humanitarian crisis is rapidly developing that cuts right to the heart of America's sacred mission to bring its own brand of sexual freedom to the rest of the world . In addition to the ongoing plight of the country’s female content creators, a second crisis is developing .
 Bacha bazi, meaning “boy play’, was once a pervasive practice throughout the tribal areas of Afghanistan . Bachabazi, which means ‘boy play, is a popular practice in Afghanistan's tribal areas .
 Young boys, known as “chai boys, would explore their sexuality with the aid of one or more Pashtun tribesmen .
 The chai boys would often cross-dress at parties attended by dozens of men who would help the young boys find themselves over many hours and sometimes even days .
 When the Taliban came to power, this timeless, valuable educational practice was brought to a swift end .
 Legend has it that Mullah Omar was actually inspired to form the Taliban when he came across two local warlords teaching a young tea boy .
 The bigotry that inspired Omar was defeated by the American-led invasion. The subsequent twenty-year occupation became a golden age for bacha bazi, paid for by American taxpayer dollars .
 The Taliban are back in power, but the tea boys are once more out of work and in mortal danger of trans erasure . But now that the Taliban is back in control, they are once again in danger of erasure.
 ‘Daniel’ was forced to flee the capital Kabul after Joe Biden's shameful withdrawal .
 He has since relocated to Arizona, where he’s making ends meet by plying his former trade as well as providing nutritional advice .
 His dream, he told us, is to be able to return to Kabul while he is still a child . He told us that he can once again pursue his vocation in the place he calls home .
 The individual today is as SOVEREIGN as an Individual in any other period of history . As collective powers gain ground, so the individual is SEPARATED from the old associations and must stand for himself alone .
 The world's most popular news stories continue to go from strength to strength . This week's featured stories from around the world .
 Each new issue brings with it the promise of unprecedented amounts of content, and this fifth issue certainly won't be bucking that trend .
 Food, fitness, wahmen, politics, history, cars, film and so, so much more . So much more.
 COCCHUN SeAair Tallow is the single most Dowerful thing you could put on your face . Lm alelUliKiamelare regenerate your skin. PULSE SOUL.
 An Austrian soldier of the First World War finds himself captured by Russian forces . The final instalment of the John COLD SAGA and more 15 Man’s World ISSUE 5 PRISONER IN THE FORBIDDEN LAND GUSTAV KRIST .
 GUSTAV KRIST tells his true story of escapes, recaptures, and his quest to return home by any means . Facing near death at every turn, he tells his riveting true story.
 The chaos of the communist takeover of Central Asia would only make matters more dangerous . But while the Russian Revolution would bring an end to the war, the chaos would only be more dangerous.
 The kid didn't know why his —, Seen eet penis was so strange looking, and neither did we .
 The Taliban are set to demand the UK Tale Me (Tale Me) dal) mat-l ice (ar-m er-me) ar-mer-me (el-lelie) siomne Afghanistan .
 The past two years have been a nightmare for the small business owner. EG.
 Raw egg nationalism is a physical and political ethic built upon the massive consumption of raw eggs .
 No men have been more politically persecuted than nationalists. Justas no single food has been subject to greater calumnies in our time than the ege .
 Shakes looked at Labs Sicahks Cocktails Recipes for Sauces reais Pur all your oo8s im this basket, coumt your chickens before they hatch .
 He was the eleventh child of Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York and the richest man in the realm . He was born to Cecily Neville, wife of the Duke and father of his wife. He was also the 11th child of the Prince of York .
 He was a sickly child, and is poor health seemed to reflect the state of England as she embarked upon the Wars of the Roses .
 The Yorkists, led by Duke Richard, were opposed by the Lancastrians loyal to Henry VI and his wife Margaret of Anjou .
 In 1460, the Duke and his eldest son Edmund were slain at the Battle of Wakefield .
 Young Richard was sent with his brother George to the Low Countries . Richard was eight years old when he was sent to the country .
 Edward, himself merely an adolescent, crushed the Lancastrian army at the Battle of Towton . Tens of thousands fought in a howling blizzard .
 Richard was made Duke of Gloucester, Knight of the Garter and Knight of Bath . Richard saw his brother crowned as Edward IV and soon offices rained down upon his young head . Richard was also made Duke and Knight.
 A few years later, at the tender age of 11, he was entrusted with levying troops in the Western Counties . Man’S WORLD ISSUE 5 is a member of the British Army .
 The Duke of Warwick was insulted by Edward's refusal to marry his brothers Richard and George to the Duke's daughters . He allied himself with Henry and Margaret and allied himself to his daughters .
 Richard played a vital role at Barnet and Tewkesbury . At Barnet he held the right flank wielding a battle-axe, while at Tewesbury he led the vanguard .
Scoliosis, 32 contrary to Shakespeare, began to develop in early adolescence . He did all this despite an increasingly painful case of scoliosis .
 Warwick made the most violent threats and complaints about his inheritance . They continued to bicker about issues of money and property, especially the inheritance of Warwick .
 Edward forbade his brother from marrying into the House of Burgundy . Things came to a head in 1477 when Edward forbaded his brother.
 George became a real threat, and it is in this heady atmosphere that he was accused of treason and executed .
 Richard was sent by the increasingly corpulent king to punish them, invading their land and burning their villages . After repeated incursions into the north of England by the Scots, he was sent to punish the Scots .
 James III of Scotland was clapped into irons by his own fickle nobles . Richard seized this opportunity to rout the disorganised Scots and take their strongholds .
 He took Edinburgh without the loss of a man. This he accomplished extremely quickly. This is not the first time he has done this .
 Edward V. With George dead and buried, the nobles were divided into two camps . The one represented by Richard, now named Lord Protector, the other by the family of Edward IV's wife Elizabeth Woodville .
 The Woodvilles moved quickly to secure the young king, and it is equally unsurprising that Richard moved quick to intercept them . It is no surprise that the Woodville moved quickly.
 Richard had him arrested and taken to Pontefract Castle, where he was later executed on charges of treason . Richard was later sentenced to death for treason .
 Richard set about crippling the Woodville faction, thereby securing his own position . Richard then set about killing the faction, which he set about to do so himself .
 He accused Lord Chancellor Hastings of treason and had him slain following a confrontation in the Tower of London .
 Richard V's brother Richard got hold of his brother Richard by convincing his mother to release the boy from sanctuary . Richard's presence was required at Edward V's coronation, ostensibly because his presence was needed at the coronation . Richard then convinced his mother, ostensibly,
 They declared that the young Edward was illegitimate, owing to the late king's earlier affair and supposed engagement to one Eleanor Butler . The young Edward had an affair with Eleanor Butler, and was supposed to be engaged .
 A petition soon appeared demanding that Richard take up the crown . He accepted and was hailed as king at Westminster on the 6th of July .
 Edward and his brother Richard, now nothing but bastards, were confined to the Tower . Edward and brother Richard were now nothing and bastards. Edward and Richard were confined.
 There they remained, being seen less and less until, one fateful day, they appeared for the last time . They were seen for the first time .
 It seems that the young princes were murdered by their uncle, who had their bodies hidden beneath a flight of stone steps in the Tower . They lay undiscovered for centuries.
 King Richard set out on a royal progress, attempting to drum up support for his new regime .
 Henry Tudor was preparing for war in the Channel . The young Tudor drew support from French as well as from disaffected English nobles .
 He soon landed on the Welsh coast with an army composed primarily of foreign soldiers . He soon arrived on the coast with a army composed mainly of foreign troops .
 Richard, no stranger to such struggles, levied his own troops and rode to meet the young man in battle . Richard was not a stranger to the struggle, but rode to the battle to meet his troops .
 The armies caught sight of each other south of the town of Market Bosworth, Leicestershire, on the 21st of August, 1485 .
 The Duke of Norfolk, one of Richard's allies, held the centre against Henry's troops as long as he could, but things looked increasingly desperate .
 Richard, perhaps enraged by the cowardice of Henry, who hid at the back of his lines, or by the inaction of men like the Earl of Northumberland and Sir William Stanley, who sat on the sidelines and refused to join battle, gathered his finest knights and declared his intention
 Wielding his trusty battle-axe, Richard and his companions led a stupendous charge down the hill that took the Tudor army by surprise .
 Richard himself fought most bravely, slaying with his own hands Henry's standard-bearer and unhorsing another of his bodyguards . Richard himself was killed by Richard himself, unhorsed by another bodyguard .
 William Stanley led a charge into the side of Richard's party . The king came within a hair's breadth of Henry Tudor, hewing all about him with his axe .
 Richard continued to fight until he was surrounded by enemy soldiers, thrown from his horse, and killed . He was thrown from the horse and killed.
 The last king of England to die in battle, and the last scion of the House of Plantagenet. Thus perished the last King of England.
 helicopter 7.85 million OUoyotmeoleyeelokmencejoyocemeyel deXondstaxmaolerelselacKe) mbalelor china.
 Affinity for women and sexy Beautiful Girls. Affinity For Women .
 AOC oo ge Dut st ee ay wt yey ot hh See, he told me this one weird trick you just won't believe .
 Six months later, I'm even more of a man than I was before, says the author . "Can’t believe it. Can’s just say it. I’m even more than | was before," he says .
Anonymous Iwitter accounts provide health and lifestyle advice from anonymous accounts . Now you see why you can get all your health advice.
 Stories like 's will change you if you think this is i i pate sane paces who can't take a harmless joke.
 While you need a lighter to enjoy a premium cigar, you don't technically need a cutter . You don't need to use a cutter.
 You only get one solid chance to cut a cigar. As simple as cutting a cigar might first appear, you can still get it wrong .
 The wrapper leaf will unravel and allow too much air flow . The wrapper will cause the cigar to unravel .
 We will cover four main tools and the associated methods to cut the head of a cigar . We will also cover the associated method to cut a cigar's head .
 cigars offer many ring gauges and head shapes and forms . While some will work better, all will work, and all will need a bit of practice .
 Your local tobacconist or smoking parlor may offer some options that are fixed to a counter or piece of furniture, even scissors . Also, you may have options that can be fixed to the counter or furniture .
 The cigar is the oldest and most trusted form of cutting the head of a cigar . With constant modern updates from numerous manufactures, keep in mind that in terms of modern updates, this is the best way to cut it .
 Typically, a straight cutter will have a center hole that fits most cigars, which is where two concave blades meet and then cross to complete the cut .
On both sides of the center hole are finger holes built into the frame . On both sides, finger holes are built in the frame.
You open the cutter by spreading the thumb and finger to open the blades . You open the blade with the help of the finger and thumb .
 Be sure the blades are totally open, and your thumb and finger have extended the two blades fully .
 Do not drag the cigar along the blade edge if your cutter keeps the blades exposed . This will tear the wrapper leaf. Do notDrag the cigar to the edge.
 This will send both blades through the head of the cigar, snipping off just enough for a solid draw and good airflow . This will be the first time the two blades have been used in a cigar .
 The entire cigar was made for a good cut, so if the cut is correct and tobacco begins unraveling, it is probably a minor construction flaw .
 A cap, a circular piece of tobacco draped over the head, and beneath it, a double or triple line of tobacco close together .
 You are to cut right on or just below the cap-line, and above the two or three lines of tobacco . You are also to cut just above the cap line, or below the three lines .
 This will expose the area of the cigar which is rounded by being pressed in the mold . The cigar will be pressed in a mold to expose the cigar's area .
 This area is constructed to be exposed and cut, allowing proper airflow . The area is being constructed to allow proper airflow and ventilation .
 If you cut too little, you can repeat this option with just a sliver more . You can also cut too much with less or more .
 If you've cut too much, try smoking it, but you'll soon realize why cigars are rolled to have a smoking end and a lighting end that is .
 The Punch has become especially popular because of its combining with a key chain . The Punch is a common accessory sold in cigar shops .
 A punch consists of a metal or plastic body and a cylindrical metal tube with a razor-sharp head . A punch is a metal, plastic body, a metal tube and a plastic body .
 The blade is capped so that you don't slice open your fingers when grabbing it or your leg when the tool is in your pocket . The blades are capped to ensure that they don't cut open fingers or legs when grabbing them .
 Once the cap is removed, you use your thumbs and index finger to hold the body of the punch with the blade pointed away from the hand .
 To cut, hold the punch in your dominant hand and the cigar carefully in the other. To cut. Hold the punches in your Dominant hand .
 Make sure the cigar is centered on the blade, as you want to drive the punch into the center of the cap .
 Twisting the punch left and right is a good method if the blade turns out to not be sharp . It's a good way to make sure the blade is sharp.
 The remaining part of the cap could come off during smoking . If you're far from center you could push the double/ triple wrap down or take off the edge .
 Once the cigar is lightly pressed against the punch, firmly press the punch into the cigar . The punch is hard to press, and the cigar should be lightly pressed .
 You'll know how much by how long your cutting tube is, as per the manufacturer's suggested specs .
 A perfect cylindrical chunk is taken out of the head of the cigar, which creates a very easy draw . You'll see a perfect piece of cigar.
 If you then look at your punch, you'll see the removed chunk in the cut tube . You'll also see the removal of a chunk in your punch .
 Your cap most likely has a driving rod which goes in the center of the cut tube and will push that tobacco out .
 If you don't get a good draw or have damaged the cigar, go to using a v-cutter or fiddling with your fingers to correct the error .
 Cigar smoking is delightfully antiquated, but every once in a while, some tech hits the industry . We get a nifty product .
 The V-cutter is exactly that, though it is arguable that this method was used some time ago . It's arguable this method may have been used in the past .
 Either way, the contraption is popular for taking a deep, aesthetically pleasing cut of the cigar and lines it up perfectly .
 In the device itself is stored the blade, which usually will open with the push of a mechanical button or switch . The blade is stored in a device itself .
 V-blade cuts deep into the cigar’s head, with a clean, V-shaped chunk being removed, and allows for the integrity of the cigar head to remain .
 In the body of this tool is a circle clearly made for the head of the cigar to be placed . The body of the tool is clearly made to make a circle.
 This hole will not allow the cigar to pass all the way through, meaning you cannot over-cut . This hole won't allow you to over- cut, meaning the cigar will not be able to pass.
 The process involves holding the V-cutter with one hand, between the thumb on the bottom and the index finger on top to push the blade down .
 Some hold the bottom against the heel of their hand and use two fingers to push down . Others use the bottom of their hands to hold down their hands .
 Once the cutter is open, with one hand firmly holding the cigar against the blade hole, push the blade through the cigar . The cigar is a cigar cutter .
 The device will typically lock when this is done successfully, as it is spring loaded . The device is usually used to lock when it is used to be used in the spring .
 It feels weird on the head of cigar and is also a bulkier tool, not so great for carrying in the pockets. Personally, I don't care for it, because it feels weird.
 The entire art of smoking is to eliminate drama, says author . "I find it to be a bit more dramatic too," he says .
 If youre a gadget-driven individual, you should definitely look into trying the tool . The tool is a tool that can be used to make a phone call .
 The best part of a V-cutter is that you basically can’t A typical V- cutter from Colibri make an error when using it .
 Once you've mastered the cigar, you'll be surprised at how well it plays with the construction of the cigar . The cigar is a great way to smoke, but you need to use it more often .
 Many industry professionals don't carry the fanciest of tools or accoutrements, especially those whose work involves tobacco production . Despite what you probably think, many industry professionals do not carry theFanciest tools .
 Using the nails of the index finger and thumb, a pinch is made at the head of the cigar . A slight pull removes the right amount of the cap and tobacco in the cigar head .
Holding the cigar in one hand, it is typical to place the thumb and index finger together . The fingertips on the head of the cigar are used for a preliminary line-up and measurement .
Once the fingertips are pressed on the cigar, the thumb and index finger roll together, pinching the cap of the cigar . Then once the fingertips and fingers are pressed, the fingers and fingers roll together . Then the fingers are placed on the cap, the finger and thumb
 Pinching some more, right to the point where the nails meet, a quick yet delicate pull is made from the head of the cigar .
 The 100% handmade cigar works perfectly with your hands and nothing else . It is truly astonishing to see that the 100% made cigar works with your hand .
 The construction of the head and the cap works well with this method for airflow . After some time, you'll be able to remove the tobacco in a near perfect circular shape .
 Not ruining a cigar should be the goal of every smoker, so do so with caution and always err on the side of a light touch .
 The GREAT WARRIOR-KING PYRRHUS of EPIRUS, NAMESAKE of the PY RRHIC VICTory .
 Pyrrhus of Epirus was one of the greatest warrior kings ever . He was debating whether he should invite one of his greatest warriors to help them with a problem .
 In 280s BC, it had degenerated a little, at least in comparison to its rivals . In the 280sBC, it was a little more than its rivals.
 Tarentum was a democracy, and the merchant element was taking over in politics . The merchant element took over in the politics of the country .
 They had a strong navy, but on land they relied heavily on allies and mercenaries . They had strong navy. But on land, they relied on allies.
 The Tarentines were in the middle of celebrating a huge annual festival of Dionysus . Their timing was not great the Tarentine's timing.
Almost all of the foreign ships were smashed, but not so far gone to miss a fleet of foreign ships .
 Maybe the Romans thought drunken sailors would be less inclined to operate heavy machinery and start troule. Nope.
 The Tarentines sloshed into their triremes and sped after the Roman fleet . The Roman fleet was the first Roman fleet to sail to the Tarentine .
 The Tarentines swooped in, burned and sank the Roman ships in the harbor . The Roman ships were burned and sunk by the Tarentine .
 Then they disembarked, plundered the city, got back in and sailed away . Then they sailed away. Then they got back into the city .
 Pyrrhus’ name comes up in the discussions of a great king, cousin of Alexander the Great . Pyrrus’s name is also a name for the great king of the Great and his cousin .
 The sound of festival instruments is heard at the entrance of the theater . But suddenly they hear the sound of music at the theater entrance .
Pyrrhus got there. Pyrrhus felt when Pyrrus got there . It was the first time they had been there .
 The guys who took credit for brokering this glorious alliance with the warrior king are the men who took the credit for the alliance .
 This was a man who had defeated enemy generals in hand-to-hand swordfights, while the armies watched . This was the man who won the battle in hand to hand swordfights .
 We underestimate how different life will be when our political system changes. We underestimate the impact of political system change .
 We underestimate how different we ourselves will need to be to flourish under a different regime. We underestimate our ability to adapt to a new regime .
 If you want things to change, start by being the sort of person you'll actually need to be if they do .
 Let's enjoy what's left of our democracies, and focus on building each other up, while we still have time .
 EVELYN RAE ou don't have to flick very far back in our history books to find stories of and unwavering courage in the face of adversary .
Only a century ago, Western civilization was steadily cultivating young men and women who valued the sorts of things that inspired such episodes of bravery .
 The prosperity and comfort we know today is largely due to the men and women who valued those things that underpin a well-functioning and free society .
Young, brave men who fought, bled, and died to secure the freedom-loving nations they were then building for their children to inherit .
 Many of them paid for that end with their life . Most of them were willing to do so . Many of those who did not were, at least, willing to.
 It's safe to say it's not prevalent in our culture today, says author . "Whatever it was, it’s not prevalent," she says .
 As a result, grown adults are left with grown adults who are incapable of handling decisions relating to their own health .
 They'll line up for hours on end just to be tested for an illness they have no signs or symptoms of suffering . They'll be tested on the side of the road for hours to see if they have symptoms of illness .
 Children are being subject to experimental medical procedures to quell fears of adults around them .
 Unlike our ancestors, we've become a generation of fear and paranoia, we're more than happy to forfeit freedoms previous generations secured in exchange for a false sense of security .
 freedom is never more than one generation away from extinction, and was at that crossroads today . Its been said that freedom is always one generation from extinction . It was said thatfreedom is never less than a generation away.
 We've forgotten that freedom isnt something that can be left unprotected or unchecked . We've forgot that freedom can be protected or unchecked, we've forgotten .
We have the unrelenting threat of big government whose power rest on the subjugation and control of the people .
Civilizations are shaped by culture, and culture is shaped by ideology . Civilizations areshaped by culture and shaped by ideologies .
 Today, the Western world has largely abandoned the fundamental beliefs of previous generations .
 Subjectivism and relativism now dominate virtually every major institution, and its corrosive effects seep into near-every aspect of our culture, from family to sexuality, religion, politics, entertainment, education, and more .
 As a result, there is an expectation that our cultural leaders are subjectivists, according to the author .
 We birthed the regressive and degenerate notion that objectivity and debate represent some sort of threat to social harmony .
 Truth has become a casualty of the culture war, and with it, the freedoms necessary for that truth to flourish. Truth has been a casualty.
 Nature hates a void, and too often the government is ready to fill that void sometimes even if there is no void at all .
 In the absence of objective grounding, the government becomes our only absolute . The government becomes the only absolute.
 The state now views itself as the giver of those freedoms, rather than the state protecting our freedoms . The state is no longer protecting its own freedoms .
 Coming back from this point requires a revisiting of the ideas and beliefs that once shaped a freer world . The author's book is published in the New York City, New York.
 We must remember once again that human rights are not something we earn from the government and that freedom is not a reward for certain behaviours . We must also remember that freedom isn't a reward to certain behaviours.
 Human rights are given to us by virtue of the fact that we are human, made in the image of our Creator .
 The truth is intentionally ignored and suppressed by our would-be overlords and not without reason. And that’s a truth intentionally ignored by our overlords .
 When the state is not restrained by a law greater than itself, it becomes a law unto itself . If we don't belong to God, we belong to the state, says the author .
 For as long as there is no throne above our governments, our governments will assume the highest authority over us .
 Tyranny 57 reigns when the state claims to be the highest source of law, morality, and justice . State claims to have highest level of morality, morality and justice.
In the Western world, this is a truth we're just beginning to feel the devastating consequences of embracing. Now, in the West, we are beginning to see the consequences of embrace, says the author .
 Previous generations understood that the greatest threat to tyranny is a group of people who pledge their allegiance to something greater than the state itself .
Almost every aspect of culture today is determined to undermine that fact. And yet almost every part of culture has been determined to undermined it .
 We must consider the fruit of each system and ask ourselves what future we envision for our children . We must also consider what future they would like for their children .
 The last two years have highlighted some major cultural issues, but until we find the underlying ideological cause, our solutions will be nothing more than tissue-patching the gaping hole in the hull .
 Unless we go to the root, the system will continue to produce rotten fruit . The root of the fruit is still a problem .
 When we look out of our windows or at our computer screens and see society falling headlong into unrestrained immorality and decay, we ought to turn around and examine the state of our homes .
 Ultimately, that’s the only real solution to the rot infesting our societies, says John Sutter . Sutter says that's the only solution to rot in society .
 We must do more than complain when we look outside and see injustice, oppression, corruption, corruption. So, when we see injustice and oppression, we must do less than complain .
 We must remember that the change begins at home, with you and me, breaking free from culturally decaying ideologies . We must also remember that we must remember the change starts at home .
 We must raise the next generation in an environment that previous generations considered worth fighting to preserve . We must fight for the future of our environment, we say .
 By focusing on the issue that really matters to ordinary people, says JOSIAH LIPPINCOTT . "Uild the wall"
 They don't want Mexican drug gangs, the opioid crisis, and bad schools . They want bad schools, bad schools and bad drug gangs .
 The sheer instinct for survival is constantly attacked, rarely defended, but always present . They don't want ever-skyrocketing housing prices and an ever-growing underclass .
 The left is going to call any defender of a sensible immigration policy a hardcore racist .
 The “matter’s out of which a regime is made is far more important than the form of a regime. The matter out of the regime is more important. The ‘matter” out ofWhich a regime was made is much more important, says the author .
 Democrats openly want to torch it and Republicans are afraid to return to it . Republicans are also afraid to go back to it, according to reports .
 There is no institutional support for liberty and national existence, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the last two years of Covid lockdowns and vaccine mandates have proven anything beyond a shadow of a doubt .
 The radical left decided to simply import a new people to the U.S. population .
In 2020, Trump lost every non-white voting bloc but won a majority of white voters . In 2020, he won the majority of the white voting bloc .
 If America had its 1965 demographics, Trump would have been elected in a rout . If America's 1965 demographics had been more diverse, he would be elected .
 The left's most potent weapon is the most powerful weapon at its command . But that won't happen unless the left loses its most potent weapons .
22 will likely be more of the same. But there is still time to turn things around. 22 will probably be the same .
 The GOP will grift, new names will make some noise, but accomplish little . The economic and political situation of the country will get more and more toxic, says CNN.
 The young men that make up the true intellectual vanguard of the Right must work to reorient the Right back to the existential politics of who we are as a nation .
 The worse things get, the more the nations patriotic core will demand real abiding change .
 The politics of 401ks, tax cuts, and debates about how much foreign aid to send to Israel is dead and gone . The politics and tax cuts are among the issues that are still being debated .
 Rejecting the yeast life, getting jacked and tanned, slonking raw eggs, reading the classics and holding yourself accountable will absolutely transtorm your life for the better . Read the classics.
Postmodernism may be and however ill its effects over the last sixty or so years, Derrida, Foucault and their cheese-eating acolytes were right, at least, in one thing .
 People in California were lounging around in swimming pools, smoking pot and listening to groovy music long before the term "laid back" was coined . Once it was, a whole movement of people came into being, who saw themselves and one another in a new
 Words make things so, and they allow us to orient ourselves in the world in particular ways, opening up certain possibilities and closing off others .
 I've been thinking for a while about what it really means to be a conservative . I'm saying these things, dear reader, because I’ve been thinking about what’s true to be conservative .
 As a working definition, I hope we can agree that this neither offends common sense nor conservative political tradition . I hope that this isn't the same thing, I say .
 conservatives have actually conserved. Because I couldnt think of one thing substantial or otherwise — that conservatives have actual conserved .
I could hardly claim to be the first person to have pointed out this dismal scorecard, and I'm sure I wont be the last . Now, I could hardly claims to be a first person. Now, it's clear that this is not the first time this is
 The achievements of Western conservatives are a roll call of shame, according to Burke's immortal words .
 Over the past two years, despite the global pandemic and official promises to the contrary, the incumbent big-C Conservative government has allowed the demographic replacement of the native British to continue unchecked and unabated .
Hundreds of boats carrying so-called “refugees’ from around the world crossed the English Channel . Royal Navy and RNLI boats disgorged their human cargo on these shores .
 He was arguably the man most responsible for creating the “gentlemanly conservative’s persona that has helped make conservativism, especially campus conservatism, more attractive .
 This ridiculous, bloviating definition, and the futile gesture it describes, says everything that needs to be said about the man . The man and others like him have presided over the movement he has presided over, he says .
 If they disappeared tomorrow, you'd know about it. Which isnt to say that there arent things worth conserving in her and now, because there are — and there are .
After so much has already been destroyed or corrupted, other kinds of action are now more essential to make the world fit for humans again . It's that it's that after so much of the world has been destroyed and corrupted, it's now more important to make a
 The models for the future are now very firmly those of the distant past . The future is now the future of the future, according to experts .
 Perhaps it’s the early history of the American Republic, before its corruption by the bipartisan system .
 Or perhaps it's the warrior brotherhoods of the Bronze Age and their revolt against the matriarchal world of ancient Europe .
 Instead of being a badge of honour and enabler of decisive action, it merely serves as a mark of shame .
 Buckley: We must wrest control of history from our enemies and take it in the direction, and at the speed, of our own choosing . Buckley: Our job is simply to stand athwart history telling “STOP!’.
 The film’s denouement features the oft parodied but genuinely touching scene of the boys obstinately disobeying the authority of the headmaster to stand on their desks .
John Keating's enthusiasm for his subject and his delight in irking the powers-that-be. Watch the movie as a youngling and you will be fired up by John Keating.
 A jaded 30-something has been teaching British kids over the last decade . Watch it as a jaded thirty-something who has taught British kids .
 In the past twenty years, the John Keating character has been slowly sluiced out of the education system . In the last 20 years, he has been sluice out of education system, certainly on this side of the Atlantic and I expect on the other side.
 The idea that a group of students could be so enamoured with learning that they would arrange a midnight rendezvous in a cave to read Housman and Keats is so farfetched as to be absurd .
 I was schooled in the late 90s and early part of the millennium . I will happily go on record as having enjoyed my time as a football player .
 The teachers had only recently been robbed of the ability to give a clip round the ear with no consequences . Many of them still had the classroom chops and the desire to enforce discipline .
 A qualified pilot with a red face and a battered old BMW used to have a huge Encyclopaedia of physics next to his desk .
 The essay would invariably not be done, due to a teenager’s complete incomprehension of Newtons Third Law of Motion and inability to write 2000 words in the space of an evening in a world before word processors were commonly available .
 The following lunchtime you would be stood outside the staffroom for 40 minutes and then that was the end of the matter . So the following lunch time you would have to wait outside for the following 40 minutes .
 This man got rowdy, dull-eyed kids from the post-industrial heartlands to engage . The man got a rowdy and dull- eyed kids to engage in his work .
 Our school was a 1960s concrete nightmare built around two three-storey towers overlooking the playing fields .
 One wet, grey afternoon he decided that we had done enough physics and needed a little sport . He decided to take part in a sport .
 A rugby player challenged a boy in the class to steal the ball from a Year 11 rugby game that was happening on the PE fields below . He challenged the boy to go and steal the football from a year 11 rugby match .
 The class and the teacher raced to the window to watch the doomed attempt and the lad getting pummelled .
 A Van Der Graaf generator was used to demonstrate something about circuits devolving into a game of statically charged tig . Another vivid memory of a Van DerGraaf generator being used to show something about circuit development .
 In 2007, the government brought in an indoor smoking ban after leaving school . The ban was introduced after he had left school .
 Our hero wrote “staff smoking area’ on a piece of A4 paper in permanent marker and sat in his car, in full view of the kids . I am told from people who were still at the school that our hero wrote 'staff smoking areas’
 The Indian kid used to let the Indian kid in the class off his homework if he gave him a copied CD-ROM of the latest flight simulator game .
 The old rogue’s refusal to do things ‘properly stands out in the sharpest clarity,’ says the author .
 The British government has repeatedly flagged that white working class boys underperform by every metric, against all other groups even WWC girls .
 Well ; the pay is poor, the workload is unreasonable and you could have a much more satisfying life as a plumber. Well . Well .
 The education system — emblematic of society at large — is fundamentally misfiring, says the government . The Education system is a symbol of society's failure to educate people .
 White British boys are mothered to death at primary school, where only 15% of teachers are male .
 Many are compressed and deflated by daily drugs so as to be manageable in a classroom environment completely stacked against them . Many will experience anything they will experience after they leave school at 16 .
 Their aspirations are to be Youtubers, their family unit is dysfunctional or defunct and they know nothing of their own history . They know nothing about their history .
 Good teachers, risk-takers, rule-breakers and rule-breaker are needed more than ever to guide the nation’s boys toward manhood .
 The irony, of course, is that the profession is more closed to these types than ever . The irony of this is that it's more closed than ever.
 It is incredibly sad, but there are other ways to effect change within your community .
 More than half a million illegal aliens from around the world poured across the southern border . It's not particularly difficult to differentiate ‘tourists’ from world poured over the border .
 MUnvetted ‘asylum Seekers’ were fGWn in trom Afghanistan in an open-ended resettlement program .
 We have ta Enowwhor ts migration, entering our lands, who are living among us . We have a long history of people who are allies and enemies .
 The stunning scope of scorched-earth migration ‘facilitated by anti-national entities truly dawned on me’ ‘I’ve been told to be informed on immigration issues.’
Dominique Venner was never a romantic or a depressive, says BLOSSIUS ominque Venner . Look to the work of DominiqueVenner.
 Dominique Venner saw that Europeans had lost control of their institutions, their countries, their destiny . Venner is the author of A Handbook for Dissidents .
 For Venner, this decadence was brought about, ultimately, by nihilism, he says . Venner: This decadence is not from loss of religious belief, but from a more general severing of Europeans from their own peculiar spiritual roots .
 For Venner, in short, the bugman is an unnatural and unhappy creature that has been forced to deny his true self . Venner's antidote to this, Venner concludes .
 Not so much by lived experience, as nothing is left of the forms of life that flowed from the primacy of the spirit in European civilization .
 The solution is to go back to “our most authentic sources’, in other words to Homer that speak to something primordial within us. The solution, instead, is toGo back to "our mostauthent sources”
 For Venner, each great civilization (European, Chinese, Arab, etc. is the expression of a people, each with its own deep psychological inclinations .
 The manifestation in history of this abiding “spiritual morphology of a people, he calls Tradition. The manifestation of this spiritual morphology is called Tradition .
 “Our most authentic sources are simply sources that present the best mirror to us,’ says author . “We can recognize, and finally remember, our true self.’
 Homer produced “the first and most perfect expression of an ethic and aesthetic heritage which he himself inherited, and raised, in god-like fashion, to sublime heights’ Homer is foremost.
 This is an aesthetic-aristocratic ethos that seeks to live life in harmony with the cosmic order . But without the rigid moralistic commandments of the sort we find in the Judaic Tradition .
Virtu is the virtue which Alexander, Caesar, Frederick II and Napoleon SINCE THE GREEKS MET the PERSIANS on the FIELD of MARATHon .
 Since the Greeks met the Persians on the field of Marathon, virtt and a sword in hand allowed the men of Europe to surmount all the challenges to their existence, and finally become masters .
Today’s men of the West must rediscover themselves, to meet the dangers foisted on them by their enemies .
 Our ancient homelands are not what they used to be. But our cities are crumbling, and our ancient homels are not.
 The time has come for the Europeans and their brothers, the Amerikaners, to awaken and free themselves . The time is now for them to free themselves.
 We share a rich hidden Tradition, going all the way back to Homer, the repository of all the values we need for our future rebirth . We share the rich hidden tradition, going to Homer and Homer .
 "Handbook" sets out to awaken our memory, and allow us to think differently and rebuild our lives, our communities, and eventually our nations, out of fidelity to a higher vision .
 This is the spiritual testament of a man who gave his life for the sake of this great awakening before the hour grows too late . This is a spiritual testament to a man whose life was in the middle of the night .
 This edition brings the text, suppressed in France and until now unavailable, to the community of all English-speaking lovers of civilization .
 The Baron of Muscle Beach was a bodybuilder legendary both for his beautiful body and for his lifespan as a physique competitor .
 He was also something of a Renaissance man, a star of television and print commercials . He was a renowned party-animal on the Golden Age California scene .
 Zabo followed his entire adult life, remaining in tremendous condition even to the ripe old age of 84 . Zabo: “The easiest way to get into shape is to not get out of shape’
 His first experience of physical training began in his teens, when he was a high-school sports hero . He and a group of friends acquired a barbell .
 Before enlisting in the U.S. army at the outbreak of WWII, he was training at his local YMCA .
 He took part in three combat landings and then contracted malaria and dengue while serving in New Guinea and the Philippines . He was also involved in three landings.
 His weight plummeted to around 135lbs, but he continued to maintain a regimented fitness programme . His weight dropped to 135lbs.
 Within two years he had won his first competition, the AAU's Mr New Jersey's Mr. New Jersey .
 Zabo failed to win a major competition, but never failed to turn up in excellent shape for competition . Zabo was a star of Mr America and Mr Universe .
Like Vince Gironda, he was also penalised for being “too ripped’ at a time when a softer, rounder musculature was preferred .
 He almost always won ‘best abs’ with a midsection that even now would rank as outstanding in terms of its development, symmetry and definition . Even so, it was impossible for judges not to recognise his class, and he almost always wins “best abs
 By 1951, Zabo had moved to Santa Monica, where he briefly shared a home with George Eiferman and Steve Reeves .
 Zabo was not somebody who confined himself to the gym, the supermarket aisles and the sofa / bed, but a larger-than-life character . He became an inseparable part of the greatest and most glamorous bodybuilding scene in history .
 Zabo was recruited into Mae Wests all-male chorus revue, a touring male dance sensation, with his friend George Eiferman and other California bodybuilders .
 He has appeared in films like Cheech and Chong’s Nice Dreams and Rat Patrol . He also appeared on television shows, including Rat Patrol and the Planet of the Apes .
 Bob Hise tells a story that perfectly sums up his captivating mix of physicality and charisma . Hise's story is about a man with a captivating combination of physical and charisma.
 U We of the committee decided that a fair test would be to require all entrants to total three times bodyweight . The committee also decided that all entrants would have to total 3 times body weight .
 He bent over the same bar, whipped it to his chest and made a military press . He then placed a 25 pound plate on each end of the bar and did a beautiful squat clean and solid split jerk .
 Zabo is famous for his rippling abs, and his friend, Zabo, is known for his abs . Zabo's friend is his friend.
 The pretty miss recently competed in the IFBE MISS WESTERN AMERICA contest . She was a contestant for the contest .
 Zabo performed the lifts ‘cold’ with no warm up, and barefoot . Zabo was not on a podium today .
 Zabo was always ready to put on a show. Unlike so many competitors today, Zabo has to be coaxed, and then only under favourable conditions .
 We all have so much to thank our mothers for. We all need to thank their mothers.
 His mother made sure to feed him raw milk from an early age, which is why he's grown up into such a fine young man .
 Unlike those other boys whose mothers were scared of “germs and other sissy stuff like that’s like that. Unlike those others, mothers were afraid of ‘germs’
 What you might not know is that it’s also used to induce tumours and other inflammatory diseases in rodents .
 Adjective 1. absolutely necessary; essential; essential . "secrecy is of vital importance" " imbued with energy; dynamic; dynamic" "Intelligent"
 You have fallen victim to the trickery of Postmodernism, and you believe “anything can be art’s even the ugly, even the banal.’, says author .
 This pathetic excuse for a philosophy may be holding the dominant position in our culture today . But that doesn't mean we must accept it, says John Sutter .
 The flaming torch of true Western culture was last seen burning brightly in the early 1900s . It was the time of the early Modernists .
 A sculptor trying to bring powerful art into an era of weakness, he says . In this article, he will unravel these questions from his perspective .
 I will reveal why I fell in love with early Modernism, which sadly took a wrong turn, and how I try to reinvigorate that energy to counter the rot of Postmodernism .
 It is my mission to pick up the torch our ancestors left behind and carry it forward . It is the mission of my life to carry the torch of our ancestors.
 The power of Modernism captivated me for the first time when I was in art school . He is a former member of the MASTERS of MODERNISM .
 The sculptor was a young sculptor at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts, Antwerp . He was trying to find his voice as a young sculpture artist .
 Some of my classes honoured the tradition of sculpture, and I was learning how to sculpt busts and figures from antiquity . While in other classes I was encouraged to dabble with conceptual art .
 The Academy was well and truly setting in, I have to thank the Academy for still respect .
 Italian Futurism, Vorticism and Art Deco are among the most popular artworks in the world .
 No other art period could ever compete with the vibrancy, the vitality, the virility I felt radiating out from these movements .
 It was so direct and so concentrated from a sculptural standpoint that it touched me on a very deep, primal level . It was a very direct, so concentrated, it touched him on the primal level, he says .
 All things I felt were utterly lacking in the culture that surrounded me, he says .
I realised I was alone with my fascination for powerful and confident forms . I realised I had a fascination with powerful forms .
 The more early Modernism began to inspire his own work . The more people around him tried to steer him away from it .
 Some of my student exhibitions were labelled ‘too dominant’ and “too aesthetic’ So I was asked to soften my works, as it was intimidating the other students and the teachers .
 Modernism was so close to us in history that I could still feel the warmth of its smothered flame . Yet it was considered totally irrelevant as inspiration for new creations .
 At the time I didn't fully understand why the Modernist movements died before they had a chance to prosper . Why it was considered taboo to be inspired by their vital expressions, and why my sculpture was rejected by every institution .
 The more I mature as a sculptor, the more I'm starting to see the bigger picture, he says . But the more he grows up, he adds.
Eae first set the record straight about what I mean when I use the term Modernism .
 Within a short time span many different movements erupted, galvanized by the machine age .
 The artists were energised by their fascination for the machine, which inspired them to dream and imagine things far beyond what was considered possible .
 Their lively imaginations were complemented with just the right amount of skill to birth the powerful expressions they became known for . They were known for their expressive expressions .
 When you interact with the work of the Modernists, it makes you feel alive . The Modernists' work is a great way to interact with them .
 Modernism never got the chance to fulfil its potential to lift culture to higher vibrations and inspire strong, vital society .
 Like a supernova, its extreme intensity led to an abrupt burnout, leaving behind a black hole . The black hole sucked in any remaining vitality .
 The Modernist man was shaken out of his dream when it became clear that the reality of the World Wars did not live up to his romantic expectations .
 The chivalric glory and honour he had dreamed of, proved to be nothing more than a nightmare of mechanized killing . The Chivalric hero's dream of chivalic glory and honor he had dreams of, was not true .
 The machine had invaded human space, man had become reduced to its operator . The machine was reduced to the operator .
 The ones that didn't lose their lives, lost their confidence and spirit, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A punch-drunk Western world was now ready to have its soul taken away, as it zombie-shuffled into a new cultural chapter . It was made up of irony, silliness and nihilism .
 The CONTEMPORARY CIRCUS of POSTMODERNISM is the point in history where our culture began to disintegrate . His point is that our culture is beginning to disintegrated .
 The time period after the Second World War is what I refer to as the aesthetic and spiritual dark age . The time after the second World War was what I referred to as a "dark age"
 Postmodernism is a cult of ugly art and deconstruction, with PostModernism as its driving philosophy . It is the cult of bad art and postmodernism as the driving philosophy.
 The left-wing elite and its vanguard made their ‘long march through the institutions, and installed the rot at the core of society’ If this movement hadnt been so carefully plotted, it would have died decades ago, but the left- wing elite and their vanguard
 That rot, still spreading today, is what keeps me passionately dreaming of something better . That rot is what keep me dreaming of a better life .
 The first thing you see is some found object on the floor with paint thrown on it .
 As youre still trying to figure out what the hell youre looking at, you almost trip over a pile of rubble in the middle of the room .
 A series of flags and balloons are hanging chaotically off the ceiling, and neon writing is screaming statements against some colonial figure .
 A bugman is dancing to a “composition of noise’s noise. You try to escape into the next room, only to find a neck-bearded bugman .
 All the while the wheat-bellied exhibition guide ‘artspeaks’ you into a mind prison of indifference .
 Artists are paraded about on stage to lull you into a nihilistic stupor . Artists, like a set of cheap performative clowns, are like cheap performers .
 As the viewer, trapped in your seat, forced to look directly at the awkward spectacle, you don't feel inspired or amused . But as the viewer is trapped in the seat, you dont feel inspired.
 You feel uncomfortable, cold and disconnected from your culture, because you cant make any sense of it . You can't make anysense of it, you feel uncomfortable and cold .
 Collectors don't need to feel a connection to artwork to pretend they understand it and throw money at it for bragging rights . Collectors should not feel connection to art to pretend to understand it.
 Every Postmodern artwork acts as a spell to lower your mental and spiritual vibration . It is witchcraft, and every Postmodern art acts as an act of witchcraft .
I believe art has the ability to inspire a society back to a sense of spiritual well-being . I believe art can inspire a people back to their sense of spirituality .
 It is our duty as artists to find a powerful aesthetic that can touch people on a deep, primal level, to shake them out of their slumber and open the curtains to a new way .
 Modernism is dead and Postmodernism is sapping the spirit of our culture, we are in desperate need of a new aesthetic to rejuvenate it .
 This is what I am continuously searching for as a sculptor making art today. This is how I am constantly searching for what I'm looking for today . This is where I am currently making art.
Every day I spend in my studio, I work towards finding this aesthetic language, and reinvigorating perennial archetypes that have true relevance to us in today's context .
 I believe we need to look back to a time when there was some real fire and take that forward into the present and future . I believe there was a real fire in the past and future.
 Let's not forget we are living in 2022, a spiritual and aesthetic dark age . It goes without saying that the Renaissance period was an incredibly rich time aesthetically .
Tearlessly reproducing works of antiquity, getting lost in nostalgia, is not going to bring us out of its aloof state .
 I dont believe we need to go back to celebrating the machine like the Vorticists, or glorify war like the Futurists . I don't believe we should celebrate the machines like the Futurists or celebrate them .
 There are a series of pertinent and strong elements within these movements that are still relevant to us today. But I do think there are a number of pertinent, strong elements in these movements still relevant today .
 The Modernists explored timeless archetypes of strength, strength, pure force and energy .
 They had a connection to the past and were dreaming of a vigorous future . They had been dreaming of the future. They were dreaming of a vibrant future .
These elements are of utmost importance to manifest the new aesthetic mix of our time . These elements are important to manifest a new aesthetics mix of the time .
 As artists, we need to break through the walls of this creative imprisonment, says the author .
 My hope is that a vibrant enough cultural movement can act as dynamite to clear a new path forward . I hope that the cultural movement will act as a dynamite for the future .
 I carved three monumental stone sculptures. That was the statement I was expressing with my recent exhibition entitled ‘Breakthrough for which I carved the sculptures.’
 In the context of the exhibition, I experimented with writing an early manifesto, to state what I think needs to fundamentally change . The exhibition is on display in London .
 Our imagination is meant to take people to a higher vibration and make them feel more alive . We hope our imagination will make people feel alive, we say .
 A new ERA of AESTHETIC VIGOUR E ART that UPLIFTS FORMS must be IRILLING HONOUR HARMONY . We'll look at the WALLS of CREATIVE A NEW ERA of ‘ARTSPEAK’
 The process of creating is not a casual aimless act, it is continuous problem solving to find a balanced construction .
 Our aim is to find compositions that activate human senses, much like solving a mathematical formula where everything falls into place and you know its right .
 It must tell powerful, heroic stories that make us once again feel proud of who we are, it must tell us . It must also tell powerful stories that makes us proud of ourselves .
 " raw energy brewing in early Modernism holds that vital flame," says author . "It is a continuous pursuit, but I definitely feel that the raw energy is a vital flame" says author.
 The world's most important moments can be found in the United States . From here all sorts of vital manifestations can take place .
 It's time for artists to take back responsibility for imagining a more inspiring, uplifting and exciting outlook for culture .
 They don't want you to share a common goal, collectivise and fight for a real purpose, they say . It's not just about collecting, it's about fighting for a common purpose .
 The circus wants you to remain atomised, disconnected and forever lost in the circus . Instead, they want you to stay atomised and disconnected . The circus is trying to keep you out of the circus and out of it .
 As artists, creatives and philosophers, we need to come together and get going, get working, inspire other people with our creations . As artists and creatives, we must come together, get going and inspire others .
 The flag that our ancestors proudly carried, lays muddied and trodden into the ground of today’s wasteland .
We need to pick it up and carry it through the present and into the future . We need to carry it to the future, says the author .
 Collectivising on the internet and sharing ideas is only the beginning of a new generation . Collectiveising is the first step in the digital age of sharing ideas and ideas .
 People who can play a part in making the work, showing the work or spreading the message .
 People who dare to do something different in this time, even if it feels uncomfortable, will do it . People who dared to do it will be remembered for their actions .
 Fen de Villiers’ latest exhibition is "A Language of Form" The exhibition can be seen at the Galerie Verbeeck, Wolstraat 34, and Antwerp until 30/1/2022 .
 JShcrowaceyeemuyemuyomeyems etm ovllu-vetemsovaeursd sl the rain it was a sorry sight .
 Rainstorm or no rainstorm, there should have been a little more bustle this time of day .
 Mutt walked in a grumpy circle and settled down on the porch out of the rain . Mutt was in the middle of a grumpy circle.
 A serving maid looked up with a start from a table she was scrubbing . A pitiful fire struggled in the hearth and a serving maid was looking up .
 It gave him no small comfort to see that innkeepers were still fat this far from home . It gave the innkeepers no smallcomfort to see.
 The big man looked at Lad — black-haired with fierce blue eyes, armed, armored, and wild and went pale . The man was armed, armed and wild .
 The innkeeper and serving maid settled when they caught the measure of his youth . The innkeepers and maid settle when they catch their youth .
 Such a large weapon did not suit his rangy build, which was hard and lean and kissed by the sun .
 He did not remove his bracer, his buckler, nor the short, curved blade on his belt or the old horn that hung by his hip .
 Lad slurping hot rabbit stew from a bowl and Mutt sloughing warm mutton off the bone . The mutton is served in a bowl with a bowl.
 Lad gulped down ale and laughed as Mutt tried to shove his big snout into the mug . Mutt was trying to shove it into his mug .
 Lad offered the mug and MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 . 98 Mutt shoved his face in and lapped away .
 Soft fur is the color of red clay and beautiful green eyes like the Spring wood . Big enough to ride, with soft fur with soft hair and soft fur .
 He had the short ears and thick fur of a wolf but with a thick muzzle and broad frame of a shepherd . He had short ears, thick fur and thick hair but with thick muzzle. He had a broad frame.
 Lad did not share that his four-legged companion was in fact a wold a hybrid beast bred for hunting and fighting .
 innkeeper got an eyeful of the bracer that adorned his right forearm and fist . The innkeeper's right forearm was covered in a bracer .
 He recalled in the old stories the men of the South were pugilists as well as hunters and swordsmen . He said the men were also hunters and swordmen .
 Lad walked back to the hearth, hefted the big sword, and slung it onto his back . The sword was found in the middle of the street .
 The leader's sneer withered as the big hound stalked out from behind Lad .
 Mutt charged and the leader screamed as the big beast leaped and tackled him to the floor . The big beast jumped and tackled the leader, who screamed as he tackled him .
 Lad threw his smaller blade into one man's chest with incredible speed . While the other two were distracted, Lad threw it into the chest of one man .
 Lad ducked under the blow and swept the man’s legs out from under him, dropping him to the floor .
 He brought down the edge of his buckler onto the mans throat, crushing his windpipe . The buckler had to be removed from his throat .
 Even with the weight of the giant sword on his back, the boy was as fleet as a fox . The boy was also as fleet.
 Lad pulled his curved fighting blade from the dead manss chest as Mutt licked blood from his chops . Lad pulled the blade from his head as the man licked his chops from the chest .
 The ram horn worked with copper and leather and the runes of the Faith . It was a ram horn, worked with Copper and leather .
 He breathed a little life into the golden coals of the Heartsfire that glowed within . He opened the horn and breathed the horn.
 Once more the Heartsfire burned in this village that had forgotten itself. And once more the village had forgotten it .
 Lad stood tall in the heat’s embrace, the Fire rising higher than he stood, and he drew courage from its light .
 It loomed over the town like a storm, and hateful light glowed in its windows . The town's residents were angry about the light, but it didn't seem to be a storm .
 If not, there's a good chance you may not have heard of Richard at all . Richard is a well-known television personality .
 It was the first book to expose George Soros and his color revolutions . It was also the first to expose the billionaire's color revolutions.
 I call Richard the OG Regime fighter, because he has been fighting the Cabal most of his life . I call him Richard theOG Regime Fighter, because hes been fighting most of the life .
 Richard wrote an exposé of the Trilateral Commission in 1984 . On his very first newspaper job, in 1984, Richard wrote a column about the Commission .
 Richard's most recent articles, published on LewRockwell.com, delve into the hidden power of Britains globalist elites . Richard's recent articles delve into a subject most of us never knew existed .
 Richard argues that globalism is a British invention, which was foisted on a reluctant America by Anglophile front groups such as the Council on Foreign Relations .
 He believes British elites still drive the globalist agenda to this day . He believes that British elites are still driving the globalists agenda .
 Richard, as an avid admirer of your reporting, it is an honor to interview you for Mans World issue 5. Richard is an avid fan of his reporting .
As a friend, I am delighted to be able to offer readers a glimpse of who you are and your extraordinary life's work . As a friend. I'm delighted to have been able to provide a glimpse into your life .
 The fictional town of Bedford Falls was partly modeled after Seneca Falls, which is about 40 miles west of Syracuse .
 The author grew up in a kind of suburban version of It’s a Wonderful Life . He says he was in the 1960s suburban version.
 In our conversations, you ve often talked about how the upheavals of the Sixties influenced your life . We often talk about how they influenced our lives .
 I was a child during the Sixties, so I experienced that era from a child's perspective, and very much through my parents’ eyes . I was also a child when I was in the 60s, and I experienced the era from an adult's perspective .
As any child does, I watched my parents closely, watched their reactions . As any child did, she watched her parents closely .
 He worked in semiconductors and integrated circuits . His work was top-secret for the military and space program .
 Both were brilliant people, doing ground-breaking work in their fields . Both worked in the same fields .
 World War II generation had an innocence and modesty about them, says the author . They had a natural selflessness which one often sees in people of that generation, he says .
 When the Sixties psyop was unleashed on America, it really stunned people like my parents . So when the Sixty-sixth century psyop is unleashed on the U.S., it really surprised people .
 It was a culture war, a direct hit on the American middle class, the U.S. way of life . It was also a cultural war .
 Bedford Falls turns into Pottersville . It was like the nightmare sequence in It's a Wonderful Life .
 This was particularly jarring for people like my parents who had come from immigrant families and grown up poor . This was especially jarring for those who had grown uppoor .
 My father’s parents were Russian Jews who escaped from the Russian Civil War in the early ‘20s .
My maternal grandfather fled Korea to escape Japanese occupation after Russo-Japanese War . My maternal grandfather was born in Korea .
 My grandparents wanted what every immigrant wants, a better life for their children, and their children found that dream in the U.S. suburbs . "My grandparents wantedWhat every immigrant wanted," says one of my grandparents .
 It was almost as if someone had torn a hole through the fabric of reality . It's almost as as if a hole had been torn through reality .
When we walked out the front door, we were in suburbia, the land of plenty . We were in the city of suburbia.
 Our world was backyard barbecues, drive-in movies, washing machines, cars, road trips, and split-level homes . Our world is a world of backyard bars and drive-ins .
 On the other hand, when you turned on the T'V, you were transported to another world . The T-V is a car that can be driven by a car .
 The TV kept telling us we were living in a failed state, on the brink of collapse . The TV said we were in a state of failed state .
 The media showed us assassinations, race riots and race riots, young people blowing their minds with LSD . Young people shot at Kent State by the National Guard, and of course, Vietnam .
 Vietnam in the background, this endless war we were fighting against guys in pajamas, and, for some reason, we were losing . Always Vietnam in a background, the Vietnam war was in the back, and it was losing .
Joe McCarthy had warned everyone what was coming, and the Sixties proved him right . Back in the Fifties, Joe McCarthy had told everyone what's coming .
 The part that everyone could see was the phenomenon of pressure from above and below . The obvious part, the part that people could see, was the part of pressure .
 Pressure from above and below means that the government and the street protesters are working together . Pressure from below and above means that they are working Together .
 But the conspirators raise such a great clamor that dissenting voices are drowned out . But the conspiracyists raise such an enormous clamor, the author says .
 Normal people who arent in on the plot feel alone, surrounded, outnumbered, outnumbered . Normal people feel alone and surrounded, surrounded.
 This concept of pressure from above and below was discussed in our last podcast . We discussed this in our final podcast .
 Back then, you had protesters chanting things like, “Ho, Ho, Ho Chi Minh.’s Ho Ho Minh’, ‘Ho,’ and ‘’ back then. Back to the original version of this article .
 This was horrifying to ordinary people, whose sons were fighting and dying over there . So this was horrifying, it was horrifying for ordinary people to see .
Politicians on TV praised protesters, treating them with deference, and it was like the Twilight Zone . But you would see politicians on TV praising these protesters, agreeing with them, and treating them as deference .
 If the Sixties was a color revolution, it achieved its objective the night Nixon stepped down . It was like slipping if the Sixty-year-old had been in an alternate universe .
 Nixon came across as normal and sane. In a world where everyone seemed to be going crazy, Nixon came out as normal .
 He won every state in the Union except Massachusetts when he ran for reelection in 1972 . He won all of the states he won in 1972 and 1972 .
 Nixon resigns in a crowded lounge in his dorm, filled with hundreds of college students cheering and laughing and carrying on .
 Some people say the Sixties ended that night, with Nixon's resignation . Some say it was the end of theixties .
 If the Sixties was a color revolution, it achieved its objective the night Nixon stepped down . The night Nixon step down was the night he stepped down.
Activists and their government allies applied pressure from above and below, and they overruled the people . But the activists and their friends applied pressure to the people.
 The American spirit has been poisoned for decades. It was poisoned by President Obama's administration .
 The biggest fear they managed to instill in our parents was the fear of losing their children to the counterculture, to the mad culture of sex.
 All through the Sixties and into the Seventies, the TV was showing us white middle-class kids on drugs . The TV was also showing us the drug use of the 1960s and 1970s .
 White middle-class kids hating their parents, dropping out of school, running away from home, and living on the street . White middle class kids hate their parents and living in the street.
 The counterculture was like a stalking predator, stalking the suburbs, looking for kids to snatch . The counter culture was like the stalking predator.
 hippie cult breaking into suburban homes and slaughtering people with knives. Here was a hippiecult breaking into homes and killing people with knife .
 It confirmed Middle America’s worst fears that, beneath its seductive veneer, the counterculture was a raging beast thirsting for blood .
 The exact quote was, Unless youre prepared to kill your parents, you're not ready to change this country . The exact statement was, unless youre ready to killyour parents, is the exact quote .
 I remember the anger and fear in my mother’s eyes, when she heard that. I remember her anger andFear in her mother's eyes.
 I wanted to protect my parents from the madness, to reassure them, to comfort them . I wanted them to tell them everything would be all right, to be reassured them .
 As the Sixties morphed into the early Seventies, the counterculture just kept getting stronger . The political crisis died down, but the counter culture just got stronger .
 I was 16, having skipped two grades, so I was very impressionable . I was only 16. I was just 16 .
 The author was quickly absorbed into the counterculture, pot-smoking and all the rest of the world .
 In the end, I did exactly the opposite of what I did in college, he says . "One of the first things I did was to do in college"
 I joined the counterculture myself. I was to drop out of pre-med and become a creative writing major .
 I dropped all my science courses and immersed myself in literature, history, comparative religion, Jungian psychology, and the like .
 As I sank ever deeper into a morass of mysticism, I immersed myself in the literature of the counterculture, reading the drug-fueled rants .
 The sound of the Russian language is one of my earliest memories . My grandparents had lived with us briefly in the early Sixties, when my grandmother was ill .
 All the classes were in Russian and we were supposed to speak only Russian all summer . But we often broke that rule, even with each other .
 We had been warned in orientation briefings to be wary of any young Russians who tried to befriend us . They would undoubtedly be KGB operatives bent on compromising and recruiting us .
 Russian students complained freely about the oppressive Soviet system . They told us, with what appeared to be perfect sincerity, how they longed for reform . Even so, we had many vodka-fueled conversations with Russian students .
All that summer, I met young Russians who loved America with unquestioning abandon . All that summer. I met them all that summer .
 Even in those days, the allure of Levis and Pink Floyd for Russias youth was a joke among Americans .
 The passion for American Pop didnt stop with rock bands. But I discovered that their passion for rock bands didn't stop with American Pop .
 Russian friends grilled me ceaselessly about the hippie counterculture, the race riots, and the antiwar movement of the Sixties .
 Many were shocked to learn that American college students in 1978 considered the Sixties passe . Many were deeply shocked to find out that Americans in 1978 had considered the passe.
 Some went so far as to suggest that the USSR needed its own Sixties uprising . Some even suggested that the Soviet Union needed its its own uprising .
 The Sixties psyop had so horrified my parents made a completely different impression on this side of the Iron Curtain . With some amazement, I realized that the Sixties Psyop had made a different impression .
 The courtyard in front of the Winter Palace where so much somber history has unfolded . The courtyard is the site of the Summer Olympics in 1978 .
 Rumor had it that Bill Graham had arranged a free, open-air concert that night . Santana, Joan Baez, and The Beach Boys were among the performers .
 Leningraders blocked the square and a monotonous voice intoning on a loudspeaker . The only thing they found was a battalion of gray-uniformed militiamen blocking the square .
For the next six hours, those 5,000 young people absolutely refused to disperse . For the next 6 hours, the young people were not to disperse.
 They kicked the sides of patrol wagons as they wheeled by on the street .
 What amazed me, though, was not the occasional bursts of violence, but the overall restraint of the militsya . "What amazed me was not an occasional burst of violence," he says .
 At one point, a pretty, blonde girl, college age, neatly scrubbed and groomed, her hair in two thick braids, standing quietly and gazing across the square .
 From all around came screams, shouts, and harsh laughter . The crackle of loudspeakers, the padding of thousands of feet, the angry beeping of car horns .
 There was a tiny smile on her lips, and she breathed softly and slowly, like someone waking from a deep, pleasant sleep .
 Russia is the country's national epic, in the same way War and Peace is the national epic of Russia . In those eyes, I saw strength, Gone with the Wind is our country’s national epic .
 I think she realized that evening, maybe in that very instant, that her generation was destined to be free . She realized in that instant, perhaps in that night, that she was free . I think that evening she realized she had been free .
 The author's summer in the USSR impacted him in an unexpected way, opening his eyes to a dimension of the Sixties counterculture he had not fully understood .
 This reminds me of something you've said in our interviews, that you've never liked people telling you, “This is your enemy. This reminds him of something he's said in his interviews, he says . This reminds us of something we've said, that we
 Whenever people tell you that, it makes you want to do the opposite, to learn more about the “enemys point of view’s’S.
 Parents told you to hate the counterculture may have kicked off a similar reaction to your parents .
 There’s always another side to the story, and there's always something to be learned from the other side . There's always a second side to a story, but there's also something to learn from other side, says CNN .
 My favorite novel as a kid, as a child, was Gone with the Wind . His favorite novel of all time was Gone With the Wind, he says .
When I was 10 or 11, I got hold of my parents paperback copy and read it so many times, it literally fell apart . When I was 11, it fell apart.
 Gone with the Wind is our country’s national epic, in the same way War and Peace is the national epic of Russia .
 Gone with the Wind takes the most dreadful event in our history, the Civil War, and helps us to understand it, not as history, but as real human experience .
 Senator Joseph McCarthy's warnings of communist subversion went largely ignored . Richard Nixon's resignation in 1974 marked the real political end of the Sixties counterculture .
 Just because we disagree with someone doesn't mean we have to hate them or demonize them, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We disagree with people but don't have to be demonized or hate them"
 The Aeneid or the Iliad is one of the greatest epics ever written . It captures the soul of a nation, he says .
 It helps North and South understand each other and maybe even forgive each other, after so much bitterness and bloodshed . It helps both sides understand each each other .
 When you set out to explore the counterculture, you were really defying the teaching of your parents that the counter culture is the enemy .
 In a sense, you were deliberately going into the enemy's camp to learn the enemys point of view . In the sense, it was a deliberate attempt to learn.
 The counterculture is a drug culture, at root, and I got sucked into that, especially psychedelics . It appealed to my mystical bent, which appealed to his mystical bent. The counter culture is a drugs culture at root .
 After graduating from SU in 1979, I had no plan, no idea how to build a career as a writer .
 The writer dropped out after her first year to go study with Allen Ginsberg . She then dropped out of SU's graduate program for creative writing .
 Hed has been pushing psychedelic drugs and sexual revolution since the 1950s . Hed has pushed psychedelic drugs, sexual revolution.
 My mother was carrying me in her womb when Ginsberg uttered those words . Her mother was also carrying her in the womb .
 In a very real sense, Allens threat was directed at Podhoretz, but at her mother and her whole genera112 tion .
 Allen and his friends really did “get me, in the sense that I came under their spell’s spell, he says .
 I read Jack Kerouac’s On the Road and became enthralled by his vision of rootless youth hitchhiking aimlessly across America .
 A whole movement grew up around Kerouac which ultimately gave rise to the Sixties counterculture . The movement was formed in the 1960s.
 In the Fifties, Kerouac and his followers were known as the Beat Generation . The Beat Generation was known as 'Beat Generation'
Ginsberg, William Burroughs, and Gregory Corso all ended up teaching at Naropa Institute in Boulder, Colorado . Kerouac died in 1969.
 When I was accepted into Allen's writing apprenticeship program, it was a dream come true, says author .
 Allen was a frequent guest at Soross Fifth Avenue apartment and his El Mirador estate on Long Island . Allen was also a frequent visitor to the estate .
 According to Soros, it was Allen who got him interested in drug legalization . Allen was also interested in the drug legalization.
 Allen was extremely evangelistic in encouraging others to use psychedelic drugs . Allen was all about drugs, especially psychedelic drugs, and he was very evangelistic .
Biographer Michael Kaufman implies Allen and Soros met in the early '80s and became ‘life-long friends’ Kaufman puts it in the book . Kaufman says the two met in early ‘80s .
 Another author suggests Soros and Ginsberg may have met around 1980 . Another author provides a little more precision .
 Soros was trying to write a book on philosophy, which he never finished . Soros was living in the West Village in Manhattan when he was in his bohemian period .
 On the other hand, suppose they met earlier, perhaps 20 years earlier, during Soros's bohemian phase in the West Village .
 Kaufman's description of a “life-long’s friendship would make more sense . In that case, they would have met in their 30s, Kaufman says .
 The Burden of Consciousness is based on the philosophy of Karl Popper, who was a teacher at the London School of Economics . He struggled to write a book based on his experience as a stock trader .
 Only half a block from Soros's apartment was the famous White Horse Tavern . Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg frequented the Tavern .
Soros met Allen during those years, but it does seem likely, he says . Now I can't prove that Soros met Allen.
 It's hard to imagine an aspiring young phiI tried to live what I imagined to be a Jack Kerouac sort of life, hitchhiking around the country, working odd jobs, and writing .
 My big project was an autobiographical novel, very much in the confessional, tell-all tradition of Jack Kerouac . The book was a big project for the author .
 I started the novel while living in San Francisco, then finished it in Syracuse . I started it while living on the island of San Francisco and then moved to Syracuse .
When it was done, I realized with an almost sickening sense of horror that I could never publish it . When it was finished, I felt like I could not publish it. I realized that it was a horror story .
 The novel was intensely personal and autobiographical in the mode of Kerouac’s On the Road . The book was written in the style of the author's memoirs .
 I realized that I’m not Jack Kerouac or Allen Ginsberg or Henry Miller or any other such person. I realized I'm not Kerouach or Ginsberg .
 I just didn't have the same burning hatred of conventionality that seemed to drive them. I just did not have thesame hatred of conventions that drove them, he says .
 I freelanced at first, then finally got my first newspaper job at the Syracuse New Times, in January, 1984 .
 That lasted for maybe five minutes, and was succeeded by a fit of the horrors . That lasted five minutes .
 The poor staring white face on the floor was more than I could bear . I managed to get a table-cloth and cover it .
 The brandy was found in a cupboard. Then I staggered to the cupboard and swallowed several mouthfuls .
 I had seen men die violently before; indeed I had killed a few myself in the Matabele War . But this cold-blooded indoor business was different .
 There was nobody there, nor any trace of anybody, but I shuttered and bolted all the windows and put the chain on the door . There was no trace of anyone, but there was no sign of anybody .
 It took me about an hour to figure out the thing out, and I did not hurry, for, unless the murderer came back . I had till about six oclock in the morning for my cogitations .
 Any shadow of a doubt about the truth of Scudder’s tale was now gone, says author .
 The men who knew that he knew what he knew had found him, and had taken the best way to make certain of his silence . The men knew what they knew, and made sure to make sure that he was safe .
 He had been in my rooms four and felt very sick, but he was in his rooms four . He sat down in an armchair and felt sick .
 He had been in his rooms four days, and his enemies must have reckoned that he had confided in me . Yes, but he had been there four days. Yes; but he'd been in my rooms 4 days .
 It might be that very night, or next day, or the day after, but my number was up all right . It may be that night, but it might be next day or day after .
 The body of Paddock was found in Paddock's hotel room . Paddock is believed to have been killed by a single gunshot wound to the head . He was found dead in the room of the hotel .
 I lied to Paddock about him, and the whole thing looked desperately fishy . I had lied to him, he said, and it looked desperatelyFishy . The whole thing was a lie .
 If I made a clean breast of it and told the police everything he had told him, they would simply laugh at me . If I told them everything he'd told them, he would have been laughed at .
 The odds were a thousand to one that I would be charged with the murder, and the circumstantial evidence was strong enough to hang me . The odds of a murder charge were one million to one .
Few people knew me in England; I had no real pal who could come forward and swear to my character . Few people knew him in England.
 English prison was as good a way of getting rid of me till after June 15th as a knife in my chest .
 If I told the whole story, and by any miracle was believed, I would be playing their game. Besides, if he told the entire story, he would have been playing his game, he says .
 The sight of Scudder's dead face had made him a passionate believer in his scheme .
 A long knife would not be the end of Scudder if he could play the game in his place . You may think this ridiculous for a man in danger of his life, but that was the way he looked at it .
 It took me an hour or two to think this out, and by that time, I had come to a decision . It took him an hour to think out, he said .
I must vanish somehow, and keep vanished till the end of the second week in June . I must vanish Somehow, and keeps vanished till end of second week of June .
 Scudder told me what Scudder had told me . Then I must find a way to get in touch with the Government people and tell them what he had told them .
 I wished to Heaven he had told me more, and that I had listened more carefully to the little he told me . I wish to Heaven, he had said more, but I wanted to listen to him more .
 There was a big risk that, even if I weathered the other dangers, I would not be believed in the end, says author . "There was a huge risk," he says .
I must take my chance of that, and hope that something might happen which would confirm my tale in the eyes of the Government . I must take his chance, and I must hope thatsomething might happen .
 It was now the 24th day of May, and that meant twenty days of hiding before I could venture to approach the powers that be .
Scudder's enemies would be looking for him, and the police, who would want him for Scudder's murder . I reckoned that two sets of people would be look for me, and Scudder's enemies to put me out of existence .
 It was going to be a giddy hunt, and it was queer how the prospect comforted me . It was queer. It was Queer how it comforted her .
 I had been slack so long that almost any chance of activity was welcome . I'd been slack for almost a year. I'd like to see some activity again .
 If my neck’s safety was to hang on my own wits, I was prepared to be cheerful about it .
 Scudder had any papers about him to give me a better clue to the business . My next thought was whether Scudder has any papers to tell me about him .
 I drew back the table-cloth and searched his pockets, for I had no longer any shrinking from the body . He drew back his table- cloth and searched the pockets for no longer shrinking .
 The face was wonderfully calm for a man who had been struck down in a moment .
 There was nothing in the breast-pocket, and only a few loose coins and a cigar-holder in the waistcoat .
 The trousers held a little penknife and some silver, and the side pocket of his jacket contained an old crocodile-skin cigar-case .
There was no sign of the little black book in which I had seen him making notes . There was no signs of the book, but he had been making notes.
 Some drawers had been pulled out in the writing-table. But as I looked up from my task I saw that some drawers were pulled out .
 Scudder would never have left them in that state, for he was the tidiest of mortals .
 Someone must have been searching for something, perhaps for the pocket-book .
 Most likely the enemy had found it, but they had not found it on Scudder’s body . Most likely it had been found by the enemy .
 My notion was to get off to some wild district, where my veldcraft would be of some use to me, for I would be like a trapped rat in a city .
 I considered that Scotland would be best, for my people were Scotch and I could pass anywhere as an ordinary Scotsman . I considered Scotland would have been best for me to be Scotsman, but I was not Scottish .
 I had half an idea at first to be a German tourist, for my father had German partners . I had been brought up to speak the tongue pretty fluently, not to mention having put in three years prospecting for copper in Germany .
 The Scot says it would be less conspicuous to be a Scot, and less in a line with what the police might know of his past . But he says he would be more conspicuous if he were a Scot .
 It was the nearest wild part of Scotland, so far as I could figure it out, and from the look of the map was not over thick with population .
 A search in Bradshaw informed me that a train left St Pancras at 7.10, which would land me at any Galloway station in the late afternoon . A train would land him at Galloway in the afternoon .
 The writer was to make his way to St Pancras. He was certain Scudder’s friends would be watching outside .
 This puzzled me for a bit; then I had an inspiration, on which I went to bed and slept for two troubled hours . It was an inspiration for me to sleep for two hours .
 My inclination was to let things slide, and trust to the British police taking a reasonable view of my case. My inclination is to let it slide, but I trust to British police to take areasonable view.
 The writer has decided to go on with his plan after a wry mouth . But as he reviewed the situation he could find no arguments to bring against his decision .
 I was not feeling in any particular funk. I was only disinclined to go looking for trouble, if you understand me . I was just looking for problems.
 A well-used tweed suit, a pair of strong nailed boots, and a flannel shirt with a collar. I hunted out a well- used tweed suits, a strong nailed boot and a strong- nailed boots .
 A cloth cap, some handkerchiefs, and a tooth-brush were stuffed into pockets of my pocket .
 I had drawn a good sum in gold from the bank two days before, in case Scudder should want money . I took fifty pounds of it in sovereigns in a belt which I had brought back from Rhodesia .
 The writer had a bath and cut his moustache, which was long and drooping, into a short stubbly fringe . Then he had a baths and cut it, and then cut it.
 Paddock used to arrive punctually at 7.30 and let himself in with a latch-key . He arrived punctually and used to use it to get into the room .
 The milkman turned up with a great clatter of cans, and deposited his share outside his door .
 I had seen that milkman sometimes when I had gone out for an early ride . He had seen him sometimes when he was out for a ride .
 The witties in this book contain beautiful mages of strueele and leiumpl mixed with the fiery defense of justice and truth . Antelope Mill Publishing is vying for a new feneralion .
 A handfal af these works of prose and poetry have been selected lor special honors as winners in respective categories .
 Antelope Hill Publishing is proud to present the selected works of our first writing contest, entitled Why We Fight, sponsored in part by the White Art Collective .
 I went into the darkened smoking-room where the rays of morning light were beginning to creep through the shutters . I went in the darkened smoked-room.
 There's a whisky-and-soda and some biscuits from the cupboard .
P pipe in pocket and filled pouch from tobacco jar on the table by the fireplace .
 I lifted the cloth from the body and was amazed at the peace and dignity of the dead face . I was amazed by the peace of the body of the deceased .
 That was the worst part of the business, for I was fairly choking to get out of doors . I was pretty choking, but it was the best part of my business, he says .
 At one minute after the quarter to seven I heard the rattle of the cans outside . The rattle was outside the cans.
 I opened the front door, and there was my man, singling out my cans from a bunch he carried and whistling through his teeth . He was a man who carried his cans and whistled through the teeth .
I stuck on his flat blue hat and his white overall, picked up the cans, banged my door, and went whistling downstairs . I stuck on my flat blueHat and his black overall, and picked up his cans, and banged his door .
 The porter at the foot told me to shut my jaw, which sounded as if my make-up was adequate . The porters at the Foot told me.
 A policeman a hundred yards down, and a loafer shuffling past on the other side . Then I caught sight of a policeman a 100 yards down .
As the loafer passed he looked up, and I fancied a signal was exchanged . As the Loafer passed, he looked down and looked up .
 I crossed the street, whistling gaily and imitating the jaunty swing of the milkman . The milkman's swing is a typical swing.
 A left-hand turning led past a bit of vacant ground. Then I took the first side street, and went up a left- hand turning .
 I had just just put on my cloth cap when a postman came round the corner . I had only just put the cloth cap on when the incident happened .
 At the moment the clock of a neighbouring church struck the hour of seven .
 At St Pancras, I had no time to take a ticket, let alone that I had not settled upon my destination . I was not able to get a ticket .
 A porter told me the platform, and as he entered it, I saw the train already in motion . A porters told me that the train was in motion.
 Two station officials blocked the way, but I dodged them and clambered into the last carriage .
An irate guard interviewed me. Three minutes later, as we were roaring through the northern tunnels, an irate guards interviewed me .
 He wrote out for me a ticket to Newton-Stewart, a name which had suddenly come back to my memory . He conducted me from the first-class compartment where he had ensconced himself to a third-class smoker .
 He went off grumbling, and as he mopped his brow he observed to his companions in his broadest Scots that it was a sore job catching trains .
 The sailor morosely agreed, and he started his new life in an atmosphere of protest against authority . The sailor's new life was a protest of authority .
 As I entered the platform, I saw the train already in motion . A porter told me the platform was in motion, and as I entered it I saw it in motion.
Every MAN’S WORLD man knows, whether it’s work or play, he should always look his very best . You see, our handsome friend here is a man. You see.
Even when he's slaying the demons of hell, OCBD and yachting shorts are just as essential as his chainsaw and shotgun .
 She'll be there at his side, cheering every kill, no matter what, she says . And that's why she’s why she will be there, she will cheer every kill .
 For a husband and wife being each a part of every family, the state may be about equally divided into men and women . In those states in which the condition of the women is bad, half the city may be regarded as having no laws .
 The legislator wanted to make the whole state hardy and temperate, and he has carried out his intention in the case of the men . But he has neglected the women, who live in every sort of intemperance and luxury .
 The consequence is that in such a state wealth is too highly valued, especially if the citizen falls under the dominion of their wives . The Celts and a few others who openly approve of male loves are among those who openly love men .
 The old mythologer would seem to have been right in uniting Ares and Aphrodite, for all warlike races are prone to the love of men or women .
 This was exemplified among the Spartans in the days of their greatness . Many things were managed by their women. This was example of the Spartans' greatness .
 The influence of the Lacedaemonian women has been most mischievous . Even in regard to courage, which is of no use in daily life, and is needed only in war .
 The evil showed itself in the Theban invasion, when, unlike the women other cities, they were utterly useless and caused more confusion than the enemy .
 This license of the Lacedaemonian women existed from the earliest times, and was only what might be expected .
 The Lacedaemonians gave themselves into the legislator's hand, already prepared by a soldier's life .
 The women under his laws, they resisted, and he gave up the attempt . BC. BC (British Museum)
 The defect in the constitution is clearly to be attributed to them. These then are the causes of what then happened, and this defect is clearly attributed to it .
 We are not considering what is or is not to be excused, but what is right or wrong, and the disorder of the women, as I have already said, as well as what is wrong or wrong .
 The mention of avarice naturally suggests a criticism on the inequality of property .
 Some Spartan citizens have quite small properties, others have very large ones . The land has passed into the hands of a few .
 The legislator holds up to shame the sale or purchase of an inheritance . But he allows anybody who likes to give or bequeath it .
Nearly two-fifths of the whole country are held by women . This is owing to the number of heiresses and to the large dowries which are customary .
 It would have been better to have given no dowries at all, or, if any, but small or moderate ones . It would surely have beenbetter to have had no dowry at all .
 As the law now stands, a man may bestow his heiress on any one whom he pleases . If he dies intestate, the privilege of giving her away descends to his heir .
 The whole number of Spartan citizens fell below 1000 . The country is able to maintain 1500 cavalry and 30,000 hoplites .
 This plant is used as anaphrodisiac today and historically by monks . But it can also act as aphrodisiak for which Greks used it, as they had interest in intensifying, not lowering sexual desire .
 This ‘chasteberry’ is also used to treat wounds, it has some wound and ligament-healing ability . Greks are also used for this also .
 I was going to write a supplement guide for frends but I got carried away with this introduction . I was supposed to write the guide for Frends, but I was carried away .
 Many remedies are available now if you know where to look and take care attention to supplement quality . Many such remedies are now available now .
Many frog doctors took part in medical trials where common drugs were shown to have no more than a placebo effect . Many pharmaceuticals don't work; I have spoken to many frog doctors who take part in trials .
All pharmas are dangerous with long-term use and have serious side-effects including on germline, says author . He believes combination of modern diet and modern pharma overuse will lead to a massive population degradation or sterility in two to three generations .
 Since I intended to write a supplement guide, I will give only one suggestion here . Since he intended to writing a guide, he will give just one suggestion .
 Some frend therefore choose to switch to collagen or to add other amino like lysine when they start to experience these effects . Somefrend also choose to change amino like collagen when they experience the effects of collagen .
 The supplement is an amazing supplement that has changed my life and that of frends considerably . It is a great supplement. It has changed the life of my life, and I'm glad to have had it.
Empty stomach first thing in morning will do much to lower all effects of dread or overstimulation . It will give a strong calm, but not make you sleepy, says author .
 Taken with coffee or tea in morning, it gives a calm concentration and focus of power .
 A fan of books Dune even start to call this mix rachag after the stimulant drink . Join BAP’s telegram group or follow @caribbeanvirtu on Twitter .
There were many things which drew me, a man alienated by modernity, to the sport . There were manyThings which drew him, aMan alienated by Modernity, into the sport.
Sumo is relatively unscathed by western progressivism, allowing its viewers to enjoy the sport without having to endure brazen propaganda . Sumo is not the first time that Sumo has been allowed to enjoy its sport without being subjected to such propaganda .
 Sumo has a strong history of respecting hierarchy, with low ranking athletes acting as servants to their more highly ranked superiors .
Sumo in 2021 features both the most dominant athlete of all time in Hakuho Sho and Terunofuji Haruo . Haruo is responsible for the greatest comeback in sports history .
When I first started watching sumo, I immediately recognized these two as quite prominent . When I first began watching, I recognized them as very prominent .
 Hakuho performs the traditional Yokuzuna entrance . Terunofuji dispatches an opponent for his ability to alternate between extreme force and masterful, calm technique .
 Terunofuji carries his opponents out of the ring whenever he finds himself in a difficult position . He is known for his unmatched strength, showing his ability to carry his opponents.
 The July 2021 tournament in Nagoya held significant meaning for both men . The tournament was held in July 2021 .
 Hakuho was on the brink of being forced to retire by the sumo elders . Terunofuji was closing in on a promotion to Yokozuna, the highest rank a sumo wrestler can achieve .
 Both men needed a strong tournament performance to win the Nagoya tournament . The two men met undefeated in the final match of the tournament .
 Monkhbatyn Davaajargal is the son of a six-time Mongolian wrestling champion and Olympic silver medalist in freestyle wrestling . HAKUHO akuho is born in Mongolia, where he was born .
 Despite being undersized in his adolescence, Hakuho quickly climbed the ranks as he grew . He was undersized as a teenager .
 In May 2007, at the age of 22, he became the 69th Yokozuna . He became the highest rank that can be achieved in sumo, the only rank from which one cannot fall due to poor performance .
 In January 2015, he set the record for most top division championships with his 33rd title . He set his record in January 2015 for the most title titles in the top division .
 Had he retired then, he likely would have been considered the greatest sumo wrestler of all-time .
 He was the subject of much criticism from the Yokozuna Deliberation Council and the Japanese media . Despite this fact, he was subject of many criticism .
 Every unseemly move Hakuho makes is under intense scrutiny . From undignified ring moves, such as face slaps and forearm shivers, to post-bout shoves and celebrations, every unseemily move HakUho makes .
 Hakuho’s foreign-born status only serves to exacerbate the already severe perlustration one would expect from Japans .
 Hakuho received an official warning from the Yokozuna Deliberation Council in November 2020 .
 These warnings are exceedingly rare . They are issued to wrestlers whose performance is contrary to what is expected of the rank .
 Hakuhos warning remained in place up to July 2021 tournament in Nagoya . Hakuho missed previous five tournaments to recover from minor injuries associated with aging and a COVID infection .
 Hakuho would be forced to retire by the sumo elders unless he could perform up to the high standards of a Yokozuna in the Nagoya tournament . Hakuha would be force to retire if he could do well in the tournament .
 Terunofuji is also Mongolian born and had an exceptional beginning to his career . He was born in Mongolia and is also a former member of the Mongolian National Council .
 He climbed the ranks and won his first top division championship in May 2015 . He won 25 tournaments, the third-fastest championship in sumo history . He is the first man to win a top division title .
After his first tournament victory, Teru was promoted to Ozeki, the second highest rank one can achieve . Teru won the tournament for the first time in his career .
 He would be plagued by knee injuries caused in part by his fighting style . But he would also be plagued with knee injuries due to his style .
 Teru frequently uses his freakish strength to lift and carry his opponents out of the ring . Teru often lifts his opponents and carries them out.
 The knee injuries took their toll and had Teru perpetually at risk of demotion from his Ozeki rank . Teru's knee injuries have taken their toll .
 Terunofuji came runner-up in consecutive tournaments, March and May 2017 . At first it seemed a success, with Terun ofuji coming runner- up in two consecutive tournaments .
 Teru re-injured his knee near the end of the May tournament, which prompted his fall from his Ozeki rank . Teru's fall from the top division altogether led to his fall out of the Ozeki ranks .
After surgery, his weak knee caused him to compensate with his other leg, resulting in double knee surgery on June 25 2018 .
 Lower-ranked wrestlers act as servants to their higher-ranked colleagues . Makushita is one of the world's top sumo wrestlers .
 No other former top division champion or former Ozeki had fallen out of the salaried divisions . No other ex-top division champions or ex-Ozeki have fallen out.
 Others who had come close to falling out of the salaried ranks chose retirement to preserve their honor . Others who came close to fall out of salaries chose retirement.
 Most wrestlers spend over a decade in the sport without ever achieving what he achieved at a young age . Most wrestlers have never achieved what they achieve at the age of 20 .
 He was in a wheelchair, recovering from surgeries on both knees . But now he is in a wheelchair, and is recovering from surgery on both legs .
Coach convinced him to take time off to get healthy before attempting a comeback . But his coach still believes in his natural talent and youth, and says he will return .
 American athletes are taking time off to recover from major surgery . It's essentially unheard of in sumo .
 The ranking system is unforgiving and a missed tournament counts the same as a winless tournament . A missed tournament count as a loss of a tournament .
 Terunofuji missed four consecutive tournaments and dropped down to the second lowest division in professional sumo . Terun ofuji has missed four successive tournaments .
 Due to his new fighting division, he was now a servant to his former servants . He was not earning a monthly salary .
 Hakuho and Terunofuji will fight in the July 2021 tournament . The shame from falling from glory would be profoundly magnified .
emo entered the March 2019 tournament with the weight of the world on his shoulders . He entered the tournament with a heavy weight on his shoulder .
 He could only preserve his honor by winning and returning to the top division . He can only preserve it by winning, returning to top division.
 Teru won the March 2019 Jonidan division tournament with an undefeated record . The tournament was held in March 2019 .
 In July 2020 Terunofuji was set to fight in a top division tournament with healthy knees for the first time since May 2017 . Terun ofuji will fight in the top division in July 2020 with healthy knee injuries .
 He came out strong, winning his first four matches before a loss to Ozeki Takayasu on day five . But he lost his first five matches before the loss to the Japanese side on day 5 .
 Terunofuji was set to face off against Mitakeumi on the final day of his career . The 12-2 record-holder is set to take on the 11-3 Mitakesumi on Sunday .
 A Romney who actually was capable of acting like his looks, and was worthy of his looks. A Romney actually was able to act.
 Imagine a younger Romney who rouses the nation to a new war, against India, through power of charisma .
Rumors spread that Mitt Romney is in preparation to overthrow the government . The Holocaust Museum and Lincoln Memorial were defaced by someone .
 Mitt runs to Russia where he becomes a major advisor to Putin . Instead of returning to Russia, Mitt becomes an advisor to the president .
 Putin has been banging Putin's wife in secret, it is discovered . He finally has to leave in a great hurry when it's discovered .
 He runs to China where, again, he becomes a major political force and advisor, adopting Chinese customs and language with ease . He is now a top political advisor and an advisor in China .
After some time he leaves China and ends up living with the tribesmen as one of them . He goes out fighting, charging them repeatedly with machine gun in his glorious blackand-gold armor and Dune-look headset .
 Terunofuji gets his favored grip, with his left hand on Mitakeumi’s belt outside of his arm .
 If Teru's story ended here, it would already be worthy of a Hollywood movie in which his character is played by a person of a much darker hue .
 There exist no official criteria as to what makes one worthy of promotion to sumos two highest ranks . Ozeki and Yokozuna are the highest-ranked sumos in the world .
 A wrestler can maintain an average of eleven wins across three consecutive tournaments with ten or more wins in the final tournament . The wrestler is virtually guaranteed to receive a promotion to Ozeki .
 Terunofuji won his first three tournaments back in the top division . He won one tournament and finished runner-up in another .
 Teru finished runner up in the next tournament, but only won eleven of his fifteen matches . He was one short of what he would need for Ozeki promotion . The next tournament is in Tokyo in January 2021 .
 He went on to win the March tournament with a 12-3 record, easily qualifying him for Ozeki . He won the tournament in March with a record of 12-2 .
 The traditional criterion for a Yokozuna promotion is two consecutive tournament victories while at the rank of Ozeki or equivalent . The traditional criteria is two successive tournament victories .
 Only one tournament was won at the rank of Ozeki . He did not receive the promotion . Some argued that he should have won the tournament .
 Terunofuji did not complain about not getting promoted, insisting that he wanted to earn the promotion .
Terunofuji will host the next tournament in July 2021 . The next tournament will take place in July 2020 .
 Ozeki has one tournament victory at the rank of Ozeki in the previous tournament . He won the tournament at the level of Yokozuna .
 Terunofujis return to the top division and subsequent dominance coincided with Hakuhos absence . Terun ofujis returned to top division in 2011 .
 He had yet to face the greatest sumo wrestler in history and fellow countryman since his resurgence . He has not been able to compete with the world's greatest wrestler .
 Hakuho needed a strong tournament to stave off retirement, while Terunofuji similarly needed one to join Hakuha . The sport's sole Yokozuna is in the highest rank .
 Both wrestlers started the tournament strong with wins in their first few bouts . Both wrestlers won their first bouts in the tournament .
After the fifth day, a shift in the strategies of their opponents became visible . After each was undefeated after the five day, the strategies became visible.
 Wrestlers opted to fight the top contenders head-on, rather than using cheap-but-legal tactics such as dodging out of the way at the start of the match, face slaps, or forearm shivers .
 No wrestler wanted to lose his honor by derailing an undefeated showdown on the final day for a shameful match victory in an unwinnable tournament .
 Hakuho and Terunofuji each racked up wins day after day until the final day arrived . The pair racked up victories day after night until the last day arrived.
 Each fighter was undefeated, leaving the tournament championship to the winner of their clash . The winner of the fight was the winner.
Before their bout, wrestlers are introduced to the crowd as foreign-born. Before their bout they are introduced as foreign born .
 In said ritual, wrestlers clap to attract the attention of the gods, lift their hands to show they are unarmed, stomp the ground to scare away demons and throw salt in the ring to purify it .
 They repeatedly crouch as if they are about to start the match and then stand up after a few moments of glaring at each other . The pair repeatedly crouched as if about to begin the match .
 The match starts when all four hands are simultaneously touching the ground . All four hands touch the ground when the match is played .
 Hakuho opens with his signature forearm shiver . The move is strictly legal, but which is frowned upon for Yokozuna .
 Teru counters by reaching for his trademark outside left grip on his opponent's belt . Teru is known for his outside left hand grip on the belt .
 Hakuho backpedals and slaps Terunofujis head with his left hand with left hand . Terun ofujis is surely aware that giving up the position is certain defeat .
 Hakuho attempts a head slap with his right hand and Terunofuji counters with his own . The pair are still waiting for the opportunity to seize the all-important belt grip .
 He thrusts his right hand to the back of his opponent's belt and gains a firm grip . The fight takes place in front of a crowd of two people .
 Teru starts clawing for Hakuhos belt with his left hand . Teru begins clawing to the belt with left hand.
 Hakuho uses masterful technique to keep his belt just out of reach . Terunofuji uses masterfully technique, twisting and twisting his hips .
 Teru uses his right hand to pull Hakuho closer so that he can secure the other hand . He uses his left hand to secure his other hand.
 Hakuho senses his opponent is overextended and clamps down Terus right arm . Hakuhi senses that his opponent's opponent is over-extended .
 Hakuho attempts to send Terunofuji into the clay. Using his opponent's momentum, he tries to send his opponent in the clay . He then uses the momentum of his opponent to send the opponent into the Clay .
 Hakuho holds on to Terunofuji’s upper arm and uses his right hand to tighten his grip .
 Terunofuji is just trying to resist and wait for an opportunity to grab a Hakuhos belt .
 Hakuho twists Teru by his arm, testing his rehabilitated knees . He goes for another throw and goes for a second throw .
 Terunofuji sends Terun ofuji into the ground, nearly breaking his arm in the process . He sends his arm to the ground .
 Hakuho is the tournament champion, and still the greatest to ever do it . He is still the world's greatest to do it.
 Promotion to the rank tends to shorten ones career, as poor performance that comes with old age necessitates retirement instead of demotion . The rank is the honor of the rank .
 He originally stated that he wanted to continue competing at least until the Tokyo 2020 olympics in order to honor Japan as a representative . He originally said he would continue competing until the 2020 Olympics .
 Nagging injuries and pressure from the sumo elders made it more difficult to wait the extra year from the Olympics getting delayed by the pandemic .
 Yokozuna Kakuryu will retire in March 2021 . Hakuho had another reason to continue competing in the world's most popular sport .
 As the sole Yokozuna, he needed a young man to pass the torch . He needed to be able to pass on the torch.
 The sumo elders were pleased with his victories, but dissatisfied with the way in which he won . He used dishonorable tactics such as face slaps, elbow bashes, and retreating .
 When the September tournament rolled around, Hakuho officially announced his retirement . The former world No. 1 said he was retiring .
 He far surpassed his father's record, with 45 top division tournament victories . He far surpasses his father, who won 45 tournament victories in the top division .
 He continued wrestling long enough to support Japan in the 2020 Olympics . He continues to wrestle long enough for Japan to compete in the Olympics .
 Hakuho’s undefeated tournament win and victory over the most dominant wrestler of the next generation was his final taste of glory . His undefeated tournament victory was his defining act of greatness .
 Terunofuji received his promotion to Yokozuna, making him the 73rd in the nearly one thousand years since it became an official rank . The move cemented the greatest comeback in history .
 Yokozuna's only substitute to a second consecutive tournament victory in his quest for a second successive win . The Yokozunian has lost his first game in a tournament since joining the club in 2010 .
 Terunofuji easily won the September tournament with a record of 13-2 . With Hakuho out of the field, Terun ofuji comfortably won the tournament .
 I wish that I could have watched these two fight for championships for years to come . I am yet grateful for the opportunity to have witnessed their respective careers .
 Terunofuji came so close to glory, losing it all, but put his honor on the line . To see Terun ofuji come so close, lose it all is the key to his success .
 A legendary, historic showdown. To see the apex of their careers result in a legendary showdown . The final showdown will be held in London on Sunday night .
Com men show such masculine virtues in a world where they are otherwise almost entirely absent . I am forever indebted to these HERCULEANSTRENGTH.COM men, and to the sport of sumo .
 The Japanese hotpot recipe chankonabe is a favourite of sumo wrestlers . Dont hesitate to email us for further information .
 You can either make the chicken broth yourself with an onion, carrot and bay leaf, then strain the mixture . You can make the whole chicken carcass for four to six hours .
Ground beef and pork meatballs to go with the chicken thighs, white fish and shrimp . Chankonabe tends not to include beef or lamb because four-legged animals represent a loss in sumo wrestling .
 Of course, there are eggs in there, which you wouldn't normally find in a chankonabe .
 The stew is usually served, with rice or udon noodles, as shown to the right .
 If you choose not to use the sake and mirin, bring the broth on its own up to a simmer .
 Make the meatballs by combining ground meat, garlic clove, herbs and egg and forming the mixture into equally sized balls .
Cut the cod into chunks and do the same for the chicken thighs, removing any bones . Cut the cod in chunks and remove any bones.
 Cut the spring onions into two-inch lengths and remove the stems from the shiitake mushrooms and halve them .
 The meatballs, cod and chicken thighs first for 5 minutes, then add the shrimp and simmer for another 3 minutes . The shrimp and shrimp are then added to the meatballs and thighs .
Next add the napa cabbage, spring onions and mushrooms and simmer for a few more minutes . Next add the Napa cabbage and spring onions to the soup .
 soft boil the eggs for 3-5 minutes and then reserve them . Soft boil the vegetables for three-five minutes and reserve them for three minutes .
 Ladle the stew into bowls, slice the eggs in half and add a whole egg to each bowl . Ladle it into bowls and add the eggs into each bowl.
 Alaska Chaga is picked and packed wi small bateles, Our Chara Mushrooms are picked near Fairbanks, Alaska . Chaga from these frigid conditions and away frou cur polluted world ensure thal vou receive the maxim benefits .
 When America came into this territory, it was still pregnant with untapped natural resources and ranged over by people and wild animals that lived according to nature .
 Americas mission was to fill the west with emigrants and stratify it with layers of gridwork, from property lines and excavation tunnels to railways, bridges, fencing, and telegram cables .
What went on in those years was the building of civilization from the ground up, carving order out of chaos and then establishing the parameters to keep chaos gone for good .
 The Kid serves as a vector through which all of this passes, and although he acts, his actions have no major consequences for the circumstances in which he finds himself .
 Before the West can be “settled,’ it must be pacified, says the majority of the book . The majority of book is concerned with this process .
 The Kid takes up first with Captain White and his band of filibusterers, and later the scalp-hunting Glanton Gang, with whom he wanders . Early in the novel, The Kid is first seen as Captain White.
 The Kid continues wandering, going wherever he can be useful and doing whatever needs to be done . They range over open territory in search of plunder, and when that proves out of their grasp, they continue to wander .
 The Gang was made up of outlaws, drifters, and military veterans, and The Kid himself was a runaway . The Kid was a runaway .
 The Glanton Gang range directionless around Northern Mexico. Just as the winds and rains blow wildly across the plains and the open dessert, or herds of animals roam freely .
 Glanton Gang wanders in search of natives to scalp in Mexico . They retreat north with no goal and no destination, stopping only at the most convenient place .
 Their inherent aimlessness is not insignificant, rather it may be the most important detail about them . Their aimlessness may be most important details about them, says author .
 These men go wherever their violent impulses take them, where they may be used to earn a living .
 Established men of trade or office from back east, a city in New England or Ohio, could never commit or withstand the extreme violence necessary for the lives of these men .
 The settling of civilization, the confrontation with the Frontier, requires a certain type of man, a man who comes from outside the parameters of domesticity . The survival is predicated not on the taming of his violent impulses, but for the unfettered embellishment of
In civilization, these impulses would get a man jailed at best, executed at worst, but on the Frontier, repressing them would lead to an even swifter death . In civilization, this would get him jailed at worst.
Once that is done and the building begins, they become a hindrance . These men are required for the pacification of the Frontier .
 The Kid breaks two bottles over the bartenders head and stabs his eye out . 'The Kid meets Toadvine they burn down a hotel'
 The Kid is invited first into Captain White's band and later the Glanton Gang . The only way they know how to get what they want is violence, and it is expressly for this quality .
 Mexican citizens run afoul of the Mexican Government . They try to pass off the scalps as Apache warriors and later, try to do the same with Mexican citizens .
 Once they become wanted men, they go into villages and their violent impulses are channeled into drinking, whoring, raping, murdering, and thievery . They are repeatedly forced out under a hail of gunfire .
 Several members are killed this way, others hanged in Sand Diego . The Gang is eventually almost wiped out by a group of Indians .
 Once the Gang is unemployed and on the run, they retreat north and take up residence at a ferry over the Colorado river near Fort Yuma, Arizona .
 The Gang kills the people running the ferry and begins operating it for their own enrichment . They charge exorbitant fees, robbing customers of all their possessions, and excluding Natives from passage .
 The Glanton Gang were retarding that progress, says the author . It served as a crucial vector for the civilization-building process America was embarking on .
 Yuma Indians attack ferry, club Glanton to death and murder several others . In real life, the Gang also sabotaged or outright murdered the operators of two other fords along the river .
 As a result of this debacle, the U.S. military sends a contingent of troops to man the ferry and they allow safe passage of emigrants for the next 30 years .
 violent nature brings them in direct confrontation with developing civilization . It speeds up the progression of that development by bolstering the bulwarks against men such as themselves .
 As Nietzsche puts it in Twilight of the idols, these men are required to build liberal institutions . In fact war itself builds liberal institutions, and the type of man needed to make war is the truly free man .
 The institutions limit freedom, and they have no room for the man who does not subdue his natural, violent instincts . The institution limits freedom and does not have room for him to be violent .
 The men who KS g make up the Glanton Gang, men like The kid, must themselves be forced out of civilization, once it's up and running . The men like the kid, like the kids, must be forced to run .
 Judge Holden is to depict Judge Holden as fighting his way out by leveling a 12 pound howitzer cannon at the Indians and holding them at bay with it to make his escape .
 He wields the howitzer with his bare hands . The ball is twelve pounds, the cannon is much heavier . He has a larger than life, perhaps even inhuman character .
 Much speculation surrounds the Judge, even within the story itself . One character remarks that he’s never presided over any court cases .
 Holden himself waxes philosophical quite a lot about war and the warrior type, some amalgamation of Nietzsche and Heraclitus .
 Judge's knowledge and study of nature helps him make gunpower from bare materials . He sketches plants and takes samples of dead things and saves them for study .
 The novel is about the generative power of war, and that is what it is about . The novel's main character is a war character .
 It is a pre-apocalyptic novel, in which nature is examined, captured, and exploited by men who must make war upon it and its inhabitants in order to make way for the civilization that is to come .
 These men, as we've seen, have no place within that civilization, in fact they threaten its very existence . But these men have noplace within that society, as well as threatening its existence .
War's nobility becomes dishonored once the dance of civilization begins, and the warrior must be subtracted . War's nobility is dishonored.
 A Judge must determine who among them is a threat, and it is his duty to remove them . And they need a Judge to determine who are a threat .
 Once the West is closing, The Judge hunts down and finds The Kid and must murder him . These walking pockets of wilderness must be tamed, he says .
 Death stalks the Crusader in The Seventh Seal, who outlived his time of war . The Judge stalks The Kid as the closing of the west draws near .
 Judge Holden cannot allow a warrior to walk among the merchants and politicians, the farmers and the women .
 Holden mocks and taunts The Kid in a paradoxical way, from an angle antithetical to the reason he must kill him . The Kid is not the only person to be killed by Holden .
 He tells the kid he wasnt cut out for war, that he suppressed his nature when he showed, or tried to show mercy to several characters along the way .
 The Kid represents an earlier, freer time when a man was allowed to cultivate his killer instinct and use his violent nature to carve order out of chaos .
 Despite the eminently mis-spellable name, boeuf bourguignon is not a complicated dish to make . The name is a mis- spellable name .
 As always, if you look after the little things, the big things will take care of themselves, says the author .
 My favourite is shin, a bit of tough hard-working muscle that turns to oozing gelatinous chunks after a few hours at the right temperature .
 If you choose short rib, make sure to remove as much fat as possible and don't throw away the bones .
 Either add them to the stew to enhance the stock or save them for stock-making later .
 Heat the oil and butter in a large casserole dish over a medium-high heat . Add the bacon when the foam has died down, add the bacon .
Fry until the bacon is golden, then remove with a slotted spoon and retain . Fry until the Bacon is golden. Then remove with the spoon and keep the spoon .
 Add bay leaf, carrots and mushrooms to the pan and sauté until lightly golden, then remove and retain them separate from the bacon . Add the bayleaf, carrots, mushrooms and mushrooms. Then add the bay leaf and carrots to a pan.
Add the small onions or shallots to the dish, turn down the heat slightly, and fry until just beginning to brown . Add the small onion or Shallots to a dish, and turn the heat down slightly . Turn down the Heat slightly, fry until the dish is brown .
 At the same time, put the flour on a plate, season, then roll the beef in it . The flour is used to make the beef, and the beef is served in a plate .
 Remove the onions with the other vegetables and turn the heat up slightly in the pan . Turn the heat of the pan into a pan.
 Cover and bake in the oven for two and a half hours, then tip in the small onions, mushrooms and carrots and bake for another half an hour . Cover and Bake in the kitchen for two-and-a-half hours .
 Add the remaining parsley and serve with mashed or boiled potatoes, fine green beans, crusty French bread and red wine . Add the remainder of the parsley to the meal and add the remaining potatoes and boiled potatoes .
 Philly therapi Rashatwar I’m z “4 — amined That Adele Lost. “Is Joke nan With mii disordered eating for a decade, and her fe fard amid the coronavirus lockdown.’s fefard amid
 Fatphobia and Racism are linked when thinking about police violence . We need to consider how they're linked to police violence when thinking.
 Raw Egg Nationalism is a political manifesto giving the reader everything he needs to take control of his body and assert his autonomy against the globalists and anti-human agenda .
 Tie the thyme sprigs, bay leaves and parsley stalks together and put in the bowl with the peppercorns . The thyme is the most common way to tie the spig and bay leaves together .
 Heat half the butter in a large casserole pan and, in batches if need be, brown the oxtail . In batches if needed, brown oxtails and brown the butter .
 Don't have the temperature up too high, to prevent the butter from burning . Don't be too high to prevent butter burning .
Add more butter and cook the carrots, onion, celery and garlic until just starting to brown . Add more butter to the carrot, onion and celery until just beginning to brown.
 Scoop off any froth that appears, then cover and place and place in the oven for 3 hrs 30 mins . The oven is set for 3 hours 30 mins.
 Remove the oxtail to a bowl and either shred or leave it whole, depending on your preference . The oxtails can be shredded or left out of a bowl .
 You can either sieve the liquid to remove the vegetables, or leave them in . You can both sieve and leave the vegetables in the liquid .
 Season to taste, then serve the soup in bowls and scatter over some chopped parsley leaves, to garnish . Then serve it in bowls, then scatter some chopped leaves over some chop leaves .
 Having goals and being able to see yourself achieving them is one of the royal roads to success .
 Soviet weightlifters have been using mental techniques since the 1970s . Now theyre a common part of the repertoire of elite athletes .
 Athletes will use the power of intense concentration and imagination to run through the routines, from start to finish . The moment they step up onto the podium to collect the winner's trophy is the moment they collect the trophy .
 Tiger Woods, for instance, has practised such techniques from his teens, and swears by them .
Scientific studies have begun to verify just how helpful these techniques can be . The techniques are now being used to test how helpful they are .
 Like Tiger Woods, at a young age Arnold Schwarzenegger discovered the power of visualization .
 This began when he first saw Reg Park, in his movie role as Hercules, in a magazine . He first appeared in the magazine when he played Hercules in the movie .
Every training is taking me one step closer to turning this beautiful vision into reality. I knew that every training was taking him one step further to turning it into reality .
 Arnold went much further after that, winning the Mr Universe four more times . He also won the Mr Olympia, bodybuilding’s contest, seven times .
Being able to taste the success you want will carry you a long way towards achieving it. Being able to see yourself doing it will help you achieve it .
 Heaven knows, weve seen and heard variations of this dichotomy so many times . Heaven knows . We've seen, we've heard variations.
 If we were given a dollar for every time somebody told us you have to choose between being muscular and aesthetic on the one hand, or being strong and looking like a sack of potatoes, we have a lot more spare change in our pockets.
 Franco Columbo was the last Mr Olympia winner to take part in a World's Strongest Man competition .
 The bodybuilders of the Golden Era are known for their strong physique . This is exemplified by the bodybuilder of the golden era .
 He would play Hercules on the silver screen and fill out the mythical heros loincloth and lion costume . He was also famous for his feats of strength and strength .
 Canadian weightlifter Doug Hepburn was the second man ever to bench press 500lbs . Park trained briefly on a visit to North America . He was the first man to do so and was second to do it .
 Mr America winner was the second strongest bench presser in the world, having pressed 600lbs .
 Only the powerlifter Pat Casey, who was considerably larger than Sipes, was a better presser . Only the Powerlifter was a good presser.
 The ‘infinity WOD’ method is based on getting good at the ‘big’ compound lifts .
 Reg Park followed the 5x5 method that had probably been taught to him by Doug Hepburn . Reg Park follows the 5X5 method.
 Reg credited this for increasing his strength massively and also for adding a kind of size and density to his physique . He had not otherwise been able to obtain when he was training just for aesthetics rather than strength . Reg credits this for increased his strength.
 It's this 5x5 method, with some important modifications, that weve made the basis of our Golden Era 5X5 programme . And it’s this 5 x5 method. Weve made some important changes to the programme, including some modifications .
 This is a comprehensive 12-month programme in three phases that will help you gain serious strength and add balanced mass to your physique . This is also a balanced mass programme that will also help you improve your physique.
 The programme contains its own diet plan, with a wealth of Golden Era wisdom on nutrition and muscle gain .
 If you're a beginner looking to build a powerful, muscular physique, we recommend the Golden Era 5x5 . The Golden Era is the latest generation of the Golden era .
 strength and aesthetics can go hand in hand, we believe . The former is the best basis for the latter, and not the other way around .
 A man without friends is like a ship without a rudder, a plane with only one wing, a car without a steering wheel . A plane without a wheel is a plane without one wing and a car with one wing .
 We don't mean the kind of people who are just there for the good times, who share in the spoils of victory, drink the champagne then leave you high and dry when you need them most . We don’t mean the type of people.
 A real friend is there through thick and thin, when the chips are down . When the shit hits the fan or when it won't, when it doesn't, a real friend will be there .
 A time to be born, and a time to die, is the Bible's most famous verse . Hese famous verses from the Bible extol something MAU eTerom e Terom .
 Many people think that building muscle is just a case of eat chicken and rice + chug protein shakes . Many think it's just the case of eating chicken, rice and rice .
 In fact, I can think of fewer paths less likely to lead you to success than this bland formula .
 Many people think that this formula is foolproof, when in fact, only fools are the ones doing it . I've seen so many people, on the internet and in real life, fail .
 In my home town, there's a guy who regularly posts his progress on his Instagram . In his hometown, there’s a guy with a lot of Instagram posts .
 To tell the truth, ‘regularly’ doesn't accurately convey the number of times he posts gym-related material .
After two or more years of this nonsense, which is totally unsuited to his purposes, he’s still going, despite making no visible progress whatsoever . And yet, after two and more years, he's still going.
 In every post, he still looks like he’s stepping into the gym for the first time .
 No amount of branded gear, straps, lifting belts and other accessories can disguise the fact that he is neither appreciably bigger nor appreciably stronger than he was when he started .
 Vince Gironda knew that there was no single formula for success in the gym . He knew that the gym was not the perfect place for success .
 If pushed, he would have said that the right mindset is the one thing everybody needs . But even that doesn't guarantee success, he says .
 Vince had bulk diets, cutting diets, mass gain workout programmes, and definition workout programmes . Vince's diet was a programme and diet to every purpose under the heavens .
 Vince knew, and so should you, that there’s no point sticking with a programme that doesn’t meet your purposes and needs .
 He never advocated any of his diets or programmes to last forever . That's why he never advocated a diet or programme that would last forever.
 No, you shouldnt stay on the 36-eggs-a-day diet once you've gained the mass you need, and sticking to the diet might see you lose too much weight .
 Who Poo explores wild animals and their scat near you . It's an interactive library, Who Poo.
 A filter feature in the library allows users to inpul scat dimensions and animal track features to find matching wildlife .
 The library includes photos from President Theodore Roosevel (s North American huntine journals)
 Who Poo users can also upload their own photos to complete the m-app encyclopedia .
 The organization was in many ways successful, but its aims of renewing Western civilization were not .
 Today we find ourselves in another, more extreme, crisis of masculinity of masculinity . We are in a more extreme crisis of men's masculinity .
 Many men and boys have turned to the simulated achievement of video games, pornography, and social media . Many reject reality for the digital and refuse to take the risks necessary for any kind of genuine achievement .
 Boy Scouts of America, in its untainted state, should be a bastion of positive male culture, says the author .
 To go into the wild is to return to a natural condition from which civilized man has detached himself, says Roger Scruton . To return to the wild, he says, is to go in the wild.
 In camping, man faces the timeless trials and struggles against the elements that his ancestors have faced since the beginning .
 In the mountains, there is peace, liberty, and serenity. Instead, in the mountains he is one with it; there is Peace, liberty and sereneity .
 To experience himself as a part of nature is to rediscover that condition that we were in once, before separating ourselves from the natural order . To experience yourself as part of Nature is to ... rediscover the condition that they were in.
 There has been a long withering of the BSA’s principles since its inception . In fact, there has been no change in BSA's principles since it began .
 As wilderness is paved over for tract housing, it becomes harder to camp as the wilds are less intimate and immediate to the person .
 As an organization ages, there comes the growing bloat of rules, bureaucracy, and liabilities dulling the experience with restrictions . It's preferable to organize outside of the organization, making it preferable.
 camping is commodified with bleeding-edge aerospace technologies and materials, making it more expensive and much less challenging . In a stagnant and decadent culture, camping is still more expensive than camping .
 The decline of the BSA also comes as a result of things within its control . The BSA has been in control of some of the world's most powerful agencies .
 O’Sullivan’s law that all organizations that aren’t actually right wing will over time become left wing has proven true . O'Sullivan's law has unfortunately proven true.
 Standards have been destroyed, and political indoctrination is now par for the course, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Merit badges went from a proof of proficiency to being an ornamental check mark of completing a career sampler .
 Young boys’ requirements to earn ranks now cover subjects such as diversity and inclusion . It includes drug use, cyberbullying, and rape .
 With the 8th edition of the Handbook, in 1972, the program was completely overhauled . The Handbook was released in 1972 .
 The Handbook was dumbed down to a sixth-grade reading level to appeal to ‘inner city youths’ while talking about subjects such as drugs, race consciousness, and eliminating what is core to scouting .
 The outdoor requirements, the objective skill-based advancement system, and many skills were all removed . Many skills were also removed from the system .
 All the while the Handbook suppressed individual responsibility and initiative and initiative . The Handbook suppressedindividual responsibility .
 Within a decade the organization lost over a third of its membership . The organization lost more than a third.
 William Hillcourt, a personal friend of Lord Baden-Powell, came out of retirement to fix the situation . Hillcourt is the son of the founder of the world's most famous and most successful company .
 Unlike then, today there is no old guard to come out of retirement and save the organization . Today, today, there are no old guards to come from retirement .
 In 2013, openly homosexual scouts were allowed in the organization, and in 2015, homosexual adults were allowed as well . In 2015, gay adults were also allowed to join the organization .
In 2019, a plan was made to quickly double membership, and in 2019 it was enacted . In 2019, the plan was enacted, with a plan to rapidly double membership .
 The BSA declared bankruptcy in 2020, as the Britannica states . It was the first ruling in five years since it was made .
 The Boy Scouts are dying, but there are no true alternative organizations to take its place . We stand at a historic moment; not only is Boy Scouts dying, it's not just Boy Scout dying .
 In short, we are making a book for individuals from which a grassroots organization can be derived . The book is called "The Grassroots" and "A grassroots organization"
 There will be an online group that makes and sells the book as well as distributing PDFs for financially insecure individuals . The group also sells pins, patches, and uniforms .
 There will be no regional or council hierarchy, only local self-sufficient local groups . But there will also be no national or local hierarchy .
 The book's objectives are to give a common directive for outdoor adventure to members and groups .
 There were many proto-scouting groups before BSA and each had a different way of organizing . BSA was formed in the early 1960s .
 No method has had greater success in modern times than the patrol method . But no method has been more successful than the modern patrol method.
 ‘gangs’ would emerge based on various things like similarity of interest, locality, or like-mindedness . ‘Gangs' would emerge from a large group of men together .
 The patrol method is a mere organizational recognition of these naturally occurring ‘gangs formed by instinct’
 The Gangs consist of about 5 8 people, by no means a clique but not big enough to be unwieldy to lead .
 The smaller size of the patrol compared to the troop is logistically easier . It allows its membership to remain local, and thereby have more frequent meetings and outings .
 The troop is an organization of several patrols at a local level . Leadership cadre and senior members fill support positions to help run the troop and plan meetings .
 On a troop level, this preparation is in the practical application of skills and knowledge through hikes, outings, games and contests .
 Patrols would have classroom-style or infield instruction in preparation for troop-level events . On their own practice previously learned skills as a group .
On an individual level, there is book-learning and practice of learned skills . On an individuallevel, there are book-learning and practice.
 While book-learning can teach concepts and aid in teaching skills, it has clear limitations . It cannot teach or improve a new skill, because it can't teach or learn new skills .
 Instead, whenever possible one must ‘learn by doing’ as done in troop and patrol meetings. Instead, one must learn by doing the same thing as doing in patrol meetings .
 A Scout has already learned a skill, the book serves as a refresher and allows him to practice a skill alone .
 The writers say people can make their own troops with little to zero oversight from us, the writers . Keeping the organization exclusive in the right way cannot be done in any conventional way, they say .
We would not only have no hands-on interference with these groups, but would have no knowledge about them unless they contacted us . We would not be able to contact these groups unless they contact us .
 Putting a childish disclaimer ‘no girls allowed!’ in the text of the book would not dissuade anyone .
 First, we will extensively draw upon the kinds of history that were once taught by the scouts . We will also draw on the kind of history we will draw upon. First, they will examine the kinds.
 This will help to create a sense of context and identity, so that politically oppositional and antagonistic groups would not use the book as it is .
 Historical material is so integral to the philosophy and way that removing it would destroy the whole . Such groups would be unable to coopt the material and bowdlerize it, since it is so important .
 We encourage writers to talk about history and politics whenever practicable . We encourage our writers to speak about history.
 The second method of gatekeeping is to have a system of quantifiable merit-based requirements . A local leader or peer who has mastered the skill must be inspected under inspection of a local leader .
 One can call himself part of the organization if he completes certain initiation rites, challenges, and demonstrations of skill . One can also call himself a member of the group if he does not complete some of the tasks .
 Completing requirements would include having a witness when archiving them as proof of their completion . Completing the requirements would also include having to have a witness to prove their completion.
 This system relies on the honor of both parties, both participant and witness . This system uses both parties to honor both participants and witness.
 These challenges can be something like sleeping in the woods for a night with only the clothes on your back and your knife . How many pull-ups you can do or demonstrate proficiency in tying a knot or starting a fire by friction.
 The requirements and rank system would also apply to local troops and patrols . A streamer would be added to the pole or a star stitched on the flag .
 The focus is on building a group of people who are interested in this concept and can create the material, standards, and standardized operations that will be the bedrock of this organization .
 The book is being written in sections by volunteers who are writing on their own specific competencies . The book has been written by volunteers in sections.
 The project is still in its infancy so YOU can have a great effect on shaping the book and the organizations . The book and organizations are still in their infancy so you can help shape them .
 The plan is to produce a handbook that teaches core values and skills, how to establish your own local unit, as well as how to plan and execute, meetings and trips into the wild .
 The country farm, even in Roman times, represented an idyll that stood in the starkest contrast to the growing cities, especially Rome, and the life of business .
 The urbanite and metropolitan have done their bit to fashion this image of the country and village as a place apart, where all that is solid does not melt into thin air .
 The modern-day village is not what it once was, certainly not in England anyway . An initial problem, if we choose to make the village our ideal traditional community, is that it is not the same .
 The author has spent a decent portion of his life in a number of very beautiful English villages . None of which could qualify as a real, living place, he says .
 The picturesque thatched houses are mostly still intact, despite the intrusion of some modern homes and council housing . There are still people living in the houses, at least for a portion of the year .
 The price of properties has become so inflated, and the supply is limited, the young have no real place there and are inevitably pushed out . Without an independent economic life of their own no trades or small businesses, small businesses are left out .
 The ancient customs, tied to the rhythms of the agricultural seasons, are almost entirely gone . Those that do survive are mere curiosities, like the people who maintain them .
 Some life remains in the local pub if your village is lucky enough to have one, that is .
 The modern English village is not, like the fictional Cheers, but it is somewhere where everybody knows your name .
 Id suggest reading Ronald Blyth’s Akenfield, the story of a semi-fictional Suffolk village . The book was written in the late 1800s and ending in the 1960s .
 A village life is stripped of its true purpose and dependent on the wealth of the city for fresh infusions of money and vitality . No, you're going to have to go far back if you want a model of village life that isn't a hollow one .
 Simply moving to villages en masse is not a viable strategy for a traditionalist revival today, says the author .
 Many of the problems they rail against, thinking they were symptoms of the modern condition, were in fact present way back when, and in just as vicious and unappealing forms as we find today .
 The ‘matriarchy’ that does exist, and that exerts enormous influence and power in the social and moral realm, is only the manifestation of this brokenness of the males . The 'matriarch' that does exists, and the ‘
 The Karen who was watching your every move in the office waiting for something 'inappropriate' to report to HR. She had been replaced by a seamstress called Beatrice . Beatrice watched you at night through a hole in your roof, hoping you'd say something heretical to your
 The village was principally a farming community, with a small contingent of artisans and a larger number of itinerant shepherds .
 The wealth of surviving testimony is a sense of just how utterly stifling life was for the inhabitants of the village . The village's residents are still living in the village.
 In Montaillou, village life revolved around the household, or domus . The domus assumed a biological, economic, mystical and religious significance, at once .
 There is much talk on Twitter of the benefits of the “multi-generational household” well, well, this is what it actually looked like .
 The generations dwelling within the domus were considered also to include the dead . The living had to be regularly appeased by the living .
 The domus was the principal unit in the agricultural division of labour and the means by which resources were allocated .
 The chief long-term concern of the head of the household, who was usually male but sometimes female, was the proper descent of the domus and its humble resources .
 Marriage customs were such that marriages outside the domus, although inevitable, were considered a kind of tragic threat to its integrity .
 The needs of the domus, not the individual, always came first, and it’s hard to doubt that such unions would actually have taken place had they been allowed .
 A man might try to rule his domus with an iron rod, but authority within the household was far from straightforward .
 The women wielded a variety of soft powers that proved no less crushing than a formal matriarchy would have .
 The bishop's official testimony to the bishop consists of men insulting the women around them, the sole exception being their own mothers . It's unsurprising, then, that so much of the official testimony is men insulting women around the bishop .
 Male servants would often take their masters side when they insulted their wives . Male servants were often taken to the side of their masters .
 The swiving local priest married off his pregnant mistress in order to save his reputation . He told the couple that “A man is nothing if he is not his wife’s master”
 The presence of multiple generations in a single home is almost always a recipe for bitter resentment and scheming . This “total domestication’, as Bronze Age Pervert puts it, was made yet worse through endemic conflict, says author .
 The villagers gave before the bishop is unequivocal evidence that virtually nothing went unnoticed by someone privacy, whether from one's own family or from the neighbours, simply did not exist .
 Owing to the ramshackle construction of the village houses, it was easy to hear or see what was going on inside at any time .
 The walls were so thin that it was all-but impossible to have a private conversation if others were in the house . This was particularly effective at night, when inhabitants would be huddled around the light and warm of the hearth .
 Many houses didn't even have front doors, but ill-fitting planks or slats are another boon for nosy neighbours .
 It’s fashionable to claim, after Foucault, that modern man lives in a panopticon, where his every move and every word is surveilled by unseen forces . This was hardly less the case in Montaillou, and in the febrile atmosphere
Aloof from this domestic hell, masters of their fate alone, were the shepherds of the village . Aloof from the domestic hell. Aloof.
 The wandering shepherd enjoyed a kind of blessed freedom, unbothered by the cares and customs of the settled world . In Montaillou, it was a common classical trope that the wandering shepherd enjoys a kind.
 The book's main character is the randy priest Pierre Clergue . But it is another Pierre, Pierre Maury, a happy and magnanimous shepherd, who is the real hero .
 Maury followed his flocks into the mountains during the season, leaving behind the village and its residents . Like the other shepherds of the region, Maury follows his flock into the mountain .
 Shepherds came together in voluntary groupings of friendship as they roamed the mountain passes and pastures .
 This vagabond life also resulted in a different mental outlook, more philosophical, more prone to lofty thoughts and much less superstitious than that of villagers .
 The shepherds were untouchable, and many took advantage of this fact to evade the strong arm of the Church .
 He would not trade that liberty for the plate of gritty lentils held out to him by friends, employers or parasites . He would rather be adopted into a rich family .
 He saw his destiny as travelling over hill and dale, with friends everywhere and temporary sweethearts . But he also saw his fate as travelling with friends and friends everywhere .
In this description of Maury’s life, there is a very striking echo of some things Tacitus wrote in the Germania . They point the way to an alternative model of “trad life in Europe, one that is barely less ancient than the village.
 Tacitus notes how the young men who would form the companions, or comitatus, of the great war chiefs could never settle down to peace, but would instead wander in search of other battles and other battles .
 The horse made for battle, the bloodied and winning spear. For the companions demand from the companions of their chief the horse makes for battle .
Like Pierre Maury and his fellow shepherds, these men voluntarily forsook the settled life and its regularities . Like Pierre Mauries, they chose place, property, work, comfort, comfort .
 They would wander and find their own fate, rather than waiting for it to find them . They too would wander. They would find themselves, not wait for it.
 Tacitus describes another similar custom, most prevalent among the Chatti, a particularly ferocious tribe .
 When a young man reached maturity, he would not shave his hair or beard until he had killed a man . When a man reaches maturity, a man would not be able to shave his beard or hair or hair until he killed a person .
 These men were a marvel to behold, and lived a life devoted solely to battle . They were a life dedicated solely to fighting .
 Tacitus: "They would always make up the first line on the battlefield" Tacitus says.
 In fact, if we want to look for its origins and impetus, we should look much further back in time, to the very birth of the European peoples .
 The Yamnaya, the principal steppe people in question, have been called ‘the most murderous people of all time’ and “the most violent group of people who ever lived” with good reason .
 The Yamnaya migration was basically one big mounted warband which either killed or enslaved the Neolithic men of Europe and took their women as wives .
 Academics are now doing their best to walk back the full implications of the genetic data they have revealed . But — horse, stable door, bolted, bolted.
 No amount of wishful academic thinking, motivated by the desire not to stir “dark currents in Europeans thinking about who they really are, can hide what has been revealed, says author .
 The origins of the European peoples lie in a wild, bloody ride of young warriors off the steppe . As much as the establishment of settled farming communities, the origins of European people lie in the wild .
 Germans are known to band together and wander in search of their fortune . It was already an established custom for the young to wander around the world .
 The phrase used by David Reich is unlikely to have been used by scientists . But given the scale on which the migrations must have taken place, it seems unlikely .
 population pressures on the steppe, and perhaps even political crisis, forced a large number of young, unaccompanied men to move on and create their own opportunities .
 As dynamic as pastoralist lifestyle may be, these societies are just as prone to conflict and sclerosis as settled ones . It's worth noting that, as dynamic as the pastoralists may be.
 To wander in pursuit of blood or glory remained an alternative way of life right through the Middle Ages and into the modern era . The shepherds of the Pyrenees are in full-blown, full-blooded, form as well .
 This attitude would carry the earliest European colonisers overseas as well, even in the absence of any European tradition of sailing at that time .
 The Spaniards expanded from their island colonies in the Caribbean into Mexico and beyond . The early days of the colonial enterprise were a time of perhaps unparalleled individual initiative .
 The conquest of Mexico in 1520-21 was achieved without the proper approval of the Crown or its agents in the New World .
 Cortés was pursued as keenly by his rivals on Hispaniola as the Aztecs . He had to head off a number of parties sent to arrest and return him to the isMAN’s land .
 The first thing Cortés did was return to Spain to plead his case retrospectively — before the Crown . When the conquest was over, Cortés returned to Spain.
 The village is not what many traditionalists think it is or indeed ever was . This is just one of a thousand similar stories that could be told, whether of the Spanish, Portuguese, English, French or Dutch .
 Montaillou expressed many of the worst possibilities latent in the form for domesticity to become total . For proper authority to degenerate into a joyless, saggy-breasted matriarchy.
 There's no reason to believe that a revival of small communities today would make many of the problems all of us hate .
 A new localism could easily become an intimate tyranny far beyond our worst possible nightmares, bolstered by advances in modern technology, and perhaps drawing its justification from Christianity in its present state .
 Christianity today, which is no different from the language of “social justice’, has fallen far since the Middle Ages, and seems incapable of doing anything other crushing and twisting life . Christianity today is not different from ‘social justice'
 There can be no doubt that the Yamnaya left the steppe was a world-historical event . Whatever the reason why it left the Steppe, there is no doubt the decision was an historical event .
 A settled life has never been the only option for Europes children, and it need not be so now . A settledlife has never be the only choice for Europe children, says Europes expert .
 There are timeless rules of style every man’s world man breaks at his peril .
 A charcoal flannel threepiece suit with peaked lapels matched it with a perfect club tie, white shirt and rosecoloured silk handkerchief .
 See, he knows it’s not a false choice between yesterday and today that he must make, but a choice to find the best of both and create something new .
 “Buster Keaton is illiterate in the same way Homer was,’ says the FAT NUTRITIONist . ‘BusterKeaton’ is an illiterate man who is ‘uneducated’ and ‘an illiterate
 It's the illiteracy of a warrior, a seer, a poetbard, or a god who doesn't need to read what other people wrote, because hes a god . It's not the illiterate of a warriors or a poet, it's a god.
 My Lunches With Orson by Henry Jaglom is the best book on movies from the past decade .
 Jaglom isn't important and there's a good reason you never heard of him before . He's not important and he's not a good guy .
 The old men walk around big cities wearing an opera cape and a stupid-looking hat . They tell rambling stories about all the famous dead people he used to know to cover up for the fact he's a failure .
 You see these people everywhere desperately trying to prove they used to be somebody and you can never tell just how much they're bullshitting with their anecdotes . You see them everywhere desperately Trying to prove that they used.
 Henry Jaglom used to have lunch with Orson Welles once a week in the 1980s . He recorded the conversation on a tape recorder .
 The funniest parts of My Lunches With Orson are where Welles trashes Woody Allen for being an ugly yet narcissistic simp who wants people to love him even though there's nothing to love .
 Orson Welles knew all these people and at the end of his life he didn't give a shit about what he said anymore . Orson welles died at the age of 50 .
 The book isn't funny because hes a crank, it's funny because he speaks so much truth you laugh out of pure shock . "Nobody's said that before," says author .
 Read chapter 13 of My Lunches With Orson's new book . Read chapter 12 of the book about Charlie Chaplin .
 Buster Keaton is finally giving him the bath, and will, historically, forever, forever . That's why he's finally getting the bath. That's what he's doing .
 Welles goes on to show just how self-obsessed Chaplin was, and what a cheap bastard he was too .
 Chaplin was completely unwilling to give credit where credit was due . But what really makes Chaplin seem like a shitty human being is the way he didn't give credit .
 Welles was bitter because Chaplin ripped off one of his screenplays . Welles isn't the only Hollywood moviemaker who got fucked over by Chaplin .
 In 1952, Chaplin made a cringe-makingly sentimental movie about an elderly drunk who used to be a big star in vaudeville . He is now a broke, long-winded boring old man who is somehow attractive to a pretty eighteen-year-old girl who
 Either there’s hope for all of us or this is the dumbest shit ever written, it's not the worst ever written .
 You should watch Limelight just to see how petty, vain, out of touch and self-obsessed Chaplin was .
After 20 minutes you even start to wonder whether Chaplin was straight because the sheer vanity has to be seen to be believed .
 The drunk has a comeback performance and then dies after taking a fall onstage . Maybe the worst part of Limelight comes at the end .
 “crying clown’ shit that you always thought was just an urban legend. It's the sort of nauseating “Crying clowns’ crap that you ever thought was a urban legend,’s the kind of nauseated ‘crying Clown�
 The Day The Clown Cried is so bad that Jerry Lewis decided it could never be released in his lifetime . It is about a clown who entertains children on their way to the gas chamber at Auschwitz .
 It’s a serious achievement to come second place in this contest, when you think about it . It's a serious accomplishment to come third place in the contest .
 You have to be authentically talented to be able to make things up this badly. You must be authentic. You need to beauthentically talented. You can't make things happen badly .
 The drunk clowns death scene is the funniest part of the whole movie, not only because the “funny parts are so cringe, but also because youre expected to cry yet want to throw up instead .
 Buster Keaton is the other great slapstick comedy star in 1920s Hollywood . But for the drunk’s comeback performance his comedy partner is played by Keaton .
 Chaplin showed me the rushes of the original Limelight scene with Keaton, before it was cut .
 Chaplin's brilliance would give him the generosity of spirit to recognise . I don't think brilliance is the word, genius is. You would think that the brilliance of Chaplin would help him recognise .
 No, not some kind of genius — he was ab201 MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 .
To my great sorrow, I've got to the age now where all my old minority opinions are ceasing to be minority . To mygreat sorrow, he's got to his great sorrow. To my great sadness, I have got to a time when all my former minority opinions have been
Keaton to me is more farcical, broader, not as real as Chaplin . I don't know why Keaton to him is morefarcical than Chaplin, but I'm not sure why .
 You can see it in his very first movies where he's the only thing worth watching on the screen . He's also seen in his first movies .
 All thirty comedies that he wrote and directed between the beginning of 1915 and the end of 1918 are one of the most innovative series of short films in the history of movies .
 Some of his longer movies like The Gold Rush and City Lights and Modern Times are masterpieces by anybodyss standards . Some of the longer movies are masterpiece by anybodys standards, and you can admit that even if you don't think it's funny .
 A better director, a better writer and a better performer are all around . A better comedian is a better storyteller all around, and a funnier comedian, says a better director .
 Buster Keaton had a masculine genius, and the passive-aggressive skinnyfats who have done most of the major writing for the past hundred years cant deal with a male genius . The passive- aggressive skinny fats have been known to be more aggressive .
 Buster Keaton was born in Piqua, Kansas as Joseph Francis Keaton VI on October 4th 1895 . He was born on October 5th, 1895 .
 The Grand Café on the Boulevard des Capucines was the first real movie projection to an audience in Paris . It was the year of the first movie projection in Paris.
 Joe Keaton came from a long line of Quakers that emigrated to America from Lancashire in the early 1700s . His father Joe was a Quakers who emigrated from the country to America in the 1800s .
 Joe himself was a drifter from Indiana who joined a travelling medicine show . Joe himself is a doctor from Indiana .
 Houdini was one of the greatest stuntmen and escape artists in history . He was known for his stunts and escape artist work .
 In 1922 a couple of frat boys decided to test him on this and one of them punched him in the stomach . He had time to prepare himself .
 Houdini was important in Buster Keaton’s life because he convinced Joe Keaton to start a vaudeville act with his wife Myra . He convinced him to do the act with Myra.
 He and his wife were never going to draw crowds on their own . He was OK, but he was OK. But he was not going to attract crowds .
 A semi-poisonous intoxicant will make people feel giddy and help them forget just how empty and miserable their lives are . It doesn't take a lot of talent to convince people who live in the middle of butt-fuck-nowhere and have literally nothing to do
 Joe and Myra needed a gimmick to make it in vaudeville so that people would actually pay money to come and see them on stage . Joe and myra needed to make the gimmick so that they would actually be on stage.
 Buster Keaton got his name because when he was 18 months old he took a “buster’ down a full flight of stairs .
 A “buster’ was the slang term in those days for a serious fall . The kind of fall where you break a couple of bones.
 They don't want you to bond with anybody, and that includes your lovers . They don’t want youto bond with anyone, that includes their lovers .
 The pill actually shuts down the release of the ‘love hormone’ oxytocin, and that’s why they want you to wear a piece of dead rubber over your penis . The pill is the reason women push the pill.
 A condom is a barrier to the closest form of physical intimacy you can achieve with another person . It prevents the true union of flesh .
 Plus condoms are covered in horrible chemicals like parabens and endocrine disruptors, which mess with your hormones .
 Using condoms can actually contribute to making you permanently infertile . Using condoms is a good way to avoid getting pregnant .
 From that day onwards they called him Buster, and the name stuck for the rest of his life .
 On October 27th 1900, Buster Keaton made his first appearance on stage in Wilmington, Delaware .
 Buster was billed as “The Little Boy Who Cant Be Damaged’’ and luckily for Joe and Myra, audiences were willing to pay a lot of money to watch him throw around the stage .
 The deadpan, poker-faced Stoicism in the face of violence and MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / FILM chaos began as a gag and ended up becoming the centre of Buster's entire philosophy .
 If you've ever seen his autograph, he has suspiciously neat handwriting . He never had any education, and if you're ever seen him, he's never had an education .
 He could barely read, and his signature was pretty much all he could write . He could hardly read, but he could barely write .
 He's like a figure from the distant ancient past when men had to observe the world and memorise knowledge without using writing . He's also like a man from the ancient past.
 The summer of 1915 (the summer before his twentieth birthday) was important for Buster . The summer before the twentieth birthday was important.
 He caught his first clap, allegedly from a hooker in Muskegon, Michigan . He was allegedly caught by a woman he was allegedly with .
 Hed seen movies before and thought Chaplin was funny, but until The Birth of A Nation he didn't see motion pictures as something hed want to do .
 He was tired of getting thrown around the stage by his alcoholic father . He was also tired of being thrown around a stage .
 Fatty Arbuckle was a silent-film comedian who was accused of raping and killing an actress . He was accused in the case of rape and killing the actress .
 He was innocent, and couldnt possibly have committed the crime, but the media didn't care, and wrecked his career . He couldnt have committed a crime, and he was innocent .
 If youre six years old, you're already too old for Fatty Arbuckle comedies .
 Paramount wanted to offer him a three-year contract for three million dollars . It was because he was so popular that he was too popular .
 He kept falling behind schedule because he partied too much and had no work ethic . Problem was, he kept falling back because he was not working hard .
 Fatty was offered a job by the end of the day. He and Fatty fell into conversation and hit it off so well that he ended up joining in the scene .
 He said hed think about it as long as he was allowed to take a camera home with him . He said he would think about the camera home for a long time .
 Buster's main scene lasts less than four minutes total and was improvised in a few hours . The main scene is improvised in just a few minutes .
 Fatty asks Fatty to fill up the bucket with molasses . He only has twenty-five cents to spend . Fatty says he has no money to spend.
Old men are playing checkers in the store. Then they get engrossed in a game of checkers that some old men play inside the store .
 Fatty finishes filling up the bucket. While he’s interfering with the game, Fatty ends up filling the bucket .
 Buster picks it up and tries to leave, but Fatty reminds him he has to pay . Buster picks up it up, tries to get it up. Fatty tells him he must pay .
 The quarter's in the bucket, so Fatty has to fish it out . It turns out that the quarter is in the Bucket . Fatty must fish out .
 Some molasses are still lying on the counter of Buster's hat . To do so he has to pour out some of the molasses into his hat, which is still lying.
 The quarter, pours the molasses back into the bucket and calls Buster over . He finds the quarter and pours it back in the bucket .
 Fatty tries to help him pull it off and knocks the bucket of molasses onto the floor . Fatty is trying to pull the bucket off and gets it off .
 When they yank the hat off his head, the soles of Buster's shoes are stuck to the floor .
After a struggle, Fatty gets a kettle of boiling water from a stove and pours it over one of the shoes to get it unstuck from the floor . Fatty pours the water over the shoe to get the water unstuck.
 When it's loose enough, he plants one of his feet on Buster's chest, kicks him backwards and sends him flying out the door . When it’s loose enough.
 The fight took place in the middle of a fight, with a man taking a sack of flour to the face and flying . Later he went back to get his hat, and went flying .
 The employee ducks out of the way and Buster roundhouse-kicks himself . He tries to take revenge on an employee who laughs in his face by picking up a broom .
 Buster is a minor character who is on screen for less than a fifth of The Butcher Boy . He is a small character who has appeared in less than one fifth of the show .
 There’s an economy in the way he moves, and you can see how intelligent he is even when you don't compare him to all the other second-rate comedians on the screen .
 When Buster takes a fall, you can see that he isn't afraid to take punishment . When Buster falls, he doesn't seem to be afraid.
 The gymnastic skill it takes to roundhouse-kick yourself like that should have got him into the Olympics .
 Fatty Arbuckle knew he had a star on his hands, and it’s a credit to his generosity that he didnt mind when Buster went from novice to apprentice to comedy partner to dominant partner .
 Fatty was supposed to be the mentor in this relationship, but Buster was clearly better than him . He was clearly a gag man, a writer and a director, as well as when it came to performing .
 Buster was only 5’4’, but when you look at his movies it's obvious that he was incredibly lean, strong and agile .
 Buster on the other hand could never be a loser or a tramp like Chaplin because he was so self-evidently physically superior to everybody else on screen .
 Ultimately Buster was too sophisticated for Fatty, and in 1920 they went their separate ways but stayed best friends . In 1920, Buster and Fatty were best friends.
As a solo comedy star, Buster never forgot how important it was to build a solid team . As a solo comedian, he never forgot the importance of building a team .
 He said he hired his staff based on whether or not they were any good at baseball . He was only partly joking, he said .
 All of Fatty’s best men came over to work for him . He formed a solid, loyal wolf pack that became the finest small production team in Hollywood .
 Buster was on contract to make eight short comedies a year, and ended up making nineteen in two and a half years . He was also on contract for eight short comedy films a year .
Before that Buster spent eight years as the most perfect filmmaker in Hollywood . But before that, he was the best filmmaker in the world .
 One Week is the first solo comedy Buster released . It's the first time the comedy has been released .
 A pair of newlyweds get a house as a wedding present . It's the story of a pair of Newlyweds who get a home as a Wedding present .
 Buster's wife is jealous of him for having married the woman he loved that out of spite . He changes the numbers on the crates that contain the building materials so that they don't match the “do it yourself’ instructions .
 Buster's combination of high IQ, high technical competence, high mechanical ability and low to non-existent ability to read. A lot of this has to do with Buster's lack of reading ability .
 Some of the worst silent-movie comedies are unwatchable because they rely too much on subtitles, both to develop the story and to get cheap laughs .
 He didn't think he was a poet like Chaplin, and he didn't want you to love him the way Fatty obviously did . He didn’t think he wasn't a poet, and didn't believe he was.
 Buster's standard character is curious, inquisitive, serious-minded and has a passion for gadgets . Buster is curious and inquisive, and has an interest in gadgets .
 In one of his most iconic comedies, Cops he plays a young man who is trying to make it in business so he can win the hand of the girl he wants to marry .
 The second half of the movie involves the Los Angeles Police Department's annual parade. What I can say is that the second half involves the L.A. police parade .
 He accidentally drives a horse-drawn wagon into the middle of the parade and passes by the main reviewing stand just as an anarchist on a rooftop lights a bomb and throws it down below .
 It lands on the wagon right beside Buster just as he’s trying to light a cigarette . It lands right beside him as he tries to light his cigarette .
 He lights it off the bomb, which he absent-mindedly tosses away as though it were a match . He then tosses it away, as though he was playing a match.
 It's the distracted, dreamy carelessness of the philosopher who has more important things to think about than the everyday world around him . The philosopher's carelessness is the dreamy Carelessness of him .
 Sherlock Junior is so impressive in some parts that youre too impressed to laugh . He was a master of special effects, as you can see in his 1924 feature .
 When he was making Sherlock Junior, he took a fall and cracked his head on a railroad track . He was making his first appearance as Sherlock Junior .
 He didn't stop in the middle of the take, he finished the scene, then took the rest of the day off because he had a blinding headache .
 Twelve years later he found out during a physical that hed fractured his neck . He came within a micromillimetre of getting killed that day .
 Steamboat Bill, Junior is a famous gag where Buster is standing in the middle of a street when the front of a house falls on him .
 The only reason he isn't crushed to death is that a window was open on the upper storey . The onlyreason he isn's crushed to life is that he was in a storey that was open .
 Some crew members threatened to quit if he went through with the stunt . Some of his crew members said they would quit if the stunt went through .
 According to legend, the cameraman couldnt bear to watch, in real life and in the movie, Buster doesnt flinch .
 I cant tell you what to watch if you're new to Buster Keaton because I don't really have any favourites . I can't tell you if you are new to Keaton .
 A man who smoked three packs of Camels a day his entire life. Not bad for a guy who smoke three packs a day .
 Buster Keaton at his weakest is still better than pretty much everybody else. Keaton is still good.
 The play is based on a stage play about a man who has to get married by seven oclock on his twenty-seventh birthday in order to inherit seven million dollars from his grandfather .
 The premise is stupid, and the miracle of the movie is how Buster takes this idiotic source material and turns it into a genuinely epic comedy .
 The climax of the movie features Buster getting chased through the streets of Los Angeles by hundreds of unmarried women who don't know whether they want to marry him for money or simply tear him to shreds .
 You have to wonder at the imagination that could come up with a sequence like that . It's not the first time a sequence has been created by a film director .
 Buster not only dreamed those dreams, he could put together movies that made them real . He could also make movies that make them real.
 If you need a hero, try looking for one who doesnt MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / FILM believe in heroes .
 Buster Keaton has the most realistic, hard-headed view of life of any major filmmaker . Keaton's most realistic view of the life of a major filmmaker is that of a director .
 The devices are efficient, functional devices created to serve a specific purpose . They're efficient,functional devices created for specific purpose. They're designed to serve specific purposes .
 Buster dismissed the idea he was a genius, not out of false modesty, but because it was totally alien to his view of what he did .
 He worked hard to make sure that he never had to explain the fact to anybody . He knew he was better than everybody else, and worked hard for him to be better than everyone else .
 The film is the most convincing, realistic movie ever made about the Civil War . It shows how a little guy who got turned down by the army ended up as a war hero .
 No bravado, no showing off, he just gets the job done, without ever realising how spectacular his results are, or caring very much .
 IN—1i776 IM—1776 is an online magazine of philosophy, cultural, and sociopolitical analysis . The magazine is based in London .
 Our elites have stopped caring about what is good and what is noble and fully embraced sin and weakness clothed as virtue . Our elites are now more focused on what's good than what's noble and what's virtuous .
 Trust in our institutions has almost fully collapsed, and yet, as those in power increasingly expose themselves as frauds and charlatans . In what is probably the last desperate attempt to protect their undeserved privileges, their control over our lives has reached unprecedented levels .
 We hope to provide the intellectual foundations for those practical solutions capable of forming the resistance our civilization depends on . By giving a platform to, we hope to bring together the most talented writers the post-political scene has to offer .
 The only people who benefit from eating vegetable oll are the shareholders of the companies who make it and big pharma, which gets to sell you copious “treatments’ for the diseases it causes .
 He manor stunk of corruption. Just say “NO’ TO VEGETABLE OIL and SAY “YES” to a life of RENEWED HEALTH and + VITALITY .
 The rough sound of snorting and clanging echoed from deeper in the manor and Lad stalked toward it . The rough sounds of snort and clang echoed from deep in theManor and from deeper inside the manors .
 Two hulking figures stoked the ovens and stirred filthy pots brimming with some heinous gruel .
 Lad and Mutt sneaked past gluttonous pig-men as they barked at each other in their underbitten dialect .
 In the shadowy halls they made short work of a stooped and red-eyed gaoler and took his keys .
 In the dark corridors under the manor, he heard the beating of hammers and the rattle of chains .
 Chained, beaten and emaciated, they hammered away in these brutal mines while gray devils pressed them with lash, boot, and threat of blade . Chained and beaten, beaten, emaciate, they hammer away in the mines .
 The furious sight of Mutt bounding over crags, crunching bones and rending flesh, scattered the slavers and sent them screaming .
 His covered knuckles knocked teeth, wind, and senses from his loathsome foes .
Short fighting blade slid past leather doublet and iron plate, found the flesh it sought and opened it like a gift .
When they were free of their chains they took their hammers and picks to the red-eyed cowards who had lorded over them . When they were freed they took the picks and hammers to the cowards .
 Lad and Mutt joined them with their own hoots and barks. They cried out in furious triumph and joined them. They were joined by their own barks and hoot and hoots .
 Just as the men’s hearts began to swell with courage again, a shadow fell over them .
 The brute held a cudgel in one massive fist and a black whip in the other . The brute also held a large fist in one huge fist and the other in the another .
 He feared not the cudgel, nor the whip, or the dark hearts of the wicked, he said .
 slave master brought down his cudgel, but Lad rolled out of the way, through the brute’s legs .
 Lad ducked and the massive weapon scattered stone and dust as it crashed into the cave wall .
 The slaver raised his whip arm but Lad stood on the end of the lash, grinding it into the dirt . The slavers raised the whip arm, but Lad held it to the ground .
 The brute struck the brute in the back of the elbow with his buckler and the big arm went slack with the sound of crunching bone . The brute went down in the face of the brute with the buckler .
 With their hammers, picks, and reserves of strength, they broke the giant apart like the rocks of the mine .
 One man looked at Lad’s horn and the glow that emanated from within it . One man was looking at Lad's horn.
 The pigmen followed Lad out of the mine and dealt with the pigmen in the kitchens . They followed Lad to the kitchens.
 The men staggered into the gloomy daylight. They went out the front doors and staggered into gloomy daylight . The men went into the dark and walked into the darkness .
 Back in the manor they made their way up the sweeping staircase to the top floor . Back in a manor, they make their way through the staircase to their top floor.
 As they crossed the landing they came to a long corridor and found their path choked with the Mayor's ghouls .
 They snarled and ran spotted tongues over rotten teeth and blistered lips . They also ran over their lips with blisters and lips .
 Lad turned their hooks and blades against them, spilling their foul guts . Lad turns their hooks against them .
 Mutt sent a panic through them, tearing hamstrings and breaking the necks of those who fell . Mutt's panic sent the panic through the hamstrings.
 Eryk and the men came behind them, their tools doing mighty work in the Mayor's halls . The men worked hard to get the mayor's office on the streets .
 Lad kicked open the doors at the end of the hall and found a chilling and loathsome sight .
 All along the walls of the large chamber were the village women, encased on display behind some crystalline prison .
 All of the warmth of their love and virtue sup_ planted and mocked by cold crystal .
 Blood erupted from the man’s mouth, eyes, and nose . He fell dead where he stood .
Each man searched his own soul and a shadow of guilt fell upon them all . Each man searched their own soul.
 We comforted ourselves with pretty lies as she tightened her noose around the village and the Heartsfire burned lower and lower . The Heartsfire burnt lower and higher and lower.
 She was comely, with long chestnut hair, and freckles that peppered her face . She was also comely.
 In the Spring I bring her flowers and she makes them into garlands that she wears . In the spring she makes her flowers into garland that she wear .
 Lad nodded and together they left the gallery and walked into the Mayors bedchamber . Lad nodded, together they walked to the bedchambers .
 Lad threw open the wooden doors and parted the gowns and found a stone staircase spiraling down . The stone staircase was found spiralling down .
 Amid the shadow and stench, they could hear children’s cries in the dark .
 Above the din of the fight in the dungeon, or perhaps beneath it, he heard a womans voice .
 Lad walked deeper into the darkness until all other sounds disappeared . All other sounds disappear .
 Her face was framed by long, black hair that fell around her full, naked breasts .
 The Mayor was seen with the body of a giant serpent. He looked back and saw the Mayor rising above him .
 She screamed and struck at him with fangs the size of whaler’s hooks, her perfect face now a monstrous horror .
 Lad threw up his arm just in time, his buckler halting the venomous fangs . Lad threw his arm in time .
With his free hand he pulled his blade and stabbed her in her amber eye . With his freehand he pulled the blade and stabbing her in the eye .
 He tried to roll away but it caught him in the back, throwing him through the air . He was thrown in the air by the air, but it didn't stop .
 The Mayor of New York City. He opened the end, casting valiant light and blinding the creature that was the Mayor .
 The tendrils lashed the scales of the demon Mayor and filled her maw and lungs as she drew in air to scream .
 Heartsfire burned every black corner of her vile being until there was nothing left but smoldering bones and ash . From within and without the Hearts fire burned every corner of the vile being .
 When Mayor was destroyed her spell over the women was broken, they were freed from their crystalline cage .
 When the rain broke and the sun returned Lad and Mutt set out to leave, the pair left .
 He danced with all the young girls while the children played with Mutt . The children were also playing with him .
 The Heartsfire burned so bright and strong it could be seen for miles, it was so bright that it was visible for miles .
 I was still under the spell of the Sixties counterculture, still trying to live up to the '60s "ideal" in some way .
 I decided that if I couldn't be the next Jack Kerouac, I would be an “underground’s journalist, in the tradition of the Sixties underground press. I decided to be an 'underground journalist'
 The New York Times writer was always testing the limits at the New Times, trying to see how radical they would let him be . He says he was always trying to be radical at the Times .
Since the New Times was a left-leaning, “alternative paper, they let me get away with quite a lot, he says . The Times is now a "left-leaning" paper, he adds .
 The Eye was founded by Leonard Abrams in 1979 . It mainly covered the art and avant-garde scene in downtown Manhattan .
 In the 1980s, ‘The Eye was about as close as you could get to the Sixties underground.’
 At the East Village Eye, you wrote an amazing MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 . In conversation with The MAN'S WORLD Latreview, Richard Poe tells the story about the MOVE bombing in Philadelphia . At East VillageEye, you write an amazing man
 Not only was the reporting brilliant, your piece was also eerily prescient . Your piece was the best, but it was also the best.
 They had done a trial run in 1985, dropping explosive charges onto a house in North Philadelphia, from a helicopter . They had dropped explosive charges on a house.
 The explosives started a fire that destroyed two city blocks and 61 homes in the surrounding neighborhood . The MOVE house was destroyed .
MOVE members trying to flee the burning house were forced back inside by automatic gunfire . MOVE members were forced to return to the house after the shooting .
 The FBI was deeply involved in setting up the MOVE bombing, even providing explosives . It turned out the FBI was involved in the bombing .
 The feds had stripped MOVE of all rights, purportedly making them legitimate targets for counterinsurgency strikes .
 The government planted pseudo-insurgents among the protesters to commit acts of violence . That sounds so much like the fake insurgency of January 6, where the government planted them .
The concluding paragraph of your East Village Eye story was prophetic and chilling . The concluding paragraph was prophetic, chilling and chilling.
 Some say the big event is already on us, that the cabal is preparing the final crackdown, to take our freedom . Some say it's already on them .
 I believe all their efforts will fail, as people are finally waking up, I believe . I believe people will finally wake up .
 It's possible there may be a false awakening, as there was in the Seventies . But it’s also possible there could be afalse awakening.
 What happened in the Seventies is they created an illusion that a great cleansing was occurring . The illusion was created in the seventies .
 The Church Committee, the Rockefeller Commission, the Nedzi Committee and the Pike Committee were all the government committees supposedly investigating the alphabet agencies . We had the Church Committee.
 Every day brings new revelations about the FBI and the CIA, and their alleged crimes against the American people .
 We learned about the MKUltra mind control program, the LSD experiments on unwitting victims, the CIA recruitment of journalists and clergymen . We also learn about the CIA's use of LSD to recruit journalists.
 COINTELPRO targeted political dissidents, using surveillance, infiltration, disruption, assassination, and black propaganda . It is smearing people with the use of forged evidence and fake stories planted in the media .
 In 1979, the House Select Committee on Assassinations officially determined that Oswald most likely did not act alone . The House select committee determined Oswald most probably did not acted alone .
 All these revelations came pouring out of these government committees and people were just overwhelmed. So all these revelations come pouring out from these government Committees and people are just overwhelmed by them .
 A new age of openness had dawned, and reform was in the air. But it gave Americans the vague impression that responsible people were on the case, looking into things .
 Today, the alphabet agencies are far more pervasive and destructive in our lives than they ever were in the past . Today, they are more pervasive than they were in their past, says author .
 I had become a business writer and a senior editor for SUCCESS magazine . I had also become a Business writer and editor for the magazine .
 Russia has seen the rise of free enterprise in recent years. SUCCESS sent me to Russia several times to report on the rise.
 How to Profit from the Coming Russian Boom was published in 1993 . The book was written by McGraw-Hill .
 George Soros had turned down my request for an interview, but he allowed me to interview some of his people who were working in Russia . I wrote very positively about Soros and all his good work helping the Russians convert to a free-market economy .
 Soros and others were lining their own pockets, taking advantage of Russias economic crisis to buy up state properties cheaply . The privatization process was corrupting the privatization process for their own gain .
 In 2004, NewsMax asked Chris Ruddy to do an exposé of Soros for the cover of NewsMax magazine . Ruddy: "I got a call fromChris Ruddy at NewsMax, asking me to do a cover story of Soros"
 Soros said he intended to do in America what he had done in other countries . He said he was going to do a “regime change’ against President Bush .
 "George Soross Coup" was a cover story for NewsMax . The story exposed Soross history with color revolutions, he says .
 This may have been the first detailed exposé of Soros’s color revolutions in an American publication . I believe this may be the first detail of Soros's color revolutions.
 UK writer Neil Clark had previously written on this subject in 2003 article in The New Statesman .
 The O'Reilly Factor, David Brock and David Brock wrote an open letter to Bill O' Reilly and Roger Ailes . They demanded equal time to defend Soros, Brock said .
 The chairman of NewsMax Media at the time was a guy named Lord William Rees-Mogg . He was also the chairman of the NewsMax media company .
 As a journalist, Lord Rees-Mogg helped create the myth that Soros singlehandedly broke the Bank of England . As a reporter, he helped create a myth of Soros' role in the banking crisis .
 The whole operation appears to have been sanctioned by the British establishment . In fact, Soros had a lot of help from major financial institutions, and the whole operation appeared to be sanctioned .
 Rees-Mogg also went to great lengths to build up Soros’s reputation as a financial guru .
 Lord Rees-Mogg was a major promoter of Soros . He also happened to serve as chairman of MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 .
 Chris and an associate of his, Nick Simunek, had basically gone behind Rees-Mogg’s back to assign me this story . So Chris and a friend of his. The late Nick SimUnek, the late NickSimunek.
 Rees-Mogg apparently wasn't even aware of the story until after it was published . The story was published on Sunday .
I felt I was onto a pretty big story with Soros, and I didn't want to stop, so I had to find another outlet . Now, at that point, I felt I'd been onto apretty big story. Now, I feel like I'm on a very big story
 I had previously worked for David Horowitz as editor of his news site FrontPageMag. com in 2000-2002 . I was editor of FrontPage mag.com in 2002 .
 Glenn's "Puppetmaster" was partly responsible for getting Glenn kicked off Fox News . "Puppymaster" is responsible for Glenn's dismissal from Fox News.
 The role of Lord Rees-Mogg in helping to “create George Soros is something very few people know about’s role . The role is a very little known about.
 "How the British Invented George Soros,’ posted on LewRockwell.com.com .
 The theme of British influence in US affairs seems to be quite MAN’S WORLD ISSUE 5 / INTERVIEW negative .
 Many people think of the UK as an obedient satellite of the U.S. But you seem to be saying it's the other way around .
 A lot of our history with Britain has been suppressed, and I think it needs to be restored, for our own good . I think we need to restore our own history with the UK .
 If you talk to an educated person from India or Ireland, they can recite a litany of British misdeeds against their country, off the tops of their heads .
 Britain can negotiate realistically, with an accurate understanding of how the British system works . It enables them to have good relations with Britain today, because they can negotiate with them realistically .
We have forgotten huge portions of our past experience with the British Empire . We have forgotten many of our previous experiences with the Empire .
 The most important thing to know is that globalism is a British invention, says David Cameron . Globalism is an invention, he says .
 British elites are the world’s leading promoters of it, to this day . British elites created it, and to the day, they are world's leading promoters .
 Americans, on the other hand, have traditionally disliked globalism . The United States Senate rejected the League of Nations in 1919, or, more recently, when Pres220 ident Trump put forth his America First policy .
 Americans oppose globalist policies, British establishment takes that very personally . The part we need to understand better is that, when we oppose globalists, the British establishment take that personally .
 They take it as a threat to their vital interests, and they respond accordingly . They respond accordingly, they say .
 British establishment opposed Trump on America First policy, but took covert action against him .
 The British eavesdropping agency GCHQ actually boasts of being the initiator of the so-called Russiagate fiasco, according to a 2017 article .
 The agency claims it discovered “interactions’ between the Trump campaign and Russian intelligence in “late 2015, then passed on this “material’ to then-CIA chief John Brennan in the summer of 2016 .
 The British can exert influence over U.S. affairs when they believe their vital interests are threatened . This is just one example of the kind of influence the British can exerted over United States affairs . The UK can exert its influence over the U.K.
 The British continued to exert economic control over the U.S. even after the Revolution .
After signing the 1783 peace treaty ending the Revolutionary War, the British started dumping huge quantities of cheap manufactured goods on the U.S. market .
 Americas fledgling manufacturers could not meet those prices and went under . The prices went under.
 This led to a catastrophic collapse of the U.S. economy, an armed rebellion in Massachusetts, and threats of secession from many states . The United States economy, the armed rebellion and threats to secession led to the collapse of many states.
 The British demonstrated they had both the will and the power to continue enforcing their colonial monopoly on manufacturing in America . By this means, the British demonstrated that they had the will.
 Prior to the Revolution, manufacturing was forbidden in the Thirteen Colonies .
 Our Founding Fathers created the Constitution specifically in response to this British trade war . The Constitution was created specifically to respond to this war .
 We needed a new federal government which could retaliate by imposing tariffs . We need a new government that could retaliate. We need the new government.
 Under the existing Articles of Confederation, the national government had no such power . The national government was not in power under the existing articles .
 George Washington wore a suit of homespun cloth to his inauguration . The item would have been illegal and subject to seizure under British rule .
 The British continued using financial and economic maneuvers to bring the rebellious Americans to heel . All of it culminated in the American Civil War .
 The British had managed to re-establish a colonial economy in the South, based on the cotton trade . Over time, the British had re-established a colonialEconomy in South .
 The South exported 70 percent of its cotton to England, and purchased British manufactures in return . The South bought British manufacturers in return for 70 percent .
 The North tried to replace England as the South's leading trade partner by building its own textile mills and imposing tariffs on foreign trade .
 The South secretly encouraged the South to secede, promising diplomatic and even military support, if necessary . They promised diplomatic and military support if necessary.
 British strategists planned to split the U.S. into four or more pieces, some of which would be shared with France .
 A January 3, 1860 article from the London Morning Post called for the reestablishment of British rule over America . North and South should separate, according to the article .
 The Morning Post was widely known to be a mouthpiece for Lord Palmerston, Britain's PM at the time .
 There have been many secession movements in America, starting almost immediately after the Revolution, and continuing right up through the Civil War . The British always seem to be involved, one way or another, says author .
 Britain's interest to split up the U.S. to make it easier to handle, easier to manipulate . It's in Britain’s interest to break up the United States, to make us easier to control .
Today's “national divorce’ movement might have some British influence behind it, as well as other sorts of foreign influence perhaps. So I wouldn't be surprised if today's ‘national divorce' movement was behind it .
 There has never been a serious secession movement in America that did not involve foreign influence, according to research . But research indicates that there has not been aserious secession movement that has not involved foreign influence .
 You mentioned that the Seventies brought false hope, the illusion that things were being cleaned up following the exposure of government misdeeds .
 "I know what my mission is, because life has never allowed me to do anything else," he says . "I have never been able to do any other thing," he adds .
 Everything I've learned has prepared me to do one certain thing, which seems to be solving riddles, solving mysteries, unraveling the Gordian Knot .
 Once the knot is unraveled, the solution has to be broken down and explained to people in simple terms . The solution is simple and simple .
 After 63 years on this earth, this appears to be the one set of skills that I've managed to master .
 I just need to focus on my task, to keep writing and researching as long as I can, until someone or something stops me . I just needs to keep researching and keep writing, until something stops him, she says .
 If the task is worth doing, it doesn't matter if someone stops me, he says . And if it's worth doing it, it's not a matter if they stop him .
First companion was the son of the wolf, raised to be such during the Pleistocene . The wolf's first companion was a young boy who was born in the same place .
 In man's constant war with his surroundings, the dog was first a hunting partner and guardian .
 The dog became a fellow warrior too. Then, as that war deepened to include war against himself, the dog became another warrior .
 One of the first recorded instances of the use of dogs in war was in a seventh-century BC battle between the Magnesians and the Ephesians .
 The Magnesian mounted warriors were accompanied by a dog and a spearman . The warriors are accompanied by dog and spearman.
 In this war the Keres took the life of a Magnesian horseman by the name of Hippaemon . He was buried with his horse, his spearman, and his dog Lethargos .
 A dog followed his master into the fray at Marathon against the Persians . The act was commemorated in the now lost mural of the Stoa Poikile .
 The Dog stayed at our side if need be until death. While the horse carried us into battle, the dog stayed at the side if needed .
 In the age of exploration and conquest that followed the voyages of Columbus, the Spanish Conquistadors fought to make a foothold in America against insurmountable odds .
 These men came from a Spain freshly united after a centuries-long successful Reconquista . They were hardened, seasoned warriors unlike any in the world at the time .
 These veterans brought with them veteran companions, Alanos and Mastiffs . They had fought with them in Spain against the moors .
 Juan Ponce de Leon was born to a line of war dogs . He was whelped in the Americas as a warrior dog .
 Ponce de Leon began his career of conquest for Spain in 1508 when he landed on the island of Puerto Rico . He was born in Spain in 15th century .
 Becerrillo appears in the record for the first time, already battle-hardened and sporting scars .
 Said to be worth fifty men, he was paid a soldier's wage and awarded comfort befitting his prowess . Said to have been worth 50 men .
 Sancho de Aragon was known to tear through thirty-plus enemies at a time . He was the pride of his master and caretakers like Sancho De Aragon .
 Becerillo would meet his end by a poisoned arrow in 1514 during the Spanish-Taino War of 1513-18 .
 Aragon swam out from shore behind their canoes, but was wounded by a poison arrow . Aragon was attempting to rescue his caretaker Aragon from a band of Caribs .
 The men that fought beside him tried to save his life, but he died .
 The Spaniards buried him in an unmarked grave so his memory could keep haunting the Indians . He was mourned by the men more than any other soldier lost that day .
 His master Ponce de Leon would meet a similar fate at the hands of the Indians’ poison arrows, not long after .
Becerrillo’s seed would go on to conquer the rest of the Americas alongside the men of Spain . Becerrillo's seed would be Spain's most successful player ever .
Known to have inherited his father’s fighting skill and ferocity, he gained the respect of the men with whom he served . He wore a gold collar given to him by Balboa himself .
Becerillo was a war dog who served with the Air Force in Vietnam . Of the same noble blood as Becerillo, he was Nemo, an Air Force dog .
 In 1966, at the peak of the ground war, Nemo and his master Robert Thorneburg encountered the Vietcong face first .
 The Vietcong were usually able to move through the jungle silently and unbeknownst to the America GIs . They could not escape the keen noses of their dogs, whose barks must have saved countless lives .
 Thorneburg and Nemo stumbled on a group of hidden Vietcong while on patrol . This is how they stumbled on the group ofhidden Vietcong .
 Nemo was shot in the face and the bullet took away his right eye . But he was able to defend his master until help arrived .
 Nemo was retired from service at the front but continued to serve until the end of his life at Lackland Air Force Base .
 The films are all based on books, but actually the film versions are the superior ones . They are based on novels, but the films are the better ones .
 The first two films are magical films at base, dealing with providence, destiny and dreams on the field . The films are at base.
 The third tries to make the first two disappear, explaining in cold detail how baseball really works . The third attempts to make it disappear .
 Nothing is ever quite the same once it's been explained as a series of causes and effects, at least of all magic . It's never been explained.
 Roy Hobbs is given a second chance to play in the big leagues when lightning strikes a tree on his property . He carves the remains down into a baseball bat .
 Roy Hobbs is bribed, threatened, blackmailed, and suffers every other attempt to dishonor a man . Hobbs has been threatened, threatened and blackmailed for years .
 Ray Kinsella is called crazy, ostracized from his community, and almost loses his farm and family . He is now living on a farm in Texas, and his family has lost their home and farm .
 Ray, after winning the pennant and shattering the lights in the stadium with a walkoff homerun, hangs up his jersey when he learns that he is a father . Ray's father is a dad .
 The film ends as he plays catch with his son, just as it began with young Ray on the same farm playing catch . The film was shot on a farm near the home of Ray's father .
 He is given the chance to play catch with his dad one more time, as a reward for following the voice and believing in something greater than himself . He has spurned his father's wishes for him to be a ballplayer as a young man .
 Manhood and its decline in modernity is a cornerstone of the dissident right . Manhood is a key part of the Dissident right, says the author .
 Royss' father, a good man, instills in him that gifts are not enough . Royss talent is obvious, but his father instills that gifts aren't enough .
 Roy seems bitter or angry that his father spends so much time with him to hone his skill . They train for hours and hours and not once does Roy seem bitter or unhappy .
 Roy's father dies of a heart attack and we see Roy mourn him, the first great loss on his heros journey . His father died of the heart attack .
 Roy carves a baseball bat, Wonderboy - his very own Excalibur . This loss only strengthens his resolve and during a storm, he says .
 Roy is even on the way to becoming a good father, as he and his girlfriend, Iris, spend a night together before he departs for a tryout with the Cubs .
 He's dismissed as too old to be a rookie, but gets his shot and turns the team around . He's performed feats unimaginable for younger, more athletic men .
 The Silver bullet that’s been lodged in his stomach for 16 years comes loose and sends Roy to the hospital .
 The last game of the season is their only shot at the playoffs . The team loses the next few games and the last few games are their only shots at the playoff playoffs .
 In a feat of strength, in his last at bat, he sends a homerun through the stadium lights . Ina feat of power, he sent a homeruns through the lights .
 The father-of-one retires from the game and returns to his farm to play catch with his son . He continues the tradition of his father and all fathers before them .
 Ray Kinsella is a product of the 1960s or at least 1960s that were sold to the public .
 The hippy was determined never to be like his father, an old man obsessed with the game . He was a hippy who read banned books and was determined to never be like him .
 Hes not a bad father by any stretch, but first two failures can be said to keep him from being a great father to his young daughter .
 Throughout the movie, he keeps referring to his father and the regret he has with how things ended between the two of them .
 Ray hears a voice in his cornfield, telling him to build a baseball field for Shoeless Joe Jackson . Ray hears the voice of ShoelessJoe Jackson .
 Ray builds the field, using up his savings and plowing over some of his richest farm land . The mystery and the nagging thought that he has grown up to become just like his father.
 Shoeless Joe Jackson then appears one night, walking through a wall of corn at the edge of the outfield . Jackson and Jackson bond over their love of the game .
 Ray is then told to find a reclusive author whos lost his love of writing and a former ball player who never got his shot in the majors . Ray is now told he must find a Reclusive author.
Terrence, the writer, is invited to see the other side and because of Ray, feels the creative spark and love for his fellow man that brought out his gifts years before .
 Archie, the former right fielder turned doctor, gets his shot to bat against the greats of his time . Archie is a former right-fielder who turned doctor .
 When duty calls, he abandons that dream to save Ray’s daughter's life . But when duty calls he abands that dream, he says .
 Ray is rewarded with a gift he swore he never wanted, to be able to play catch with his dad again . For his efforts, his faith and his faith, and his risks he has taken, he is rewarded .
 These films bring men to tears because we fear we might not be righteous enough to stay principled in the face of power, corruption, vice, and all other temptations .
 These films inspire belief in miracles, redemption and an uncynical world. These films are magical because they inspire belief.
 It is the story of old men sitting in a room, debating ballplayers’ physical appearance, dating habits, and other apparently meaningless intangibles .
 Wealth, greed, ignorance, and old white men are the cause of Billy Beane’s problems .
 Hes a bitter former ballplayer who was told that he could be the best there ever was . Hes was told he was the best he could ever be. Hes was a bitter ex-ballplayer who had been told he would be best there was .
 Oakland Athletics are a plucky team of misfits who rely on good scouting to keep their team competitive . The pressure of such expectations broke him and eventually he became the general manager of the Oakland Athletics .
 Only through the power of analytics are the ability to build a roster that can beat best teams in baseball .
On-base percentage wins games and Sabermetrics thrusts the As to the playoffs in a game that they werent supposed to win . On-base Percentage wins games are the key to winning the game .
 Nerds behind computers calculate percentages and the effort, talent, and skill of the men on the field . In a simulation, the men become ones and zeroes in a simulation .
Past-his-prime player is traded to the As for nothing, he tries to bring that spark of heroism to the team . If he wants to play, he needs to play their way, he says .
 Analytics removed the soul from baseball and yet we expect the victories still to mean something . We expect the wins will still mean something.
Today's game looks like a machine, performing inputs and creating outputs . Today's game is more like a computer than a machine .
 The pitching machine throws a ball that the hitting machine can only hit % to 1/3 of the time . The hitting machine throws the ball at 1/1 per cent . The machine can throw a ball at 0.5 per cent.
 The base stealing machines no longer steal bases because base stealing is analytically irrelevant . Base stealing machines are no longer used to steal bases .
 The umpires are monitored by machines and if their call is wrong, their authority is overturned . The umpire's authority is also overturned by machines .
 The worst part is, this thinking wins, so it will keep being the standard until something else comes along . It will be the standard for the next few years .
Heroism can be explained away with rationality, so heroes cant exist in this world . Heroism can't be explained with rationality .
 Today a man is nothing more than an economic unit, the same as a woman who can be replaced in the system like a screw or a washer .
 Ray Kinsella, and spurn their fathers, because they are old and have sinned and are obsolete . They are taught to be RayKinsella. They are also taught to spurn fathers because they're old.
 Society would see them be a jack of no trade, a master of nothing, because self-sufficiency is inefficient . Self-suffering is inefficient, says the author .
 Better men than I have written much longer, more profound works on declining birthrates in exchange for extended adolescence . Better men are better men than me, but better men, he has written .
 Everything sucks because the nerds took over and explained away the things they never could accomplish on their own .
I say we call our fathers if we're lucky enough to still have them . I say we play catch with our sons and we call them if we have them. I say they play catch.
 We show them Field of Dreams and the Natural and throw Moneyball in the trash . We also show them how to throw moneyball in a trash .
 When those boys grow up and it's their time at bat, a hero might knock the cover off the ball .
 The FAISAL MARZIPAN rchitecture and interior design matter . Very few are likely to appreciate the design choices .
 The brutalist building was designed to be a “machine for living in’, as Le Courbusier famously put it .
 Architecture is a reflection of a unique place, and, more importantly, the people that inhabit it . Architecture is the reflection of the people who inhabit it.
 The English built castles of stone and mortar, the peoples of the ancient Near-East erected cities of mudbrick, and certain Native American tribes carved intricate abodes into the sides of cliffs .
 Even in the wake of the industrial revolution, raw materials did not immediately take on an international aesthetic . The industrial revolution was the first time raw materials became available for megalithic construction .
 This remained largely true until the arrival of “universal ideas of governance and habitation’s ‘universal ideas’ of governance. This remained true until “ universal’ idea of governance was introduced .
 Universalising architecture and design went hand in hand with these ideas, erecting pillars of glass and steel in Beijing, London, or wherever their foundations lay .
 It's no surprise that within and around these obelisks of modernity, culture is equally universal . It's easier than ever to find a panini in Tokyo or tacos in Copenhagen .
 Most probably see this as a good thing, but something very remarkable is being erased . Most probably sees this as good thing. But something very strange is being deleted .
 Today, nothing is safe, at least of all a people's own identity and history . Today, no one is safe. Today, none is safe .
 Daniel Libeskind's additions to the Canadian Museum and the Museum of Military History in Dresden, Germany . Zaha Hadid's update on St.
 Antony's College in the United Kingdom and the Port Authority building in Antwerp, Belgium. Antony’s College in U.S. and Port Authority in Belgium .
High priests of the architectural community are bowing down and praying to these newly constructed golden calves . It’s a clash of old-meetsnew, and the high priests are praying to the golden calves.
 The average layman might mistake these tasteful additions for an alien invasion . However, I’m willing to bet that the average lay man might mistake them for an aliens invasion .
 Some of them appear, quite literally, as if the building is being subsumed or harvested by a galactic entity . Some of the buildings appear to have been created by an entity .
 A new architectural craze has been dubbed the "architectural craze" Social media postings about this new architectural Craze may imply widespread admiration . Other cultural trends suggest otherwise .
 It’s worth understanding what's happening to our culture, and that obviously includes the spaces that were supposed to live and work in .
 If you can, you should try to avoid being sucked up into this dehumanisation machine . You can't be sucked up in this dehumanised machine .
 If youre considering buying a place, make the extra effort to get something older and fix it up yourself .
 Newbuild condominiums are usually terribly constructed and have time limits baked into the construction . Besides, newbuild cond condos are usually very badly constructed .
Local breweries and bearded douchebags are at least repurposing long-neglected buildings .
 Frequent places like this as well as your local pub in lieu of some edgy, modernistic culture hole .
 The architectural oligarchs of modernity are less and less bothered with the environments of where normal people live . One good thing is that they are less concerned with the environment of normal people .
State-owned companies are usually not state-owned, and even if they are, theyre not nationally valuable enough to be targeted for defacement .
 Locals and tourists alike can continue to enjoy normal living situations, unencumbered by the ever-changing tide of modernism .
 Since the start of this pandemic, you've know something was wrong . After all, since the start, you have been able to find out what's wrong .
 As time has progressed, you've only become more awake to the manipulation of the pieces, moved by hidden actors on the chess board .
 Either way, you know that the propagandised narrative makes no sense . Why is a matter of secondary importance at this stage is not clear .
 Your being awake to it all is not stopping it from happening. Unfortunately, as you've probably realised by now, your being awake is not stop it .
 You've saved yourself and if youre lucky, maybe a couple of your close friends and family . You've also saved yourself .
 The same person who mocks us as “conspiracy theorists would be the first to shop us to the authorities if they were asked to .
 This is the person we must win over and have standing alongside us if we are to finally bring Leviathan down . This is what we need to do to bring it down, says author .
First, try to understand this situation from the viewpoint of the normie. First,try to understand it from the view of thenormie .
 You're comfortable among others who feel the same, patting one another on the back . You are comfortable among other people who feel like you are patting each other .
 The appearance of someone who wants to strike at the heart of all you hold dear. Now imagine the appearance of a striking person .
 You must set up a counter-narrative and leave seeds of truth for them to ‘stumble’ across along the way . You must also set up the counter- narrative.
 You will need to create an entire world view that they feel comfortable accepting, when the time is right, says author .
 As much as we may despise the normie, as much as they may frustrate us, we are playing a numbers game . We are playing the numbers game.
 Most of all, show them just how fulfilling and rewarding it is living your world view .
 The truth is, we can't just interact with these people, we must engage with them and, ultimately, win them over . We must engage in the motions and engage with the people, and ultimately win them.
 The alternative to the global pandemic plan will be terrible for all of us, says the author .
 BMW released the E39 5 Series in 1995, and production ran until 2003 . The facelift in 2001 smartened up the car’s already pin-sharp looks .
Spent some time with any of these vehicles and you ll know what Agent Smith was talking about .
 The civilizational implications of such vehicles are not clear . It's not clear why such vehicles no longer exist, and if youre like me, you ll start to think about the civilizations implications .
 Every line is straight, the flaring around its arches is subtle, and only the slightest beveling takes the edge off its right angles .
Even the top-of-the-range M5 is considered by many to be the greatest performance sedan ever built . It doesn't sport a gaping maw of a grille like modern BMWs do .
 Switchgear is minimalistic and rugged, an errant knee or elbow wont snap or break anything . The clunk of its doors makes the equivalent Audi or Mercedes-Benz feel like they were built from Chinese tin .
 Only on higher-end models will you find any screens or digital displays, and honestly, these features let the more premium models down .
 How these cars drive largely depends on which of the dozen or so engine options you go for .
 Smaller 2-litre petrol and diesel units are lacking in power, but still have six cylinders . Germanic superiority is a hum of Germanic supremacy .
 Straight-line pulls in larger-displacement diesels are endlessly satisfying . The bigger straightsix petrols sing at high RPMs .
 Manuals are geared longer than you may ex239 Man’s World . The manual is designed to help you have fun .
 Not having complete control over shifting is unacceptable to me, I'm not sure what to do with shifting . Spending extra time tracking down one of these manuals is highly advised .
Every premium vehicle has had its character hardened and stiffened out . The body roll adds another dimension to cornering, one lost two decades later .
 A few hours behind the wheel and chaining together corners becomes an art form . The E39 becomes a lithe and supple dancer .
 BMW could have repeated or improved the same winning formula, but chose not to . BMW introduced a new 5 Series in 2004 .
 Japanese designer Joji Nagashima was given the boot and replaced by the American Chris Bangle . Bangle is a fan of “deconstructivism’s” inspired by the relentlessly ugly architecture of Frank Gehry .
 Bangle deconstructed the hell out of the 5 Series and BMW vomited out the swollen, curvy, and plasticky E60 .
 The 5 Series of today is tailored to the crass, bugman tastes of Beijing businessmen .
 Interiors became flimsy and cheap, screens replaced dials, and engines became overengineered, unreliable, and prohibitive .
 I bought a dirt cheap E39 525D last year, and came from owning more modern BMWs, I was blown away . I bought the E39 last year. I bought it for £1,000, and it was a good buy .
 Everything I needed to do, I could do in my driveway with hand tools and YouTube videos, I can do everything I need to do . I could use hand tools, YouTube videos and videos .
 When I wanted to remove the pozzed emissions tech, I simply pulled out the relevant pipes, blanked up the holes, and started the car . The car has been fitted with a high-tech emissions system .
 E39 has no longhouse technology to screech and bark at its owner for committing such environmental sins . The E39 is a dealer for routine maintenance .
 The E39 owner rejects this cucked future and chooses timeless aesthetics, precision engineering, and build quality that will endure .
 The E39 represents a high water mark for BMW, and the decline that followed has echoes throughout our civilization . The BMW E39 is a high-water mark.
 Roads and bridges are crumbling while our best and brightest minds move imaginary money and design smartphone wanking apps . Roads and bridge are crumbling.
 We tear down monuments to martial heroes and replace them with sculptures of vaginas . We tear them down and create vaginas for martial heroes .
 On January 21, 2015, Ukrainian soldiers sang the song for the last time as they unloaded their Kalashnikovs .
 The War in Donbas, sometimes called the Russo-Ukrainian War, began in 2014 following several months of unrest . The War was called the War in the Donbas after several months.
 The loss of Crimea to the Russian Federation, along with the Euromaidan riots in Kiev that removed President Viktor Yanukovych, created civil war conditions .
 On one side stood the supporters of Ukraine's full integration into the European Union . On another side, supporters of the Ukrainian government stood for the EU .
Left-wing and right-wing liberals, centrists, anarchists, social democratic progressives, and hard-right nationalists linked arms and loaded 5.45x39mm rounds into magazines to remove endemic corruption from their country .
Supporters of Yanukovych, communists, Cossacks, regionalists, and pro-Russian forces organized themselves to defeat Kievan and EU imperialism . On the other side, supporters of Yanukovych and other supporters of the Yanukovych regime.
 Both sides called the other “fascist, a term which still has some potency for the grandsons and great-grandsons of the Great Patriotic War .
 Before long, private armies owned by billionaires on both sides were trading shots all across the country .
 Ukrainian oligarchs mimicked the Roman Senators of the Old Republic by raising their own warbands . Such archeo-futurism gave way to fully mobilized and modern battalions .
 Patriots, political soldiers, and mercenaries lined up and got MAN’s World ISSUE 5 / REAL LIFE their orders .
 The Azov Battalion and the Ukrainian Volunteer Corps began as paramilitaries for far-right political parties . The Ukrainian Volunteers Corps were formed in the early 1980s .
 These two men found companions and compatriots from the four corners of the globe .
 This is how a civil war became a new crusade pitting competing nationalist visions against one another . The civil war began in the 1930s as a war between nationalists and nationalists .
 By the autumn of 2014, much of the fighting was concentrated in the far-eastern provinces of Ukraine .
 A plurality if not an outright majority of the population is ethnically Russian and/or speaks Russian .
 Moscow considers the Don River basin integral to its current mission to reaffirm Russias status as a great power . Separatism runs deep in the Donbas region, and more importantly, Moscow considers it integral to Russia's current mission .
 DPR and LPR militias focused on capturing strategic towns and vital infrastructure like rail hubs and airports . Ukrainian opponents concentrated on defense and well as expulsion .
 Donetsk, a city with almost one million people, awaited as a prize for both . Donetsk is a city of almost 1 million people .
 The Sergei Prokofiev International Airport was the crown jewel of the diadem . The airport was the Sergei ProKofiev Airport .
 The international airport is located approximately five kilometers from the urban core of Donetsk . Two smaller hamlets, Opytne and Pisky, are situated much nearer at hand at the airport .
 The "cyborgs" would be born and baptized in blood to the music of machine gun fire and artillery shells .
 The Ukrainians responded to this ultimatum by sending in an airborne task force complete with attack helicopters and planes and troops from crack airmobile regiments . The Ukrainians sent in a task force of attack helicopters, planes and planes .
 The airport was comfortably in Kiev’s hands by May 27 . Overwhelming Ukrainian firepower retook the airport .
 It is believed that fifty separatist fighters died in the battle, including Chechen, Russian, and international volunteers .
 Ukrainians undertook a major offensive in July 2014. Flush with victory, the Ukrainians undertook major offensive .
The offensive was spearheaded by Colonel Mykhailo Zabrodski and his 95th Air Assault Brigade . The offensive was launched by the 95th air assault brigade .
 Kramatorsk won a string of victories before returning to their base at Kramatork . The 95th won their first game of the war at the base . The team won the first two games of the campaign .
 Kiev looked on the verge of an all-out victory in the summer of 2014, as the DPR and LPR forces were reduced to defending ever-dwindling pockets near the Russian border .
 Moscow couldnt let its client states disappear, so that summer, between 6,500 and 10,000 Russian troops crossed the border and entered the field of fire .
 Moscow still denies this, and one must always be wary of reports coming from the Atlantic Council and other auxiliaries of the American foreign policy Leviathan .
 The goal of attacking the Donetsk Airport was to both centralize the Ukrainian defenders in one place and render the airport unusable regardless of the battle’s outcome .
 The Second Battle of the Donetsk Airport lasted from September 28, 2014 to January 21, 2015 . The battle lasted for more than a month .
 The siege earned the sobriquet “Little Stalingrad’ owing to its viciousness, level of destruction, and its mythologizing. The siege was the most brutal in the world .
 The “cyborgs’ came into the world as mere men and left it in the same way . They earned their own memorial day and celebrations throughout Ukraine .
 The survivors, men like paratrooper Oleksandr Mashonkin, showed extraordinary courage in extraordinary circumstances, and yet remain ordinary men . The survivors showed extraordinary strength and courage.
 Donetsk airport was defended by a motley assortment of Ukrainian regulars, volunteers, and militiamen .
 The defending units included the 93rd Mechanized Brigade and battalions of the Ukrainian Volunteer Corps . The Ukrainian Volunteers Corps was formed from the Ukrainian National Army .
 There isn’t just a single kind of human life. In case you haven't noticed, there isn't just one kind of life .
 Later reinforcements came from the 79th Airborne Brigade and the Dnipro Regiment . The 93d Mechanized Brigade and 3d Spetsnaz Regiment were also reinforcements .
 Some reports claim that the infamous Azov Battalion took part in the battle as well . But these reports cannot be confirmed .
 The men of Azov, as well as the men of the Volunteer Corps, displayed more valor and heroism than all the world’s NGOs and Humanities departments combined . But, if true, then there is something bitterly humorous about the fact .
 NATO and the EU may refuse to train with Ukraine's “fascist’ paramilitaries, but they will gladly let them die in the name of countering Vladimir Putin .
 Facing the "cyborgs" were equally tough and dedicated warriors of the Vostok, Somalia, and Sparta battalions .
 The Sparta Battalion, a 1,000-man special forces battalion, was at that time led by the legendary commander Arsen Pavlov, aka “Motorola, a Russian-born ethnic Komi who participated in the counter-protests against Euromaidan .
 Mikhail ‘Givi’ Tolstykh is best known for a video featuring him harassing and terrorizing captured Ukrainian soldiers . The Somalia Battalion's commander is also known for harassing captured soldiers .
 These battalions included battle-hardened veterans of the Second Chechen War, as well as former members of the Ukrainian Army .
 The battle was equal in terms in terms of the battle at Donetsk airport . The battle in Donetsk was fought at Donetsk Airport .
 The DPR/LPR forces also successfully used their control of the city of Donetsk, specifically the city's high-rise apartment buildings .
 Throughout October and November 2014, DPR/LPR forces conducted daily assaults on the airport to wear down the defenders . The airport was targeted by the forces.
 The average temperature dropped from 45 degrees Fahrenheit in October to 36 and 39 degrees in November and December . The cold took its toll too, with the average temperature dropping from 45 to 36 degrees Fahrenheit .
 The constant shelling also knocked out power and water to the airport, forcing the defenders to rely on their narrow supply lines back to Pisky .
 The DPR force, possibly with the help of Russian special forces, forced the Ukrainian defenders to retreat to the newest terminal in the airport, their last defensible position .
 The defenders did not retreat to the new terminal until December 5 . Amazingly, the defenders didn't retreat until the end of December 5.
 More shelling barrages and penetrating attacks lasted until January 12, when the airports air traffic control tower collapsed . The airports air Traffic Control tower collapsed.
 The DPR hoped to end the siege by issuing an ultimatum on January 13, 2015 . The DPR hopes to end it by issuing a deadline on January 14, 2015.
 The ultimatum demanded that the Ukrainian defenders leave the airport that evening . It also demanded that they leave the Ukrainian airport that night .
 The Ukrainians defied the ultimatum, and on January 17, a last-ditch counterattack was launched against the DPR soldiers by the airport’s defenders .
 The counterattack surprised the separatists and allowed the Ukrainians to evacuate many of their dead and wounded . The counter attack surprised the Ukrainians and allowed them to evacuate some of their killed and wounded.
 Ukrainians hunkered down on the airport's second floor and resolved to fight to the end . Eventually, after losing the first floor, the Ukrainians huddled down in the second floor .
 On January 21, 2015, the last of the Ukrainian defenders either died, or were captured by DPR forces .
 The Second Battle of the Donetsk Airport was a resounding victory for the anti-Kiev movement . The second battle of the airport was the second battle in a row .
 The War in Donbas is a frozen conflict interspersed with artillery duels and occasional raids across the trench lines . The War In Donbas has been frozen for years .
 War fever now seems to have gripped Washington, D.C., with even nominally conservative senators from ruby red states like Mississippi suggesting that America should use its nuclear arsenal to protect Ukraine .
 Hubris has struck again, even despite the recent embarrassment in Afghanistan .
 Most of the supposedly identified Russian units in the conflict came from as far away as Vladivostok . Also, the war showed the expertise of Russian logistics .
 Many soldiers in the Russian military have experience in exactly the type of warfare that would occur if the United States and Russia began a shooting war over Ukraine . The U.S. military has been bogged down in “woke’s idiocy and useless COIN strategy games
 "cyborgs" of Donetsk airport are so revered in their country. But all the politicking and geostrategy talk should not overshadow why the airport is revered .
 These men withstood hunger, the cold, and the threat of death for over two hundred days . They had been threatened with death for more than two hundred Days .
 The story of Ukraine's ‘cyborgs’ is an ancient epic transferred to the age of smartphones . The story is a story of an ancient ancient epic.
 Like Sparta and Athens, these warriors proved their worth to their ancestors and to those who will come after them . The heroes of Sparta.
 The bear cult of the berserker can still be found in modern European men . They and their opponents proved that the bearcult of the bear cult is still found in men .
 Sometimes all that is needed is the right moment, the right cause, or the right airport to uncover the glory that can lurk with the hearts of simple men .
First met my wife. And there in the aftermath o. mo. Mo. Mo's first met his wife .
 There was no alterwe 44 native but to find contentment in 4 ™ its presence . Death, after all, was the new condition of + our age .
 The glass was decorated in a mosaic of reds and yellows and blues . The religious scene it once depicted was unrecognizable, much like the dead .
 The woman who I dragged from the debris was still in good condition, considering . My wife though, this woman, who was dragged from debris, is still in a good condition .
 She had been pretty, near gorgeous, when she was living, and was still pretty now . Her heart and brain had stopped working, and she had been very pretty .
 Her ribcage had been crushed by a cinderblock and her whole upper body was now sunken and flat like a pillow removed of its stuffing . Her only physical fault, if you could call it a fault.
 The woman I had chosen as my wife had been this exact mans daughter, but I didn't think so . Perhaps, out of all the bodies before us, the woman I'd chosen as his wife, had been the same woman .
 He began frantically digging through the stone and metal carcass of the building that had once stood across the street .
 He pulled from the wreackage one corpse after another, which he tossed aside because they were not his daughters . He tossed aside one corpse because it was not his daughter .
 He stacked one on top of the other, whole bodies, discrete limbs, torsos, their shredded clothes . The shredded clothes made a kind of grout between their burnt skin .
 I felt sorry for him, but this was not a time for pity, and he, too, would be among the dead soon enough . I feltsorry for him but this is not aTime for pity.
 By now the sun has fallen to the low point of the sky, casting just a faint light across piles of bodies .
 Fires as tall as mountains danced in various parts of the city like drunken demons . The city is famous for its nightlife, but the city is also known for its wildness .
 A small sailboat was dangling from a palm tree as though it had been lynched .
 To the east, a storm cloud rose out of the MAN’s WORLD ISSUE 5 . The storm cloud was like a giant, throbbing brain .
 As the man went on tossing bodies atop his pile, I finished clearing my woman of the stained glass .
 She lay on her back, her feet stretched out on what must have been a chair, her arms dangling beside her . Her arms were dangling from a chair.
 I took her arms and wrapped them around my neck, then grabbed at her waist to lift her . She then wrapped her arms around her neck and lifted her to her waist .
 She came up to me effortlessly, almost tenderly, rather as if she were half-asleep . She came to her bed effortlessly, as though she crashed out on the sofa with the TV on .
 As I pulled her toward me, it seemed that her arms found purchase around my neck and held me by a strength of their own .
 I brought her all the way upright until she was on her tip-toes, her whole body slack, languorous, her eyes cracked open just enough for me to see my reflection in them, she says . "I was promising her," she says.
 Once upright, her skull fell forward, her forehead flopping against mine as if she was coming in for a kiss .
 An old man still desperately in search of his daughter just across the street . But I wasnt ready yet, not here, not with that old man. But I wasn't ready yet .
 I rolled her down the block until we came to a drugstore where I found shampoo and a bar of soap . I rolled the girl down the blocks until we found shampoo, soap .
 I cleaned her hair and skin, careful to remove the dust and ash that had gathered in her armpits, under her fingernails, and in her crotch .
 In another aisle I found deodorant, toothpaste and a toothbrush, and a kit of makeup, which I applied sloppily, but the best I knew how .
 I placed a band-aid across a gash on her bicep and cleaned her chest wound with ointment and gauze .
 A rack of new dresses, navy-blue with red buttons, stood miraculously untouched by the war . A few blocks down the street, a rack of dresses, blue with red button buttons, was untouched .
 The dress fit neatly into the dress, although it was loose around her crushed ribcage .
 I found a pile of jewelry in a shattered glass case and around her neck . I clasped a string of costume diamonds .
 The old man, delirious with grief, had pushed through his wall of corpses and now carried his own dead woman across his shoulders .
 She was short and blonde, nothing like her wife, missing an entire leg, her face concealed by blood . Her face was covered in blood .
 He saw me and my wife, so lovely and limp, lying face up in the wheelbarrow . He saw him and his wife so lovely, he saw them lying face-up in a wheelbarrows .
 He leaned over her, the blonde woman still slung across his back, and touched his wifes navy-blue dress . He leaned in over her and touched her, and then touched her.
 He fingered the diamonds around her neck, and then, as a final goodbye, pressed his palm against her forehead .
 His gestures were delicate, so tender and human, which made me embarrassed for him . His gestures are delicate, but his gestures were so tender, human, that made him embarrassed .
 The sun by now had dropped below the horizon and it was night . He wanted to know how we could still see each other, and the dead, and our leveled city .
 He brought his one-legged, blonde woman down from his shoulders and cradled her like an infant . He brought her down from her shoulders and held her like a baby .
I wanted to leave. Now he was speaking like some kind of mystic, which I despised in him, and I wanted to left . Now he's speaking like a mystic, and he's talking like some sort of mystic .
 "My daughter,’ not as frantic as hed been when I first saw him," she says . "Still with an unresolved longing in his voice that I could remember having once felt myself," she writes .
 My wife spends her days in bed, dreaming, I like to think, of stillness . I'm a father-of-two . My wife is a mother of two . She's a daughter of a son of a father who is a father of three .
 It is an overly simplistic understanding of things that does not allow the dead an inner-life of their own. It is a simplistic understanding. It does not let the dead live an inner life of themselves .
 I maintain her body as best I can, though she is deteriorating as one would expect . I maintain my body as well as I could, but she's deteriorating, she says .
 "My daughter’ I like to imagine what he means, what he sees, and the memories, false and true, that make up the shadows of his pathetic longing. And sometimes, when I am lying beside her, I think about the old man chanting to
 I know he must mean something undead, something that cant be had again, no matter how long he searches, I know . I know that he must be something undead. I know it must meansomething undead, no Matter how long his searches.
 The girl he once knew to be his daughter was on her bicycle for the first time . Her pig-tails are flying behind her, he says .
 The man, much younger and more sure of himself, watches from the yard, urging her on . The man is much younger than himself, but his father is much older .
 The metallic buttons of her overalls throw rays of sunlight that blind him briefly and then not . The metallic button of her Overalls throwrays of sunlight into him .
 She has a natural sense of how to shift her weight, lean into turns, how to maneuver the handle-bars . She also has a good sense of what to do when using the handlebars .
 She is graceful, an athlete, and it is coming easier to her with every turn . She is also graceful and an athlete .
 He watches, happily, near to tears, as she comes out of one of her turns and continues down the street, a straight, clean line, picking up speed .
 He calls for her but she does not turn back, her pig-tails horizontal behind her, accelerating away from him, into the bright spring sun . She is too far to see him, until she is too close to him .
 Set 1 will be a heavy set, shooting for 6-8 rep range . Set 2 will shoot for 1015 reps and shoot for 2-8 reps . Set 1 is set to shoot for 1005 reps .
 Really try to push as much blood into the muscle as possible with this set of sets .
 I find that while it does put a little more load on my upper chest, my shoulders are still doing the bulk of the work . I’m able to really push a lot more weight than if the bench was at 90 degrees .
 wrap your elbows or do whatever you have to do to get this one in because you will grow . Wrap your elbows. Wrap your elbow or do what you need to do because you'll grow .
 I like doing these with a slight incline on the bench, again allowing me to load a bit heavier . I like to do these with an incline, again letting me load a little heavier .
 Lately I have been really liking a pretty unique vbar that my gym has . It has a very obtuse angle, so it's almost right in the middle of a straight bar and traditional vbar .
Using a machine really helps with maintaining accuracy in the execution . Using a machine can help maintain accuracy in execution .
In this modern society which strives to tear down its own high culture and history, Shakespeare and his plays are one of the few still-burning embers by of our theatrical and literary tradition . Coriolanus, in the 2011 film ad A 3 ispeare Today, in this modern
 For centuries, our ancestors were intimately familiar with and moved by the works of William Shakespeare .
 If you look up one of your favorite historical figures since 1600, chances are they had a favorite Shakespeare play . They ve been such a part of the western canon that if you look to one of their favorite historical Figures since 1600.
 Many are introduced to Shakespeare through reading his plays in the classroom rather than watching them be performed on stage .
 Many arent even aware that he is best known for his war stories, as they've only been introduced to his high-school romances .
 For centuries Shakespeare set the standard in the west for heroic masculinity by weaving together tales that demonstrate what these virtues look like .
 One man single handedly changed the language we use today . He changed the way we use our language .
 Words like “critic” “lonely’s’ “swagger-... even “skim milk” were all coined by the bard .
 Shakespeare's plays are one of the few still-burning embers of our theatrical and literary tradition . Today, in this modern society which strives to tear down its own high culture and history, Shakespeare and his plays are still still- burning embers .
 In Shakespeare's tales, social harmony depends on heroic masculinity as an avatar of divine justice . In Shakespeare, heroic masculinity is a figure in social harmony .
 What makes his stories different from the films you see today, is that usually you already know how its going to end .
 In plays like Romeo and Juliet he tells you from the beginning that this romance between star-crossed lovers will end in tears . In plays such as Romeo and Romeo he says that the romance will end with tears .
 Shakespeare is a master of understanding the human condition and fully embodies the perspective of his characters . Shakespeare is known for his ability to communicate with his characters.
Three-dimensional characters struggle with the choices they have to make . They are deep three-dimensional Characters who struggle with their choices . The characters are deep, three- dimensional characters .
 The plays reinforce the notion that the line dividing good and evil cuts through the heart of every human being . The play reinforces the notion of the line between good andevil .
 You'll have to watch his plays for yourself if you want to know why they have dominated our high culture for so long . But if you really want to understand why his plays work, you will have to look at them .
 The best way to experience Shakespeare is not to read one of his plays, says the author .
 Many theater directors try to subvert Shakespeare with cringey gimmicks that ruin the experience . purists would recommend going to a live theatrical performance .
 Shakespeare adaptations are made by people who love Shakespeare and are not trying to “deconstruct’s work or repackage it to make it more suitable for modern tastes and fashions . Instead, consider dipping your toes into the water by watching faithful film adaptations made by
 The director has many ways to heighten the drama of scenes . Through cinematography, music, and using the camera to command the audiences focus, the director has several ways to enhance the drama .
 Shakespeare's antiquated language is wonderful, but it takes a little bit of time to get immersed into it .
 Subtitles not only speeds up this process, but also helps you catch all the dialogue if the actors are speaking quickly . The actors are talking quickly.
 This PBS Television film adaptation of MacBeth is one of the best Mac Beth films . Trading 11th century Scotland for 1960s Eastern Europe, this PBS TV film adaptation is a classic . The film is based on the film, which was shot in the 1960s
 Stewart does an excellent job transforming MacBeth from someone who is torn over the prospect of assassinating his rivals, into a power mad tyrant .
 MacBeth has become a force of evil who needs to be stopped . The character arc is intriguing, but it's equally exciting watching the other lords of Scotland realize that Macbeth is an evil .
 Michael Feast delivers an incredibly moving performance as MacDuff . To that end he delivers an incredible performance .
 P Pn rai rdered his father and married Jabkswaateldstae . One of the key dramatic questions is whether Hamlet is crazy or if he is purposely trying to get his others to think he's gone mad .
 Gibson is perfect for this role in how his performance walks the line between genius and insanity . This debate has been waged for centuries, and Gibson is the perfect role in this role .
 Gibson channels Hamlet's mischievous Dionysian energy as he embarks on his revenge mission . Gibson channels Hamlet’s mischievous Dionyian energy.
 Hollywood FEARS this adaptation and has tried to memoryhole it . Mel Gibson’s sheer artistic raw power, Hollywood Fears this adaptation is an adaptation .
 Coriolanus is a man of power, and placing the film in a modern setting instead of classical Rome further emphasizes how such an elite man clashes against a degenerate egalitarian society .
 The Shakespeare adaptation is an excellent adaptation to watch . With some of the best action scenes in a Shakespeare adaptation, this is a great adaptation .
 Richard is bathed in a divine light and with a gold and white color palette that separates him from the gray world of the lesser classes . Richard is a gold-and-white man with a golden palette .
 Rory Kinnear plays a great Henry IV, and does a great job at showing Henry struggling with the morality behind his plot to remove Richard from power .
 Shakespeare has well and truly rubbed the censorious up the wrong way . The ending of King Lear was rewritten for being too harsh, throughout the Puritan, Victorian, and up into the modern era .
 The National Theater once went as far as to end their performance of the play with an apology for the holocaust . The play was played by the National Theater in New York .
 Nazi Germany disliked The Merchant of Venice as it was considered too sympathetic a portrayal . The marriage in the play between Jew and gentile violated the racial purity laws at the time .
 Dissidents in history have seen echoes of their struggles in Shakespeare plays . Dissidents have seen parallels in their struggles with their lives .
 In the 1964 Soviet Union juUboeM-Cer-lolE-NuCojeMeymer-veelimm Gsalevem CeyAlniaminiae the play to portray Hamlet as a Soviet dissident . The play modeled Claudius on
 MacBeth performances became popular in post-Mao China as the story of a national hero turned bloodthirsty tyrant resonated among survivors of the cultural revolution .
Today’s opposition to Shakespere is of the dumber variety. Like most things, today's opposition to the Bard is of a dumber range .
 Othello, with its black lead, has been a source of casting hilarity due to the ever-changing cultural rules of the past half century . O thello's black lead has been the source of hilarity.
 Non-white characters started playing the role in the film . That was considered offensive, so non- white characters began playing the roles .
 By the 1980s in England, it was considered racist to have a minority play a flawed character like Othello . So white actors were cast for the part .
We are back to casting non-whites for the role . Today, that’s considered erasure, but that's considered erasures, and we're back to cast non-Whites .
 It will soon probably be offensive if you don't cast Othello as a woman, it will soon be offensive . It will probably beoffensive if you do not cast O thello as woman .
Despite all the attempts to ruin the play through modern values, the text remains . The text remains.
 Shakespeare's stories will endure long after the dumb ideas of this era are long forgotten . As long as the text remains, the stories of Shakespeare will endure .
 In a world that wants to destroy our high culture, watching Shakespeare is a revolutionary act, says John Sutter . Sutter says Shakespeare is "a revolutionary act"
 Shakespeare channeled the spirit he channeled, and belongs to all men of the west . Shakespeare may have been an Englishman that never left his beloved island .
You will be carrying the torch of western high culture onwards to the next generation .
 Throttle to the max, heraced towards the town where this adventure had started . The adventure began with a trip to the town.
John lowered the plane and flew underneath the cloud, battling the crazy wind . John lowered the aircraft and flew under the cloud .
 Bolts were striking left and right, and thunder roared at the tigerstriped plane . The plane was struck by a storm of thunder and lightning .
 Cold circled the town, looking for a place where the silver discus could have landed .
 Below them, people huddled in their tin sheds, at least the ones that still stood .
 John made another circuit, then another one, then a second .
 A map flew up, tossed by the wind and momentarily stuck to the windshield, blinding them . The map was tossed by a wind, but it was quickly spotted by a passerby .
 Three dots flew for a second to the south, when in that direction three dots appeared, speedily growing . They flew for one second to a second, when they flew for another .
 Cold must have quickly repaired whatever damage Cold had done to their craft . They must have quick repaired what damage Cold has done to them .
 Nurlan's uniform is recognizable from afar by his uniform . He is known for his uniform, but his uniform is still recognizable .
 The air was stilled here, as if the effect of the somatoma started a good click below the ancient craft .
 The warlord gave a shot at him from his personal firearm, but the distance was too great . He gave the warlord a shot from his own firearm .
 Nurlans body was hanging listlessly. Then with a swift blow, he cut the rope on which Nurlan was hanging . Then he cut it off with a quick blow .
 John saw ports in the discus open as they finally achieved its altitude . John also saw ports open for the first time .
 Makan-Khans plane avoided the one aimed at him, going into a deep spiral . Makan. Khans plane avoids the plane aimed at the man, but not the plane .
 John could not look behind him, but he saw a large flat light appear in front of her face .
 He flew under the discus, and at that very moment it seemed to lose its buoyancy in the air . He was flying under the Discus .
John put his mind to dispatching the Tiger planes now, but this proved unnecessary . John put hisMind to dispatch the Tiger plane now, and this proved pointless .
 Makan's plane was nowhere to be seen and the third one had started making his escape . Makan’s plane was no longer seen and he was on his way out of the plane .
 Sunset was coming fast, and with it, it was the end of fighting for radar-less planes .
 Cold put the floatplane in the muddied road going into Kirshevo from the west . The floatplane was put in a mudded road.
 John ran towards Amara as fast as he could, knowing that Amara had disabled its defenses as well . John ran to the Amara's defense, knowing it was disabled by Amara .
 When they were close enough, she opened the trap door and Cold jumped on it even before it touched the ground . The trap door was opened when the pair were close.
 Desist from helping this mudwalker’s plight. ‘You voided your rights when you attacked me,’ he says .
 It was installed in one of the flier’s panels, the gruesome beating heart still present . The heart is still present in the panel .
 Pressing the panel in a few places, she made the device emerge and picked it up .
 Methinks the welcome at the Rajas court in Surgut will be splendid’ John gave no verbal response to the welcome .
 Makan, instead of pushing Derletass lifeless body off, rolled with it, letting it fall with the somatoma . Makan rolled it off, letting the body fall with it .
John jumped up, avoiding the blow, and landed a mighty kick on his opponent's face . John jumped up and avoided the blow and landed the kick on the face .
 Once again, the Khan of the Tigers fell back, this time not to stand up again . The Khan fell back again, but not again.
 The somatoma had fallen in mud, but its heart still beating feebly within it . He walked over to the place where it had fallen .
 He is yours to arrest and send as a trophy to the Neon Tsar, with my regards . He is your to arrest.
 She stood a long while, watching as he disappeared in the distance with the setting sun .