 Poroshenko stresses need not to let Russia "spill its aggression into Azov Sea" Poroshenko stressed Russia's attack in the Kerch Strait and the Black Sea was not an isolated incident .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has stressed the need not to allow Russia to spill its aggression into the Sea of Azov . Ukraine's President has stressed that Russia should not be allowed to spill into the sea .
 An 'Azov package of sanctions' against Russia would be the least the world should respond with this time . The world should also respond to Russia's actions.
In 2014, for the first time in seven decades, a state sought to redraw Europe's map by way of military aggression . In 2014, it was the first state in seven years to seek a new map of Europe . In 2013, the state sought a map that
 Ukraine alone was not able to withstand a Russian military adventure four years ago . Ukraine's revolution was in the aftermath of our revolution, Ukraine's president says .
 Russia is prepared to stand up to Russia. But today our resolve is strong, and we are prepared to Stand Up to Russia .
 Ukraine has enacted limited martial law in Ukrainian territory near the Russian border . This is why we are able to mobilize and protect our security should Russia dare to intensify its aggression, says Ukrainian president .
 Moscow's president calls for further sanctions against Moscow . "We also need the support of the international community in the form of further sanctions"
 Jobs have been lost, livelihoods destroyed, food is being wasted, and goods intended for Europe and the Middle East delayed . Jobs are lost and livelihoods are lost, and food is wasted .
 "The words of Western condemnation this fall have only worsened Russia's behavior," he said .
 Poroshenko says Ukraine's ships never aggressed Russia's Navy, never opened fire despite being attacked with gunfire and missiles .
 Moscow did not hide behind 'little green men' as it did in Crimea in 2014 or its servicemen on 'vacation' in 2014 . It claimed when hostilities started in Eastern Ukraine the same year .
"These are not just Ukrainian ships; they carry the flags of other countries," Poroshenko said . "They have effectively been commandeered by Russia," he added .