 By early February 2014 a decision had been made in the Kremlin to dismember parts of Ukraine, even if Yanukovych had put down Euromaidan and remained in power .
 This was revealed in a recently leaked policy note or document which caused a stir in many newspapers and elsewhere several days ago . The leaked document was published in a recent leaked document . It was published on the website of the National Security Council .
 Some independent Russian commentators have suggested such a document could have been produced by any one of several important Russian think tanks who were all gradually coming to the same conclusion make a grab for Ukrainian sovereign territory .
 He thought that Russia no longer supported him in the Kyiv standoff, that Moscow had sold him out . Moscow now had its own plans unrelated to extending his presidential powers .
 One of Putin's closest aides, Sergey Glazyev, said at the time, "Ukrainian authorities make a huge mistake if they think the Russian reaction will become neutral in a few years from now"
 Yanukovych was under constant pressure from Russian authorities not to sign the Association Agreement deal with the EU . He declined to do so late November 2013 .
 Boris Nemtsov was a most charismatic man and true friend of Ukraine . He was killed in the assassination of his friend and friend Boris.
 Putin is leading his country in Russia, according to Russian media reports . Putin is the leader of Russia, and his country is the world's most powerful leader .
 The Polish PISM site provides sober analysis of the sensational leaked Kremlin policy note .
 Kharkiv would be a big problem because of the local strongmen, Mayor Gennady Kernes and Regional State Administration head Mykhaylo Dobkin . Young students could react unpredictably.
 Bohoslovska's predictions of what she called a 'war between Russia and Ukraine' are markedly similar to the ideas expressed in the policy note . The leaked policy note is most likely genuine, debunking Russia's claims that the uprisings in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine were a response
 Putin must have realised 'the game was up' and that Putin would not be his saviour . He must also have realised that Putin wouldn't be his Saviour .
 Yanukovych started making plans for evacuation soon after these interviews took place . Russia's aggressive actions toward Ukraine were approved .
With recent events in Ukraine and beyond, many policymakers and foreign policy analysts are asking what motivates Putin .
 Officials in Washington and European capitals are left asking what Putin wants and how far is he willing to go .
 The great lesson of the outbreak of World War I in 1914 was the danger of misreading the statements, actions, and intentions of the adversary .
 Vladimir Putin has become the greatest challenge to European security and the global world order in decades . Today, Vladimir Putin is the most powerful leader in the world .
 Russia’s 8,000 nuclear weapons underscore the huge risks of not understanding who Putin is and what his aspirations are for himself and the people of Russia .
 He has plans of action, but included in them are also alternative contingency plans to deal with problems . He is therefore very difficult to predict, he says .
 Since coming to power he has created a unique system fusing intelligence with politics and the military and security branches of power . He has also created a new system for intelligence to be used by politicians and military .
 In the current Russian/Ukrainian hybrid war this system has come into its own . The current Russian and Ukrainian hybrid war has been dubbed a "Russian hybrid war"
 The podcast is a brutal description of how Putin views the rest of the western world . Also from about 1 hour 00 minutes onward into the podcast .
 Western politicians and media continue to conveniently delude themselves . Western politicians continue to delude their own media and politicians .
 The Ukrainian crisis is not just about some disgruntled separatists in a far corner of the country . It's not just the Ukrainian crisis.
 It is a 'spetsoperatsiya' inspired by, organised, funded and controlled by Putin an a handful of his colleagues .
 It is replete with 'maskirovka' lies, lies, false trails, misleading declarations . At its core is the absolute need not to reveal its true aims .
 Western nations have an absolute obligation to prevent Putin accomplish his aims . Western nations now have a absolute obligation.
 Other operations simply do not exist at present at present, and new ones can not be developed in a month . Other such operations simply don't exist.
 It has transferred hundred of heavy weapons, including rocket launchers, heavy artillery, tanks and armoured vehicles . It maintains hundreds of regular soldiers, including Special Forces, in Ukraine, as well as command and control elements .
 The recent escalation in fighting would not be possible without the military support and strategic direction that Russia provides . Russia provides a strategic direction and military support .
 There are some claims an ammo dump was hit by Ukrainian artillery . Some heavy weaponry also destroyed .
 A major attack on Ukrainian-held territory could be halted or at least seriously delayed . The chances of any ceasefire soon are very slim, says Russian television newsreels .
 Tonight's 'earthquake' in Donetsk is perhaps the first bit of luck Ukies have had for quite a while .