 Most of the Communist seats were from the Eastern regions of Ukraine . Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts are in the highly industrialized Donbas area .
 The main issue that got the Kiev “Maidan’s protests going was that of international economic relations. The main problem is that of economic relations, the government says .
 Yanukovych had been negotiating for the inclusion of Ukraine in a relationship with the European Union . Yanukovych was negotiating with the EU to lead perhaps to full membership .
 Ukraine is the poorest country in Europe despite its rich agricultural resources and valuable mining and industrial operations in the Eastern part of the country . The country's per capita gross domestic product is lower than that of El Salvador .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin offered Yanukovych what appeared to him to be a better deal, Yanukovych withdrew from the European Union project .
 Yanukovych's notice that the European Union and the related Euro currency group was not doing very well for the poorer member countries . Greece, Portugal, Italy and Ireland were being forced to accept drastic austerity measures in order to stay in the Union .
 Ukrainian nationalists of various kinds, including neo-Nazi and fascist groups, also have an extreme anti-Russian ideology . Part of their desire to become “part of Europe’s Europe is related to this, says the author .
 Easterners have both cultural and economic links to Russia . Russia buys much of what their factories produce . Easterners buy much of their factories .
 Many in the East began to resist control from Kiev when the new post-Maiden government began to put out its program .
Among their fears was that native Russian speakers would be deprived of their language rights . Among their fears were that native Russians would be depriving them language rights.
 There were plebiscites in the Eastern areas in which the idea of either autonomy or outright independence for the East was strongly voiced .
 The new government of right-winger Arseny Yatsenyuk decided to crush this movement, which it labeled as separatist, by military force .
 Kiev government sent in troops to suppress the autonomist movement in the East . They met with strong resistance and were thrown back in many cases .
 Kiev became more reliant on the forces of self-organized fighting groups such as the Aidar and Azov battalions, which contain many neo-Nazis, fascists and other extremists .
 At least two score burned to death in a horrific attack in Odessa last May . These elements have launched violent attacks against Ukrainian Communists and others they despise .
 Kiev regime is being forced to accept much of the program which the communists promoted a year ago, including a high degree of autonomy for the Donbas region . The Kiev regime has recently lost its troops in the East .
 The U.S. has continued to claim that the revolt of ‘Eastern Ukraine is nothing more than ‘Russian aggression’ and is followed in this by our corporate press .