 Crimea was invaded and subsequently annexed by Russia following an internationally-criticized referendum . During its first phase in February–March 2014, Ukraine was invaded by Russia .
 protests by anti-Maidan and pro-Russian groups took place across other parts of eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Local separatists, some directed and financed by the Russian security services, took advantage of the situation in Donetsk, Luhansk, and Kharkiv oblasts in early March 2014 .
 The Ukrainian government was able to quickly quell this unrest, and removed the separatists by 10 March . In April 2014, armed Russian-backed groups seized government buildings across Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 The Ukrainian government began what it called an "Anti-Terrorist Operation" to quell the unrest . To suppress this insurgency, the government began sending in the armed forces .
 Unrest in Kharkiv and Odessa oblasts did not escalate into armed conflict . Unrest on the other hand, on theother hand, didn't escalate into conflict .
 Order was restored in these regions with co-operation of the local civil authorities . Pro-Russian disturbances, such as bombings, continued throughout the year .
 City centre clashes and further events. City centre protests by date and attendance 4.4 .
 Pro-Ukrainian counter-protests 5 List of proclaimed breakaway states . The list includes a list of declared breakaways .
 Ukraine became gripped by unrest when President Viktor Yanukovych refused to sign an association agreement with the European Union on 21 November 2013 . The 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine was the first pro-Russia unrest in the country .
 An organized political movement known as 'Euromaidan' demanded closer ties with the European Union . The movement also demanded the ousting of Yanukovych .
 Donetsk oblast governor Serhiy Taruta said that rallies in Donetsk included ex-convicts and others who travelled from Crimea .
 Ukraine's police and border guards denied entry to more than 8,200 Russians between 4 and 25 March .
 A poll conducted by Kyiv International Institute of Sociology from 8–18 February 2014 assessed support for union with Russia throughout Ukraine .
 12% of those polled favoured union with Russia . 0% of the four regions surveyed agreed that Ukraine should remain independent .
 Only 5% of respondents in eastern Ukraine felt that Russian-speakers were 'definitely' under pressure or threat . Russian Federation sent military to protect Russian-speaking citizens of Ukraine .
 Among all Ukrainians polled overall, 34% favoured joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . 44% were against joining it .
 Only 14% of people polled in eastern Ukraine thought that the country was going in the wrong direction, compared with 36% in western Ukraine . A poll conducted by the Institute of Social Research and Policy Analysis analysed the identities of Donetsk inhabitants .
 The same poll determined that 66% of Donetsk residents that were polled supported remaining in a unified Ukraine . 18.2% supported joining Russia, and 4.7% supported independence .
 A second poll conducted from 26 to 29 March showed that 77% of residents condemned the takeover of administrative buildings . 16% supported such actions .
 40.8% of Donetsk citizens supported rallies for Ukraine's unity, while 26.5% supported pro-Russian rallies . A vast majority disapproved of the seizure of administrative buildings by protesters .
 Over 50% of those polled in southern and eastern Ukraine considered acting President Oleksandr Turchynov to be illegitimate . More than 50% polled in the southern and east of Ukraine considered the acting president illegitimate .
 Most of those polled said they found nothing attractive about Russia . Those who did so did so for economic, and not cultural reasons . Most of the respondents said they did not like Russia .
 Those polled in southern and eastern Ukraine were generally split on the legitimacy of the present government and parliament . Majority in all regions agreed that deposed president Viktor Yanukovych was not the legal president of Ukraine .
 In all regions but the Donbas, pro-Euromaidan oligarch Petro Poroshenko dominated preliminary election polls . In all region but the donbas, Pro-EURomaida oligarch dominated preliminary polls .
 A comprehensive poll released on 8 May by the Pew Research Centre surveyed opinions in Ukraine and Crimea .
 The poll was taken after the annexation of Crimea, but prior to the clashes in Odessa on 2 May . 70% of easterners polled said that they wanted Ukraine to remain united .
 91% of Crimeans polled thought that the vote was free and fair . 88% said that the Ukrainian government should recognize the results .
 During the Euromaidan revolution there were widespread reports that pro-Yanukovych and pro-Russian 'anti-Maidan' protesters were paid for their support .
 Media portrayal of the Ukrainian Crisis differed greatly in the way they portrayed the demonstrators .
 In the Ukrainian media, "Colorado beetle" was used as a derogatory word for pro-Russian demonstrators and militants . The word was used in reference to the Ribbon of St George they wore .
 The "Russian Spring" refers to the Prague Spring of 1968 and the Arab Spring of 2010-2011 . The wave of unrest came to be referred to as the Russian Spring .
 The March of Peace took place in Moscow a day before the Crimean referendum .
 Following the removal of Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych on 22 February 2014, various protests and counter-protests were held in Crimea . Anti-Maidan Russian nationalists sought the peninsula's annexation by Russia and by Crimean Tatars .
Unidentified militants began to take control of the Crimean Peninsula on 26 February . Unidentified militants, subsequently confirmed to be Russian troops, began to gradually take control .
Question of joining the Russian Federation was put to a referendum, which had an official turnout of 83 per cent and resulted in a 96% affirmative vote . European Union, American, Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar officials have condemned the vote as a violation of the Ukrainian constitution and international law .
 Crimean Parliament declared independence from Ukraine on 17 March . It asked to join the Russian Federation .
 Russia and Crimea signed a treaty of accession of the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol into the Russian Federation in March .
 The accession treaty was ratified on 21 March . The establishment of two new constituent entities in the Russian Federation was marked by a 30 gun salute .
 The United Nations General Assembly passed a non-binding resolution that declared that the referendum was invalid . Around 3,000 people had fled Crimea by April 1, and 80% of them were Crimean Tatars .
 Teams from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast and Chernivtsi Oblast assisted internally displaced persons in western Ukraine .
 The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said that about 10,000 people had been displaced . Numbers of refugees, primarily Crimean Tatars, continued to rise, by 20 May .
 Donetsk People's Republic and War in Donbas Pro-Russian protesters occupied the Donetsk regional state administration building from 1 to 6 March . Security Service of Ukraine removed the building after protesters occupied it .
Pro-Russian protesters in Donetsk, 8 March 2014, clashed with pro-Maidan protesters . Pro-Russian protests in Donetsk were marked by violent clashes between pro-Russian and anti-maidan demonstrators .
 A large group of anti-Maidan protesters broke through a police cordon and began to attack a smaller pro-maidan demonstration . A small group of protesters broke into a policecordon and attacked a smaller demonstration .
 On Sunday, 6 April, pro-Russian protesters held a rally in Donetsk pushing for a referendum on independence .
 A group of 1,000 protestors broke away from the crowd and stormed the RSA building . The police offered little resistance .
 The people who voted within the RSA were not elected to the positions they assumed . People who voted in the RSA had not been elected to positions they had assumed .
 The declaration was voted on by some regional legislators . Other reports say neither the Donetsk city administration nor local district councils in city neighbourhoods delegated any representatives to the session .
 The group's leaders have appealed to Russian President Vladimir Putin to send Russian peacekeeping forces to the region . The group has appealed to the Russian President to send peacekeepers .
 Andrei Purgin had been arrested weeks prior on charges of separatism . The group's leader, AndreiPurgin, was arrested weeks before the charges .
 SBU office in Donetsk was retaken by SBU Alpha Group . Later that day, the SBU offices in Donetsk were retaken .
 Ukrainian special forces unit led by Ukrainian vice prime minister for law enforcement, Vitaliy Yarema, refused to storm Donetsk RSA building . The unit was supposed to restore control over the building, but refused to remove separatists .
 Turchynov offered amnesty to separatists if they laid down their arms and surrendered . Also offered concessions that included devolution of power to regions, and protection of the Russian language in law .
 Many in Donetsk expressed disapproval toward the actions of the separatists . Many in the Donetsk region expressed disapproval of the actions .
 A group of masked militants, formed in Crimea, captured Sloviansk, a city in the northern part of the Donetsk Oblast . The group captured the executive committee building, the police department and SBU office in the city .
Seizures of police stations and other government buildings by armed separatist groups also occurred in Donetsk Oblast . Ukrainian Internal Affairs Minister Arsen Avakov labelled the gunmen ""terrorists" and swore to use Ukrainian special forces to retake the building .
 Ukrainian transitional president Oleksandr Turchynov launched a full-scale 'anti-terror' military operation to reclaim the buildings . Russian Special Forces units were operating on Ukrainian territory in the cities of Kramatorsk and Sloviansk .
 The number of Russian special forces troops was said to be 450 on 16 April .
 The 'anti-terror' operation in Donetsk Oblast had hit some stumbling blocks .
 Protesters seized Ukrainian armoured vehicles in Kramatorsk, Sloviansk, and sent soldiers away . Protesters seized Ukraine armoured vehicles and sent them away .
The Geneva Statement of 17 April did not result in the end of the government building occupations in Donetsk Oblast .
 Two pro-Russian groups in Mariupol said that they 'felt betrayed' by the action taken in Geneva .
 A truce declared for Easter Sunday was broken by an attack upon a separatist checkpoint in Sloviansk . The situation remained tense on 23 April, with occupation of government buildings ongoing throughout the region .
 OSCE monitors observed that the city administration building, SBU building, and police station in Sloviansk remained heavily fortified by armed groups of men with masks .
 The monitors believed that the city remained under heavy surveillance, both by people in uniforms and masks, but also by many persons in civilian clothing . However, the monitors said that many people were still under surveillance .
 One resident said that people in Sloviansk were afraid to discuss their opinions of the occupiers . One resident says people in Slovakia are afraid to talk about their opinions .
 Ukrainian forces made a series of 'probing attacks' into Sloviansk against the insurgents .
 The Ukrainian government then stated on 25 April that it would 'fully blockade the city of Sloviansk' and continue with the 'anti-terror' operation . The government then said on 25April that it will 'fully block the city'
 Seven international monitors detained on an OSCE military verification mission in Ukraine . They had been travelling into Sloviansk on a bus, along with the bus driver and five Ukrainian soldiers .
 Access to the city remained unrestricted despite the supposed Ukrainian army blockade, with fewer people then on previous days .
Leaflets released by the Donetsk People's Republic were distributed on 26 April . Local residents said that the separatist administration in Sloviansk provided no administrative services to citizens .
 Two members of the OSCE special monitoring mission were held by a group of unarmed men from the Donbas People's Militia in Yenakiieve .
 The monitors were taken to the occupied city hall, questioned, and released after a letter sent by the mission's office in Kyiv confirmed the credentials of the monitors .
 A large pro-government rally in Donetsk city marched in protest against the violence in Donetsk Oblast . The attempted assassination of Kharkiv mayor Hennadiy Kernes on 28 April .
 The rally was swiftly and violently broken up by separatists armed with baseball bats, iron rods, firecrackers and shields . The rally took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 First Battle of Mariupol. The barricade outside Donetsk RSA features anti-western slogans .
 A new counter-offensive by government forces on Sloviansk during the early morning of 2 May resulted in the downing of two government helicopters .
 Ukrainian forces gain control of all separatist checkpoints, and of half the city . As a result, Ukrainian forces gained control of half of the city.
All of the international monitors who had been held in Sloviansk were released by Vyacheslav Ponomaryov on 3 May . At least ten separatists were said to have been killed in Andriivka .
Kramatorsk was reoccupied by militants on 4 May, and Sloviansk saw renewed fighting on 5 May, resulting in the deaths of four Ukrainian soldiers . On the same day, protesters in the city of Donetsk stormed and occupied the chairman of the regional government's private business office
Government forces recaptured the building on 7 May, but then left it, allowing the separatists to quickly re-occupy it . Donetsk International Airport was closed to all traffic at the time .
 The regional television broadcasting centre remained occupied by about 30 camouflaged insurgents with AK-47s . The regional TV broadcasting centre remains occupied.
 A BTR-70 was parked outside building, along with barricades made of sandbags and tyres . The barricades were made from sandbags.
Denis Pushilin, the leader of the Donetsk People's Republic, refused . A similar presence was observed at the RSA building in Donetsk .
 Ukrainian transitional prime minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk referred to Putin's words ""hot air" A large skirmish erupted in Mariupol on 9 May, when government troops launched an attack on a police station in the city . At least 20 people were killed in the attack,
 Ukrainian government described as "militants" and "terrorists" Some local residents said that they were unarmed protestors .
 Donetsk People's Republic's representatives say 89% voted in favour of self-rule . 10% voted against self- rule .
 OSCE monitors did not observe the referendum, as the situation in Donetsk was said to be "volatile" The situation in Mariupol has forced them to restrict operations in the region .
 Some Ukrainians who opposed the insurgents formed the "Donbas Volunteer Battalion" modeled on the Ukrainian partisan groups that fought against both the German Reich and the Soviet Union during the Second World War .
 Steelworkers and security guards from Metinvest, along with local police, began joint patrols in Mariupol .
 These groups forced the insurgents out of the buildings that they had been occupying . These groups made the insurgents leave the buildings.
 Steelworkers could be seen removing barricades from the city centre, and cleaning up the burnt city administration building .
 By the morning of 16 May, Associated Press journalists could find no trace of insurgents in Mariupol city centre .
Pro-Russian activists gathered on the steps of the city administration building in Donbas on 16 May . The separatist flag continued to fly over the building .
 In response to this call, cars gathered in front of the Donetsk RSA building and continually honked their horns . In response.
 The confederal state of Novorossiya was proclaimed by Pavel Gubarev on 22 May . It incorporates both the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People'sRepublic .
 A heated battle broke out between separatist insurgents and Ukrainian government forces on 26 May . A few days later, the conflict broke out in Donetsk International Airport .
Chechen paramilitaries, along with others from Russia, fought Ukrainian forces . Around fifty insurgents were killed in the fighting, which resulted in their losing control of the airport .
Members of the Vostok battalion, the pro-Russian insurgent group that fought Ukrainian forces at the airport, took control over the Donetsk RSA building on 28 May . Most of the separatists' losses were due to friendly fire, says Artur Gasparian .
 They were seen clearing barricades and rubbish left by those previously in control of the building . They were also seen clearing the rubbish from the building.
 War in Donbas Vostok Battalion members dismantling the barricade at Donetsk RSA on 3 June .
 As part of Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko's fifteen-point peace plan, a frequently broken ceasefire spanned from 20 June until the 30th .
 A renewed government offensive after the ceasefire broke down resulted in heavy losses for the separatists . Many cities had been under their control since April, such as Sloviansk, Druzhkivka, Kostyantynivka and Kramatorsk .
 Heavy fighting continued in the following months, until the signing of the Minsk Protocol in early September, which established a ceasefire . The ceasefire was established in September .
 There were a number of attacks on journalists by members of the separatists in Donetsk .
 Belarusian journalists were attacked for speaking Belarusian language, and not Russian . Ukrainian journalists were forced to speak Russian to avoid angering pro-Russian protesters .
 Russia Today and RT did not carry the story . According to Kyiv Post, they also attacked reporters from Russia Today .
 An unknown man set the car of the editor-in-chief of the News of Donbas on fire . The car was set on fire by an unknown man .
 Stepan Chirich, a Belarusian reporter with the Russian NTV channel disappeared in Dnipropetrovsk Oblast .
 Evgenii Gapich, a photographer for the Reporter newspaper from Ivano-Frankivsk, disappeared in Horlivka . Another journalist, Evgeni Gapch, was also a photographer.
 His whereabouts are unknown, but he has been held in detention by separatist forces in Sloviansk . He is believed to have been held by separatists .
 Simon Ostrovsky, a journalist with Vice News, was captured by unidentified people in uniform in Sloviansk .
 The regional administration of Luhansk Oblast voted to demand that the Russian language be given official language status .
 A peaceful pro-Maidan demonstration on Heroes Square, outside the Luhansk city administration building, was attacked by counter-demonstrators on 9 March .
 The attackers then stormed the building, and occupied it, but were swiftly removed by government forces .
 Pro-Russian activists discussed plans for a "Luhansk Parliamentary Republic" on 8 April 2014 . 1,500 were involved in the building's occupation .
 The mood remained tense in Luhansk on 14 April . Former Berkut special police personnel include former members of the Berkut Special Police .
 There has been no indication that pro-Russian demonstrators in Luhansk would enact the terms of the Geneva Statement on Ukraine . demonstrations have continued .
 Those occupying the SBU building told OSCE monitors on 20 April that they would demobilize once occupied buildings in Kyiv . Euromaidan supporters have vacated the buildings in the building, they said .
 The monitors also encountered a roadblock near the village of Rayhorodka, in Novoaidar Raion .
 It was manned by about ten people in civilian clothes, including the local Orthodox priest . It was staffed by about 10 people.
 The roadblock was set up on 14 April to protect their village from any separatist incursions . They stated that they set up the roadblock on April 14 to protect the village from separatist incursion .
 A rally outside the SBU building to elect a 'people's government' in Luhansk occurred on 21 April . A commander of the Ukrainian army indicated that no incidents had occurred at the roadblock .
 Several hundred protesters that had gathered outside the occupied SBU building proclaimed the ""Luhansk People's Republic" on 27 April . The SBU was occupied in Donbas .
 Ukrainian government demands amnesty for all protesters, enshrine Russian as an official language, and hold a referendum on the status of the region .
 2,000 to 3,000 protestors stormed the Luhansk RSA building on 29 April . They issued an ultimatum that stated that if Kyiv did not meet their demands, they would launch an insurgency in tandem with the Donetsk People's Republic .
 The building was unprotected on the exterior, but a group of riot police confronted the protesters .
 A brief standoff resulted, but the police did nothing to stop the protesters . The protesters were not arrested .
 Several other buildings, including a police station and the local prosecutor's office, were later seized .
 Twenty separatist gunmen fired machine guns at the police station to force the officers within to surrender .
 President Oleksander Turchynov demands the immediate resignation of police chiefs in Donetsk and Luhansk . President Turchnov responded to the loss of the buildings by demanding the immediate resignations of the chiefs .
 separatist leader and self-proclaimed mayor of Luhansk Valeriy Bolotov announced the formation of a "South-Eastern Army" to march on Kyiv . Pro-Russian protesters occupying the city council and the television centre had left .
 Bolotov also declared a state of emergency, introduced a curfew, a ban on political parties, and a mandate that local law enforcement officials must take an oath of allegiance to him . The Russian president also declared an emergency, introducing a curfew.
 Members of OSCE special monitoring mission stopped at 'illegal' checkpoint near village of Shchastya . Held for three hours before being released .
Valeriy Bolotov, leader of the Republic, declared ""martial law"" on 22 May . According to RIA Novosti, 96.2% voted in favour of self-rule .
 OSCE monitors said that around 70% of "shops, cafés and banks" were closed in Luhansk city centre .
 Those shops that were still open were said to be sold out of some necessities, and fuel was not available . Those shops still open are said to have been closed .
 The confederal state of Novorossiya was proclaimed by Pavel Gubarev on 22 May . Police were entirely absent . The Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk people's Republic were incorporated .
 Explosions struck the RSA building in Luhansk on 2 June, killing eight people, and wounding twenty-eight .
 Russian media reported that the explosions were caused by an airstrike by Ukrainian government forces . Russian media said it was caused by a government airstrike .
 Ukrainian government officials denied this, and said insurgents had fired an anti-aircraft missile at themselves .
 A CNN investigation found clear evidence that the detonations came from the air . The pattern of the craters suggested use of standard equipment on the Su-25, a ground-attack fighter, and the U.S. Su-27 .
 Heavy fighting in the region continued over the following months . The signing of the Minsk Protocol in early September established a ceasefire .
 Kharkiv Oblast Protests were also held in Kharkv Oblast . The regional state administration building there was occupied multiple times .
 Euromaidan protesters occupied the Kharkiv regional state administration building on 22 February 2014 . Pro-Ukrainian protesters first gripped Kharksiv city on 22 Feb 2014 .
Several thousand protesters tried to topple a statue of Vladimir Lenin that stood opposite to the RSA building in Freedom Square . Later that day, several thousand protesters attempted to topple the statue .
Several taxi drivers defended the monument, injuring several protesters . Several taxi drivers were injured by protesters .
 Several thousand pro-Russian protesters had gathered in the square to protect the statue .
Local police kept Euromaidan and Anti-Maidan protesters apart until 1 March . Local police kept the protesters apart from each other .
Pro-Russian activists stormed the RSA building, assaulted the Euromaidan activists who had been occupying it . They raised the Russian flag over the building, and raised the Russia flag over it .
 Some of the protesters were Russian citizens who had travelled to Kharkiv from Russia .
 2,000 Russians were brought by buses with Russian number plates to Kharkiv to take part in the storming of the RSA building .
 Russian activist organizations confirmed that they sent Russians to "peacefully protest" in Kharkiv . Russian activist groups confirmed that Russians were sent to protest in Kharksiv .
Demonstrations by pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian activists in Kharkiv continued throughout the month of March . Police regained control of the building by evening on the same day, and replaced the Russian flag with Ukraine .
 Two people were killed in a shootout between Ukrainian nationalists and pro-Russian activists . Despite this, the city remained relatively calm until 15 March, when the shootout occurred .
Pro-Russian activists broke into a Ukrainian cultural centre in Kharkiv . They removed books written in the Ukrainian language, and burned them on the street .
 Pro-Russian protesters stormed and occupied the RSA building in Kharkiv on 6 April .
 Doubts arose about the local origin of the protesters after they stormed an opera and ballet theatre believing it was the city hall .
 By 8 April, the RSA building had been retaken by Ukrainian special forces, and seventy protesters had been arrested . Thousands of pro-Russian protesters returned to the building on 13 April .
 Protesters then holed up inside the building with Kharkiv mayor Hennadiy Kernes . The protesters then huddled up in the building. They then held up with Kernes.
 Later in the day, Kernes declared his support for an autonomy referendum and amnesty for the arrested Kharkiv separatists . Kernes also declared support for the autonomy referendum .
 At least fifty pro-Russian protesters were severely beaten in attacks by pro- Russian protesters .
 No protesters have been seen in front of the RSA building since 13 April .
 Kharkiv City Appeals Court ruled on 17 April that 43 of the 65 protesters arrested following the takeover of the RSA building on 8 and 9 April would remain in custody .
 They called for the resignation of the city mayor and prosecutor as well as the return of Viktor Yanukovych . They also call for the re-election of the former president .
 Both anti-government and pro-government demonstrations held in Kharkiv city centre . More peaceful rallies were held in the morning on 23 April .
 Over 7,000 residents held a rally in the same spot to support the unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine . Later that day, over 7,00 residents held the rally to support Ukraine's unity .
 The situation overall in Kharkiv remained calm, though police remained on high alert . The situation in Kharksiv remains calm .
Rival demonstrations by supporters and opponents of a unitary Ukrainian state occurred in Kharkiv city . A small group of riot police were seen guarding the RSA building on 25 April .
Mayor of Kharkiv, Hennadiy Kernes, was shot in the back while cycling on 28 April 2014 .
 He was said to be in "grave, but stable" condition, but later recovered, according to Televiziyna Sluzhba Novyn .
Former governor of Kharkiv Oblast and potential Ukrainian presidential candidate said shooting was an attempt to destabilize the region . He also said he did not support the pro-Russian insurgency, and backed a united Ukraine .
 Ukrainian military roadblocks in Donetsk oblast returned to relative calm by 30 April . No rallies have been observed there by OSCE monitors .
 A minor demonstration by about four-hundred separatists was held in Freedom Square on 4 May .
 A notably increased police presence remained in and around Freedom Square . A notably increase in police presence was seen in the area .
 A planned rally by pro-Ukrainian unity groups was cancelled due to concerns about potential clashes . Russian and Soviet flags were held in front of the Russian and Polish consulates in Kharkiv city .
 1,500 people from Kharkiv signed petitions calling on EU and Russia not to recognise results of the election .
 They voiced opposition to the Ukrainian government's military operations in Donetsk Oblast . They also voiced support for the Ukrainian military operations .
 Mayor Hennadiy Kernes returned to Kharkiv city on 16 June, after receiving medical treatment in Israel .
 The city administration provided buses for around 1,000 people who came to greet him upon his return .
 Demonstrations similar to the one that took place on 26 May continued throughout the month of June .
 The demonstrators voiced the same concerns about the Ukrainian government's military operations to combat separatist insurgents in Donetsk Oblast .
 Some of the people participating in this rally approached the location of the pro-Russian demonstration .
 Police officers that had been escorting the pro-Ukrainian demonstrators dispersed the crowd . The crowd had been dispersed by police officers .
 Thirty activists from both groups were temporarily detained as a result . Thirty activists were detained by police .
European Union, NATO, and Ukrainian flags gathered outside RSA building . They wanted to prevent the war in the Donbas region from spreading to Kharkiv Oblast .
 separatists and communists within Kharkiv city. They demanded that gatherings of separatists and communist groups be prohibited . They also demanded the ban on gatherings of communists and separatists .
 An attempt was made to destroy an important bridge in the village of Hrushuvakha on 29 July .
 The bridge was not damaged in the attempt, but Kharkiv RSA said that there were other plots to carry out "terrorist attacks" in Kharksiv Oblast .
 The mayor of Kharkiv, Hennadiy Kernes, granted freedom of the city to two Russian citizens at a session of city council on 6 August .
About one-hundred people protested outside city administration building . Some people in the city were concerned about some people in city .
 Police restrained the protesters, who attempted to force their way into the building . The protesters tried to enter the building.
 Protesters and police negotiated, and eventually five protestors were allowed into the city administration to voice their grievances . Protesters and the police negotiated .
 About one-hundred anti-Maidan-affiliated demonstrators gathered on Freedom Square to protest against corruption in Ukraine on 17 August .
 The pro-Euromaidan demonstrators also collected money for the Armed Forces of Ukraine, and for refugees fleeing the War in Donbas .
 peaceful gathering of Ukrainian unity activists was held outside the Russian consulate in Kharkiv on 28 August .
One of the largest gatherings of Ukrainian unity in many months took place in Kharkiv on 28 September . The demonstration was later dispersed by the police after stun grenades were thrown at the consulate .
 At about 14.30, a diverse crowd of 2,000 people met in front of the Opera House . The Opera House was at about 14:30 .
 The crowd then marched to Freedom Square, where there was a statue of Vladimir Lenin .
 The statue was a rallying point for pro-Russian protesters earlier in the year . The statue has been a focal point for anti-Russian protests .
 The statue of Lenin was pulled down by demonstrators at 22:40, shortly after oblast governor Ihor Baluta signed an order to dismantle the statue .
 From early November until mid-December, Kharkiv was struck by seven non-lethal bomb blasts . Kharkov was hit by seven blasts from early November to mid- December .
 Targets of these attacks included a rock pub known for raising money for Ukrainian forces . Targets included a hospital for Ukraine forces, a military recruiting centre, and a National Guard base .
 Russian covert forces were behind the attacks, an investigator says . The attacks were intended to destabilize the otherwise calm city of Kharkiv .
An 'Odessa People's Republic' was allegedly proclaimed by an internet group in Odessa Oblast on 16 April . They demanded that a referendum on the establishment of an " Odessa Autonomous Republic" be held .
 Members of the Odessa anti-Maidan protest group later swore that they made no such declaration . They said they had only heard about it through the media .
Local anti-Maidan and pro-Euromaidan leaders in Odessa Oblast voiced scepticism about the Geneva Statement on Ukraine on 20 April . The OSCE monitoring mission in Ukraine later confirmed that the situation in Odessia remained calm .
 A hand grenade was thrown from a passing car at a joint police-Maidan self-defence checkpoint outside Odessa on 25 April . Seven people were injured in the incident, causing heightened tensions in the region . The anti-maidan leaders insisted that they
 A week later, a rally by about 1,500 pro-government demonstrators was attacked by smaller group of alleged pro-Russian militants with batons and helmets . City centre clashes and further events Pro-Russian encampment.
 Both sides clashed in the streets of central Odessa, throwing petrol bombs, and firing automatic weapons at each other . The anti-Maidan protesters were later overwhelmed by the much larger group of Ukrainian unity protesters .
 militants on the roof tossed rocks and petrol bombs at the protesters below . They responded in kind with petrol bombs of their own .
In the aftermath of the clashes, the main Internal Affairs Ministry office in Odessa was attacked by pro-Russian protesters . Police said at least three people were shot dead .
 The group demanded the release of their "comrades" who had participated in the clashes . They demanded release of the group who had taken part in clashes .
About 60 people gathered on Kulikovo Field to commemorate the 2 May fire on 13 July . By 5 May, the situation in Odessa had calmed, though the atmosphere remained extremely tense .
 They chanted "Donbas, we are with you" in reference to the ongoing War in Donbas . They chanted: "We're with you. We're with us"
 Internal Affairs Ministry advisor Zorian Shkiryak said on 25 December that Odessa and Kharkiv had become "cities which are being used to escalate tensions"
 The separatist network behind it also wanted to set up a "Porto-Franko" and other breakaway entities . The security service says the network also wanted a "Odesa People's Republic"
 The charts below show the locations, dates, and attendance rate of pro-Russian protests in Ukraine . Largest protests by date and attendance were held in Ukraine, and also in Ukraine's counter-protests .
 The Donetsk People's Republic was proclaimed on 7 April . This was proclaimed in Donetsk, Donetsk, on April 7 .
 Donbas People's Militia controls large swathes of territory in Donetsk Oblast . It is supported by the insurgent Donbas people's Militia .
 This is the successor to the failed Luhansk Parliamentary Republic, proclaimed on 27 April . It is the first time the country has been in power since the failed parliamentary republic was formed .
 Activists occupied the SBU building in Luhansk from 8 April . They gained control of the city council, prosecutor's office, and police station by 27 April .
 The regional administration announced its support for a referendum, and granted the governorship to separatist leader Valeriy Bolotov . The region has been in the midst of a referendum .
 A referendum on the status of the region took place on 11 May . The referendum was held in Donetsk, Ukraine .
 Republic of Crimea was proclaimed on 17 March by the parliament of the Autonomous republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol . This was proclaimed by the Parliament of the Autonomous Republic of Crimean .
 The two entities, which together comprise the whole of the geographic Crimea, functioned as separate administrative units within Ukraine .
 The Kharkiv People's Republic was a short-lived republic proclaimed on 7 April by protesters occupying the RSA building . The Russian Federation annexed the Republic and split it back into the federal city of Sevastopol .
 Ukrainian special forces retook the building later that day, ending the control protesters had had over the building .
 On 21 April, during a rally, demonstrators elected a "people's governor" It is unknown if this is connected to the former Republic .
 Antimaidan protesters said they had not made such a declaration . Odessa People's Republic was declared by an internet group on 16 April .
Pro-Russian protesters in Odessa said they wanted Odessa to be an autonomous region within Ukraine, rather than join Russia . Unlike in Kharkiv, Donetsk, and Luhansk, they said they want to be a region within the Ukraine .
 The SBU said they had foiled a plot to create a People's Republic in the region . On 28 October, the SBU announced they were foiling the plot .
 They found a munitions cache, and arrested members of an alleged separatist group . They found the cache.
 Russian intelligence and security services were behind the plot, they said . They also said that Russian intelligence, security services and Russian intelligence were behind it .
 Novorossiya is a confederal union of people's republics . It was established on 24 May 2014 with an agreement between the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People'sRepublic to form a confederation .
 The Parliament of Novorossiya, chaired by Oleg Tsarov, continued to function as an office for political advancement . It was involved in the coordination of humanitarian assistance on 2 February 2015 .
 The armed forces of the two People's Republics are combined in the United Armed Forces of Novorossiya . The war flag of the NovorOSSiya remained in widespread usage .
International reaction to Crimea's annexation by the Russian Federation . International reaction to the annexation of Crimea .
 For reactions specific to the war in Donbas region, see International reactions to the conflict . For more information on the conflict in the region, visit CNN.com.com .
 Various international entities warned all sides to reduce tensions in Eastern and Southern Ukraine .
 Armenian president Serj Sargsyan and Russian president Vladimir Putin held a phone conversation in March . Both men stated that the Crimean referendum constituted a case of people exercising their right to self-determination via the free expression of will .
 The presidents highlighted the importance of commitment to the norms and principles of international law, especially the UN Charter . At the same time, the presidents also highlighted the need for commitment to international law .
 Australia cancels a planned visit to Russia by the Trade Minister Andrew Robb . The Prime Minister told the House of Representatives on 3 March that Russia should back off .
 Harper condemned Russia's military intervention in Ukraine . Harper announced that Canada had both recalled its ambassador to Russia and withdrawn from the G8 summit .
 The House of Commons passed a unanimous motion condemning Russia's intervention in Crimea on March 3 .
 Harper called Russia's actions an ""invasion and occupation" Baird compared them to Nazi Germany's occupation of the Sudetenland in 1938 .
 Canada suspended all military co-operation with Russia, and asked Russian military servicemen to leave its territory in 24 hours . Canada also asked Russian troops to leave their territory in the same time .
 A spokesman restated China's belief of non-interference in the internal affairs of other states . A spokesman urged dialogue .
 India – National Security Advisor Shivshankar Menon of India stated that Russia has legitimate interests in Crimea . Menon called for ""sustained diplomatic efforts"" and ""constructive dialogue" to resolve the crisis .
 Menon's statement was not an official statement issued by the government of India . However, the National Security Advisor is not a part of the Cabinet of India.
 India subsequently made it clear that it will not support any "unilateral measures" against Russian government . India subsequently said that it won't support any unilateral measures against Russia .
Renzi said Crimean status referendum was illegal and that the G8 countries must start co-operating to solve the crisis and prevent a return to the Cold War . Renzi said G8 nations must co-opate to solve crisis.
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization convened the North Atlantic Council due to what it called Russia's military action and President Vladimir Putin's alleged threats against Ukraine .
 OSCE chairman-in-Office Didier Burkhalter condemned detention of military inspectors in Sloviansk . He requested that they be released .
 Apakan said there is a need for de-escalation . The Special Monitoring Mission is here to promote this objective .
Harsh exchange of words between officials in Moscow and Bucharest erupted in the context of Ukrainian crisis .
 Rogozin's statements have irritated the authorities in Bucharest that catalogued them as a threat . Rogozins' statements have angered the authorities .
 The ministry alleged that what it called "American experts from the private military organization Greystone" disguised as soldiers, as well as militants from the Ukrainian far-right group Right Sector .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin did not send regards to Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko for Independence Day of Ukraine celebration on 24 August . Poroshenko had sent his regards to Putin for Russia Day on 12 June, despite the fact that Putin had sent him his regards .
 On 7 April an "anti-terrorist" operation against militants was started in Luhansk and Donetsk self-proclaimed republics .
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry said he thought the conflict in Kharkiv, Donetsk, Luhansk and Mariupol was a carefully orchestrated campaign .
Geoffrey R Pyatt, U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, characterized the militants as terrorists . Nuland said that the United States had no doubt that Russians were behind the takeovers of government buildings .
 John Kerry stated that phone tap evidence proved that the Kremlin was directing pro-Russian protests in the region . On 30 April, John Kerry said that phone tapping evidence proved the Kremlin is directing protests in Russia .
 The U.S. followed by the European Union, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, and Japan, began to sanction Russian individuals and companies related to the crisis .
 The Russian government responded in kind with sanctions against some American and Canadian individuals . The sanctions were issued against some Americans and Canadian people .
 The European Union and Canada imposed further sanctions in mid-May . The unrest continues to escalate .
 Ukraine, the United States, Russia and the European Union agreed to hold a 17 April quadrilateral meeting in Geneva . The meeting will try to negotiate an end to the crisis in Ukraine .
 The meeting produced a document called the Geneva Statement on Ukraine . It stated that all sides agreed that steps should be taken to "de-escalate" the crisis .
 All four parties agreed that all "illegal military formations in Ukraine" must be dissolved . Everyone occupying buildings must be disarmed and leave . There would be an amnesty for all anti-government protesters .
 The agreement put on hold additional economic sanctions against Russia by the U.S. and the European Union . The agreement also puts on hold more economic sanctions.
 National unity talks were held in Kyiv, Ukraine, starting from 14 May . The talks are part of an OSCE initiative to solve the crisis in Ukraine .
 The OSCE said that Russian president Vladimir Putin supported its initiative . The Russian president supported the initiative, it said .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said separatists should be included in the talks . The separatists should also be included.
 Separatists from Kharkiv were indeed invited to attend, but they refused to participate . Separatist leaders from Kharksiv were also invited, but refused to attend .
 Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine announced a fifteen-point plan for peace on 20 June .
 The plan called for a week-long ceasefire, starting on 20 June, for the separatists to vacate the buildings they've occupied . The plan also called for decentralization of power from the central government in Kyiv .
 Amnesty for those who laid down weapons and didn't commit serious crimes . Amnesty for the people who did not commit serious crime .
10-kilometre long buffer zone on the Ukrainian-Russian border .
 Liberation of illegally seized administrative premises in Donetsk and Luhansk regions . The seizure of administrative premises is a violation of the law .
 restoration of central television and radio broadcasting in Donetsk and Luhansk regions . Restoration of central TV and radio broadcasts in Donetsk, Luhans regions .
 Coordination of governors with representatives of the Donbas before the elections . Early local and parliamentary elections are held early in the year .
Russian president Vladimir Putin offered some support for the plan, but called for Poroshenko to bring the separatists into negotiations .
OSCE monitors with the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine met with a representative of the Donetsk People's Republic on 21 June . Poroshenko previously refused to enter into negotiations with armed separatists .
 The representative said that the Republic would reject the ceasefire, and that the primary demands of the government of the Donetsk People's Republic were "withdrawal of Ukrainian forces from Donbas" and recognition of the Republic .
Alexander Borodai, prime minister of the Donetsk People's Republic, said his forces would hold to the ceasefire . However, after initial peace talks between the separatists, Ukrainian and Russian officials, and the OSCE in Donetsk on 23 June, he said .
 separatists in Sloviansk shot down a Ukrainian Armed Forces Mi-8 helicopter, killing all those on board . Soon after this statement, separatists in Slovakia shot down the helicopter .
 The next day, the Office of the President of Ukraine issued a statement that said the ceasefire had been violated by the insurgents at least thirty-five times . The statement said that the insurgents had violated the ceasefire at least 30 times .
 Poroshenko extended the ceasefire by three days from its planned ending on 27 June . Despite this, the ceasefire was extended three days earlier than planned .
 In response to this action, protesters in Kyiv took the streets in large numbers to demand that the ceasefire be cancelled .
 The ceasefire had little actual impact on clashes between government and separatist forces . At least five government soldiers were killed during the ceasefire .
 By July, the peace plan had fallen by the wayside and Poroshenko ended ceasefire . Both sides accused each other of repeated violations .
 The Ukrainian Security Service put out a wanted poster for Strielkov . It accused him of premeditated murder and organizing mass riots . He is accused of a series of charges .
 CNN presented a video from a large separatist rally held in a central Donetsk city square around lunchtime on 26 May .
 Two told a CNN team they were from Chechen capital Grozny . One indicated that he was formerly a policeman in Chechnya and was in Donetsk to serve the Russian Federation .
 Russian and Ukraininan media published numerous reports on bodies of separatists being transported secretly back to Russia, usually through Uspenka .
 The bodies were transported to a Russian military base in Rostov-on-Don .
 Some families were able to get the bodies secretly returned to them . Some of the bodies were returned to their families .
 Russian political scientist Aleksandr Dugin appeared in a leaked Skype video conference with Kateryna Gubareva, the wife of Donetsk-based separatist Pavel Gubararev .
 He reassured her of Moscow's support and further actions that should be taken by the movement . In the call, he reassured her.
 He also stated all presidential nominees should be considered 'traitors' with only Yanukovych considered legitimate . He also said all presidential candidates should also be considered "traitors"
 A member of Dugin's Eurasian Youth Union was arrested on 31 March for planning terrorist acts in Ukraine .
 Nadiya Savchenko is a Ukrainian ex-paratrooper and a helicopter navigator . He was captured by the separatists as a member of Aydar battalion near Luhansk .
 After being captured in June, separatists published a video of her interrogation, and held her hostage .
 Nikolai Varsegov accused Savchenko of being a sniper and mass killer . Savchenko was the subject of a number of articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda by NikolaiVarsegov .
 Russian government officials said Savchenko had "illegally crossed Russian border as refugee" Savchenko is facing trial for alleged assistance in the murder of two Russian journalists .
 Ukrainian consul says she was transported to Russia against her will . Savchenko was finally allowed to see her consul . She said she was taken to Russia by her will.
 Ukraine's National Security and Defence Council chief Andriy Parubiy oversaw the military operation against pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine .
Parubiy appealed for assistance from the United States as one of the signatories . Parubiy was part of the Budapest memorandum participant .
Parubiy resigned as National Security and Defence Council chief on 7 August 2014 . Parubiy was the first chief of the council's security council .
 Andriy Biletsky, the head of the Social-National Assembly and Patriots of Ukraine, is commander of the Azov Battalion . Chechen, Abkhaz, Ossetian, and Cossack paramilitaries have been active participants in the insurgency in Donetsk and Lu
 Some Chechen opponents of Russian government were fighting pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine for the Ukrainian government . The Ukrainian government has been fighting the separatists for years .
 Russian politician Sergey Kurginyan held a press conference with representatives of Donbas People's Militia . He said Russia did provide significant military support for the separatists .
 Gubarev complained that the arms that had been sent were old, and not fully functional . The arms that were sent were not functional, he said .
 Kurginyan listed specific items, including 12,000 automatic rifles, grenade launchers, 2S9 Nona self-propelled mortars, two BMPs, and three tanks . He said he knew the separatists had been supplied to Russia by Russia .
 Kurginyan admitted that Russia had initially sent "4th category weapons" But since 3 June, Russia had supplied equipment that was fully functional . Kurginian admitted Russia had originally sent "4th class weapons"
 He also said one of his goals was to ensure that military support from Russia was increased . He said he also wanted to ensure military support was increased from Russia .
OSCE monitors were sent to Ukraine after a request by the Ukrainian government . OSCE monitors from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe were sent .
 SMM lost contact with four monitors in Donetsk Oblast on 26 May, and another four in Luhansk Oblast. The SMM also lost contact on 29 May .
 Both groups were held in captivity by separatists for a month, until being freed on 27 June and 28 June respectively . Both groups have been freed by the separatists .
 There were reports of both police and military deserting their posts or defecting to separatists .
 Oleksandr Turchynov stated that numerous Ukrainian military and security personnel joined the separatists, alongside Ukrainian military equipment . The Ukrainian military said the separatists joined the Ukrainian military .
 Internal Affairs Ministry says over 17,000 policemen had defected to insurgents in eastern Ukraine by 23 May .
 Ilya Bogdanov, a former Russian FSB lieutenant in Vladivostok, defected to Ukraine . He claimed he couldn't stand the lies used by Russia to stimulate the situation in Eastern Ukraine and Dagestan .
 Russian army serviceman Andrej Balabanov asked for political asylum in Ukraine . On 24 July, he said "I finally took a decision not to take part in this war and sided with Ukraine"
 Balabanov claimed his unit had sent "military intelligence, GRU, experts and Chechens" into Ukraine to help the separatists . He said his unit sent military intelligence and experts into Ukraine .
 Russian man escaped house arrest after cutting off his monitoring bracelet . He later gave interviews about 'guerrilla struggle' and using firearms to capture buildings .
 Topaz was re-arrested as he set up another interview with Russia's Life News channel .
On 12 April a saboteur known as ""K"" was arrested by the SBU in Kharkiv . He received an eight-year prison sentence in January 2018, but was released in September with credit for time served .
 He was tasked with organizing riots and capturing administrative buildings . He had been tasked with organize riots and capture buildings .
 The men were travelling on a bus and found in possession of explosives, petrol bombs, bats, shields, helmets, knives and other weapons . The SBU announced it had arrested two Ukrainian military members recruited by Russian intelligence .
 Makarov, an alleged spy from the GRU, was arrested in Chernihiv on 20 March 2014 . Makarov was arrested on March 20, 2014 .
 Anton Rayevsky was arrested in Odessa and deported for inciting ethnic hatred and violence . He was arrested and then deported.
 Roman Bannykh, allegedly an agent of the Russian GRU, was detained on 5 April 2014 . He was detained in April 2014.
 Negrienko was arrested earlier in March 2014 for attempting to recruit Ukrainian police officers .
 Oleg Bakhtiyarov allegedly planning to storm Ukraine's parliament and Cabinet of Ministers buildings in Kyiv by force .
 Bakhtiyarov allegedly arranged to film the incident, which would then have been blamed on Ukrainian radicals . Bakhtyarov allegedly also arranged, with some Russian TV channels, to film it .
 Two Russian citizens were arrested in Lviv oblast on 2 April 2014 . They were suspected of plotting to take several Ukrainians hostage, including a presidential candidate .
 Also allegedly found was a notebook with details of cars used by the presidential candidate and a timetable of his movements . A tablet with images of the targeted politician, as well as members of the Lviv Regional Council, was also found .
 Pro-separatist supporter detained by Ukrainian soldiers, 30 July 2014 . Mariya Koleda was arrested on 9 April 2014 . She allegedly performed Russian intelligence tasks to destabilize the situation in the southern regions of Ukraine .
 On 7 April, she allegedly took part in fights at the Mykolaiv Oblast State Administration building using a firearm . She allegedly confessed to shooting and wounding three people .
 Ukraine's director of Ukraine's national security service announced that they had arrested three alleged Russian GRU agents on 22 April . On 22 April, Ukraine's head of security service said the arrests were made .
Border guards arrested a Russian citizen for planning separatist provocations in Luhansk . On 1 May, border guards arrested the man for planning a separatist provocation .
 The man was allegedly a member of the neo-Nazi skinhead group 'Slavs' The man had several swastika tattoos and a Nazi-branded knife .
 Ukraine arrested a man that they claimed was a high-level Russian intelligence agent . In April 2014, the governor of Dnipropetrovsk Igor Kolomoisky issued a $10,000 bounty for the apprehension of Russian agents .
 On 19 April he issued his first $10,000 payout for the capture of a Russian saboteur . He has been in jail since April .
 Protesters burn literature from far right groups in Kharkiv, 1 March 2014 .
 Demonstration in support of Ukrainian unity in Donetsk, 17 April 2014 . Protest rally in Odessa against Russian President Vladimir "Putin's occupation actions in Ukraine"
 George's Ribbon, used by pro-Russian civilians as a patriotic symbol, has been used as a national symbol .
 Church of Holy Epiphany in Karlivka, Donestk Oblast, on 23 May 2014, was held by Ukrainian forces and pro-Russian separatists . The church is located in the Ukrainian town of Karlivk, near the border with Russia .
 Regions inhabited by significant Russian populations in Ukraine in 2001 . Russia's population grew in 2001.
 Donetsk and Luhansk separatists are driven by people of Akhmetov and Yefremov . People of the two regions have been involved in the conflict in the past .
 A Crimea Applies to Join Russia Archived 21 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine . It was published on 28 February 2014 .
 "How 'eastern Ukraine' was lost" is a reference to Ukraine's civil war . "How "Eastern Ukraine" was lost," is a quote from the book "How the Ukraine was lost".
 In Donetsk Gubarov was known as a neo-Nazi and as a member of the fascist organization Russian National Unity . He was also known as the member of a fascist organization .
 Pavel Gubarev, a former member of the neo-Nazi, Russian chauvinist Russian National Unity movement, has declared independence from Ukraine . He was a member of a pro-Russian group in Donetsk .
 Pro-Russian protesters storm buildings in cities close to Russia border .
 The Wayback Machine was opened in March 2014 .
 Protesters declare Donetsk 'republic', BBC News ^ Daily Press Briefing: 7 April 2014 .
 Ukraine Crisis Escalates as War Fears Grow Archived 8 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine .
 All illegal armed groups must be disarmed; all illegally seized buildings must be returned to legitimate owners . All illegally occupied streets, squares and other public places in Ukrainian cities and towns must be vacated .
 Amnesty will be granted to protesters and to those who have left buildings and other public places and surrendered weapons . Those found guilty of capital crimes will also be granted the exception of those found guilty.
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission should play a leading role in assisting Ukrainian authorities and local communities in the immediate implementation of these de-escalation measures, says the OSCE .
 The U.S., EU and Russia commit to support this mission, including by providing monitors . The United States, EU, Russia and the EU commit to supporting this mission .
 The announced constitutional process will be inclusive, transparent and accountable . The announcement was made in the wake of President Barack Obama's election .
 It will include the establishment of a broad national dialogue, with outreach to all of Ukraine's regions and political constituencies . It will also allow for the consideration of public comments and proposed amendments .
 The Crazy Ideologue of the New Russian Empire, The Daily Beast. The DailyBeast. The CrazyIdeologue of a New Russian empire .
 The Russian language has been used as a shorthand for Russian language language .
 A Russian agent who coordinated separatists in Ukraine was detained in May 2014 .
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 . Additional terms may apply. Text is available for use under the license .
 Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization . The Wikimedia Foundation is a nonprofit organization .