 It contains the research findings on the EU’s interventions in conflict prevention and peacebuilding in Ukraine .
 It focuses on possible areas for improvement and recommendations regarding the EU capabilities . Further, it focuses on potential areas for improvements and recommendations .
 This case study report is based on both a desk research and field research . It consisted of in-depth Interviews with representatives of local and international actors .
 This document only reflects the views of author, and the EU is not responsible for how the information may be used . This project is funded by the EU’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme Grant agreement no.3866 .
 The EU as a security actor has relied on its soft power, promoting democratic transformations in the neighbourhood through positive conditionality .
 Ukraine has regarded the North Atlantic Treaty Organiszation as its primary security partner and model . Ukraine, in turn, has, for the most part, regarded it as its main security partner .
 Some aspects of civilian security were touched upon (e.g. border management, judiciary reform) But never constituted a core dimension of the bilateral relations .
 The EU could not help but become a security actor during the Revolution of Dignity .
 The EU was the player who recognized the legitimacy of the presidential elections held after the Revolution of Dignity on 25 May 2014 . The entire world, including Russia, recognize them too .
 The EU has been active in setting up the Geneva format for negotiating a peaceful settlement of the conflict and the stabilization of Ukraine . The Geneva format has been set up by the EU for negotiations .
 Brussels remained active in helping Berlin and Paris put together a settlement plan . The Geneva format was replaced by the Normandy format, which no longer included the EU .
Several waves of sanctions imposed by the EU against Ukrainian and Russian persons and companies . The sanctions have thus far been effective in deterring Russia from seizing more territory .
 The EU made an attempt at contributing to the conflict settlement by dispatching an EU Advisory Mission to Ukraine . The EU also made a attempt to contribute to a conflict settlement .
 EUAM remains a significant tool in Ukraine's institution building at the time when viable and functional institutions are paramount for the state’s survival and sovereignty . The mandate of the mission did not match the request of Ukraine .
 The role played by the EU and the form that the EU interventions have taken is subject to debate in Ukraine . The EU's role in Ukraine has been under scrutiny in recent months .
 The EUAM mandate also considers decentralization as an additional element for conflict settlement . This was not only the case with the EUAM mandates, but also the EU’s choice to consider decentralization .
 The latter is particularly sensitive and hotly contested in the Ukrainian context . The two are particularly sensitive in the Ukraine context .
 The EU considers decentralization a means to contribute to conflict resolution . The reason to include this case in this study is that the EU consider decentralization as a way to help resolve conflict .
 The authors of this report do not imply that the root cause of the conflict in Ukraine is the status of the regions in the East . More autonomy in these regions will necessarily lead to a solution, they say .
 The paper concludes with a reflection on how the EU civilian capabilities in peace building and conflict prevention could be more inclusive and sustainable .
 The presence of the EU in the eastern neighbourhood has irritated Russia over the last decade . Russia has been irritated by the EU's presence in the region for years .
 Moscow has created alternative integrationist projects that fuelled tensions in the region . In order not to lose its capacity to project power in the post-Soviet era, Moscow is creating alternative projects .
 The final choice of President Yanukovych, announced on 21 November 2013 by then Prime Minister Azarov, of suspending the signing of the Association Agreement generated deep dissatisfaction in the form of mass protests .
 After repeated violent crackdowns by law-enforcement agencies, the protests led to a regime change after the incumbent president left the country .
 This chapter provides some relevant background information about the Ukrainian national context, both before and after the Revolution of Dignity took place .
 Ukraine found itself between two integrationist projects and how it managed to revive the relations with the EU and pursue a reform agenda . It explains the conditions in which Ukraine finds itself between the two projects .
 Yanukovych’s Ukraine was an uncomfortable position in the Customs Union . For Yanukovych, the choice between association with the EU and membership in the customs Union was uncomfortable .
 Choosing the Customs Union was dangerous due to the potential to provoke protests within Ukraine and loose the relative comfort of managing an independent policy for the benefit of Russia . The decision was made by Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin .
 During Viktor Yanukovych’s rule, Ukraine made significant efforts to balance the two centres of gravity . This permanent balancing act led to a loss of credibility and worsening conditions to join one or other .
 The decision of Yanukovych was not well received in Moscow, which put significant efforts into convincing Ukraine to join the Customs Union . The decision was made by Yanukovych.
 Yanukovych accepted to shelve talks with the EU over the Association Agreement on 21 November 2013 . After four months of pressures from the Russian side in combination with discreet negotiations between Moscow and Kyiv.
Many Ukrainians viewed the AA as a tool to fight corruption and revive the economy . Many Ukrainians viewed it as a weapon to fight Corruption and revive economy .
 Almost half of the population was willing to join the EU in 2013 . About 30% supported the idea of joining the Russian-led Customs Union .
 The attempted violent crackdown of peaceful protests on Maidan generated more protests demanding the resignation of the cabinet, and later of the president .
 This was criticized by a part of the Ukrainian public and appreciated by another part . The Ukrainian public was also criticized by another parts of the public .
 The pressure from the EU states increased in January and February 2014 after violent attacks on the protesters .
 The foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland became the mediators between president Yanukovych and the opposition . With the rising protests in February 2014, the foreign ministers became mediators .
 The mediation of the Weimar Triangle, also attended by a Russian representative, consisted of an attempt to find a compromise between the parties . A Russian representative also attended .
 The EU did not manage to predict the seriousness of the crisis in Ukraine and the aggression of Russia . The EU, however, did not predict the severity of the Ukraine crisis .
 The new Ukrainian leadership now favoured signing the AA and the continuation of the European integration path . New Ukrainian leadership favoured the AA.
 The annexation of Crimea and the subsequent Russian meddling in the East of Ukraine revealed the dire situation of the Ukrainian army and shortcomings in the functioning of state institutions in Kyiv .
 The Russian annexation of Crimea and the meddling in the East was evidence of the weakness and unpreparedness of the Ukrainian state to deal with domestic and external challenges .
 Ukraine needed the support of the EU, the U.S. and other developing partners in restoring the state institutions, says Peter Bergen .
 Relations with developing partners focused partly on security related institutions, but the economy was also a priority . The relations with these developing partners focus partly on the economy .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin has explained the annexation of Crimea as a preventive intervention . Putin has denied the illegality of Russian actions, saying that 90% of people living in Crimea voted in favour of reuniting with Russia .
 The main process, which Ukraine had been preparing since 2007, was re-launched . The first political part of the AA was signed despite Russian protest .
 The signing of the AA was supported by the majority of Ukrainian society . The signing was backed by the most of the country's society .
Despite the high support of Ukraine’s EU membership, there were considerable differences at the regional level . Despite the high overall support of the EU, there are considerable differences in the region .
 The AA between EU and Ukraine provisionally entered into force on 1 November 2014 . The AA is between the EU and the Ukraine .
 The DCFTA between EU and Ukraine allows Kyiv to access the EU market in specific sectors and to have the same regulatory environment in those sectors . Kyiv can access the European market in certain sectors .
 EU, Russia and Ukraine reached agreement to delay DCFTA in Ukraine . EU had not accepted interference from Russia in Ukraine relations .
 Ukrainian leadership was not willing to join the Customs Union . DCFTA and the Customs 6 Union exclude each other as each of these provides a different regulatory framework .
 The entry into force, even provisionally, of the Association Agreement changed the optics of how European integration is perceived in Ukraine .
 Decision makers in Ukraine now need to implement the AA and avoid “empty words about EU-Ukraine relations’s relations .
 The reforms target urgent issues like fighting corruption, independence of justice, reform of law-enforcement agencies, but also various reforms in social and economic areas .
 The pro-European government in Kyiv took office in 2014 . It was part of the contribution of Brussels to avoid an economic collapse of Ukraine .
 The financial support of EU to Ukraine would be important for Ukraine . However, the political support of the EU was paramount for Ukraine.
 EU support for presidential elections on 25 May 2014, which basically closed down the debate about the legitimacy of acting president .
1 The Support Group was established by the European Commission . It consists of staff working for the Commission .
 The several waves of sanctions against Ukrainian and Russian persons and companies seem to have been effective in deterring Russia from seizing more territory . But they were insufficient in preventing the ongoing support of Moscow for the separatists in the East of Ukraine .
 The Russian Federation has attempted to play “divide and rule’s” over the European continent . It has tried to find situational allies in order to make decision-making process more sluggish .
Austria, Finland, Hungary, Cyprus, Slovakia, Greece and the Czech Republic have echoed unwillingness to increase sanctions or cancel sanctions . Also, countries like Austria and Finland have expressed readiness to cancel sanctions or increase sanctions .
 Germany has a strong role in pushing the EU to speak with a common voice towards Russia .
 Russian government imposed retaliation sanctions on a series of goods produced in EU, U.S., Australia, Canada and Norway . The sanctions were imposed by the European Union .
 The statement of Russian leadership was surprising for many given the contraction of Russia's economy .
 The European Union is an important player in Ukraine . The EU is a key player in the country's economy .
In 2008 the negotiations on the new enhanced agreement – the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement – started and were concluded in 2013 . In 2008 the talks began and were finished in 2013. In 2008, the negotiations began and ended in 2008 .
 The Association Agreement was signed in 2014 and serves as one of the key roadmaps for Ukraine . It was signed as part of the Ukraine Association Agreement .
 In 2014 the EU announced the allocation of another 11 billion EUR to Ukraine . The EU announced a further 11 billion euros to Ukraine in 2014 .
 EU money and reputational costs to Ukraine if it fails to deliver on its promises, provide the EU with a “carrot and stick’ tool . EU money, as well as specific policy tools (e.g. the Association Agreement, the Visa Liberalization Action Plan
 The VLAP contains the “Public Order and Security’s” block, which in turn contains requirements for fighting corruption and law enforcement . The block also contains requirements.
 The EU Delegation to Ukraine is the official representative body of the EU . There are a number of EU mechanisms which provide support to Ukraine .
 The EU Border Administration Mission to Moldova and Ukraine has been a permanent “representation’ of the EU in Ukraine since 2005 . On a regional level, the mission has headquarters in Odessa, Ukraine .
 Various aspects of reforms in good governance, democracy, rule of law, human rights, justice and migration have been part of the EU-Ukraine Action Plan and EU-Ukrainian Association Agenda .
 The EU involvement in multi-track diplomacy became evident in the attempts of the EU to contribute to the settlement of the political crisis in Ukraine .
 The EU has been active in setting up the Geneva format for negotiating a peaceful settlement of the conflict and the stabilization of Ukraine . The Geneva format has been set up by the EU member states .
 Brussels remained active in helping Berlin and Paris put together a settlement plan . The EU was no longer included in the Normandy format, but its member states Germany and France were .
 The EU also coordinated its activities on Ukraine with the U.S. and other countries, especially those represented in the G7 .
 The EU was instrumental in shaping a joint response to the conflict in Ukraine . Despite the fact that the EU was not always present at the table, the role of the EU wasn't always present .
 The EU sanctions on Russia for illegal annexation of Crimea and for fuelling conflict in the East of Ukraine .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe E became the key organization tasked with observing the cease-fire and report on the implementation of the Minsk Agreements . Other efforts were concentrated on such international organizations as the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the Council of Europe, NATO and
 EUAM was dispatched as a direct result of the Russia-Ukraine conflict . EUAM is the only EU instrument in Ukraine that was dispatched to Ukraine as a result of Russia- Ukraine conflict .
 The aim is to produce a coherent and complete strategy for the constitutionally independent players in the justice sector . The aims are to produce an independent strategy for justice sector.
 The objectives include enhancing the police skills on management and operations against cross border crime . The objectives are to improve the police's management and operation against cross-border crime .
 A large number of EU member states have been engaged in Ukraine’s SSR, in addition to numerous other international actors .
 The EU tasked EUAM to coordinate donor support to SSR in Ukraine to avoid duplication . Since no donor coordination mechanism was established in Ukraine, no coordination mechanism has been established .
 The document offers a solid overview of the donors’ presence and priorities in Ukraine . It also offers a good overview of donors' presence in Ukraine.
 The key partners include NATO, the Council of Europe, IMF, the World Bank, the USA operating through the United States Embassy, Japan, OSCE, as well as a whole range of individual states .
 NATO is the only international organization dealing with the military aspect of SSR in Ukraine . It is obvious that NATO is only international group dealing with SSR .
 The civilian aspect of SSR is supported by the EU, OSCE, Council of Europe and others . In turn, SSR has a civilian aspect.
 Law enforcement is the sphere where the EU has the strongest involvement given the EUAM’s coordinating role . The EU is present in all of the above mentioned spheres, including law enforcement .
 EU members such as Poland, Sweden and Germany have been consistently supporting 12 the decentralization reform through technical advice and financial assistance .
 With EU support, a concept document on the reform of local self-government was approved by Ukraine in July 2009 .
 EU's financial assistance was preceded by the political decision derived from the EU-Ukraine Association Agenda to prepare and facilitate the implementation of the Association Agreement .
 The utilization of two different mechanisms by the EU is primarily driven by the peculiarities of decentralization reform in Ukraine . The use of two separate mechanisms is driven by decentralization reforms in Ukraine.
 IcSP funded programmes would be focused on the eastern regions of Ukraine, Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Despite the signing of a ceasefire in winter 2015, hostilities continue to continue to this day . It requires a different approach to decentralization and local governance reform, says the author .
 IcSP is aimed at assisting with reforms, but also toward reconciliation efforts . The IcSP aims to help with reforms and reconciliation efforts.
 U-LEAD focuses on other areas of Ukraine that also require capacity building programmes and technical assistance to enable administrative and fiscal decentralization . U-leAD, on the other hand, focuses on another area that requires capacity building and technical help .
 Any of its efforts in peacebuilding and conflict prevention could yield significant result, according to the EU . The EU is willing to fully engage and provide the necessary resources .
 The EU efforts within the multi-track diplomacy, security sector reform and decentralization are reviewed in detail below .
 European Union Diplomatic Intervention in Ukraine has been dubbed "Normandy Format" The EU has been involved in the Ukraine crisis since 2004 .
 EU intervention in Ukraine was unable to prevent the domestic crisis in Ukraine or Russian intervention in the East of Ukraine and Crimea .
 The international community, including the EU, found itself unable to swiftly respond to the unfolding events in Ukraine . The events included ‘hybrid warfare’ and “hybrid’ warfare .
 The term hybrid warfare is used for a combination of traditional and unconventional elements that are employed by an aggressor . Russia in this case is using hybrid warfare to fight back against Russia .
Russell Glenn defined hybrid warfare as ‘an adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs some combination of political, military, economic, social, and information means, and conventional, irregular, catastrophic, terrorism, and criminal warfare methods.
 Ukraine and the EU are facing an enormous challenge as it requires skills and resources that were not implemented before . This type of warfare was applied on a large scale in Ukraine .
 Ukraine, Ukraine, EU, United States and most of the UN countries refer to it as the illegal annexation of Crimea . Russia claims the annexation was carried out according to international laws .
 The Ukraine, EU and U.S. have used the term Russian aggression . Russia denies involvement and calls it a domestic conflict and civil war .
 All parties unofficially acknowledge that hybrid war tactics were applied initially . All parties have acknowledged that hybrid tactics were used initially .
 Chief of General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces, general Gherasimov, laid out his theory on new type of war before the Ukraine conflict took place .
 In 2013 general Gherasimov was saying that ‘in the XXI century there is a tendency of erasing distinctions between a state of war and peace.
 Russian applied in regard to Ukraine once the aggression took place. That is to a great extent the policy that Russian applied to Ukraine .
 The short history of the independent Ukraine provided the tools to avoid conflicts and guarantee territorial integrity and security . The short History of the Independent Ukraine provided a short history to avoid conflict .
 Despite the existence of the memorandum, Ukraine was not protected against external aggression . Ukraine was also not protected from external aggression, says the government .
 Russia, as one of the guarantors, was the one who actually annexed Crimea and crafted the conflict in the East, instead of protecting Ukraine’s territorial integrity .
 The EU reaction was often one step behind the events in Ukraine . Sometimes Brussels delegated its job to the member states .
 The first mention of the political crisis in Ukraine is contained in the EU Council conclusions of 20 December 2013 . It highlights the readiness of the EU to sign the Association Agreement and ’emphasizes the right of all sovereign States to make their own foreign policy decisions without undue external pressure�
 The EU dropped its neutral position towards the ongoing events in Ukraine and agreed on necessary steps that would lead to de-escalation . On 20 February 2014, the EU gathered for an extraordinary session of the Foreign Affairs Council .
 Yanukovych and Catherine Ashton met on 10 December 2014, in which Yanukovych promised not to resort to violence .
 The situation in Ukraine after the presidency of Yanukovych was extremely chaotic . The situation after Yanukovych's presidency was extremely chaos .
 The level of polarisation between Maidan supporters and Yanukovych supporters was extremely high . On the other hand, the state institutions were weak and it took them a few days to be back in control .
 The shuttle diplomacy of officials from the United States, European Union and EU member states culminated in the Agreement on the Settlement of the Crisis in Ukraine . The agreement was signed on 21 February 2014 by President Yanukovych and three opposition leaders .
 The agreement was mediated by the foreign ministers of Germany, Poland and France at the invitation of the former EU HR and Vice-President Catherine Ashton .
 President Yanukovych fled the country on 22 February 2014 . The so-called 'Weimar Triangle' was too late since protesters rejected the deal .
 The EU has been slow in its response to the Ukraine crisis, according to experts . It has been at least slower than the expectations of Ukraine . Experts like Judy Dempsey have called for mediation to Germany and Poland .
 All the calls of the international community to restore control of the Ukrainian authorities were ignored .
 Despite the restoration of power, the Ukrainian army was in a very poor condition . The Ukrainian army is in a poor condition, according to reports .
 Ukraine has been able to withstand the expansion of Russian-backed separatist territories mainly due to the mobilization of many volunteer battalions alongside the regular troops .
 Even in the Donbas region, there has been significant opposition to Russian inspired separatism .
 Igor Strelkov is the minister of defence of the self-proclaimed Donetsk Peoples' Republic . He led the Russian-backed separatists in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine .
 The direct intervention of Russia, as well as the downing of MH17, caused EU member states to become more involved in settling the conflict . Other factors, such as Russia's intervention, also contributed to settling the dispute .
 The Weimar Triangle was a recognized fact after president Yanukovych’s exile . The Geneva format emerged in April 2014 .
 It 16 was agreed that the protesters in Ukraine were to leave the buildings they occupied . The illegal groups in Eastern Ukraine would be offered amnesty .
 The Geneva agreement was cautiously welcomed, though there were no guarantees that the commitments on the side of Russia and Ukraine would be fulfilled .
 The EU model aimed to aid conflict settlement in Ukraine broadly corresponds to the one suggested by German Chancellor Angela Merkel .
 The “Normandy format for the conflict in Ukraine was created on 6 June 2014, when the leaders of Ukraine, Germany, France and Russia met close to the 70th anniversary of D-Day allied landings in Normandy .
 A cease-fire agreement was much needed in order to stop the violence and the rising number of causalities, but also for Ukraine’s stabilization . The agreement was also needed for Ukraine's stabilization .
 A package of measures for conflict settlement was agreed upon on 12 February 2015 . After a fourteen hour negotiation, the settlement was reached .
 The package of measures agreed by the Normandy Four in Minsk was not a process that started from scratch . The package was not the process that began from scratch, says a spokesman .
 A joint declaration was a political umbrella for the Trilateral Contact Group and the two leaders of the separatist territories . They prepared a joint declaration .
 The Normandy Four upgraded and reinforced the Minsk protocol to create the conditions for the signing of Minsk II package of measures .
 The Kremlin accepted the Minsk package, de-escalation and a sharp decrease in cease-fire violations took place . It was clear that if Russia wants to stop the war, then it stops .
 The UN Security Council adopted Resolution 2202 which also endorsed the Minsk Agreements . During the negotiations and the creation of the Normandy Format, Brussels was not involved in the negotiations .
 Frederica Mogherini is the new head of the European Commission and president of the Council . The new HRVP for foreign and security policy, Frederica Mogherini, is a former member of the Commission .
 The EU Council meetings served to build consensus, while some arrangements took place prior to the Council .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel took the initiative and also brought Paris into the format .
 The absence of the EU was regretted by certain EU countries and EU institutions . Germany and France signed an open-ended deal, which was later accepted by the EU through its Council endorsement .
 Frederica Mogherini has been coordinating with the leaders of France and Germany . She was on the phone with them during the negotiations, she said .
In the Council, the member states had agreed on the red lines of the future agreements, diplomats said .
 The risk of reaching an agreement unacceptable to a member state was minimal. Therefore, the risk was minimal .
 The EU lost the initiative in the process, but it is still necessary to find out why the EU lost it . The EU has been criticised by the EU for losing the initiative .
 The involvement of the EU in the negotiations is a much more disputed issue that it seems in the public discourse . The EU's involvement in the EU negotiations is more disputed than it seems to be .
 The lack of direct involvement in the conflict settlement has several explanations for the lack of involvement . It has also been suggested that the conflict was a result of a conflict settlement .
 Many experienced and knowledgeable public figures and EU officials share the idea that it would have been logical for the EU to sit at the table alongside the US, Russia and Ukraine .
 The EU was weak because of the elections in the European Parliament and the change of the European Commission . They point out that the need for deeper EU involvement emerged when the EU wasweak .
 It is worthwhile to consider the mandates of HRVP Ashton and HRVP Mogherini, and how these mandates impacted member states' behaviour, from a comparative perspective .
 Ashton's mandate has clear roles the EU played in the negotiations with Iran and Serbia – Kosovo negotiations . It is possible to observe more diplomatic leadership during Ashton’s mandate .
The EU has played a leading role in the settlement of the Cyprus conflict . The EU has also played a key role in settling the conflict .
 In the mandate of HRVP Mogherini, there seems to be a greater focus on strategic planning and cooperation with the European Commission .
 The EU revised the EU strategy in global affairs, the EU neighbourhood policy, and improved the inter-institutional coordination . Under Mogherini, the European Union has improved the international cooperation .
 The challenge remains to increase the HRVP’s contribution to the most pressing international issues in foreign policy, especially to EU member states .
 The EU is involved in diplomatic efforts to solve the conflict in the East of Ukraine . It is not only the EU institutional void that caused a timid involvement, it is also the EU's timid involvement .
 Frederica Mogherini assumed office at a crucial moment in the conflict .
 EU officials questioned Mogherini's ability to negotiate on behalf of the EU . They questioned her preparedness to withstand a negotiation round with Putin .
 Leaders of several member states have suspected Mogherini of having a too soft and conciliatory position towards Russia . Also, leaders of several countries have suspected the Italian leader of having too soft position toward Russia .
 The EU policy design regarding its intervention in Ukraine at the level of multi-track diplomacy was rather process driven . The EU has arguably weakened its influence in the process .
This mainly happened due to the overlap of the need to intervene in the conflict with the leadership change in the EU institutions . This mainly happened because of the overlap between the need and the need for intervention .
 The steps of the EU, especially at the level of the HRVP, were seen by certain EU member states as not entirely coherent and often inconsistent towards Russia . Questions regarding to what extent the new HRVP was well positioned and ready for negotiations in such a complex situation were raised .
 Few observers consider it possible that another format would have been able to achieve what the Normandy did not achieve . Very few observers think it could have been possible.
 The negotiation format was limited by the true intentions of the participants .
 Author’s interview with an EEAS official, Brussels, 2016 . In Ukraine and in a considerable part of the interview, the author talks about the country .
 The Kremlin, on the contrary, highlights its readiness to contribute to the conflict . The Kremlin denies any direct involvement in the conflict. The Kremlin highlights its willingness to contribute .
 This implies Russia positions itself as a mediator and not as a party in the conflict . This also implies that Russia is not a part of the conflict. This also suggests that Russia has not been a party to the conflict in Russia .
 Minsk II, signed as a result of Normandy format efforts, shifted the centre of gravity in the conflict from military operations to diplomacy .
Military means are still used and the Russian military build-up on the Ukraine’s border continues to take place .
 The question is whether Minsk was created to hold the ceasefire and solve the conflict or to reform Ukraine . The question has been frequently asked by critics of the Minsk agreement .
 In Kyiv, many accused president Poroshenko that within Minsk II he committed to things he cannot deliver . The amendment of the constitution can only be done by the parliament .
 In Ukraine, many parties did not receive the insistence to adopt constitutional changes well . Many parties didn't get the insistence that they would adopt changes well.
 Ukrainians ask why a constitutional change has to be imposed from the outside instead of emanating from the population . The question that many Ukrainians ask is why aconstitutional change has been imposed from outside .
 The Minsk conditions are seen by many parties as a direct pressure on the country’s leadership to accept changes that are not needed and do not contribute to the settlement process . These are not directed to solve the conflict, but to give Russia guarantees that Ukraine is not
 Pressure on Ukraine also relates to the issue of elections in the occupied regions . The pressure on Ukraine is also related to the issues of the occupied region .
 Minsk II does not provide for a concrete sequencing of the process . Among other aspects, it doesn't provide for an exact sequencing .
 Each side interprets the interconnections of the agreement in its own way . This has become a big issue as each side interpreters the interconnection of the deal in its way .
 Germany has focused on negotiating a strict action plan with clear dates and benchmarks in order to move on with the implementation of the plan . That is why Germany has been focusing on negotiating with clear deadlines and benchmarks .
 In Ukraine, many parties see this as an attempt to transform the conflict from an interstate conflict into a domestic conflict .
 Kyiv is pressured by the Kremlin, and by the Ukrainian public opinion and various groups to withstand occupation and confront the separatists . But as Kyiv's government is pressured, it is also pressured by public opinion to resist occupation .
 The EU sanctions are a key component in the de-escalation of the Ukraine crisis . US, Canada, Australia, Japan, Norway and other countries increased each time the Kremlin crossed another “red line’s’.
 First, they were an important signal to everybody that the West was united in its rejection of Russian aggression . First, it was a signal to everyone that the world was united. First, the West's rejection of Russia's aggression was important .
 At the same time, some EU member states advocated for lifting sanctions against Russia as these were affected by the Russian counter-sanctions .
 EU based companies may have been affected by the Russian counter-sanctions, according to research carried out by CEPS (Gros & Mustilli 2016) and the report of the European Parliament . EU economies were not really affected or the impact was limited .
 There was a discussion in 2014-2015 about the provision of lethal arms from the Western countries to Ukraine . There was also a discussion about the possibility of lethal weapons from the West .
 President Obama and European leaders did not support this approach as the common policy is that the conflict could only be solved by peaceful means . However, President Obama did not back this approach .
 There were discussions that the West might embark on a trade-off with Russia . The West might also have more conciliatory over Ukraine, and Russia helping more in Syria .
 The intervention of Russia in Syria was intended to weaken the EU’s position in the negotiations, including on Ukraine . EU officials wanted to show the ability to act as global power and reaching places outside the so-called near abroad .
 The EU managed to keep separate tracks for Syria and Ukraine . It is true that the issue of Syria does effect the position of certain member states .
 The two most significant players in the EU are handling the crisis by themselves and demand changes in the format . EU members and officials of certain member states are concerned with the fact that the two most important players are handling it by themselves .
 The EU eastern member states are concerned about the vision of Berlin and Paris over the conflict . The Russian responsibility for the conflict may not be sufficiently reflected by Germany and France .
 The member states that have had negative experiences with Russia in the past are the most vocal . Russia's most vocal member states are most vocal, according to CNN .
 Berlin and Paris have a significant level of distrust for the Kremlin’s real intentions in the conflict . The conflict is also the case for Berlin andParis, although to a lesser degree .
 Ukraine has quite a feeble ownership over the process of negotiations in the Normandy format . Kyiv is often pressured by the Kremlin, Berlin and Paris, and its choices are quite limited .
 Even if HR Mogherini is not at the negotiation table, she has an important role in shaping the EU position on Ukraine within the European institutions .
 Chancellor Merkel and President Hollande made it very clear that they do not consider themselves neutral brokers . Russia is responsible for the war in eastern Ukraine and the destabilization of Ukraine, they said .
 As of August 2016, it seems that there is an agreement at the level of the EU of who did what in the conflict and who is to be held accountable .
 There are different ideas within the EU on how to deal with Russia in the future . However, there are different ways to deal.
 France, Italy, Austria and other countries would like to restore the dialogue, ease the sanctions and then deal with the issues . France and Italy, Italy and Austria want to ease sanctions, ease sanctions and deal with issues .
 Poland, Romania and Lithuania favour strong preconditions to re-launch dialogue and cooperation with Moscow . Other countries, such as Poland, Romanian and Lithuania, favour strong pre-emptions .
There is a consensus that bringing Russia and Ukraine into a diplomatic process has played an important role in de-escalating the conflict . Nonetheless, it seems that there is aensus that bringing the two countries into a Diplomatic process is a key part of the process .
 The involvement of the U.S. was demanded several times, above all by Kyiv . Number of ceasefire violations is the highest number .
 Poland is the most vocal country in the EU, according to the European Union . The most vocal nation was Poland . Poland is one of the EU's most vocal countries .
 There were also reported offers on behalf of the White House to enter the negotiation format . Many officials and the expert community in Kyiv were disappointed by Obama's disinterest in Ukraine .
 The U.S. presence might lead to a discussion of Russian-US bilateral grievances in a format that was not created to discuss these . The United States presence may lead to discussion of bilateral grievances .
 The United States unofficially joined the negotiation format by having a separate track of consultations over Minsk implementation led by V Surkov and V Nuland .
 The U.S. mentioned they could join Normandy ’if the four countries agree that Washington could play a role during the consultations or at the negotiating table’ 16.
 The Russian position is that the participation of such countries as the US, Poland, UK, etc., would have blocked the results that the Normandy format achieved so far . But in general, the Russian position.
 The EU at the table would be a nice exercise, according to Russia, but would not provide the results which the Kremlin would like .
 For the EU, the inclusion of the U.S. in the Normandy format might make sense since the direct negotiations between the United States and Russia are non-transparent .
 This leaves the possibility for Washington and Moscow to accept compromises in the absence of EU and Ukraine . This is not the first time the two countries have agreed to compromise .
 If this occurs, Ukraine and the EU will lose ownership over the process . If this happens, the EU and Ukraine and Ukraine will lose control of the process.
 EU direct and indirect involvement in negotiations regarding conflict 19 settlement in Ukraine. Comparative advantages and disadvantages on EU direct / indirect involvement .
 This issue became a central element of the EU-Ukraine summit in April 2015 . This issue was the first time the summit was held in Ukraine .
 The mission is only observing how the ceasefire is violated, broadly speaking . However, the mission is not only observing the ceasefire .
 Minsk has no free access to the occupied territories, as separatist leaders condition the access . In practice, contrary to the Minsk provisions, it has noFree access.
 Kyiv has been unhappy with it, because the Ukrainian leadership would like a mission with the capacity to enforce peace . The Ukrainian leadership is unhappy with the situation, because it would like to have a mission to enforcePeace .
 The EU HRVP, backed by Italy and France, proposed an EU mission to maintain the ceasefire in Libya . In the case of Ukraine, Brussels did not even propose such a mission .
 Kyiv, Ukraine 19 Author’s compilation based on the carried out interviews . The compilation is based on interviews carried out in Ukraine .
 The Normandy format was able to reach an unstable ceasefire, but it is quite unlikely that it will solve the conflict in Ukraine .
 The inability of the West to solve the conflict was not because the diplomatic efforts of Germany and France were insufficient, but rather because of the diverging objectives of Ukraine and Russia .
 The Kremlin states it would like to hand back control of the separatist territories to Ukraine . But on its own conditions, the Kremlin says it would want to hand control back to Ukraine.
 Russia wants the institutionalization of its meddling in local and national politics, especially when it comes to strategic issues such as NATO membership or joining the EU . Ukraine now has two choices and both of them are bad.
 The first is to accept the status of the separatist territories on Russian conditions and risk paralysing the Ukrainian government for an indefinite period . The first will be to accept a separatist territory.
 The second is to keep the status quo with the separatist territories and move towards freezing the conflict . The third is to stop the conflict in the territories and stop the separatist territory.
 Theoretically, there is a third option – ensuring security in the East of Ukraine, creating conditions for elections in separatist regions and taking back control of the territory and the border . The Minsk agreements prescribed.
 Russia to further sponsor the separatist regions brings significant economic and reputational costs, for example . Russia's funding demands of the occupied regions and the economic and political impact of sanctions.
 Russia raised the issue of the Minsk implementation in discussion with the EU and US in August 2016 . In order to speed up the process, Russia raised it in talks with the European and US .
 The pretext for this was allegedly a planned diversion of Ukrainian intelligence in the occupied Crimea, something denied by the government in Kyiv .
 Moscow seems increasingly disappointed in the Normandy format and its European brokers . Moscow seems more disappointed in Normandy format .
 The main Russian disappointment came as a result of the inability of Germany and France to make President Poroshenko implement Minsk II, especially the part on constitutional reform .
 The Kremlin sees Washington as the one who could really influence Ukraine . The Kremlin does not seem to have any other choice.
 The EU has been slow in responding to the crisis in Ukraine and the following conflict between the Kremlin and Kyiv . The EU is slow to respond to the Ukraine crisis and the conflict in Ukraine .
 26 weakened EU intervention in the conflict settlement in Ukraine, Kyiv, 2016. 26 weakened European intervention in Ukraine .
 EU difficulties in having a clear role in conflict settlement in Ukraine were also generated by the institutional void and change of EU leadership when the conflict emerged .
 The inability of the EU to respond to the crisis in Ukraine revealed insufficient experience in conflict intervention and slow reaction mechanisms . But different visions inside the EU on how to deal with Ukraine and how to build a dialogue with Russia .
 The EU and its member states have managed to move a considerable part of the fight to the diplomatic arena by creating the Normandy format . Germany and France have a leading role in the European Union .
 The EU strengthened its positions by imposing a series of sanctions against Russia and mobilized a wide support for Ukraine to resist the pressure .
 This chapter focuses on the role of two EU missions present in Ukraine – EUBAM and EUAM – in Ukraine’s security sector reform . This chapter also focuses on Ukraine's security sector reforms .
 EUBAM is the EU’s only “hybrid mission, administered by the European Commission but supervised by the Council . EUAM is a civilian CSDP mission, while EUBam is a military CSD mission .
 EUBAM started its work in 2005, while EUAM has only been in operation since 2014 . EUAM started in 2005 .
 EUBAM is a local mission based in Odessa oblast, while EUAM is Kyiv-based and covers all of Ukraine with its mandate . EUBam is based on Odessa Oblast and is based in Kyiv, Ukraine .
 EUBAM is widely regarded as an EU success story, while the record of EUAM is still to be evaluated . Also, EUBam is widely considered as an European success story .
 The chapter first gives an overview of the dynamics of Ukraine’s security sector reforms from independence until the present . The chapter also gives a look at Ukraine's security sector reform from independence .
 It then provides an assessment of the two missions on focus, tracing the processes of policy design, implementation and change . It then moves on to provide a review of the policies on focus and focus .
 It ends with conclusions and reflections about how the EU capabilities and conflict prevention can be enhanced, based on the case study .
 In the first years of Ukraine's independence, the new state apparatus focused on establishing autonomous and capable security structures . Ukraine inherited from the Soviet Union.
 The ‘Law on Domestic and Foreign Policy’ of Ukraine declared Ukraine’s neutral status in 2010 . This has been by far the most important key strategic document which shaped Ukraine's “security identity’ until 2010 .
Special attention will be paid to the state of the security sector in Ukraine in the period 2010-2013 . Different analysts have suggested different periods of security sector reform .
 The European Union deals with the civilian security sector reform in Ukraine only . This reflects the state in which Ukraine’s security institutions were at the time the conflict in the East of 21 .
 This section provides an overview of the security sector reform as a whole . In the current geopolitical environment, analyzing civilian and military security reform in Ukraine separately from each other would prevent the reader from an overarching comprehension of Ukraine’s security problematics .
 By the years 2011-2012 the Ukrainian security institutions, especially those belonging to the civilian sector, still reflected the centralized Soviet model of governance . By the year 2011- 2012, the security institutions were still reflecting the Soviet model .
 Internal Forces of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the special militia troops ‘Berkut’ were mainly used for the crackdowns on the protesters and not the Ukrainian Army .
In-depth research on the role of Ukraine’s security sector in the events of the Revolution of Dignity remains an unfilled niche in the academic and policy literature . One of the reasons why the Army was not engaged in the crackdowns could be the loyalty of the armed forces
 EU Crisis Management Concept lays the basis for the EU Advisory Mission to Ukraine . Pro-Russian militant groups have seized control over local police, intelligence services and municipal buildings in the Eastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk .
 The unpreparedness of Ukraine's civilian and military structures to defend Ukraine’s citizens from the Russian attack was undeniable .
 After the Presidential and Parliamentary elections in 2014, the newly established authorities embarked on a series of reforms in the security sector .
 The rights and freedoms of an individual and a citizen are for the first time defined as one of the key objectives of Ukraine’s National Security Strategy . European and Euro-Atlantic integration as a guiding vector of reform (National Security Strategy of Ukraine 2015) Reforming in
 The volunteer movement was instrumental to the support of the Ukrainian army in 2014-2016 . It should be noted that the volunteer movement.
 The Concept for the Development of the Security and Defence Sector assigns numerous roles to the civil society . The Concept calls ‘peacekeeping tasks’ by the Armed Forces of Ukraine .
 In practice, the Concept’s provisions reflect the changes which have started and been ongoing since 2014 .
 The reform of the civilian security sector has generally been less straightforward . However, it is fair to say that emphasis has been placed on military reform .
 The Ministry of Interior is now the key internal security structure . The National Police, the State Migration Service, the National Guard and the State Border Service will belong to the Interior .
 The police patrol reform was part of the Ministry of Interior reform, which kicked off in 2015 .
 Eka Zguladze supervised the establishment of the National Police as a body subordinate to the Ministry of Interior . Eka also supervised the creation of the national police body .
 The police patrol was a new structure which was created from scratch and in a very short period of time . Within which the officers were employed and trained, they were trained .
 Former Georgian officials from Saakashvili government occupied various state positions, including those in the security sector .
 OECD-DAC approach to definition of security sector on which the EU relies . This approach is different to the OECD's approach to the security sector .
 The consequences of this discrepancy for the operation of the EU missions in Ukraine will be analysed in further detail .
 The financial factor is the financial factor . The criminal investigation is much harder to reform, both cost and human resources .
 Ukraine’s defence needs have grown exponentially, which has led to a fivefold increase in its security and defence budget in comparison to 2013 . Ukraine's defence budget has increased fivefold in the past year .
 abuse of funds is likely to stay in the short to middle term, according to a report .
National defence is a top priority in Ukraine, with national defence being the top priority . National defence is underfinancing of the civilian security sector, according to Ukrainian authorities .
 Over the last year numerous institutions have been created whose functions overlap, especially in the anti-corruption sphere . Many institutions have had their functions overlap.
 It remains to be seen whether all these institutions find their niche and can coexist efficiently . ‘Turf wars’ between security sector institutions are loathed to curb their own competences and authority .
 EUAM and EUBAM – deal with SSR in Ukraine . EUAM is one of the two EU actors present in Ukraine. EUAM was also present in the Ukraine .
 Both missions represent the EU efforts in the civilian security sector reform in Ukraine . Both missions are part of the EU's efforts to improve Ukraine's civilian security .
 EUAM Policy design a CSDP mission to Ukraine was requested by Ukraine in the wake of a Russian organized referendum in Crimea . EUAM policy design was requested in wake of Crimea referendum .
 Ukraine’s idea was to request a monitoring CSDP mission to be dispatched to the administrative line of occupation between Ukraine and the Crimea .
 The request was reviewed in the EU, but the Russian intervention in the East started . The Russian intervention started when the EU was reviewed by Russia .
 Sweden, Poland, Poland and Great Britain suggested a compromise in the form of an SSR CSDP mission, with headquarters in Kyiv .
 The CMC stressed the role of weak security institutions in the Ukraine during the unfolding and development of the conflict .
 A CSDP mission was dispatched to Ukraine, but its “security and defence’s’ component was watered down as much as possible . As a result, a CSDP Mission was dispatched.
 The key interlocutor with Brussels was the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine . It is important to stress that none of the mission’s beneficiaries were consulted .
 The potential beneficiaries did not even know that they would be the mission’s partners and target institutions until the mission was set up in Kyiv .
 The EU Delegation in Kyiv was not consulted at the stage of the mission’s inception, an EU official said .
 The “SuperTWINNING’s project, run by the Delegation, had already covered practically all institutions foreseen as EUAM beneficiaries . The mission was a reinforcement to the EU reform effort in Ukraine .
 EU Delegation had to withdraw the Twinning advisors from the Ministry of Interior to give way to EUAM advisors .
 The mission was mandated with providing strategic advice to the civilian security sector reform only . Sent as a political signal of support to a partner country at war .
 Its “security and defence’s” component largely disappeared from the mandate . Its ‘security and defense’ component largely vanished from the mandates .
 Some member states even opposed the mission’s assistance to the National Guard . The National Guard was subordinated to the Ministry of Interior .
 The National Guard was not included in the list of EUAM beneficiaries . As a result, the National Guard did not include the list .
 The EU reluctance to send military missions to the Eastern neighbourhood region for fear of irritating Russia has been addressed in the literature . Ukraine's case provides more evidence of this reluctance .
 The EUAM mandate is from any relation to the Russian-Ukrainian war . The Ukrainian case is still a precedent for the EU by sending a mission to the Eastern neighbourhood while armed conflict is ongoing .
 The EU Monitoring mission to Georgia was dispatched after the hostilities were over . In contrast, the mission was dispatched to Georgia after the conflict was over .
 The initial mandate of the EUAM was to provide strategic consultation and coordinate donor support to civilian security reform in Ukraine . The EUAM's initial mandate was to give strategic consultation to the civilian security sector .
 The key complaint was that strategic advice was not enough for the local institutions and they needed projects and training as well .
 The mission's mandate itself required it to support ’rapid preparation and implementation of reform measures’ and the expectations of local stakeholders for the mission’s rapid involvement in the reform process were high but not met .
 The Political and Security Committee delegation arrived in Kyiv in September 2015 to make an assessment of the mission's activities . The local frustration with EUAM was felt in Brussels .
 EUAM’s strategic review of EUAM's mandate was carried out after less than a year of its operation .
 K�’stutis Lančinskas, chief of Vilnius County Police, took over the position after Kalman Mizsei left at the end of 2015 .
 The review of the mission’s mandate after one year was an exception to the regular procedures . A typical timeframe for a CSDP mission mandate review is 2 years .
 The National Police was established with support of EUAM and now is among the mission's beneficiaries . 29 Author's interview with an EEAS official, Brussels, 2016 .
 The launch of regional offices was considered from the start of the mission but only took place in May 2015 . The member states were sceptical about establishing regional offices for reasons of safety .
 EUAM regional offices were approved in Brussels on condition that they would perform a representative rather than a policy-making function .
 The issue was so sensitive for some member states that they even opposed the regional representations of the EUAM to bear the names of “offices” instead . The EUAM prefers the term “presences’ instead .
 The mission drew up a list of its achievements. The mission itself drew up an list of the achievements .
 EUAM’s key achievements Target partner Assistance to drafting strategic documents and legislation . The Sector at large ‘Strategy of the reform of the internal affairs agencies’
 The majority expressed their satisfaction with the cooperation with the mission . The majority said they were satisfied with the help of the team .
 EUAM is active in a variety of spheres, including collocation of experts to the beneficiary institutions . According to six interviews of the author held in June – July 2016 in Kyiv .
 EUAM coordinates donor support for the law enforcement sector . EUAM organizes monthly meetings with donors and beneficiaries .
 Various beneficiaries assured that the donor assistance was coordinated effectively and avoided overlap . Various beneficiaries assure that the aid was coordinated .
 EUAM coordinates its activities with the EU Delegation to Ukraine and the EU Support Group to Ukraine . Also, EUAMcoordinates its activities in Ukraine .
 EUAM and EU Delegation have started to work on a “comprehensive approach’ of support for anticorruption reform, community policing and the rule of law .
 The European Commission provides funds and a third party (e.g. a relevant member state institution) Under this mechanism, EUAM drafts a project proposal .
 The mission finally reached its full operational capability and was ready to engage fully starting in autumn 2015 . The role of the mission as the channel of communication between Brussels and Brussels and the beneficiary institution37 .
 The EUAM operates among a wide variety of donors and partners . The beneficiaries seem to perceive the EUAM as one of the Western projects present in Ukraine .
 It is fair to say that the mandate review of EUAM led to positive evaluations of beneficiaries, who were of the opinion that the mission was much more focused and responsive to the needs of the partner institutions .
 A number of different but interconnected factors challenged EUAM’s activities . EUAM's activities were also challenged by the European Union .
Lack of domestic strategic reform vision and civil-military dilemma one of the key challenges to EUAM’s work is lack of consensus on the vision and broader purpose of civilian security sector reform in Ukraine .
 EUAM has drafted a proposal for a “Civilian Security Strategy’s’ of Ukraine . The proposal is part of a plan to improve Ukraine's economy .
 The idea is to develop a mind-set of security as a civilian concept . EUAM attributes to a more militarised approach to security .
 Ukraine says it is impossible to draw a clear distinction between civilian and military security in times of war . This contradicts Ukraine’s own approach, according to the country's own approach .
Border Guard and security service institutions function as both civilian and military bodies . For example, border guard and security services institutions are both civilian, military bodies.
 Ukraine often complains that the advice received from the EU would suit a peaceful security environment but not a country facing military aggression . Ukraine proclaims European and Euro-Atlantic standards as guidelines for its SSR .
 EUAM distances itself as much as possible from any connection whatsoever to the conflict in the East .
 The Security Service of Ukraine says it does not carry out any activities which could be described as a contribution to conflict prevention and peacebuilding . It also rejects indirect involvement,g. assisting in the establishment of regional antiterrorist centres .
 The mission was invited by Ukraine as assistance in the conflict resolution and in the aftermath of the Russian aggression and not as an adviser to SSR in peaceful times . It is understandable that such attitude is the result of caution.
 The restraint of EUAM towards recognizing the realities of the ongoing war in Eastern Ukraine can well corrode the receptivity of Ukrainian counterparts towards its advice .
 Some Ukrainian senior officials see significant potential if EUAM could assist in SSR in the East . The security institutions can be built from scratch .
 EU officials in Brussels confirm possibility of reintegration of occupied territories . But strictly conditional on the launch of the reintegment of the occupied territories.
There is resistance of certain actors from the Ukrainian civilian security sector against reform . There is resistance to reform, says Ukrainian government .
 The ‘old apparatus’ remains employed in much of the security sector . Another factor is the ‘personnel resistance’ the “old apparatus.’s’ old apparatus .
 Ukrainian partner institutions are not used to receiving advice as a type of external assistance. Another cause of domestic resistance is that partner institutions aren't used to receive advice as an external assistance .
 They are used to perceive assistance as donor supported projects, technical and material support, trainings, professional development, trips, etc. They are also used to see assistance as support for professional development and travel .
 Some partner institutions have more constructive cooperation with EUAM than others . Lack of trust between the mission and local partners is also true, but it is true that some partner institutions are more constructive .
 EUAM GPO was one of the organizations which did not attribute itself to the security sector . It is worth pointing out that from the outset of EUAMGPO was not one of those who did not attributes itself to security sector.
 National Police EUAM comes fourth in terms of priority partners . For example, for EUAM the National Police is one of the key local partners .
 The Security Service of Ukraine and EUAM were very constructive and fruitful according to both sides . At the same time, the cooperation between the two was very constructive .
 The creation of the International Advisory Group to SSU was explained by receptivity of the institution . EUAM suggested and to which it belongs, which was explained, inter alia, by the institution.
 EUAM is the only EU representation in the capital alongside the EU Delegation . EUAM's low profile means it bears the reputational costs for the EU in Ukraine .
 The EUAM keeps in the media, but lack of public statements and participation in public discussions are detrimental to the EU image in Ukraine . It may also decrease the probability of reform success.
 The reforms advocated by EUAM would be supported by Ukraine’s civil society . It might create synergy with EUAM in exerting pressure, advocacy and monitoring .
 Ukraine's civil society is unable to appreciate the EU efforts, or to take part in public discussion .
 EUAM does the ‘technical’ part of the work while the “political’ statements are part of EU Delegation or High Representative portfolio .
 CSDP was never meant to be a ‘technical’ instrument. This appears as a certain paradox since CSDP wasn't intended to be an 'technical' instrument .
 Publicity is also important in order to inform the civil society about the mission’s ‘logic’ of reform . Publicity should also be important to inform civil society of the mission.
 EUAM is mandated with a very broad and far-reaching task of assisting the civilian sector reform in Ukraine . It should be noted that EUam is mandated to assist civilian sector reforms .
 EUAM rather offers a ‘fishing rod’ than a “fish’ The focus is on assisting to choose the most suitable reform vector and reallocation of domestic resources .
Justified as this approach is to ensure local ownership, it is time-consuming and unlikely to provide immediate results. Justified as it is to ensuring local ownership is to be ensured .
 While Ukrainians expect a quick pace of reforms, EUAM risks 45 Author’s interview at the National Police of Ukraine .
Human rights and gender belong to one of three cross-cutting issues which EUAM focuses on in supporting reform of the civilian security sector in Ukraine . EUAM is focusing on supporting reform in the civilian sector in the Ukraine .
 EUAM aims to mainstream a human rights and gender perspective into all advice and support provided to agencies in the civilian security sector . EUAM wants to mainstream the human rights, gender perspective of the civilian sector .
 EUAM realized a number of initiatives promoting gender equality in Ukraine’s SSR,g. in the National Policy, the Ministry of Interior and State Fiscal Service .
 EUAM also emphasized the European standards in human rights and gender . EUAM advised on the Law of Ukraine on Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and on Human Rights Strategy and Action Plan .
 The interlocutors typically were taken aback by the questions of their cooperation with the mission on gender issues, says the author . The author observed that the interlocuttors were often missing the link between conflict prevention and peacebuilding .
 The EU-US ‘rivalry’ was observed by some commentators in 2015, when the U.S. prevented the EU from “co-owning’ the police patrol reform .
 In 2016 several interlocutors representing the EU institutions in Ukraine shared their frustration over the American approach . EUAM is not the priority partner for them but the US, Canada and Japan are not .
 Reanimation Package of Reforms, Razumkov Centre, Amnesty International, and Amnesty International are among those who support the package .
 EUAM avoids any cooperation with the military . It also created the ‘Parliament – Civil Society Platform’ on issues related to civilian SSR.50 .
 No examples of civil-military synergy in connection to EUAM were observed .
51 interviews with officials of EEAS and EUAM, Brussels, Kyiv, 2016 . One such example is e-case management .
 EUBAM The EU Border Assistance Mission to Moldova and Ukraine has been operating since 2005 . The mission is based in Ukraine and Moldova .
 It also has a EUBAM Office in Moldova and five field offices – two on the Moldovan side of the joint border and three on the Ukrainian side .
EUBAM's primary counterparts in Ukraine and Moldova are the local Border and Customs Services . EUBAM is based in Ukraine, Moldova and Ukraine's main border agency .
 EUBAM is not a proper CSDP mission but a hybrid one, since it is administered by the European Commission rather than the European Council . The European Commission is administering the European Union rather than by the EU Council .
 The Russia-instigated conflict in Transnistria remains frozen since 1992 . Both Moldovans and Ukrainians were distrustful towards each other over the alleged smuggling over the Moldovan-Ukrainian state border .
 The European Commission and European Council were debated between the Commission and the European Council prior to its establishment .
 The European External Action Service is part of EUBAM . It is also part of the European Economic and Security Council . The European Union and European Union have been working together for years .
 The daily activities of EUBAM experts, as described by Isachenko, include two main duties .
 First is the on-the-job training of Moldovan and Ukrainian customs and border guard personnel .
 EUBAM experts provide advice on how to set up night patrols, how to deal with subordinate personnel .
 EUBAM’s work is focused on field work and real time ‘on the job’ training . The bulk of EUAM activities is aimed at capacity building of the local partners .
 EUBAM efforts are local and constrained to specific branches of the Customs and Border Services of the partner countries . EUAM is based in Kyiv and attempts to influence the strategic level of decision-making .
 One of EUBAM’s key achievements is considered to be the introduction of a new customs regime between Moldova and Ukraine .
 EUBAM did detect the large smuggling route of chicken meat which was smuggled through Transnistria to avoid custom duties .
 The first is to introduce automated exchange of travelers’ data between Ukraine and Moldova . This includes on travellers entering Moldova through the Transnistrian segment of the border .
 The second is the establishment of a jointly operated border crossing point at Kuchurhan-Pervomaisk, which is located at the Transnistrian segment of the border .
Border police will be able to access and check all travellers and vehicles entering or exiting Moldova . This is an extraordinary achievement, since for the first time since the start of the Transnistrian conflict, Moldovan customs and later, border police .
 In a whole range of interviews which the author has carried out on EUBAM, not a single beneficiary complained .
 The fact that almost 100% of EUBAM personnel were seconded from the EU member states border and customs services and had practical rather than theoretical expertise was appreciated .
 The presence of an EU mission in Odessa makes the Ukrainian population feel more secure against the threat of Russia's continued aggression .
 There are fears in Ukraine that Russian troops could be used for an attack on Ukraine . Russian troops are stationed in Transnistria .
 EUBAM is known among its stakeholders as an ever self-developing mission, responding to the needs of local stakeholders and evolving geopolitical situation .
 The Addendum only put to paper what was 54 Author's interviews at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and State Fiscal Service of Ukraine, Kyiv, 2016 .
 EUBAM’s contribution to conflict prevention and peace-building in Moldova is one issue .
 The Ukrainian interlocutors see this as a sign that EUBAM is getting more focused on Transnistria and Moldova, rather than Ukraine .
 The Russian intervention in the East and the annexation of the Crimea added an extra impetus to the work of the mission . The annexation of Crimea added a new impetus to a mission.
 Monitoring of the Transnistrian segment of the UkraineMoldova border became more important . It is an early warning mechanism of any threats which might emanate from that territory .
 EUBAM has deployed 12 additional experts to the Transnistrian segment of the border since 2014 . More than 12 experts have been deployed since 2014.
 It also opened a sub-office in Pischanka, at the northern end of the Transnistrian segment of the border to increase its geographical reach .
 The additional staff have been used to advise the Ukrainian State Border Guard Service and State Fiscal Service on second line checks to detect the smuggling of weapons and contraband . The extra staff are also used to ensure traveller rights are protected .
 It is debated whether the mission will close down altogether, will continue with some changes to its functions or assume a different form .
 The reason for the EUBAM exit is that the mission has fulfilled its mandate. The mission has also fulfilled its mission, says the European Union .
 The mission itself considers that intensive capacity building has been provided and large scale training is no longer needed by local beneficiaries . The mission considers thatintensive capacity building is not needed .
 EUBAM refocuses its attention to Moldova and Transnistria, where it already has expertise and significant progress . It can also be assumed that EUBam wants to distance itself from the Russian-Ukrainian conflict .
 Ukraine is especially interested in prevention of smuggling on the occupation lines in the same way it was done on the Transnistrian segment . For this, EUBAM experience is crucial, says the Ukrainian government .
 EUAM takes up EUBAM’s functions and expertise in establishing Integrated Border Management in Ukraine . Ukrainian officials harboured the idea of taking up the role of European Border Management .
 Ukraine's authorities are expected to transfer practices to the Ukrainian institutions . The transfer of practices is expected by Ukraine’s authorities .
 The Ukrainian government and counterparts have embraced the EUBAM mission and would like it to stay and expand to border crossing points with Slovakia, Poland and Hungary .
 In 2015 EUBAM introduced an international Gender Advisor position within its staff . The position was introduced in 2015 .
 The Advisor's job is to firstly look at how EUBAM’s own support to the partners can be made more gender sensitive .
 The Advisor is also working directly with the partners to identify how to mainstream gender considerations into their policies and daily work .
 EUBAM does not provide technical equipment . Some of the improvements it supports, such as cross-border data exchange, require ICT equipment .
 EUBAM has supported the partner services in both countries to submit proposals for the EU’s Integrated Border Management Flagship Initiative projects .
Since EUBAM activity in Ukraine decreases, it ensures that other EU tools step in . Also, since EUbAM activity is decreasing, it means other European tools are also taking steps in .
 One EUBAM expert used to work on good governance and human resource management in the State Fiscal Service of Ukraine . For example, one EUBam expert worked in Ukraine for years .
 A specially focused Twinning project was launched in February 2016, deploying ampler and more targeted resources .
 This chapter discussed the EUAM and EUBAM mission in Ukraine . This chapter also discussed the European Union's mission in the Ukraine .
 The EUBAM mission started in 2005 and it is not clear whether its mandate will be extended . EUAM deployed only recently .
 EUBAM’s work is focused on field work and real time on-the-job training . The key similarity with EUAM is that a bulk of EUBam activities is aimed at capacity building of local partners .
 Overall, none of the missions contribute directly to conflict prevention and peacebuilding, instead concentrating on institution-building on a strategic, as well as local level .
 EUBAM’s “hybrid nature could be used as a blueprint for further missions, rather than a unique exception . The different institutional nature of EUbAM and EUAM suggest that maybe in sensitive geopolitical environments, maybe insensitive geopolitical environments .
 EU governance interventions in Ukraine are the case of decentralization 5.7% .
 In Ukraine, governance reform is an ongoing process that started after the proclamation of independence in 1991 .
 Throughout the past twenty-five years, the speed and depth of reforms have varied depending on the political situation in the country .
 After the Revolution of Dignity of 2014, a new impetus was given for the acceleration of much needed reforms . The Revolution of 2014 was inspired in part by the intrinsic governance problems such as corruption .
 Decentralization and local self-governance reform were among the top priorities in the Strategy for Sustainable Development ‘Ukraine-2020’
 Following the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation and its involvement in the conflict in the east of Ukraine, decentralization reform and authority of the regions became highly politicized issues in Ukrainian society .
 The majority of the provisions in the Minsk II agreement are not observed to this day . The most critical aspects of peace processes such as a full ceasefire, withdrawal of heavy weapons, access for OSCE observers to the conflict zone .
 59% of respondents believe that Ukraine has to implement the decentralization and local governance reform . 59% believe Ukraine must implement decentralization.
 The EU efforts in addressing governance reform in Ukraine, and particularly the decentralization dimension, have significantly increased in the past two years . The European Union's efforts in Ukraine have been significantly increased .
 European Union grants and programmes have been present in Ukraine for quite some time . Political and security situation in the country after 2014 has accelerated the pace and scope of support .
 This case study evaluates the process of the creation, implementation and adjustment of EU policies in support of the decentralization reform in the conflict-affected areas of Ukraine .
 It assesses the state-of-affairs of the governance reform in Ukraine . It analyses the relevant EU programmes and instruments, while accounting for local ownership, gender dimension, and communication technologies .
 It stresses the significance of decentralization reform for mitigating the grievances and shaping the conflict dynamics, not only in war-ravaged regions, but throughout the whole country .
 Decentralization in Ukraine could mitigate conflict or prevent a relapse, point at both the possibilities and possible backlashes .
 Decentralised Governance for Development’s failure of the decentralization reform to conflict occurrence . The process can be hijacked by corruption, abuse of power by elites and lack of inclusive practices .
 Dawn Brancati argues that implementing political decentralization reforms in democracies have produced mixed results for the reduction of conflict . In the analysis of the ethnic conflict and secessionism, she says .
Joseph Siegle and Patrick O’Mahony analysed patterns between decentralization and intrastate conflict . They also underlines the complex nature of the relationship between the two .
 Empirical evidence from the case study suggests there is no onesize-fits-all relationship between decentralization and conflict .
 Kyiv has outlined the possible elements of a successful decentralization reform . Inclusive practices, local ownership, and multi-stakeholder approaches will be explored .
 The structure also acquired problems such as overreliance on central authority, ineffective composition of lowest administrative units, and lack of resources available to them .
 Kyiv has been the most centralized country in the world since the mid-nineties . Despite the decentralization of Kyiv, the lack of real financial resources has hampered the transition to a more decentralized model .
 The decentralization reform during the presidency of Viktor Yuschenko was not realized, in part due to the political infighting .
 The annexation of Crimea and the conflict in Donbas have been detrimental for the decentralization process . The current efforts of President Poroshenko are largely supported at the political and societal levels .
 European Union members such as Poland, Sweden, and Germany have been consistently supporting decentralization reform, both through technical advice and financial assistance . The European Union has been consistently supported by members of the EU .
 IcSP-funded programmes would focus on the eastern regions of Ukraine, Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Despite the signing of a ceasefire in winter of 2015, hostilities continue to this day . Despite the ceasefire, the conflict continues to be ongoing .
 IcSP is aimed at assisting with reforms, but also geared toward reconciliation efforts . The IcSP aims to help with reforms and reconciliation efforts.
 U-LEAD would focus on the rest of Ukraine, which also requires capacity building programmes and technical assistance to conduct administrative and fiscal decentralization .
 EU Intervention in Ukraine is a mechanism of EU external assistance aimed at preventing and addressing conflict situations across the globe . The Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace The Instrument contributes to stability and Peace .
 IcSP focuses on conflict prevention in addition to crisis response and preparedness components . The successor of the Instrument for Peace is the successor to the instrument for Peace .
 Since the second part of 2014, IcSP-related programmes in Ukraine were funded for 55 million EUR, with an additional 20 million planned for 2016 . Since 2014, there have been more than 55 million euros in Ukraine .
 IcSP interventions can be divided into hard interventions, such as the support for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine .
 The IcSP aimed at assisting the efforts of the International Organization of Migration and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Ukraine . Alongside the OSCE, the IcSP aims to assist the efforts.
 Activities such as increasing the capacity of regional media to report in a sensitive way on the conflict, social assistance, and demining, were implemented directly through NGOs . Activities were also implemented directly by NGOs .
 The IcSP in Ukraine continues to support IDPs, activities of the OHCHR, demining, and police reform . It is expected to expand its focus to police reform in Ukraine .
 In 2016, a new action has been developed to address one of the most contentious aspects of the governance reform in Ukraine . The new action will focus on Ukraine's governance reform .
Decentralization and local governance reform has sparked heated debates in the Ukrainian society following the occupation of Crimea and war in the eastern regions .
 The future of the territories under separatists’ control remains uncertain . With the constitutional reform regarding decentralization in Ukraine underway, the future is uncertain .
 New programme ‘Restoration of Governance and Reconciliation in Crisis Affected Communities of Ukraine’ funded under the IcSP . The programme was both a timely and necessary step to address the discrepancies that may arise from the uneven progress of the governance reform in Ukraine .
 The EU’s instrument will run for 18 months . It will contribute to the existing framework and also enhance the scope of the current efforts .
 The IcSP was designed to accomplish in conflict-affected areas what U-LEAD would in the rest of Ukraine .
 IcSP will fund a range of projects and efforts that would be implemented by UNDP and UN Women in Ukraine .
 The primary focus of the funded projects is strengthening the capacity of local government in light of the ongoing decentralization reform .
 Other aspects that the instrument covers are the support of community security, enhancing social cohesion and promoting gender equality . Other aspects of the instrument include the support for community security and enhancing community security .
 Restoration of Governance and Reconciliation in Crisis-Affected Communities of Ukraine in Ukraine 2015 2016 2016 2016 2017 2018 Graph 1 .
 By and large, the activities envisioned by the instrument are demand-driven . They reflect the needs of the local state administrations and local communities .
 The IcSP programme is aimed at assisting decentralization reform in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . It has moved from the policy design to implementation stage .
 The IcSP funded programme ‘Restoration of Governance and Reconciliation in Crisis Affected Communities of Ukraine’ was jointly designed by the EU delegation in Ukraine and the UN Development Programme in Ukraine .
 The IcSP provides funds for the initiatives to strengthen the capacity of local communities for decentralization reform . EU officers also participated in designing these projects .
 The IcSP programme is similar to the approach designed for the rest of Ukraine (capacity building for local governance reform) There are nuances for the Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 EU representatives regularly visited the affected regions and interacted with the local government officials that designed regional development plans .
 EU delegation to Ukraine devised the IcSP funded programme . Based on recovery strategies and development plans, the programme was funded by the EU .
 71 Author’s interview with a EU Delegation official, Kyiv, 2016 . No direct input for the programme from the local level .
 EU intervention in conflict-affected areas of Ukraine enhanced the existing framework supported by other donors . It also encompassed a dualistic approach of development and recovery, which was not the case for the rest of Ukraine .
 U-LEAD and similar actions aimed at assisting with administrative reform and enhancing service delivery were not directly linked to regional development that was funded under separate EU mechanisms .
 The IcSP in Ukraine has also incorporated the recovery component . U-LEAD, which focused primarily on development interventions, has also included the recovery part .
 The Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace was created in 2014 . The process was not related to the events in Ukraine, but rather coincided with the changing security environment .
 European Neighbourhood Instrument is known in advance . IcSP is designed for a short period, in which the European Union identifies relevant areas and then searches for the stakeholders that could offer proposals and implement them .
 The formal start of the design stage of the IcSP was September 2015, a period that directly followed the protests around the first voting for the Amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine .
 He mentioned that it might be a risk during the implementation stage . Yet, he said that it may be a danger during the Implementation stage .
 Kramatorsk was first occupied by separatists in 2014, but later liberated by Ukrainian armed forces in 2014 .
 The EU specifically looked for partners that would be accepted in the NGCA if the situation changes . The current format is not aimed to cover the territory of Donetsk and Luhansk that is not controlled by Ukraine .
 Given the existing timeline of the Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace in the conflict-affected areas of Ukraine, it is rather premature to assess the policy implementation and subsequent policy changes .
 It is possible to explore the expected role of four cross-cutting themes, as well as the interactions between the primary stakeholders and the unique context in which the implementation stage is set to develop .
 The issue of gender and women involvement in the local governance reform was considered during this stage . The issue was actively considered during the stage of this stage.
 UN Women in Ukraine has been involved in proposing strategies and sharing practices in gender-based approaches .
 The UN Women involvement in the IcSP in cooperation with UNDP was directly encouraged by the EU delegation in Ukraine . The IcSP has been working with the UN Women in Ukraine.
 The significance of women’s involvement in local ownership for the local governance reform and reconciliation efforts is further highlighted by the fact that women are disproportionately affected by the conflict and also represent the majority of the IDPs . Women represent the most IDPs in the country .
 At the same time, their representation in the higher management and leadership positions in communities or local civil society groups remains low .
 The emphasis on gender in the recovery and development efforts in Donbas during the implementation stage of the IcSP is highlighted in the tentative action plan . The plan is focused on empowering local women-leaders, female IDPs and women groups .
 IcSP will involve the services of not only UN Women, but also local and regional NGOs and contractual service-companies . The IcSP was designed by UN Women.
 The peculiarity of the conflict in the east of Ukraine gave rise to the importance of the media and various information technologies in shaping the discourse of conflict .
 55 journalists have been executed through the creation of the Regional Voices programme . The focus is on empowering regional and local media representatives to promote a balanced view on the conflict .
 support for the local media would also be considered under the IcSP activities focused on Donbas in 2016-2017 . Support for theLocal media would be considered by IcSP in 2017-2017.
 The ICT and gender themes are highly interlinked in the case of Ukraine . Almost 95% of journalists participating in the IcSP Regional Voices programme are women .
 EU delegation to Ukraine says regional journalism is considered less prestigious and not well paid . Men are not willing to hold positions in this sphere .
 Information and Communication Technologies Introduction of innovative technologies such as e-governance is one of the primary activities planned under the goal of enhancing community capacities for an effective decentralization .
 Alongside hromadas and contractual companies, local CSOs and NGOs, as well as UNDP, will be the primary stakeholders in the process of introducing the innovative information and communication technologies .
 The current instrument would continue to support the local media in order to develop a conflict-sensitive approach to such issues as decentralization and peacebuilding .
 Local ownership in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts have been directly affected by the conflict . Local ownership has been demonstrated by the actions of local communities .
 Two regions require greater support with strengthening the capacity to conduct reforms . They are also more willing to take the matter into their own hands to accelerate the pace of these reforms .
 conflict-affected communities have shown willingness to participate in shaping the vision and strategies for change . EU and UNDP representatives have emphasized that conflict- affected communities have demonstrated willingness to receive assistance .
 Local stakeholders have actively taken part in devising regional development strategies . In the case of decentralization reform, local stakeholders have taken part.
 The IcSP funded action was building upon the existing efforts of the international community . It has now incorporated issues previously not included, such as community security, issues of IDPs, and administrative reform .
 This is actually designed to be read by an interesting public and should be considered as owned by the communities . This is not an attempt to make the public read by the public .
Community security, and administrative reform, and IDPs and social cohesion are also the themes that we integrated into the proposal and now the action . This was very useful because, for instance, the emphasis on community security is also important .
 The EU has resources from the EU to conduct the targeted programmes in those areas . Ukraine has an unequal geographic distribution of attitudes of Ukrainians toward local governance reform .
 This discrepancy can be partly explained by the timing of the report that was presented on October 2015 . The timing of this report can be explained by a discrepancy in the timing.
 There might be a lag between the activities of international donors and the Ukrainian government to educate the population about decentralization reform and the shift in the population's perceptions .
 Ukraine's decentralization and international donors are key to the progress of decentralization in Ukraine . The Ukrainian government is seeking to decentralize the country's political system .
 progressive legislation on local governance is the foundation for successful reforms . Local communities can benefit from administrative and fiscal decentralization, says the author .
Local ownership for the recovery and development efforts is not explicitly referenced in the official IcSP documents . It is nevertheless reflected in the character of activities planned for implementation by this instrument .
 The current EU action is not a standalone project, but expands on the existing framework . There is an already established dynamic of a bottom-up approach to implementing the action .
 The CBA initiatives strengthened the capacity for local governance through microfinancing local development projects in Ukraine .
 These initiatives have a wide geographic representation and have operated for several decades . The initiatives have been in place for decades .
 In the Donbas region, the CBA projects have also been implemented providing a certain foundation for the current governance interventions by UN, EU and other international actors .
 The current IcSP has the capacity to develop proposals along the duration of the action that stem from the assessment of the IcSP interlocutors or on occasion, can come from the local level .
 The IcSP proposals will be assessed and implemented if possible . The latter proposals that identify a gap or a need in the framework supported by the IcSP will also be assessed .
 The EU delegation has cooperated with the UNDP and UN Women to devise the range of activities that would enhance the capacity of Donetsk and Luhansk for decentralization reform .
 The IcSP was not designed as a standalone intervention, but as an expansion on the existing development and recovery framework . The importance of an effective multi-stakeholder coherence is further emphasized .
 SIDA/SDC and the Netherlands funded the projects funded by SIDA and Netherlands . The projects were also funded by other donors such as USAID and SIDA .
 In the implementation phase the EU relies on UNDP, UN Women, local CSOs and contractual service companies for implementation of activities planned .
 The EU IcSP highlights the unique role that Ukrainian state institutions play in directly affecting and benefitting from the planned activities .
 Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts were reorganized following the conflict . The smaller area to support for reforms is the smaller area that is funded under U-LEAD .
 The conflict dynamics in Donbas and especially the NGCA that is affected by the humanitarian crisis . It was imperative to coordinate the IcSP efforts with other stakeholders .
 It is premature to speak about the crucial changes that this action went through and how EU has adapted to them . The IcSP in Donbas was at the time of the assessment of the IcSP.
 The most vulnerable groups in the Donetsk and Luhansk region could be disproportionately affected by the decentralization reform reform . In this regard, the analytical component of the IcSP includes the monitoring of the most vulnerable group .
 No data on such groups was available at the time of the report . One can safely assume that communities close to ceasefire borderlines would be the most affected .
 The vulnerability assessment will be conducted at the initial stages of the programme . It will include the potential inequalities that women and men IDPs face in the conflict-affected areas .
 Social Cohesion and Reconciliation Index is used to measure impact of the IcSP and inform programme design through focusing on social cohesion and reconciliation . The results of this analysis will feed into the Social Co cohesion and ReconCiliation Index .
Vulnerability assessment represents the intrinsic mechanisms that can change the activities of the IcSP . There are external factors that could affect the change in policy, including external factors .
 The decentralization reform is a lengthy process and in Ukraine, where the security and political situation is still unstable . The risks of slowing and stalling remain high, according to the Ukrainian government .
 There is a risk that the wide variety and number of activities leads to dissipation of focus, says the IcSP . It is imperative to think beyond the timeframe for mechanisms that can support EU efforts in the mid-to-long term .
 The IcSP has 10 million EUR budget of 10 million euros . It is imperative not to lose focus of what the primary needs are in terms of local governance reform .
 The EU appears to have the role of funder through the IcSP and UNDP as an implementer . The lack of acceptance of decentralization efforts from local communities is important for implementing the project .
 The perceptions about what is decentralization and how it can improve the well-being of 59 communities are gradually improving . The perception about decentralization is slowly improving .
In the east of Ukraine much is contingent upon the security situation, as well as the success of the state and international efforts in the area .
 The acceptance from local communities is depending on the success of reforms that are tangible at the local level . In this regard, the acceptance fromlocal communities is based on the progress of reforms .
 The agreement was signed in the Belarus capital, first in September 2014 and then again in February 2015 . It became the generally accepted road map for solving the war in the East of Ukraine .
Under the agreement that is colloquially known as Minsk II, warring sides agreed to a ceasefire and withdrawal of foreign combatants . Under the agreement, both sides agree to withdraw foreign combatants from Russia .
 There were provisions on the reintegration of the non-government controlled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk and decentralization reform .
 A year and a half later none of the articles except for consultations have been implemented . This creates a dual risk for international efforts to support decentralization reform in the conflict-affected areas of Donbas .
 The possibility of a resurgence of conflict and deterioration of security environment would hinder local governance reform. On one hand, the possibility of an resurgence of violence would hinder reform .
 NGCAs are not reintegrated, the grievances will only grow stronger . If the situation will not change as the low level violence continues and NGCas are notreintegrated. On the other, if the situation won't change, the grievance will grow stronger.
 Minsk II says parts of Luhansk and Donetsk not under government control should receive a special status as a part of decentralization reform .
 Ukrainian parliament vote on the corresponding legislation in August 2015 has led to violent outbreaks . This provision has created tensions as Ukrainian parliament votes on the same legislation in 2015 .
 EU and UNDP representatives agree that there has to be a credible plan for expansion of the action scope if the Minsk II agreement is fully implemented . stakeholders appeared sceptical of that possibility in the near future .
 UNDP in Ukraine says activities in the GCA should be considered as a “forward deployment’s when and if the reintegration happens . UNDP representative in Ukraine suggested that the activities should be seen as a "forward deployment"
 UNDP has the capacity to conduct such operations . UNDP established throughout the past 20 years .
 The IcSP focuses on capacity building in the short run . It could have a real impact on reintegrating Donbas, but only if it triggers the processes for the long run .
Ukrainian government could show the local population in both GCA and NGCA areas the progressive and effective changes that are conducted by Ukrainian government .
 The EU Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace in Ukraine was launched in spring of 2016 . It will aim at assisting the conflict-affected communities in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The IcSP was designed to complement the existing development and recovery framework . It was created to address the lack of capacity in the Donbas region for decentralization .
 It is imperative to outline strong and weak aspects of the IcSP in Ukraine that focus on conflictaffected areas of Donbas . The EU could face challenges during the implementation stage.
 Following the interviews with main stakeholders, the table below (table 5) summarizes their central arguments .
 At all levels, the EU policies were evaluated against the background of Ukraine . The EU was able to influence the process of conflict settlement .
 The European Union has been less involved in the conflict settlement in Ukraine than Kyiv would have liked . The EU has been more involved in Ukraine's conflict settlement than Kyv would have like .
For the EU it is not important whether Brussels participated directly in the negotiations or not . For the EU, for the European Union it's not important.
 It is much more important to achieve a stable ceasefire and positive steps in conflict settlement . EU could do this with the help of others, then it will proceed precisely in such a way, says EU .
 Normandy format could be replicated for other conflicts as well, if member states have greater ability to reach EU's objectives .
 The model of Normandy has also been accepted by the EU in the case of Ukraine . The EU was happy that Germany and France took the leadership of the Normandy .
 The personality of High Representative is very important in order to reflect the consensus or trade-off of the member states, but also to face crisis situations and negotiations with such experienced leaders as President Putin .
 The EU has been slow in responding to the crisis in Ukraine and the following conflict between the Kremlin and Kyiv . The EU is slow to respond to the Ukraine crisis and the conflict.
 The EU’s policy towards the conflict was rather process driven and therefore the decisions of the EU were subordinate to the situation on the ground in Ukraine, which weakened the EU intervention in the conflict settlement .
 At the same time, the EU has the capacity to adapt and create new mechanisms to deal with new challenges . The EU has to adapt to new challenges and create a new system to cope with them .
 Germany and France put in place a series of sanctions and a support package for Ukraine . The sanctions include financial means and expertise for Ukraine.
 The EU is very vulnerable in times of transfer of power, according to the EU . Also, the conflict in Ukraine revealed that the EU is vulnerable to the conflict .
 The EU excluded itself from the negotiations process, according to the European Union . All the heads of EU institutions were changing, the EU says .
 An EU mechanism that would ensure a smooth transfer of power and not affect its capacity to act on the international arena was largely missing . The EU mechanism would ensure that a smoothtransfer of power would not affect the country's ability to act.
 The case of Ukraine shows that the EU is rather perceived as a source of funds and an extremely important player for a country’s economic stability . The EU is less as an actor that could take on the challenge of the negotiation process .
 The EU preferred to delegate some tasks to OSCE (probably also at the insistence of Russia) The EU opted for political and economic sanctions that were a powerful non-direct tool .
 The EU preferred to be less involved in the political crisis, despite calls from Ukraine, but at the same time playing a heavy technical role, especially through its financial support .
 EUBAM and EUAM have become intertwined against the backdrop of the Russian conflict in Ukraine . It would be sensible to advise on a common policy towards these two missions .
 In the first place, in the times of conflict the EU presence matters, even more so than in peaceful times . The EU presence of the EU is the first time it matters in the time of conflict .
For geopolitical and security reasons it is advisable to continue the EU presence in the Odessa region after EUBAM exits .
 Russian aggression, ongoing since 2014, does not allow for a traditional phase-out . The EU approach towards the exit strategy and local ownership for reforms is understandable and justified .
 EU presence in Odessa is perceived as a security and stabilizing factor . Leaving the region would send a wrong signal to both Ukraine and Russia .
 A flexible approach to the mandate and responsiveness to the needs of the local beneficiaries is what is appreciated by the local partners . The local partners are also appreciating the flexible approach .
 The Political and Security Committee and Member States should be ready to adopt a flexible approach to the mission’s mandate . EUAM and the political and security Committee should be prepared to respond to the needs of the local beneficiaries and the changing geopolitical context .
 The EU did not negotiate the mission’s mandate with the local stakeholders before the mission arrived, it caused certain issues . As the EU didn't negotiate the mandate with local stakeholders, the mission caused some issues .
Local partners are excluded from owning the process from the start, EUAM says . When the mandate is not negotiated, as in EUAM’s case, this decreases the probability and inclusivity of local ownership .
 It is quite puzzling that a mission was sent as a result of the Russian aggression in Ukraine, it is said . It is not clear why the mission was not sent to Ukraine .
 Ignoring these realities and specific tasks of the security sector to counter them, both civilian and military, will ultimately increase the gap between EUAM and partner institutions .
 The different institutional nature of EUBAM and EUAM could be used as a blueprint for further missions, rather than a unique exception . The European Union's “hybrid nature’s ‘hybrid’ nature may be used to help in sensitive geopolitical environments .
 For now it seems that a CSDP status for EUAM would offer more limitations and bureaucracy rather than opportunities and flexibility . For now, it appears that aCSDP status will offer more limited and bureaucracy than opportunities .
 EUBAM, administered by the European Commission, is more flexible and responsive, both activity and budget-wise . In turn, EUBam is more responsive and responsive.
 None of the missions in question were sent to prevent a crisis/conflict. Finally, it is worth mentioning that none of the mission in question was sent to stop a crisis.
 The EU has failed to act pre-emptively in the case of Ukraine, says the EU . It looks like the EU has not acted pre- preemptively in Ukraine .
 For further EU interventions it would be advisable to dispatch an institution-building mission simply on the grounds of the existing institutional weakness, and not after the institutions fail to prevent a conflict .
 Minsk II agreement means that the scale and quality of the decentralization reform would be unequal for the whole of Ukraine . Luhansk and Donetsk are not controlled by the Ukrainian government .
 The European Union has developed a new action to address the low level of capacity for local governance reform among the state authorities and local communities in Donbas .
 The Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace in Ukraine became a crucial form of EU intervention . The Instrument will enhance the capacity of the conflictaffected communities for fiscal and administrative decentralization .
 The IcSP was in the early stages of the implementation, it has already contributed to the consistency of the international donors’ efforts to provide support to the most vulnerable communities .
 The IcSP is not a standalone action, but rather an expansion on the existing programmes aimed at capacity building, community justice, and recovery . It provides a unique opportunity to consolidate the recovery efforts and connect them to the reform agenda .
 The focus on decentralization reform in Ukraine will serve not only as the conflict resolution and peacebuilding element with regard to the war in Donbas . It would also be an indispensable conflict prevention tool, given the existing grievances toward inefficient governance structure .
 The decentralization reform could improve the well-being of the conflict-affected communities . In a way, it could be strengthened by the comprehensive support from international donors .
 If successful, the reform would improve the attitude of the local communities in Donbas toward the central government . The reform would eliminate several of the causes for grievances, such as lack of authority at the local level and economic deprivation .
 There is a need for more analytical coherence at the level of the EU delegation when it comes to cross-cutting effect of various projects and programmes .
There are specific offices in the EU delegation in Ukraine that are responsible for anticorruption, decentralization, open budget and open budget .
 It is important to have a strategic level discussion, it does not have to be concentrated only at the top level . It's important to discuss strategic level discussions, but not to focus only at top level.
 EU decision to offer a separate mechanism for supporting local governance reform in conflict-affected areas of Ukraine could prove beneficial not only because it would affect both the reform and reconciliation agendas in the region . A working framework of international donors coordinated by the UNDP exists in Ukraine that has worked with local
 The IcSP is at the early stages of implementation, it is important to take into account the risks associated with local governance reform in Ukraine . There are weaknesses of the instrument that were outlined in this 64 report .
 The crucial focus is to think strategically beyond the 18-month timeframe of the IcSP project . The project could have beyond the targeted communities and, specifically, on the population in the non-government controlled areas .
 The EU Policy Briefing on Whole of Society Conflict Prevention and Peacebuilding is published on Tuesday .
 Putin has two options – to Retreat Gradually or to Launch an Offensive on Ukraine . Putin has to decide whether to retreat or to launch an Offensive .
 Ukraine’s Yanukovych missing as protesters take control of presidential residence in Kiev . Ukraine's Yanukovych missing.
 Council Joint Action 2005/776/CFSP of 7 November 2005 amending the mandate of the European Union Special Representative for Moldova .
 Revised Crisis Management Concept for a civilian CSDP mission in support of Security Sector Reform in Ukraine .
 National Opinion Poll on decentralization and local self-government reform . The poll is based on a recent survey of 1,000 people .
 Commission staff working document accompanying the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on strengthening the European neighbourhood policy .
 Commission implementing decision on the Special Measure 2015 for Decentralization Reform in favor of Ukraine to be financed from the general budget of the European Union . Commission will implement decision on special Measure 2015.
 EU announces more than €100 million for Ukraine to support decentralization reform and re-enforcement of local governance .
 Sixth Progress Report on the Implementation by Ukraine of the Action Plan on Visa Liberalisation .
 Remarks by High Representative/Vice-President Federica Mogherini following the Foreign Affairs Council .
 Restoration of Governance and Reconciliation in Crisis-Affected Communities of Ukraine . Restoration ofgovernance and reconciliation in crisis-affected communities .
 EU-Ukraine Association Agenda to prepare and facilitate the implementation of the Association Agreement . EU-Ukrainian Association Agenda is designed to prepare the EU- Ukraine Association Agenda .
 Joint Statement on Ukraine of the Weimar Triangle Foreign Ministers Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Laurent Fabius and Radoslaw Sikorski .
 The Effects of Sanctions and Counter-Sanctions on EU-Russian Trade Flows. The effects of the EU-Russia trade sanctions are based on the EU's anti-Russian sanctions .
 Vystuplenie na vstrece glav gosudarstv Tamozennogo sojuza s Prezidentom Ukrainy i predstaviteljami Evropejskogo. Sojuza. VyStupl
 Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov spoke at the Terra Scientia Youth Educational Forum on Klyazma River, Vladimir Region, July 22, 2016 .
 Urgent Problems of Reformation of the Internal Affairs Entities in Ukraine’s Security Sector Reform .
 Security Sector in the Context of General Socio-Political Situation in Ukraine. Security Sector is in the context of the GeneralSocio- political situation in Ukraine .
 Foreign Affairs and Security Challenges in the EU’s Neighbourhood. Responding to Foreign Affairs.
 Opublikovano infohrafiku pro vytratu Ukrainy na oboronu za ostanni 20 rokiv. Opublikovanoinfohrafika pro vYtratuUkrainy .
 Russia’s Hybrid War in Ukraine, Breaking the enemy's ability to resist . Russia's hybrid war in Ukraine.
 Putin zajavil o pol’ze prodovol’stvennogo embargo dlja ekonomiki Rossii. Putin zawavil.
 European Union’s engagement with nonstate actors in Common Security and Defence Policy .
 Assessing the Merits of Decentralization as a Conflict Mitigation Strategy is a conflict Mitigation strategy . Assessing Merits as a conflict-related strategy is a "conflict-mitigation strategy"
 Treba pruznachaty Molodukh Energiynukh Ludei na Kluchovi Pozytsii v Prokuraturi . Treba Pruzachati is the name of the country's most famous and
 An Analysis of Institutional Conflicts in Malawi’s Decentralized System . Malawi's Decentralsized System.
 Polish President Plans to Suggest Changing Format of Ukraine Negotiations . Polish President plans to Suggest changing Format of Ukrainian Negotiation .
 A Combined Practice Note on Decentralisation, Local Governance and Urban/Rural Development . A combined practice note on December 25, 2013 .
 Letter dated 7 December 1994 from the Permanent Representatives of the Russian Federation, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United States of America .
 Gender in EU Conflict prevention and Peacebuilding Policy and Practice. Gender in the EU Conflict Prevention and Peace Building Policy and Practices .