Ukraine’s oligarchs are united against Russia that wasn’t the case in 2014 .
 The yacht Nord, reportedly owned by sanctioned Russian oligarch Alexei Mordashov, arrives in Vladivostok, Russia, on March 31 .
 Ukraine's wealthiest businesspeople have been united in their criticism of Russian President Vladimir Putin's decision to invade Ukraine . Unlike Russia's oligarchs, Ukraine's richest businesspeople are united against Putin .
 Ukraine's super-wealthy businesspeople appear to have set aside their differences to form a united front in defense of Ukraine’s territorial integrity . They were unable to do in the past.
Oligarchs showed divided support in 2014, when Ukraine first faced Russian threats to its territorial integrity . Here's how it happened and why it matters .
Pro-Russian demonstrations spread across Ukraine’s east and south .
Pro-Russian protests in Ukraine's eastern regions escalated into an armed conflict in May 2014 . In the early stages of the unrest, oligarchs in Kharkiv and Dnipropetrovsk sided with Kyiv and helped those regions avoid a separatist uprising .
Oligarchs in Donetsk and Luhansk abandoned the area or went along with the pro-Russian protests to extract concessions from Kyiv . But oligarchs in the area abandoned the region, or went on with the protests .
In 2022, oligarchs are collectively backing Kyiv. Their actions enabled the separatists and helped pave the way for the subsequent Russian intervention in those regions . It’s a different story in 2022, in contrast to spring 2014.
Ukraine's richest person, Rinat Akhmetov, announced that his investment company would make a $34 million advance tax payment to help bolster the government's financial stability . Companies controlled by oligarchs signaled support in line with President Volodymyr Zelensky’s call
 One day before the invasion, President Zelensky met with owners and managers of Ukraine's top 50 businesses to discuss mutual support .
 16 out of the top 20 richest Ukrainians had made statements against Russian aggression or in support of Ukraine . In the first 12 days of the war, 16 of the richest Ukrainians made statements .
Oligarchs appear to be cooperating with each other, something they often failed to do in the past . They publicized how they were helping the Ukrainian government and its armed forces, territorial defense, cities and people .
 The four largest Ukrainian media groups, each owned by a major oligarch, issued a joint statement on their plans to provide open access to information under martial law . The statement was released by the four largest media groups .
 Russia's full-scale war poses to Ukraine's sovereignty, says Peter Bergen . It is also a threat to Ukraine’s system of crony capitalism, he says .
 The collapse of that system would hurt oligarchs’ ability to defend their wealth. The collapse would hurt the oligarchs' ability to protect their wealth .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is not in a position to offer Ukrainian oligarchs any credible guarantees . For example, after Ukraine lost control over Crimea and areas in the Donbas, the new governments there expropriated Ukraine oligarchs’ assets .
 In his prewar address, he spoke disparagingly about Ukraine’s super-rich .
 Russia’s continuing destruction of oligarchic property and Ukrainian infrastructure greatly diminishes the chances of oligarchs striking any bargains with the Russian president or a pro-Russian puppet regime . Ukrainians have demonstrated a strong national identity in the face of Russian aggression, while the Ukrainian army has
Oligarchs may play a number of wartime roles in Ukraine . This wealth has already suffered because of the war, says author .
 Ukraine's oligarchs have significant material, positional and mobilizational resources that could help Ukraine fight Russia . Oligarchic support and unity are important to buttress Ukraine’s economy and provide assistance.
 Studies show Ukraine's oligarchs operate at the core of regional networks that include public officials, politicians, businesses and nonprofits .
 Ukrainian oligarchs and their companies’ managers could help muster additional support for Ukraine in the West .
 Oligarchs have been reinforcing old links with the E.U. and the U.S. since 2014 . Rinat Akhmetov’s companies called for Russian companies to be suspended from international forums .
Some of Ukraine's super-rich might also be using their business connections in Russia to help Ukraine . And oligarch Viktor Pinchuk recently appealed to Western partners to send more military aid .
 Ukrainian government and army to keep as much territory as possible under Ukrainian control . Public support for Kyiv's military operations will depend on continued public support for its military operations .
Ukrainian oligarchs played a contradictory role in spring 2014, when Ukraine first faced Russian threats to its territorial integrity . Ukrainian oligarchs showed divided support in 2014.
 The separatists' actions enabled the separatists and helped pave the way for the subsequent Russian intervention in those regions .
 Ukraine's wealthiest businesspeople have been united in their criticism of Russian President Vladimir Putin's decision to invade Ukraine . The yacht Nord, reportedly owned by sanctioned Russian oligarch Alexei Mordashov, arrives in the eastern port of Vladivostok on March 31 .