 Ukrainian military and Russian-backed separatists took a break from shelling each other on Wednesday . The two sides carried out their biggest exchange of prisoners since the conflict began.
 Russia says it will only escalate a conflict that has killed more than 10,000 people . That move, Russia says, would only escalate the conflict . Russia says that move will only escalation the conflict, which has killed 10,00 people .
 The prompt release of all prisoners was a key part of a 2015 peace agreement . France, Germany and Russia in Minsk, Belarus, brokered the deal .
 The Minsk deal has gotten bogged down in accusations that the other was not fulfilling its obligations . But like many other parts of the deal, it has been accused of not fulfilling obligations .
 Wednesday’s exchange was the biggest transfer of captives on a single day, Ukrainian officials said . The two sides have swapped prisoners on numerous prior occasions .
 The United States and the European Union have each set full implementation of the Minsk deal as a key condition for the lifting of economic sanctions imposed on Russia over its annexation of Crimea and support for pro-Russia rebels in the eastern Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Russia has insisted that it is not involved in the conflict, despite evidence that it has been sending arms, money and soldiers to support the rebel cause . Russia has said it has not been involved.
 Moscow has shown some signs of wanting to dial down a conflict that has cost it diplomatically and economically . But, tiring of Western sanctions and violent infighting among separatist rebels, Moscow is showing signs of want to dialdown .
 The prisoner swap involved Viktor V Medvedchuk, a Ukrainian with close ties to Russia’s president, Vladimir V Putin . The protracted negotiations over the prisoner swap took place Wednesday .
 Russian leader saw his popularity ratings soar after he grabbed Crimea . He has garnered no discernible political benefit from Russia’s intervention in eastern Ukraine .
 The rebels have shown no interest in a long-term settlement that would strip them of Russian support . The rebels, an unruly group of feuding gunmen and fervently pro-Russian political operatives, have been fighting for Russian support.
 Putin, anxious about alienating hard-line nationalists in Russia, seems disinclined to cut the rebels loose . But faces rapidly diminishing returns from a military venture that has poisoned Moscow’s relations with the West .
 Ukraine’s president, Petro O Poroshenko, rejoiced at the exchange of prisoners . The authorities in separatist-held Donetsk responded with accusations that Ukraine had violated its obligations .
 The Donbass News Agency, a rebel mouthpiece, made a litany of complaints . It accused Ukraine of not blocking certain roads as agreed and not living up to spirit of Minsk deal .
 A further 29 captives held by Ukraine refused to return to rebel-held territory, Ukrainian officials said . The Ukrainian government said 29 captives were held by the rebels .