 Fair use determination or copyright permission has been obtained for the inclusion of pictures, maps, graphics, and any other works incorporated into this manuscript .
 The burden estimate is part of a collection of information . Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of data .
 Bridging the Capability Gap between 1 January 2019 and the Replacement Munition 5b. Between 1 January2019 and the replacement Munition5b.
 ABSTRACT Cluster munitions have caused concern around the world due to the potential for unintended harm to civilians due to unexploded ordnance .
 The United States did not sign the treaty but instead chose to enact the Department of Defense Policy on Cluster Munitions and Unintended Harm to Civilians in June 2008 .
 This policy applied to all cluster munitions including improved conventional munitions used by the U.S. field artillery . This policy applies to all Cluster munitions .
 The endstate of the policy is that by 1 January 2019, all cluster munitions in the DoD inventory will meet a 1 percent or less dud rate . The end state of this policy will be that by January 2019.
 The ICM capability gap from 1 January 2019 until an ICM replacement munition is in the inventory . The purpose of this study was to identify possible solutions to bridge the gap .
 DPICM, Convention on Cluster Munitions, Russo-Ukrainian War, ICM Replacement, GMLRS-AW, Field Artillery 19b. The World War II memorials will be held in Moscow, Ukraine .
 The opinions and conclusions are those of the student author and do not necessarily represent the views of the United States Army Command and General Staff College or any other governmental agency .
 MAJ Shawn A Mains, 88 pages, is the author of the book . The book is based on the book's first published in 2007 . It is published in October .
 Cluster munitions have caused concern around the world due to the potential for unintended harm to civilians due to unexploded ordnance .
 I found this to be very informative as well as rewarding process and could not have completed this without you . I found it to be a very informative and rewarding process .
 Jeni has continued to keep the household intact over the years . She has been my sounding board for thoughts, and has been his rock to lean on .
 I also want to thank our son, Chase, and daughters, Olivia, Emmalin, Abigail, and Isabelle .
 Crisis in Kiev .48 Annexation of Crimea .49 Battle in the Donbas .50 Minsk I Ceasefire .51 Minsk II .52 Analysis .48.52 Analysis.
Field Artillery Inherent Responsibilities in Army Command Relationships . Field Artillery inherent Responsibility in ArmyCommand Relationships.
Field Artillery Inherent Responsibilities in Army Support Relationships . Field Artillery inherent Responsibility in Army support Relationships.
 The United Nations met in Dublin, Ireland and adopted the Convention on Cluster Munitions on 30 May 2008 . The Convention was adopted by the United Nations in May 2008.
 The CCM is an international treaty that prohibits the use, transfer, and stockpile of cluster bombs . The treaty also bans the use of cluster bomb stockpiles .
 The CCM does allow weapons with submunitions that detect and target single objects . It does not have indiscriminate area effects, and has electronic self-destruct and self-deactivation mechanisms .
 Under the CCM, limited number of the restricted cluster munitions can be kept or acquired for training and development of technology and procedures .
 The U.S. acknowledged the humanitarian concerns addressed in the CCM 1 and took action . The United States acknowledged the concerns addressed.
 Then Secretary of Defense Robert M Gates issued a policy memorandum on 19 June 2008 . He defined the problem as a struggle between a 1 needed military capability and protection of the populace from undue harm .
 improved conventional munitions and other cluster munitions will be removed from the military’s inventory by 1 January 2019 .
 Future munitions that are intended to fill the capability gap left by ICM will be required to have a dud rate not to exceed 1 percent . Future munitions will be needed to fill that gap.
 Target sets for ICM included infantry in open fields or trenches; armor formations; command posts; and small, highly mobile, difficult to pinpoint targets with potentially larger target location error .
 When the canister opens, the grenades leave through the base of the projectile and spread out throughout the target area . The grenades are then spread out through the target areas .
 As the grenades make contact the ground, the grenade is then hurled upward four to six feet where it functions .
 When DPICM submunitions are ejected from the canister, a ribbon is deployed to stabilize the grenade during its descent .
 shape charge is detonated where it can pierce light armor and the surrounding steel casing acts as shrapnel to nearby personnel . When the submunitions make 2 contact with objects in the target area, it is detonated .
 The United States utilized cluster munitions in Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2003 . The U.S. used cluster munitions during the operation .
 The reduced number of rounds required to achieve that lethality with ICM rather than high explosive rounds created potential threats to friendly forces and civilians . However, the lethality of ICM and the reduced numbers of rounds needed to achieve a lethality was not enough .
 Three of the 88 submunitions 7 would not function and remained in the target area . This meant that when ICM was fired, approximately three of the88 submunition 7 would no longer function .
 A battalion of 18 howitzers fired six rounds per howitzer at a target. Now imagine a battalion of18 howitzer firing six rounds a howitzer .
 This rapidly becomes an issue as the U.S. military advanced through target areas to the next objectives or to the nearby civilian populace that traffic these areas daily basis .
 ICM is no longer authorized for use as of 1 January 2019 and the fielding of an ICM full replacement munition . The purpose of this study was to explore options for the United States Field Artillery .
 The following assumptions were made to enhance the relevance of this study. Assumptions were made by the study .
 The Department of Defense stated a need for the capability to engage time sensitive, moving, area targets, and targets whose precise locations are not known . A materiel solution or multiple solutions will be decided upon .
 The time to develop, test, acquire, and produce a munition to fully replace the capabilities of ICM is what is of most concern . ICM could cause a gap in capability creating a vulnerability to United States forces .
 Study assumed that 2008 DoD Policy on Cluster Munitions would remain in effect without further editing or revisions . This study also assumed that the 2008 doD Policy would stay in effect .
 Projectiles are cargo carrying projectiles which typically include a casing which defines a cargo cavity . The cavity is closed at the base of the projectile casing by a releasable end cap .
 Munitions are composed of a non-reusable canister or delivery body containing multiple conventional explosive submunitions . Munitions contain multiple conventional explosives .
 The implications of the DoD Policy on Cluster Munitions are far reaching across the spectrum of joint fires . The implications are far reach across the range of jointfires .
 There are a number of materiel solutions currently in progress at the Centers of Excellence . There are also some solutions in progress.
 This study mentioned the various new materiel development programs but would not go into depth on the specifics for classification purposes . This study also mentioned the different new material development programs .
 The study relied solely on the examination of unclassified documents through public records, visual documents, and online data sources . The study provided insights to the current and future threats capabilities and limitations .
 The study lacked the statistical data and ability to make general conclusions . Due to this study being qualitative in nature, it lacked the information to make conclusions .
 There is potential for skewed accuracy in reports as well as written documents that were used for this study .
 This study utilized as many relevant sources as possible in the time available to ensure these outliers in reporting do not affect the research that was conducted . This study used as manyrelevant sources as could in the times available to make the study possible .
 This can make the research process difficult and quite cumbersome at times . This can also make the process difficult at times, says author .
 The documents were used as “part of the process to inductively building categories and theoretical constructs’ 14 for the purpose of this study . These documents were utilized as ‘part of a process to inductionively building categories and theoretical constructs.
 With the computer age, the internet has been a popular search tool that was utilized in this study .
 Internet sources are constantly subject to changing content or disappearing data points . Internet sources were always subject to changes or disappearing content .
 In efforts to provide a quality study, version control as well as dates that data points are accessed were paramount .
 This allowed the researcher, as well as the reader, to identify changes in the data used to study the study . This allowed him to assess the study's relevance to the study.
 Additional bias other than those of the researcher can be inadvertently interjected in the research due to the use of internet search engines such as Google, Bing, Yahoo, and many others .
 These biases ranged in the forms of political affiliations of the company to sponsored articles and links .
 The links and sponsored articles could not be discounted from the available body of knowledge but must be scrutinized for what they could contribute to overall outcome of the research .
 This study was limited to Army and Marine Corps cannon and rocket field artillery systems . This study is limited to army and Marines cannon and military artillery systems.
 The United States Air Force, United States Navy, and the United States Marine Corps took actions to develop solutions to the cluster munition policy . The scope of the study would be far too large as the scope would be too large .
 This study analyzed the land component’s ability to provide fires to shape the objective and support the maneuver force .
 The study analyzed this from purely the ground perspective. Where joint fires would be relied on, this study analyzed it .
 DOTMLPF-P was utilized as the theoretical framework for analysis . This study will only focus on doctrine, organization, and materiel .
 Doctrine, organization, and materiel were chosen as focus areas due to the ability to rapidly implement recommendations . The focus areas were chosen due to ability to quickly implement recommendations.
 Centers of Excellence and services are covering the spectrum for ICM replacement munitions and in-lieu of ICM munitions . The study will not be of value to this study other than potential timelines to full production and fielding of the munitions .
 Due to page constraints as well as time for detailed, in-depth analysis, training, leadership, and personnel, and facilities, will not be covered in this study .
 training and leadership were not chosen as focus areas due to the amount of time needed to implement change in these areas . Training and leadership was not selected as focus area due to time needed for change .
 Personnel and facilities were not included because the Total Army Analysis process takes years to be implemented . The Total Army analysis process took years.
 The United States did not sign the CCM, however, policy on the use of dud-producing ICMs was assumed to be fixed . It was not covered in this study .
 The research will provide United States Field Artillery and commanders additional options and considerations for implementation while a materiel solution is developed . The research conducted will provide additional options for implementation .
 The doctrine, organization, and existing materiel options will be analyzed in this study . The study will attempt to close the ICM capability gap created by the 2008 DoD Cluster Munitions Policy .
 Chapter 2 will describe the extant literature relevant to the secondary research questions that will facilitate analysis in chapter 4 . Chapter 4 will also discuss the primary research questions for chapter 4.
 The following literature review analyzed unclassified public records, visual documents, and online resources used to conduct this study . The study was conducted by the University of New York .
 These documents are grouped to provide context to the strengths and weaknesses of the United States Field Artillery .
 The section on Doctrine discussed how the U.S. fights with artillery . The section also discussed the role of artillery in the United States .
 Organization examined how the U.S. artillery task organized for combat in a peer to peer or near peer decisive action fight .
 This section briefly mentioned some of the concepts in development and testing to provide the field artillery with an ICM full replacement . This section also mentioned the concept of a full replacement for the ICM .
 The longer the field artillery system takes to place rounds on target, the more time the target has to leave the area . The more rounds it will take to achieve the maneuver commander’s desired effects .
 One method to decrease the number of rounds needed to accomplish the commander’s desired endstate is to mass fires .
Massing fires is when multiple howitzers or multiple joint fires platforms engage the same target or the same small area . Massing fires are when multipleHowitzers and multiple joint fire platforms engage same target .
 The three battalions massed would saturate the target area giving the best effects where the lone battery would have good effects on the first volley but decreasing effectiveness during subsequent volleys . The first volley would have a good effect but the second volley would decrease effectiveness .
 Each platoon contained a fire direction center that controlled where and what the three howitzers of the platoon shot . Each platoon had a fire-direction center.
 A firing battery contained two firing platoons that are able to operate separately in different locations or they can combine and maneuver as a battery . The battery can be used to fire a battery or a battery that can be combined and maneuver .
 The platoon fire direction centers utilize the Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System computer to send firing information to the howitzer sections as well as to receive missions from the battalion and brigade .
 Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System is the primary interface between the battalion and the howitzer sections . The system is the main interface for the battalion.
 Field artillery units are often high payoff targets to the enemy forces . They are vulnerable to air, ground, and electronic warfare attack .
 Many field artillery units have very limited ability for self-defense . platoon operations are preferred for defending the firing unit .
 Platoons can disperse and operate as individual howitzer sections when the enemy situation and terrain dictate . Platoons are able to operate as individuals as well as individualHowitzer sections .
 Section operations are the least preferred method of employment because the section is isolated and must provide for its own defense . Section operations can be used to provide for the section's own defense.
 Firing units negate some of their vulnerabilities by being able to disperse, hide, fire, and displace quickly to avoid detection and counterfire . The units can also disperse and hide to avoid counterfire.
 Battery commanders issue survivability movement criteria based on the threat assessment . Battery commanders have a range of criteria for survivability movements .
 Survivability movement 12 criteria can be based on number of rounds fired in current location, time in position, and each unit’s standard operating procedures .
 The threat to field artillery units can also be mitigated when an external security force such as military police, infantry, or armor units are tasked to do so .
 Field artillery firing units are assigned to a position area for artillery by the maneuver commander in coordination with the fire support element at that echelon . The fire support officer or fire support coordinator is also assigned to the position area .
 PAAs are a way for the maneuver commander to manage terrain and give the field artillery units space to maneuver and survive while providing fires . PAAs can be used as a way of managing terrain and giving artillery units time to maneuver .
 Field artillery units firing from PAAs are potentially a location that attracts enemy counterfire . nearby units should stay away from PAas .
 Field artillery units do not control the PAAs they are assigned to and do not have the responsibilities associated with a unit that is assigned an area of operation .
 Other units can traverse through PAAs without coordinating with the field artillery unit that occupied that position . Other units are able to traverse through the PAas without coordinating.
 The size of the PAAs depends on the type of field artillery unit that will be occupying that position . The number of PAAs will depend on the kind of artillery unit.
 M109A6 Paladin platoons normally require over four square kilometers for their PAAs . MLRS and HIMARS platoon require 12 square kilometers . M109 a6 Paladin Platoons require over 4 square kilometers.
 PAA positioning should take into consideration possible gun-target lines, high and low angle fires, and how those will affect airspace control and coordination for rotary wing and fixed wing operations .
 Attempts should be made to laterally deconflict rotary wing, fixed wing, and tilt-rotor corridors from PAAs to allow freedom of action .
 DIVARTY, in support of the division, is tasked to deliver fires, integrate all forms of Army, joint, and multinational fires . The division will conduct targeting and conduct targeting .
 The DIVARTY commander is the division commander’s primary advisor on the fires warfighting function . He also serves as the division fire support coordinator .
 DIVARTY is the force field artillery headquarters for the division . It may be tasked by the division commander to provide training and certification standardization for all field artillery units within the division.
 The DIVARTY will also require augmentation from a combat support sustainment battalion as well as additional signal support due to not having an organic sustainedment battalion .
 Field artillery cannon battalions are organic or assigned to BCT as well as FAB throughout the Army . Field artillery battalions include FAB and FAB .
 Each battalion is comprised of four batteries, the HHB and three firing batteries . Each battalion has four batteries.
 HHB typically consists of a battery headquarters, the battalion command section, a medical platoon, the unit ministry team, the target acquisition platoon, a meteorological team, and a counterfire operations section .
 A cannon firing battery typically consists of the battery headquarters, 14 supply section, two firing platoon headquarters with fire direction centers, six howitzer sections, and two ammunition sections .
 A platoon consists of a platoon headquarters, fire direction center, three howitzer sections, and an ammunition section . A platoon is a fire-direction center, fire- Direction center, and the ammunition section.
 The field artillery battalion is organic or assigned to the BCT . The commander may assign a support relationship to one of the B CT subordinate units for a specific mission or task .
 The FAB is not organic to any Army organization or echelon . It is the only field artillery unit that will typically be employed above the brigade level .
 Battalions within the FAB will have two or three firing batteries consisting of eight or six artillery pieces respectively . Battalions will have eight or five firing batteries.
 Each cannon firing battery and platoon are set up the same way as the BCT construct . The only difference potentially being the number of systems is the number.
 The FSCs are attached to the FAB BSB as required to support the cannon or rocket battalions placed within the FSB . The FSBs are needed to support a cannon and rocket batt battalion .
 FAB BSBs do not have an organic medical company like the BCT BSB thus they depend on area support medical units . FABBSBs have no organic medical companies like BCT.
 Supplies to the FAB come from the combat support sustainment battalion, a corps level asset .
FSCs consist of a company headquarters, a field feeding section, a maintenance platoon, and a distribution platoon . FSCs is a company. It is also a company company headquarters .
 The FSCs can operate from the FAB field trains, combat trains, or split and operate from both . The FSBs can also operate from FABs or combat trains or split trains .
 They are not designed to carry an authorized stockage list but may carry critical line replaceable units and combat spares when authorized or directed to do so .
 The maintenance platoon consists of a 16 maintenance control section, service and recovery section, radar repair team, and a field maintenance section .
 Within an armor BCT, there are two maintenance support teams to support the firing batteries . There are two support teams.
Command relationships provide commanders with a continuously available, adjustable, and tailored all-weather fires package . Command relationships provide commander with continuously available and adjustable, adjustable fires packages .
 There are different types of command relationships as well as inherent responsibilities associated with each .
Organized, assigned, attached, operational control, and tactical control are the Army command relationships . The Army's command relationships are in charge of the Army.
 Has as its Zone of Fire: Is Positioned By: Has Its Fires Planned By: Organic 1. Has as Its Zone of fire: Is positioned by: Ispositioned By. Has its Fires Planned by: organic 1 .
Force field artillery headquarters 2 Area of operations of parent unit . Force field artillery HQ is in charge of the parent unit of the force .
 The Force field artillery supported unit is based in the U.S. Army's headquarters .
 Includes all target acquisition means not deployed with the supported unit (such as radars or unmanned aircraft systems), vehicles, air observers, survey parties . Includes all targets and target acquisition .
 Field artillery units can be placed in direct support, reinforcing, general support, or general support reinforcing relationship from the BCT up through the joint and multinational forces levels .
 Has as its Zone of Fire: Is Positioned By: Has Its Fires Planned By: Direct Support 1. Has as Its Zone of fire: Is positioned by: Has its Fires Planned by the end of the year .
Force field artillery headquarters 2 Area of operations of supported unit . Force field artillery HQ is in charge of the Force Field artillery headquarters .
Reinforced field field artillery unit HQ. c 2.C 2. C 2. A. C 3. C 4. C. C 1. C: C: A. B: C-2. C-3: C. 2. The Zone of fire of Rein
 Force field a General artillery supported unit to artillery artillery to Support headquarters 2 include zone of headquarters .
 Force field General artillery supported unit. Force Field General artillery support unit . Force field general artillery supported units .
 Includes all target acquisition means not deployed with the supported unit , vehicles, air observers, survey parties . Includes all targets and target acquisition .
 The Army's Field Manual 3-09, Field Artillery Operations and Fire Support, 134.9, is the Army's highest level of training .
 Nonstandard support relationships can be utilized by commanders . They are usually a variation of the standard support relationships discussed previously .
 Commanders can place limitations or guidance concerning ammunition, unit positioning, or other mission critical factors to tailor the field artillery assets in support of future operations .
 Some examples of nonstandard support relationships would be for a unit in a general supportreinforcing role to not expend more than 25 percent of their controlled supply rate in support of the reinforced unit . Some examples would include a liaison officer to the corps fires cell.
 To change a unit from one type of support relationship to another, an on-order mission will be utilized . The mission is to change the relationship from one to one .
 An example of an on-order support change 19 would be 3-27 Field Artillery . The change would be general supporting-reinforcing to 1-7 Field Art artillery . On-order reinforcing to1-7.
 Materiel Improved Conventional Munitions ICM was created to offer greater target effects with fewer munitions than traditional HE against large, poorly located or moving area targets .
 When compared to M107 HE, ICM was found to be 50 percent more effective . ICM is 50 percent less effective than M107HE .
 MLRS fired ICM spread out over a 40,000-square meter area and ATACMS based ICM covered 33,000 square meters . ICM was fired by MLRS and ICM is based in Atlanta, Georgia .
 A total of 60 percent of the troops in the target area are standing and the other 40 percent are laying in the prone .
 In this scenario, HE impact fuzed, HE airburst fuzed and ICM munitions are fired . The same number of HE impactfuzed, the same number, is also fired .
 HE with airburst fuzing will create slightly more casualties than HE with impact fuzing . He will be more likely to be hit by impact fzing than HE. HE with the airburst fzing will be less likely to cause more casualties .
ICM will more than double the number of casualties created by HE with impact fuzing . ICM will almost double the casualties created with airburst fuzing.
 In this scenario, the number of casualties created will be the same between the same three munitions . In this case, the casualties will be same.
 HE with airburst fuzing requires more than double the number of ICM rounds utilized and HE with impact fuzing utilized more than three times the amount of ICm rounds used .
 One cannon fired ICM projectile can equal the same lethal effects as 15 non-cluster munitions . ICM projectiles can be fired from a cannon fired with one bullet .
 In Operation 20 Desert Storm, ICM proved just as effective of a psychological weapon as it did a kinetic weapon . ICM was used as a weapon of psychological warfare .
 Iraqi Army units watched as neighboring units were decimated by ICM . Some units lost the will to fight .
 High Explosive HE is a surface to surface fired cannon artillery munition . It can be fuzed to attack a number of potential targets assigned to field artillery unit .
 Impact fuzing, referred to also as quick, bursts upon impact with the ground, or anything else that it may hit, is a form of impact fuzing . The term also refers to quick, burst upon impact, or a target .
 Quick fuzing begins to lose its effectiveness when targets are located in uneven terrain, trenches, inside frame style buildings, and earthworks .
 This fuze also has a delay setting where upon impact, the fuze delays functioning for 0.05 seconds . The fuze can also be set to delay when upon impact . This is the first time a fuze has been able to work for a time .
 This delay in functioning will allow the munition to penetrate as well as ricochet . This delay will allow it to penetrate and ricochet as well. This delay is expected to allow ricochet.
 Delay was utilized in dense woods, trenches, deep foxholes, and against soft skinned vehicles . Delay was used in dense woodlands, trenches and foxholes .
 The munition was fired with a high charge from the howitzer on a low impact angle at a very hard surface . It resulted in a low airburst .
 The time fuze functions at a set time along the trajectory of the munition resulting in an airburst .
 Proximity fuzing, also known as variable time, was an updated version of the time fuze . The time fuzing is a new version of Prox proximity fuzing .
 VT utilized radio waves to make the fuze function at a predetermined height of burst . VT used radio waves. VT used the radio waves for a maximum height of bursts .
 This provided the same effect as the time fuze, but does not have to be adjusted . This provides the same effects as theTime fuze. This provided a similar effect, but not the same as the Time fuze .
 VT fuzes had a pre-determined height of burst set for 20 meters above the ground and could not be utilized in rain, snow, 21 or icy conditions . Earlier VT fudes had been set for a height of 21 meters above ground .
 Subsequent versions of the fuze function at seven meters above the ground and were able to be used in any condition . Subsequent version of the Fuze function was also able to use the same level of fuze as the ground .
 Targets for fuzes time and VT were troops in the open, troops in trenches and troops in deep foxholes, and soft skinned vehicles .
 Concrete-piercing fuzes allowed HE munitions to attack concrete structures as well as earth and log reinforced positions . HE munitions were also able to attack earth andlog reinforced positions.
 The CP non-delay fuze was utilized for spotting by the forward observer, clearing rubble, and shattering concrete . The CPNon-delay fze was used for spotting and clearing rubble .
 Excalibur was a fin-stabilized projectile that glided to its target and could achieve ranges in excess of 35,000 meters . The projectile could reach a range of over 35,00 meters .
 It utilized an inertial measurement unit and Global Positioning System to attack point targets hitting less than 10 meters from the intended target in an unjammed environment .
 Excalibur was designed to attack point targets such as personnel, light materiel, and personnel within structures at extended ranges in complex terrain with minimal collateral damage .
 The Army has utilized Excalibur in combat since 2007 in Iraq and 2008 in Afghanistan . The Army used the weapon in Iraq, Afghanistan and Iraq in 2007 and 2008 .
 The Army planned on fielding three Excalibur variants, HE, smart, and discriminating . The Army also planned to fielding three other variants,HE, smart and discriminating.
 The HE variant was currently in the field artillery inventory and has been upgraded several times . The HE variants are currently in field artillery Inventory .
 The smart variant would have been able to target moving vehicles as well as time-sensitive-targets . The smart version would have a smart version of a smart vehicle that could target vehicles .
 The discriminating variant was projected to search, detect, and selectively engage individual vehicles by specific target 22 characteristics .
 The smart and discriminating variants do not have a projected timeline associated with the projectiles . The projectiles are not expected to be launched in the future .
 The rocket has an allweather, GPS-aided inertial guidance package that enabled engagement of precision point targets that required low collateral damage out 70 kilometers . The rocket was launched in the early hours of the day .
 GMLRS was equipped with a tri-mode fuze that allowed the rocket to function in point detonation, delay, or proximity settings . The rocket was fitted with the tri- mode fuze .
 Six-shot pod could be fired by the M270A1 MLRS or Ml42 HIMARS launchers . It was carried and stored in a six-shotpod that could be used by M270 a1 and Ml 42 HIMARS .
 More than 25,000 rockets have been produced for the United States and allied partners . More than 3,000 have been fired in combat in the U.S. and allied nations .
 The GMLRS was used by the United States, France, Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom, France and Germany . Five other allied nations are evaluating the system to be purchased in the future .
 Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System-Alternate Warhead was a surface to surface, inertial measurement unit and GPS guided rocket . The GMLRS DPICM rocket was designed to replace the GML RS DPICm rocket .
 This rocket could be fired from the M270A1 MLRS or the Ml42 HIMARS launchers and had an effective range out to 70 kilometers . The rocket could have a range of 70 kilometers.
 There were no 23 submunitions in the GMLRS-AW thus meeting the UXO rate of less than 1 percent as defined by 2008 DoD Policy on Cluster Munitions and Unintended Harm to Civilians .
 Intended targets for the GMLRS-AW were area or imprecisely located targets such as those during counterfire missions, air defense sites, command posts, assembly areas, and other high payoff targets .
 There were some target sets that GMLRS-AW was not effective against, but the report is classified . There were also some targets that were not effective.
 Detailed testing results could be obtained from the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation classified report dated 26 March 2015 . The report is based on a classified report released by the Department of Operations .
 GMLRS-AW entered full rate production on 8 April 2015 25 and is currently available in the U.S. Field Artillery inventory . The company is currently in full production .
 Army Tactical Missile System was a long-range, all weather missile with a high explosive, single burst warhead that could be fired from the M270A1 MLRS or Ml42 HIMARS launchers . The system could be used to launch a single warhead .
 The missile had the ability to engage high pay-off, timesensitive, and hard targets through the use of a multifunction fuze in mountainous or urban terrain .
 Munitions and Equipment in Development Sensor-fused Munition for Artillery, or SMArt 155, was developed by leading German ammunition makers in the 1980s .
 This munition was developed specifically for attacking stationary or moving armored targets . The munition has been developed specifically to attack stationary ormoving targets .
Each artillery round carried two intelligent submunitions that were able to detect armored targets and defeat main battle tanks with its explosively formed projectile . Each artillery round was able to carry two intelligent submunitions .
Collateral damage was a 24 concern to the designers so a redundant self-destruct mechanism was incorporated into the round if no targets are detected . The self- destruct mechanism was used to prevent damage from being detected .
 The Marine Corps has been working with developers for production of a High Reliability DPICM Replacement munition . The Marines have been working on the project for years .
 HRDR would have increased the legacy DPICM submunition reliability to 99 percent meeting the 2008 DoD policy standards of not more than 1 percent . It would have allowed the Marine Corps to retain the area effect munition capability .
 DPICM upgrade expected to cost $22. million through fiscal year 2019 . The munition is expected to be ready for use by late 2019 or 2020 .
 The Marine Corps increased procurement of the HE projectile M795 by four times as well as needing a 56 percent increase in load transportation assets at the battalion level . The projected impact of this initiative not being funded was the Marine Corps increasing procurement of a HE projectile four times .
 The Army had been considering its options for the aging ATACMS munitions . The Army has been considering options for its aging munitions .
 Options under consideration are a service life extension for ATACMS, restart of the ATAC MS production line, development of a new missile, and other options that were built by United States allies .
 The Army wanted to downsize the field of potential contractors to one by 2018 or 2019 to begin full-scale development . The missile could be in production by 2021 or 2022 .
 Raytheon, Boeing, and Lockheed Martin had been interested in the potential contract . Reportedly, Raytheons, Boeing and LockheedMartin were also interested .
 Raytheon had a concept for a new Long Range Precision Lires Missile that aimed to replace the aging ATACMS inventory . The new missile is a new version of the Ray theon's long range Precision Lire missile .
 The missile was designed to be fired from the existing M270A1 MLRS or Ml42 HIMARS launchers . The missile would double the payload of the ATACMS with two missiles per pod .
 The Army awarded Raytheon risk mitigation contract worth 5. million dollars . The contract is worth more than $1 million .
 Company executives believed the project would be operational around 2027 30 five years later than the Army claimed to want the new missile . Company executives thought the project will be operational in 2027 .
 Engineers at Picatinny Arsenal were in the development process for an extended range cannon artillery modification to the M777 .
 This project would have added six feet to the length of the cannon tube as well as added just under 1,000 pounds to the overall system weight . The project would also have added 6 feet and 2,000lbs to the system .
 The M777 extended range could have pushed the previous maximum range of 30,000 meters out to 70,000 metres . This modification could have allowed United States cannon units to out range adversary cannon units .
 The Armament Research, Development, and Engineering Center would have used this testing to determine if the modification was suitable for the M777 system or if an entirely new system would be needed .
 M109 series Paladin self-propelled howitzers are being tested for the M109A7 upgrade . If suitable would have been incorporated into the upgrade, it would be the first time the Paladin has been tested .
 The T-72 main battle tank entered service in 1972 and has undergone many upgrades . The Russian Equipment Tanks and Infantry Fighting Vehicles are among the most powerful tanks in the world .
 The main gun had a range of 5,000 meters during the day and 2,600 meters at night . The tank commander cannot fire the main gun on the move .
 The main gun could have achieved ranges out to 5,200 meters during the day and 4,000 meters at night . The main weapon could have reached a range of 5, 200 meters during a day .
 The upgraded ATGMs could have ranged out to 8,000 meters and were coupled with a 12.7millimeter anti-aircraft gun and 7.62-millimeter machine gun that were also remotely fired by the crew .
 The 12.7-millimeter anti-aircraft gun could have been replaced by a 30-millimeters anti- aircraft gun . The gun could also have been remotely fired by the crew .
 Software onboard the T-14 could have monitored both air and ground threats . It could have been set to automatically destroy the threat using the main gun or one of the mounted machine guns .
 Protecting the T-14 was an active protection system that claimed to have been able to defeat unguided rockets and artillery as well as third and fourth generation ATGMs .
 It was claimed that the active protection system was effective against depleted uranium tank rounds . It was also claimed that it was effective on depleted uranium rounds .
 This platform was slated to not only serve in a tank role but would have been integrated into an air defense network or have been utilized in a reconnaissance role .
 The source for the information about the T-14 was suspect as it appears that the information has been cobbled together from various other sources and states the claimed capabilities of the t-14 .
 This tank appeared to be in development and not fully fielded so true capabilities will not be known until tested in battle . The tank is in development.
 The Russian BMP-1 infantry fighting vehicle was introduced in 1970 . The vehicle has undergone several configurations and upgrades over the years .
 The vehicle had a crew of three and carried six passengers in the back . The vehicle was filled with six passengers, including three passengers .
 A 7.62-millimeter coaxial machine gun and ATGM launcher firing AT-3 wire guided missiles rounded out the BMP-l’s armament .
 The amphibious vehicle had a crew of three with seating for seven in the back . The vehicle was designed to be able to carry a crew.
 The main gun was a 30-millimeter automatic gun that could have ranged out to 4,000 meters during the day and 1,300 meters at night . The gun could have been used in the night and during day .
 The BMP-3M infantry fighting vehicle was introduced in 1998 and has a crew of three and seating for seven passengers . The vehicle has three and seven passengers.
 It has a crew of five and could be emplaced in one minute 30 seconds and displaced three and one half minutes . It could be placed in a minute and a half minutes and displaced in three or one minute .
 The D-30 could have fired in bursts of eight rounds per minute, normal at six rounds a minute, and sustained at four rounds perminute . D- 30 could have been fired in burst of eight shots per minute .
 This system could have ranged out to 15,300 meters with HE and 21,900 meters utilizing rocket assisted projectile . This system would have ranged from 15,000 meters to 15.300 meters .
 The D30’s 29 limitation was that it was not able to conduct digital operations and was restricted to voice operations . D30's 29 limitation is that it wasn't able to do digital operations .
 The entire section contained seven personnel with the two ammunition carriers . It was crewed by five personnel and the entire section had seven personnel . The ammunition carriers were also crewed.
 At the burst rate of fire, the 2S19 was capable of shooting eight rounds per minute . The normal rate ofFire was six rounds a minute, and two rounds perminute .
 The 2S19 could have achieved ranges of 24,700 meters and 29,000 meters using the HE base bleed projectile .
 The six-wheeled vehicle weighed 13. metric tons . It has light armor as well as a self-entrenching blade .
 It was capable of launching all 40 rockets in a matter of 20 seconds or it could have launched single rockets with one-half second between rockets from within the cab or on a 64-meter remote firing device .
 The BM-21 was capable of being manually reloaded by the crew in 10 minutes . The crew was able to reload the bike in just 10 minutes.
 It had the ability to have achieved ranges out to 20,380 meters with HE rockets . It had been able to have reached 20,000 meters with rockets .
 Other munitions available to the BM-21 were anti-tank mines, anti-personnel mines, smoke, smoke and incendiary, radio 30 frequency-jamming, and illumination rockets .
 The 9A52-2, also known as the BM-30 Smerch, 40 was a long range, 300mm MRL on an eight-wheeled chassis introduced to the Russian military in 1989 .
 This vehicle weighed 43. metric tons, was navigated by way of GPS, crewed by four soldiers . It was capable of being emplaced as well as displaced in three minutes .
 Automated fire control systems allowed this weapon to fire all 12 rockets in 38 seconds or it could have fired a single rocket every three seconds . The weapon could have been able to fire one rocket every 3 seconds .
 The launcher could be reloaded in 36 minutes with support from a transloader vehicle and crew . The launcher is designed to be used to reload the device in a single minute .
 Munitions that were available to this system included HE, DPICM, sensor-fuzed munitions, smoke, incendiary, chemical, and thermobaric warheads with a minimum range of 20 kilometers .
The 9A52-2 launcher, transloader and Vivary Fire Control System together are called Complex 9K58 . The 9A 52-2 launchers and transloader are named Complex 9k58 .
 The SA7 was introduced in 1972 and was later upgraded to the SA-14, and SA-16 . The SA-15 was also upgraded to SA-12, andSA-16.
 This system was introduced in 1983 and outfitted with a crew of two soldiers, the launcher operator and the loader . The system was outfitted in 1983 .
 The system could fire a missile every 16 seconds and was designed to attack fixed wing and rotary wing aircraft . The system was designed for fixed wing aircraft and fixed wing planes .
 These systems have also been used to attack unmanned aerial vehicles . These systems also have been used in attacks on unmanned aircraft .
 The horizontal range of the Grouse could exceed 6,000 meters and a vertical range near 11,500 feet above ground level at a speed of mach two (1,534.54 miles per hour) with an automatic self-destruct function .
 The missile was equipped with an HE warhead and guided by a passive infrared homing seeker with a contact fuze . The missile is fitted with a 30-year-old missile that can be fired from a distance of 30 miles .
 The seeker was designed to be resistant to pyrotechnic and electronically operated infrared countermeasures . The seeker has been designed to avoid pyrotehnic and electronic countermeasures.
 The upgrade gave the missile a proximity as well as contact fuzing, larger explosive charge, and increased fragmentation . The upgrade also increased fragmentation and increased explosive charge .
 The SA-24 has an increased probability of hit and probability of kill at all altitudes . An increased resistance to flares and other infrared countermeasures have also increased resistance .
 SA-18 batteries are deployed with a brigade or division . They are equipped with an armored command vehicle 42 with a Dog Ear Radar that extended the detection range out to 80 kilometers .
 Shilkas were introduced in 1965 with a crew of four and weigh 20. metric tons . The crew weighed 20 metric tons. Shilka was the first to have been introduced in the 1960s .
 A variety of ammunition could be used in the Shilka including HE, HE-Incendiary, armor piercing-incendiary, armor-piercing discarding sabot with tracer, and frangible armor-Piercing Discarding sabot .
 The horizontal range of these munitions could exceed 2,500 meters and a vertical range up to 5,000 feet above ground level .
 This system was designed to attack low flying aircraft and mobile ground targets while on the move or in a fixed position . The system was developed to attack aircraft and ground targets .
 The Gun Dish radar mounted to the top of the vehicle allowed it to detect targets out to 20 kilometers and track targets at 13 kilometers . The radar can also detect targets from 20 kilometers to 13 kilometers away .
 The transporter-erector-launcher and radar vehicle was an armored tracked vehicle that weighed more than 32 metric tons . Four soldiers were crewed by four soldiers .
 Mounted on each vehicle were four SAMs designed to attack fixed and rotary wing aircraft, Unmanned aerial vehicles, air to surface missiles, artillery rockets, naval vessels, and ground targets .
 Ground targets have been engaged with this system out to 15 kilometers . It was designed to also engage naval vessels out to 25 kilometers .
 This system typically utilized two missiles per target with a 70 percent probability of hit against theater ballistic missiles and an 80 percent chance of hitting against all other targets . The system typically used two missiles a target with an 80 per cent probability of hitting all targets .
 TELARs have built in protection and countermeasures in the form or active and passive jamming capability and for added survivability when operating as part of the integrated air defense system . One TELARS will operate its radar while the other TELars are passive.
 The upgraded system gave an increased probability of hit for fixed and rotary wing aircraft up to 90 percent and 80 percent for theater ballistic missiles and ground targets .
 A BUK-M1-2 battery contained two Giraffe radar vehicles, four TELARs, a radio frequency intelligence system, and a support coordination vehicle . The battery was powered by a BUK M1-3 battery .
When configured as a battalion, 24 targets can be engaged simultaneously . When configured as an army battalion, a battalion can be deployed simultaneously .
 Employment Russia typically employed these systems within a division . The 2008 war with Georgia showed that the division concept was too bulky and top heavy for the fast pace of modem conflict .
 The division was a Cold War relic that was suited for the anticipated all out conventional war with the west . The division is a Cold war relic that is suited for a conventional war.
 Russia converted the legacy divisions into 83 brigades of which only two are purely tank brigades . The transformation was completed by December 2009 .
 A new brigade was anywhere from two or up to two and one half times the size of the regiments under the former division system . The new brigade comes with their own combat support as well as combat service support elements .
 The emphasis for the creation of the Motorized Rifle Brigade was focused on a force that could be autonomous, versatile, and had a lot of firepower . The emphasis was on the force that was autonomous and versatile .
 The MRL battalion contained the BM 21 and was organized in the same manner giving the MRB 18 BM 21 MRLs . The M RL battalion was organized as a battalion with the MRL's BM 21 .
 Each BTG has one armor company, three mechanized infantry companies, one anti-tank company, one MRL battery, and two air defense batteries . The BTG is one of the world's most successful defense companies .
 The amount of firepower contained within the BTG allows its punch to exceed well above its relative echelon . The BTG's firepower is the highest in the world .
 The Russians have typically utilized their self-propelled cannon artillery in a direct fire role which resulted in an extended frontal fires capability out to 6,000 meters . The Russians typically use self- Propelled artillery in the direct firing role .
Russian forces are dispersed across a much larger area . Due to the increased ranges of supporting artillery and the increased lethality of the modem battlefield, a low force to space ration has been utilized by the Russians .
 A modern BTG would operate in what was the footprint of a cold war era brigade . It would allow increased chances for survival and increased coverage in area for the unit .
 The 2008 DoD Policy on Cluster Munitions and Unintended Harm to Civilians was set forth in 2008 . Future concepts for munitions were discussed that are forecasted to meet the 1 percent or less UXO rate .
 United States cannon and rocket artillery systems have been shown to be capable of independent operations down to the platoon level as well as the ability to mass at the brigade and in theory at the division level should the requirement emerge .
 The Russian military has not been shown to have a digital capability on all systems . The military has task organized two to four cannon and rocket artillery batteries to support a maneuver battalion .
 The U.S. cannon systems are out ranged by as much as 50 percent by the Russian cannon systems and 20 kilometers in rocket systems .
 Chapter 3 will describe the methodology that was utilized to conduct this research that was informed by this literature review . Chapter 2 will describe how the methodology was used to conduct research .
Fort Leavenworth: U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command G-2, 2011, 5-25 5-38 .
 The study was made to better understand the capabilities and limitations of the munitions that are currently available in the U.S. Field Artillery inventory .
 During the time that ICM is unavailable, these were the munitions that will have to be used during future conflicts . ICM would have been the munition of choice in future conflicts.
 An instrumental case study was conducted into the Russian aggression into Eastern Ukraine . It was conducted to determine the strengths and weaknesses of an adversarial force as they relate to the use of U.S. artillery to defeat .
 United States doctrine, organization, and materiel were then matched up against strengths and weaknesses derived from the case study to determine if an overmatch exists .
 Methodology to answer the primary and secondary research questions posed in this study . An instrumental case study was utilized .
 The study assessed whether an overmatch is present between the U.S. Field Artillery and the Russian military demonstrated by their actions in Eastern Ukraine .
 The Russo-Ukrainian War as a case study was selected due to it being the most recent military engagement . Both sides utilized armor formations, had robust air defense capabilities, and air superiority was contested .
 The conflict occurred near to North Atlantic Treaty Organization partner countries . The United States could find itself committed in their defense .
 The 2008 DoD Policy on Cluster Munitions and Unintended Harm to Civilians might have had on the U.S. Field Artillery’s ability to provide lethal fires for the maneuver commander . This case study will be used to provide insight to the effects the 2008 Do
 The United States Field Artillery can do or continue to do to enable maneuver commanders in future warfare until the ICM full replacement munition enters the inventory . The outcome of the overmatch analysis, if one existed, then formulated recommendations .
 Doctrine, organization, and materiel were chosen as focus areas due to the ability to rapidly implement change . The focus areas were chosen due to ability to quickly implement changes .
Training and leadership take longer to implement change and were not focused on during this study . Training and leadership takes longer to Implement change and not focus on change .
 Personnel and facilities are changed through the Total Army Analysis process . It would be years for implementation so they were not focused on during this study .
 The public records, visual documents, and online data resourced to answer the research questions posed during this study . The study spanned a wide array of sources from the DoD documents and policies .
 This study specifically looked into the strengths and weaknesses of the munitions currently in the field artillery inventory .
 A case study on Russian military actions during the ongoing fight in Eastern Ukraine was conducted to determine an adversarial force’s strengths and weaknesses along the same framework of doctrine, organization and materiel .
 The Russian military conducted land operations deriving strengths and weaknesses of their doctrine, organization for combat, and materiel . The way in which the Russian military conduct land operations is described .
 Some risk in analysis is being assumed on some of the Russian military’s newer items of equipment such as the T-14 Armata Main Battle Tank . There is very little unclassified data to go on.
 Risk is assumed where Wikipedia is primary source of the system’s full capabilities . The system's full capabilities can be found at Wikipedia .
 Russian actions in Eastern Ukraine were documented along the lines of doctrine, organization, and materiel used to conduct operations .
 Russian military strengths and weaknesses were then compared to the capabilities and limitations of United States artillery doctrine, organization, and materiel without ICM in a chart .
 Within doctrine, the chart will compare the ability for artillery units to operate at the platoon level and mass fires as a brigade .
 Organization analyzed the number of field artillery units within a division size element . The number of systems within units from the battery to the division level.
 Materiel focused on the unclassified range achieved by the individual systems and the effects of different types of munitions available to those units .
 The author is a serving United States Army Field Artillery officer . He has studied decisive action, stability, and contingency operations .
 The author has served on two deployments in Iraq and one deployment in Afghanistan . He has served in Iraq, Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 The author has not personally witnessed or directed the employment of ICM or other cluster munitions in combat or training exercises . The author is attending professional education at the Fort Sill Fires Center of Excellence . He has viewed the effects and capabilities these munitions can provide the maneuver commander .
 The author’s experience through attending the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, could have shaped the perception of an ICM or ICM-like capability in the future .
 There were external sources of bias outside of the author’s control present during this study .
 Bias from search engines like Google, Bing, Yahoo, and others, were presented in the form of sponsored links or articles . News outlets or companies paid for their articles to be presented to the viewer first .
 The articles could have presented the political 44 stance of the author or the news/publication agency in an attempt to influence public opinion and policy on the topic of study directly or indirectly .
 The T-14 Armata Main Battle Tank is the most powerful battle tank in the world . The system has the full capabilities of the T- 14 Armata main Battle Tank .
 The study is being conducted in the first place . The perceived need to change the way ICM affects the battlefield and more importantly, the civilians that are left to deal with the UXOs that remain .
 Undue civilian suffering was taken into account when assessing the military necessity for a munition like ICM and the munitions currently in the U.S. Field Artillery inventory .
 The Russo-Ukrainian War was used as the case study to determine an overmatch existed between the U.S. Field Artillery and the Russian military . The case study was used to determine if the United States Field Art artillery could continue to accomplish the maneuver commander’s
 Secondary research questions will be answered or further informed based off the case study and analysis of the Russo-Ukrainian War .
 Study analyzed unclassified documents that described actions taken by Russia leading up to and during the conflict in Eastern Ukraine . The study analyzed un classified documents.
 The information presented in the previous chapters and the additional context provided by the case study, attempted to inform the United States Field Artillery of potential changes that could be made .
 The RussoUkrainian War served as the case for analysis for future U.S. Field Artillery actions . The following is a description of the RussoUkraine War .
 The aim of maskirovka was to mislead the enemy’s knowledge of Russian plans, troop presence, disposition and readiness .
 Russian special operations played a major role in their operations in Crimea and the Donbas through deception tactics that made war look like peace . Russian special ops played a big role in the Crimea and Donbas .
 Russia utilized quadcopters and fixed wing UAS of various forms to aid in target identification, reconnaissance, 3 and to conduct battle damage assessments . Russia also used quadcopter and fixed-wing UASs to help in battle damage assessment .
 UAS were also used as a psychological weapon by flying over troop concentrations . Due to their small size, they were difficult to detect until directly overhead .
 Artillery accounted for 80 5 to 85 percent of all casualties on both sides during the conflict . Artillery has accounted for more than 80 percent of the casualties .
 Russian artillery units employed DPICM, family of scatterable mines, top-attack munitions, and thermobaric warheads singularly as well as together and achieved catastrophic effects 7 that focused on mass, not precision . The effects were not precision.
 The conflict continued throughout the course of this study with little in the way of change to the front lines . The study was conducted by the University of Cambridge .
 Accusations of ceasefire violations and volleys of fire continue to be traded along with relatively small amounts of land by both sides .
 Ukrainian government under pressure from Russian government to end talks with European Union . Ukrainian government had been under considerable pressure from Russia .
 President Yanukovych traveled to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin . Yanukovych secured a $15 billion loan through the sale of Ukrainian Eurobonds . Yanukovych also secured a 33 percent reduction in the price of natural gas for Ukraine .
 Nearly one million people gathered in protest at Independence Square in Kiev . The protest took place in the capital's Independence Square .
 Protesters took over government buildings and blocked city streets . They called for Yanukovych, the prime minister, and the cabinet to resign .
 In February 2014, opposition leaders met with Yanukovych and negotiated an amnesty deal for the protesters to leave the streets . In February 2013, Yanukovych met with the opposition leaders and negotiated a deal for protesters to left the streets.
 Yanukovych met with opposition leaders in a meeting mediated by France, Germany, Poland, and Russia . The meeting was mediated by the four countries .
 The meeting resulted in an agreement to hold elections by the end of the year, establish a national unity government . Ukraine would return to its 2004 constitution .
 Yanukovych fled Kiev for Kharkiv in Eastern Ukraine and was impeached by parliament . Yanukovych fled for Kharksiv in eastern Ukraine . He was impeaching by parliament.
 Speaker of the House, Oleksander Turchynov, was appointed to be the interim president . New parliament was in place by the end of February .
 Governmental leaders in the Donbas as well as Crimea continued to pledge 48 their support to Yanukovych vice the interim government .
 Crimea Long before trouble emerged in Ukraine, Russian operatives and special forces were at work in Crimea .
 Oligarchs were paid off, local officials were bribed, and pro-Russian propaganda was circulated that enabled popular support and cooperation . Oligarch was paid off and local officials are bribed .
 After Yanukovych was impeached, protesters took to the streets and demanded greater autonomy from Ukraine and closer ties to Russia . They also demanded closer ties with Russia .
 Berkut special police units, units that were officially dissolved on 25 February 2014 by the Ukrainian Parliament, seized checkpoints between Crimea and mainland Ukraine .
 Protesters stormed government buildings and removed Ukrainian flags from them . Ukrainian flags were removed from government buildings .
 Hundreds of unmarked men in military uniforms seized airports in Sevastopol and Simferopol as well as television stations 14 while what was believed to have been Russian special forces occupied the Crimean Parliament .
 The Russian Ambassador to the United Nations assured the international community that any Russian troop movement in Crimea was within the lease agreement for the port in Sevastopol 16 . Yanukovych requested President Putin to use armed forces to restore peace, stability, rule of law, and protection of the population of Ukraine
 The Russian Parliament officially authorized Putin to utilize the Russian military in Crimea . The Russian parliament has approved Putin to use the military.
 A referendum to join the Russian Federation was voted on by the population of Crimea where 96. percent of the voters supported the action . The population of the Crimea voted on the vote to join Russia's Federation .
 Crimea officially became part of the Russian 49 Federation on 21 March when Putin signed the law for annexation . Crimea officially become part of Russia's 49 Federation in March .
 In a span of three weeks, Russia employed nearly 10,000 troops in what appeared to be a humanitarian mission that never fired a single shot and annexed Crimea .
 Following the annexation of Crimea, protests began in cities throughout the Donbas . Crimea was annexed by Ukraine in March 2014 .
 Rebels in the region seized government buildings as well as police and security stations in the major cities . Rebels seized the government buildings in the area .
 Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic were formed by 7 April . Both requested Putin to send peacekeeping forces to Eastern Ukraine .
Ukrainian forces started anti-terrorist operations to disarm illegal groups throughout the Donbas .
 Petro Poroshenko was elected president of Ukraine in June . He took office in June after being elected president .
 Two Ukrainian mechanized battalions were rendered combat ineffective in less than three minutes when struck by Russian rockets 21 at Zelenopillya . In July, two Ukrainian mechanised battalions had been renderedcombat ineffective in just three minutes .
 The strike used DPICM, scatterable mines, and thermobaric warheads that devastated the battalions . The strike utilized DPICm, scatterables, and therobaric bombs .
 The investigation took more than two years to complete due to heavy fighting in the area of the crash site . The investigation was completed after more than 2 years.
 In August, the International Committee of the Red Cross assembled countries to provide aid to Eastern Ukraine . One of the countries was Russia, one of which was Russia .
 Throughout the conflict, Russia had been massing troops and equipment along the Ukrainian border and in Crimea .
 Russian forces crossed into Ukraine in early September and engaged Ukrainian troops with tanks and artillery at the Luhansk airport . Ukrainian troops were forced to pull out of the airport .
 Presidents Poroshenko and Putin met in Minsk, Belarus to put an end to the hostilities .
 Pro-Russian rebels continued to advance supported by tanks and artillery . Pro- Russian rebels continue to advance.
 In the weeks that followed, the ceasefire continued to deteriorate with rebels gaining ground throughout the region .
 Heavy rocket and artillery fire with heaviest of fighting occurring at Donetsk airport . Heavy rocket fire preceded by heavy artillery fire .
 In late October, rebels declared an end to the ceasefire and vowed to retake the major cities throughout the Donbas . The rebels have been fighting in the area since October .
 Human Rights Watch documented the use of cluster munitions in more than a dozen locations throughout Donetsk and Luhansk . The use of Cluster munitions was documented by the group .
 International observers from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe reported Russian cargo trucks crossing the border back into Russia in mid-November .
 The trucks bore the marking Cargo 200, which is Russian, code for soldiers killed in action . The trucks are also known as Cargo 200 .
 Security Services of Ukraine operatives killed a pro-Russian militia leader . The new year brought with it renewed fighting after the death of the leader .
 By late January, a state of emergency was declared as rebels continued to gain ground . The state was declared by late January .
 Ukrainian positions were subjected to heavy shelling by rockets throughout the region . A new front was opened around Mariupol .
 Minsk II the second Minsk ceasefire was scheduled to go into effect on 15 February . The second ceasefire was set to take place in Minsk, Belarus .
 Rebels were on the offensive to seize as much ground as possible prior to the ceasefire and the fiercest fighting occurred in Debaltseve .
 Russia deployed massive amounts of artillery and MRLs and shelled Ukrainian positions to ensure that the rebels captured the large railroad interchange prior to the ceasefire . Russia deploys massive amount of artillery to ensure the rebels capture the interchange .
 Once the ceasefire took effect, fighting continued in Debaltseve as well as Mariupol .
 Multiple agencies reported that cluster munitions had been used in several cities throughout the Donetsk region .
 By late February, the ceasefire was generally holding and both the rebels and Ukrainians began to pull larger weapons away from the line of contact . The ceasefire is generally holding .
 The next few years saw several periods of renewed and heavy fighting as well as times of relative peace . Progress was made toward full implementation of the Minsk II ceasefire agreement .
 The United Nations released a report in April 2016 that estimated more than 9,333 people had died in the 52 conflict . Another 21,396 had been wounded in the conflict .
 By September 2016 rebels stated they were fully committed to the Minsk II ceasefire as that was the only way to resolve the conflict . In September 2016, rebels stated that they had been fully committed.
 Evidence of Russian forces involvement in the conflict continued to surface . The conflict continues to surface.
 In October 2016, a former separatist finance minister said Russia was directly financing pensions and public sector salaries in the Donbas due to funding being cut from Kiev .
 The report stated that international armed conflict began no later than 26 February 2014 when Russia employed members of its armed forces in Ukraine to gain control over parts of the country without the government's consent .
 January 2017 brought little change to the conflict with violence continuing to increase yet again . Both sides blame the other for instigation and violations of the Minsk II ceasefire .
 The primary difference between the U.S. and Russian artillery was the focus on precision versus mass respectively . The main difference in the United States and Russia is the focus of precision and mass .
 Precision versus mass does not necessarily have a direct correlation to a tactical advantage, but precision does have an operational and strategic advantage in the form of supply .
 Precisely targeted entities utilized fewer rounds than targets where mass is utilized . Preciseley targeted entities used fewer rounds.
 United States and Russian artillery had the ability to mass artillery fires at the division level . The U.S. and Russia had the capability to fire artillery fires in the division .
 The U.S. had an advantage due to operations as platoons that occupied PAAs where Russia generally kept the battery together .
 Dispersion allowed the U.S. artillery units a better chance to survive . It forced the adversary to acquire multiple targets, process multiple fire missions simultaneously .
 Russian doctrine has placed emphasis on counterbattery radars 30 and counterfire to not necessarily destroy enemy equipment but to disrupt the fire mission and cause them to move .
 BTGs dispersed due to increased lethality in the Donbas and occupied the space typical of a Cold War era brigade . BTGs disperse due to increase lethality. BTGs were dispersed due.
 Russia used multiple sensors that varied in size and altitude to detect targets along their planned flight path in the Donbas . Russia delivered massive artillery strikes within 15 minutes of the attack .
 Phillip Karber witnessed these tactics in September 2014 and June 2015 . The tactics were used in September and June 2014 .
 The UAS would then return to the target area and conduct a battle damage assessment. The Uas would then conduct a fight damage assessment .
 Russian system seems to mirror the U.S. model of decide, detect, deliver, and assess . The Russian system is similar to that of the United States .
 The area of operation would be decided upon with UAS flight routes planned . The area would be chosen upon with the flight routes.
 UAS flew the planned routes and attempted to detect targets which were then struck by BM-21s or BM-30s . UAS tried to detect the targets and tried to find out which targets were then hit .
 The UAS would return to the location of the strike and assess the effectiveness of the strikes . The commander would be able to determine if a reattack was necessary .
 Russia modified its doctrinal employment of howitzers by utilizing them in a planned direct fire role known as an assault gun . Russia modified their doctrinal job by using them in the direct fire position known as a assault gun.
 The howitzers were utilized to target Ukrainian strong points, suppress ATGM teams, 35 or in an anti-tank role themselves . The howitzerers were also used to target Ukraine strong points.
 This change resulted in their overwatch range being extended from 5,000 meters from a tank main gun to 6,000 metres . This change was due to a change in the range of the main gun's range .
 Ukrainian anti-tank teams were reluctant to open fire on Russian armored personnel carriers or armor for fear of being targeted by direct fire artillery . The change resulted in Ukraine being reluctant to fire Russian armored carriers .
 The disadvantage of this tactic was due to the lack of 54 armor on some artillery systems and light armor of self-propelled systems . The disadvantage is due to a lack of54 armor.
 The United States artillery is trained in direct fire but not in an overwatch role for maneuver forces . The U.S. artillery is not in a direct fire role but in a more overwatch position .
 Russia incorporated electronic warfare in the BTG for target detection as well as protection . The BTG was also used to detect and protect targets .
When a command node was detected, UAS would refine the location and massed rocket artillery would strike . When a command nodes were detected, they would refine location and strike . UAS was detected by UAS .
 EW assets to deny use of GPS signals and pre-detonate or dud rounds with electronic fuzing could cause problems for the United States in the utilization of Excalibur .
 The presence of EW assets could result in the U.S. artillery being required to resort to the utilization of HE munitions .
 EW assets could be a difficult target to pin-point and would require the utilization of massive amounts of HE rounds . Much fewer ICM rounds could be utilized to saturate the area and suppress or degrade Russia's EW capability .
 The U.S. gained the advantage to operate down to the platoon level which allowed for units to be more dispersed and increase survivability while still being able to mass fires if needed .
 Both the United States and Russia had the ability to mass at the division level if necessary . But Russia had more artillery systems contained within its organizations .
 Russia continued to have the advantage when it came to UAS. UAS platforms were directly linked and utilized for target development and battle damage assessment in support of artillery systems .
 Both the United States and Russia had the ability for cannon artillery to be used in a direct fire role . Russia earned the advantage by extending the BTG’s AT range out to 6,000 meters .
 Russian BTGs with EW capability are another advantage over the U.S. Russian BTG with EW capabilities are also another advantage .
 They denied use of electronic fuzes, munitions that depended on a GPS link, and the use of UAS for reconnaissance . They denied the use.
 Russia’s capability to interrupt the satellite link and the possibility of making the munitions dud or pre-detonate . This was due to Russia's capability to interrupted the satellitelink .
 Organization both U.S. and Russian cannon artillery battalions are organized into three batteries of six howitzers .
 United States rocket artillery batteries have two more launchers than Russian batteries . U.S. rocket artillery battery has two more launcher than Russian battery .
 Russians have the advantage at the battalion level as there are three batteries to the two U.S. batteries with a total difference of two launchers . Russian batteries are three different to the United States batteries .
Russian forces in the brigade have a different organizational difference . This allows the Russians to directly support each of the maneuver battalions with rockets . This means they can directly support one of the brigade's maneuver units with rockets.
 Where the United States has one cannon battalion per brigade, a Russian brigade has two cannon battalions and a rocket battalion . The U.S. has one cannons per brigade .
 The Russian advantage is continued due to the decentralization of artillery batteries down to maneuver battalions 40 where two to four batteries of cannons and rockets can be placed in direct support .
 United States battalions could be given an entire cannon battalion in support of their operation . But only for a limited duration, according to the U.S. Army .
 Russia utilized an on-call rocket delivery system that could quickly respond to targets identified by UAS in the Donbas . DPICM, top-attack munitions, and thermobaric warheads were used .
 UAS targeting was illustrated best during the case study by the rocket barrage in July 2014 . The rocket barrage decimated two Ukrainian mechanized battalions in three 57 minutes . This system of UAS targets was shown best during a case study .
 Platoon targets where ICM would have been the munition of choice would have to be executed by no less than a battery that fired multiple volleys of HE munitions and increased the probability of detection .
 The increased expenditure of munitions by larger units firing more missions could result in a strained supply system as well as targets not being serviced.
 A Russian brigade and its subordinate battalions could potentially suffer from a supply shortfall due to a lack of sustainment assets . A lack of sustainment assets could potentially lead to a shortfall in supply .
 Russia had a materiel support battalion within the brigade but only three transport companies to support 14 battalions and four other companies . Russia had only one transport company in the brigade and only four transport companies .
 Targeting of Russian transport companies could yield superior results due to their limited numbers . Targeting could change the way in which the BTGs are dispersed as well as how they fight .
An organizational advantage up to the cannon artillery battalion organization did not exist due to equal number of howitzers . An organizational advantage was not there due to the lack of an organizational advantage .
 Russia had the advantage at the brigade level due to having double the number of cannon artillery assets as well as rocket artillery assets . Russia clearly had the advantages at the Brigade level .
 The United States had more launchers in a battery than the Russians . The advantage went back to the Russians at the battalion level . The U.S. has more launchers than the Russian .
 More than a dozen launchers existed in a Russian rocket battalion . They were organized into three batteries that afforded a battery to support each BTG in the brigade .
 The United States typically does not commit a rocket battalion to directly support a brigade unless for a very specific, short term mission .
 Both the U.S. and Russia had support battalions at the brigade level as well as a total of three distribution company size elements within the brigade . Both the United States and Russia have support batt battalion levels .
 Russian transportation companies provide supplies for 14 total battalions as well as four other companies where the U.S. had a distribution platoon directly supporting a battalion .
 Russians are required to move twice the amount of materiel to sustain the brigade . U.S. gained the advantage due to the Russians.
 The range capability gap 59 would be closed with the introduction of extended range howitzers for Stryker BCTs and Armor B CTs . Infantry BCT's would remain lacking due to only having one battery of Will .
 Russia had the overall organizational advantage, but their distribution companies were also their critical vulnerability . Russia's distribution companies had a critical vulnerability, according to the Russian government .
 Materiel Russia employed DPICM, top-attack munitions, and thermobaric warheads in the Donbas that resulted in devastating effects against Ukrainian forces .
 Cannon and rocket artillery produced 80 to 85 percent of the casualties in the Russo-Ukrainian War . Cannon and rockets produced 80-85 percent of casualties.
 The United States had begun to convert its stockpiles into lower cost training munitions . Russia continued production and maintenance of their DPICM stockpiles .
 The U.S. introduced the GMLRSAW to begin filling the capability gap left behind . ICM was no longer available for use, but it was introduced for use .
 GMLRS-AW was effective against some targets but the U.S. continued to lack an effective anti-armor indirect fire munition . The United States continued to Lack an effective indirect fire Munition .
 HRDR would be effective against soft, semi-soft, and hard targets . It would meet reliability standards set forth in the DoD policy .
 The additional type of munitions required to be shot with the SMArt 155 would not alleviate the strain on the support units . The change to the MTOE could be needed . The additional munitions would not ease the strain of support units.
 Russian artillery outranged U.S. artillery in both cannon and rocket units . Russian artillery was outranged United States artillery.
 The Russian D-30 outtranged the Ml 19 by more than 2,000 meters, 2S19 outranged M777 and M109 by 15,000 metres . The RussianD-30 is the second most popular Russian sports car in the world .
 The U.S. BCTs do not have an asset that can provide counterfire capability out to the maximum range of Russian cannon units .
 BM-30 would outrange MLRS or HIMARS to BCTs by 20 kilometers . But even if a decision was made to task organize MLRS and HIMARS, it would be 20 kilometers away .
 The Russian BM-21’s range was more than doubled by the United States MLRS and HIMARS . The BM-30 outranged United States rockets by 20,000 meters gave them a range advantage .
 Russia and the U.S. had HE munitions available, but the Russians had a variety of other artillery munitions available . DPICM, sensor-fuzed munitions, and thermobaric warheads were shown to have had devastating effects .
 The United States does not have the capability to match the lethality demonstrated in the attack at Zelenopillya . The U.S. has the munitions available advantage to Russia .
 The requirement for additional HE ammunition due to the loss of ICM remains . Even with the introduction of extended range howitzers, the requirement for extra ammunition remains .
 Russia gained overall materiel advantage through range and munitions available . Russia gained the overall materie advantage through ranges and munitions .
 The U.S. would need the capabilities of ICM due to greater dispersion, presence of EW assets . EW assets could deny GPS and pre-detonate or dud munitions with electronic fuzes .
 United States artillery units will be required to shoot and quickly displace to another location to avoid being struck by counterfire .
 BCTs will be required to have MLRS or HIMARS to effectively conduct counterfire operations as well as additional cannon units . The increased number of munitions required to achieve the commander's desired 62 effects .
 The increased number of rounds needed per target could necessitate a future change to the FSC and BSB MTOEs to move the additional munitions .
 The United States Field Artillery can bridge the capability gap with the doctrine, organization, and materiel currently available . The U.S. Field Art artillery can also be used in the United States.
 Doctrine, organization, and materiel were chosen as focus areas for the study . The study was based on the ability to rapidly implement change .
Training and leadership were not focused on due to additional time needed to implement change in these areas . Training and leadership was not focused. Training and Leadership were not focus on dueto extra time needed.
 Personnel and facilities are changed through the Total Army Analysis process . The process would take years for implementation so they were not focused on during this study .
 The problem in missing capability can be met with increases in maneuver space, assets to support BCTs, and munitions currently available in the inventory . This problem can be successfully met with increased maneuver space.
 Russia has established itself as a threat to European countries through its overt and covert actions in Eastern Ukraine . Russia has been acting in covert and overt actions in eastern Ukraine .
 Many of the European countries are also members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Russia could seek assistance from the United States should Russia attack them .
 Russia possesses capability to disrupt GPS operations making precision targeting more difficult . Russia possesses the capability to disruption GPS operations .
 The use of area effects munitions will allow for quicker effects on the target and less rounds expended in the process . With larger error in target location, the use of Area Effects munitions will be more effective .
 Mechanical versus electronic fuzing will be critical due to Russia’s ability to dud or pre-detonate electronic 66 fuzes . Russia's ability to do this will be crucial due to its ability to pre- detonate the fuze .
 The range of supporting arms such as artillery as well as Russian doctrine allows for maneuver elements to have greater dispersion . munitions that can cover larger areas or munitions can independently find and target them .
 Study focused solely on Russia as a competitor . There are other peer or near peer competitors such as China and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea .
 A larger unit will have to use mass or smaller units to shoot more volleys . Alternative munitions being less effective than ICM will be less effective .
 Additional volleys being fired increase the probability of detection and risk of counterfire . More volleys are fired are fired.
PAAs are a control measure that artillery units are assigned to operate and survive within . PAAs are control measures that allow artillery units to operate within .
 To avoid detection and counterfire, artillery units will have to move following each fire mission and following UAS overflights .
Counterfire and presence of UAS will cause artillery units to be constantly moving and hiding to ensure their survivability in a fight against Russia .
 The increased lethality associated with UAS supported by artillery in the Donbas will drive UAS units to require additional space to operate and survive in future conflict .
 Organizational MTOEs should not be changed until a replacement for the ICM munition is decided on . ICM Munition should be replaced by a replacement of the MTOE .
 A change to the MTOE for the bridging solution would be irresponsible due to the potentially short duration of the change . A change would be 'irresponsible' due to a potentially short-term impact of the changes .
 BCTs need additional howitzers to fire the increased number of rounds needed due to no longer having ICM 67 available . BCT's need additionalHowitzers.
 Additional howitzer tubes allow for larger quantities of massed fires, fewer volleys that results in decreased probability of detection and greater chances for survivability . Additional howitz tubes allow more volleys, less volleys and fewer fires that result in decreased likelihood of detection .
 U.S. field artillery cannons being outranged by Russian systems . BCTs will need the ability to conduct counterfire beyond the range of their organic artillery battalions .
 MLRS and HIMARS are a viable option to give BCT commanders additional flexibility with their cannon battalion and disrupt adversary artillery attacks beyond a BCT’s organic cannon battalion range .
 The deployment of additional cannon battalions as well as MLRS and HIMARS units is not sustainable over the long term due to the current size of the artillery force . The current number of artillery units is too large for the current force to deploy .
 Should this option be implemented as a long-term solution, the artillery force would need to grow significantly in terms of personnel and equipment to be sustainable .
 Extended range cannon artillery tubes are being developed and tested during the course of this study . Extended range artillery tubes were being developed during the study .
 MLRS and HIMARS was the only way to extend the range of BCTs to meet or exceed those of Russian cannon artillery units .
 Once the extended range cannon artillery tubes are fielded, the requirement for MLRS and HIMARS can be reduced . The requirement forMLRS and HISARS will be reduced once they are fielded .
 Alternative munitions to ICM exist in the U.S. Lield Artillery inventory .
 None of these munitions are a direct replacement for ICM . It would require multiple volleys to achieve the same effects as ICM which increases exposure, 68 probability of detection, and risk of counterfire .
 The organizational change could be increasing the size of the existing batteries or even the creation of another battery within the battalions . SMArt 155 could be used to fire munitions to enable additional munitions to be fired .
 HRDR is simply an upgraded version of ICM that would meet the reliability standard of no more than 1 percent UXO as set forth by the DoD policy letter . HRDR would be an upgraded versions of the ICM .
 HRDR could be utilized with the current size of the artillery force with little to no change in the organization . The ability to attack soft, semisoft, and hard targets as well as be utilized as a suppression munition .
 U.S. cannon and rocket artillery remain outranged by similar Russian systems . Even with the 69 alternative munitions in the inventory and new munitions on the horizon, the United States remains outranged .
 HRDR will eliminate the need to utilize multiple types of munitions on targets and reduce strain on support units that move materiel . HRDR says it will eliminate need to use multiple types.
 BCTs training for conventional operations against a near-peer or peer competitor should be augmented with an additional cannon artillery battalion and a MLRS or HIMARS battery for training and the deployment .
 This will allow for larger firing elements to mass with munitions other than ICM . This will provide a counterfire capability beyond the range of a BCT’s organic fires battalion .
 Augmentation during training would allow time for refinement of systems and processes as well as BCTs to train as they would fight .
 Larger PA As will allow artillery units more space to move and survive in combat . The new system will allow more space for artillery units to be able to survive in battle .
 More PAAs will allow artillery units more options to best provide the BCT with fires as well as more locations to move following UAS overflight . More PAas will allow more options for artillery units .
 The study was limited to qualitative analysis of bridging the capability gap between January 2019 and an ICM replacement .
 This unclassified case study of the Russo-Ukrainian War and capability match up along the theoretical framework of doctrine, organization, and materiel 70 .
 A future area of study could analyze the new munitions and how they could be employed in a manner that reduces the strain on supply systems and support units within the military .
 The vehicles within the support units or flat racks need to be modified or changed altogether . This analysis could lead to a conclusion that the vehicles within support units and flat racks should be modified .
 The communications linkages between the forward observers and the fire direction centers or fire support cells within the units. Another area for future study is the communications linkage between the front observers and fire-support cells .
 The range and reliability of the communications systems should also increase. As ranges of the systems increase and units are able to have greater dispersion, the range of the system should also rise .
 The study could research the viability of high frequency radios on the modern, fast-paced battlefield .
 A final area of consideration for additional study would be by the organization and equipment used by artillery battalion FSCs. A final place of consideration would be in the group's equipment .
 The study could determine if the number of personnel and vehicles are sufficient to move all classes of supply in a timely manner to the artillery battalion .
 Secondary conclusions surfaced that were outside the scope of this study that have implications for the Army as a whole and warrant further study .
 BCTs and battalions have EW personnel within the organization but do not have EW organic assets to produce effects . BCT's and batt battalion has EW personnel in the organization .
 EW effects have to be requested from outside the unit and are not always readily available to commanders . 71 disrupt, deny, deny or degrade their ability to communicate .
 The EW environment affects mission command as a philosophy as well as the systems. Another aspect to this study is how the EW environment affect mission command and systems .
 This study could analyze the EW capabilities and equipment needed by battalion and brigade commanders to dominate the enemy’s decision cycle through limited or denied ability to communicate . It could also analyze the size of the United States digital and electromagnetic footprint .
 Russia displayed an extensive use of UAS in the Donbas that enabled targeting with massed artillery . Russia displayed the use of the UAS.
 The U.S. has little to no capability to detect or deny the use of UAS other than sight and sound .
 These systems present a major threat to U.S. operations in the future as they become smaller, quieter, payloads of sensors and weapons increase in capability .
 Study could analyze counter UAS systems and procedures being used by allied nations . Study could determine recommended tactics, techniques, and procedures for conducting operations in an environment with UAS presence .
 The final secondary conclusion was that changes will need to be made in the way the U.S. conducts mission command . The United States conducts mission commands .
 The last 15 years of war and addition of physical systems have made command post quite large and immobile . The last two decades of war have made the command post very large andImmobile .
 Their current size, structure, and mobility would present a rather easy target for a peer or near-peer competitor to detect, target, and destroy .
 Possible areas to consider are the size and composition of mission command nodes at the battalion and brigade levels . The size of the command nodes can be considered as well as the composition of command nodes .
 The present day operating environment is far too lethal for the U.S. to conduct mission command the same way it has in the most recent conflicts . The United States has been involved in many recent conflicts.
 Army Technical Publication 3-09.42, Fire Support for the Brigade Combat Team, is published in October .
 Field Manual 6-30, Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures for Observed Fire . The Field Manual is based on the Field Manual.
 The U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command Intelligence Support Activity is a major intelligence support activity . The Army is training and intelligence support Activity .
 PowerPoint Presentation Fires Center of Excellence, Fort Sill, OK, 27 March 2016, is a PowerPoint presentation .
 Cumming-Bruce, Nick, Katherine Harrison, Lucy Pinches, and Stuart Casey-Maslen are among the seven members of the team .
Land Warfare in Europe, Lessons and Recommendations from the War in Ukraine. Land Warfare in the EU, Lessons in Europe and Lessons in the Ukraine .
 Norwegian Defence Research Establishment, Kjeller, Norway, 1 February 2008, was founded .
 Gordon, John, Anthony Atler, Scott Boston, Matthew E Boyer, Natasha Lander, and Todd Nichols are among the seven members of the Boston-based team .
 Historical Lessons Learned Workshop, Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory & United States Army Capabilities Center, Collaborative Analysis Center, Laurel, MD, 8 July 2015 .
 The U.S. Army War College is located in Carlisle, Pennsylvania . It is the largest military college in the United States . The College is home to the Army's National War College .