 Putin, Ukraine, And 'Phantom Pain' The Week In Russia: Putin,Ukraine, And \u0027 Phantom Pain .
 He lived and worked in Russia and the former Soviet Union for nearly 20 years between 1989 and 2014 . He worked with the AP and Reuters in Moscow and Russia .
 Putin, Ukraine, And 'Phantom Pain' Putin has cast doubt on the legitimacy of Ukrainian state and the nation itself .
 Putin, Ukraine, and 'Phantom Pain' set grim new records almost daily . President Vladimir Putin continued to devote a great deal of attention to the past and future of Russia’s ties with Ukraine .
 The Kremlin crackdown on opposition, dissent, and independent media continues ahead of elections to the State Duma in September .
 The pen may or may not be mightier than the sword, but both can be wielded in a threatening way .
 Moscow began a buildup of military units in Crimea and along the border with Ukraine in March . The buildup raises the specter of a new offensive within or beyond areas of the neighboring country .
 There were flare-ups of fighting but no major escalation as of yet . The military moves were seen as a show of force - a warning about what might happen if Moscow saw fit . The seven-year war in the Donbas has exerted on Kyiv and the West .
 Putin has repeatedly used another instrument -words - to keep up the pressure . Since then, Putin has been using another instrument to keep the pressure on him .
 Ukraine and Russians are "one people," he says . He has cast doubt on the legitimacy of the Ukrainian state and the nation itself . Ukraine is a "spawn of the Soviet period," he claims .
 A number of observers took aim at what they indicated were Putin's failings as a historian . Other observers also criticized his comparisons of the Russia-Ukraine relationship with those between Germany and Austria .
 Others, meanwhile, pointed to the high word count and noted that the article could have used a good editor . Others, however, noted that it could have been used by an editor .
 Mustafa Nayyem Putin's words were "not an article," he wrote, "but the phantom pain of an obsessed failure who, out of his own stupidity and greed, has lost a loved one" - a reference to the Russian aggression .
 Culture Minister Oleksandr Tkachenko says Russian leaders have been "rewriting history" since tsarist times . He says Moscow's actions reveal far more sinister messages beneath the friendly title and assertions of brotherhood .
 Zelenskiy Trolls Putin after Russian President Publishes Article On Ukraine . Zelenskyy's remarks suggested that while Putin’s article may be risible, it could potentially provoke both laughter and concern .
 The big question is whether Putin’s ramble through the past gives any indication of Russia's future actions .
 Some said it could be a sign of imminent aggressive action, others dismissed it . Some thought it was a notion that others dismissed .
 Sam Greene, director of the Russia Institute at King's College London, wrote on Twitter . "Or at all," he wrote .
 In 2014, Russia seized control of Crimea by sending troops with unmarked uniforms to the Ukrainian region . It was some time before Putin acknowledged that the occupying soldiers dubbed "little green men" were Russian . Moscow continues to deny direct involvement by its military in the war in the Donbas .
 Putin said a lot, but he had said most of it before. Observers also pointed out that, while Putin said much of it, he had been saying a lot before .
 Ukraine should have reverted to the borders that defined it in 1922, he said . He had already claimed that the Ukrainian state was a creation of the Soviet Union .
 Armed Russian military without identification take up position at an airport in Simferopol during the occupation of Crimea in 2014 .
 The assertion may seem astounding enough regardless of how many times it is uttered . But that assertion may be astounding enough if it's true .
 It appears aimed to delegitimize the international borders thrust up by the Soviet collapse . It appears to cast doubt on the legitimacy of Russia's neighbors from the Baltics and Belarus to the Caucasus and Central Asia .
 The suggestion that Ukraine has no right to statehood in its current borders goes beyond that, according to Aleksei Venediktov, the editor in chief of the Moscow radio station Ekho Moskvy .
 Both in Russia and abroad, some read Putin's article as a signal that words will be followed by actions . Some read it as very assertive or aggressive.
 Putin's article will now be "the basis of future and current policy of the Russian Federation on Ukraine" Venediktov said in a July 13 interview on the Internet channel Dozhd .
 Nayyem said his actions have driven Kyiv and the Ukrainian people further away from Russia . Instead, he said, he may be seeking to justify his position and his actions .
 The article "feels as if it's driven by frustration, by isolation, by impotence, even," Galeotti said on the podcast . The podcast is a weekly podcast .
 Putin’s claims about Ukraine may have ramifications in the long run, seeping into the consciousness of officials .
 Since 1991, 15 countries that gained independence have been at peace with one another . Russia's brief war with Georgia in 2008 and the conflict between Kyiv and Russia-backed separatists in the Donbas has killed more than 13,000 people since 2014 .
 Putin is planting a new time bomb on Ukraine, with his drumbeat of remarks on Ukraine . Putin's drumbeat on Ukraine is not the first time Putin has made such remarks .
 Steve Gutterman is the editor of the Russia/Ukraine/Belarus Desk in RFE/RL's Central Newsroom in Prague . He is also editor of Russia/ Ukraine/Belararus Desk.
 He has reported from Afghanistan and Pakistan as well as other parts of Asia, Europe, and the U.S. He has also reported from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 Some of the key developments in Russia over the past week are going forward, says Steve Gutterman . The editor of RFE/RL's Russia Desk says some of the takeaways have gone forward .
 It's posted here every Monday or you can subscribe on iTunes or on Google Podcasts . The weekly podcast is a weekly feature on CNN.com and YouTube .
 The editor of RFE/RL's Russia Desk dissects some of the key developments over the past week . The editor offers some takeaways going forward .
 I hereby give consent to RFE/RL to use my e-mail address for the purpose of sending me the selected newsletter . I am not allowed to use the e-mails for the purposes of sending the selected newsletters .