 US, EU, Canada, Canada and Switzerland introduce new sanctions against Russia, Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk . S&P cuts Ukraine’s rating to pre-default level .
 Ukraine needs another 15bn dollars to avoid default . U.S. Congress passes draft law on military support for Ukrain . Ukraine needs more than $15bn to avoiddefault .
 Parliament approves new cabinet, appoints deputy speakers and heads of parliamentary committees . Ukraine to run out of coal reserves in few days, experts say . Protesters in Vinnytsya storm regional council’s building .
 Ukrainian parliament of eighth convocation convenes for first session . NATO concerned over military capabilities of Russian troops along Ukrainian border . Ukraine to drop its non-bloc status; Ukraine's parliament of eight convocation convened .
 South African coal rejects new deals with Ukraine . Supplier of South Africa rejects new deal with Ukraine. Russian army, pro-Russian fighters readying to intensify hostilities .
 Russia strengthens military positions along Ukrainian border with Ukraine . Ukraine's currency crashes to 15. hryvnyas per dollar .
 Ukrainian authorities blamed the Russian special services for organizing the rallies in Kiev . Poroshenko meets Putin at Milan summit .
 Separatists and the Russian military have shelled Ukrainian troops more than 1,000 times since the beginning of a cease-fire . A Red Cross employee was killed during shelling by the pro-Russian separatists . The Council of the European Union postponed the application of the EU-Ukraine association
 The separatists and Russian military continue offensive actions in the area of the antiterrorist operation .
 Ukraine turned over the ratification of the Association Agreement to the General Secretariat of the EU Council . They continue shelling Donetsk, the checkpoint at the entrance to Mariupol .
 Poroshenko announced the end to a ceasefire and the resumption of an antiterrorist operation in the east of the country . Donetsk has become militants main base .
 Poroshenko wins early presidential election; 3,000 to 4,500 Chechen and Russian mercenaries involved in armed conflict in Donbas . Naftohaz sends Gazprom 786m dollars for gas imported in Q1 2014 .
 Snap presidential election held in Ukraine . Medvedev says Russia had not guaranteed territorial integrity of Ukraine . Terrorists in Donbas kill more Ukrainian military, peaceful citizens .
 Separatists in two Ukraine's eastern regions declare ‘independence’ Tatars demand national autonomy for Crimea on 70th anniversary of deportation . Russia officially warns Ukraine about advance gas payments; Tatars want national autonomy.
Ukrainian authorities resume counterterrorism operation in eastern regions . Ukrainian authorities resume operations in eastern areas .
 Separatists kidnap journalists, OSCE military inspectors, representatives of armed forces . Separatist militants kidnap journalists and OSCE officials, including military inspectors .
 The Horlivka city councillor from the Fatherland party and a Kiev student were found dead in Slovyansk . The student was a student from Kiev .
 Armed separatists seize administrative buildings in eastern regions . Russian president complains to European leaders about Ukraine's gas debt . Ukraine's economic performance deteriorates, says Russian president .
 EU Foreign Affairs Council issues conclusions on Ukraine . Protesters, opposition demand immediate reinstatement of 2004 constitution . Protesters have freed the occupied administrative buildings .