 Three days of solidarity will mark May Day 2022 in Havana, Cuba .
 In Cuba, for the first time since the COVID-19 pandemic forced cancellation in 2020 and 2021, the awesome May Day march will take place Sunday, May 1 .
 The events are dedicated to Cuba’s historical leader, Fidel Castro Ruz .
 The Central de Trabajadores de Cuba is welcoming workers from around the world to learn from Cuban workers and their neighborhoods . The United States economic, commercial, and financial blockade is essentially an illegal economic war .
 delegations will partake in the community soup called caldosa with Committees for Defense of the Revolution .
 Hundreds are coming from the U.S. in various brigades, delegations and just coming as individuals to demonstrate their solidarity with revolutionary Cuba . Many are under 30 years of age .
Activists will join the Cuban peopleiin the Plaza of the Revolution . Their experiences will inform their work when they return to the US .
Transgender youth are facing forcible detransition, says Greg Butterfield . In Texas and Alabama, transgender youth are face forcible detention .
 Greg Abbott banned gender-affirming care for children in February . Parents and health-care providers will face prosecution .
 Even kids who have been transitioning for years would be forcibly ‘outed’ and denied the care they need to grow up happy and healthy . They would also be banned from using the restroom they choose at school .
 The measures contradict the recommendations of medical experts, including the American Medical Association, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Psychological Association .
Tennessee and Arkansas already have laws banning gender-affirming care . Tennessee and Arkansas have laws ban gender-Affirming care.
Nearly half of U.S. states currently have similar legislation pending . Nearly half of United States states have similar bills pending .
 Safe Haven vandalized 3 over 1,000 students at West High School in Salt Lake City . Students walked out of classes April 6 to protest pending anti-trans legislation in Utah .
 Adventist Healthcare on several occasions has come to the bargaining table claiming that they had not seen any proposals . Adventist healthcare has been in talks with the company for several years .
 The union officials assert that all proposals were properly forwarded to the hospital administration . The hospital administration says all proposals are properly forwarded .
 The hospital chief negotiator claimed at the start of the session that the union was attempting to back-date proposals for back pay that was owed to nursing staff . One day before the one-day strike was held, the union's chief negotiator said .
 He proclaimed the proposal was invalid and that the hospital couldn’t afford it . The hospital couldn't afford it, he said .
 He told them that there was nothing to talk about and left the room . He said there wasnothing to talk @truecie about .
 Many issues have been raised by the union in this round of contract negotiations . The union has been in talks with the union over the future of its members .
 Patient ratios make sure nurses are not assigned x more than a reasonable number of patients for care . Among them are patient ratios that make sure Ff that nurses aren't assigned X more than reasonable numbers .
 Management has eliminated differential pay for evening and weekend shifts which results in a cut in pay of several thousand dollars . Management has also eliminated the differential pays for evening, weekend shifts .
 Chants demanding safe staffing levels were heard continuously throughout the day along with chants demanding fair negotiations . Chants demanded safe staffing level levels.
 The nurses on the picket line received tremendous support from the public as many drivers honked their horns in support .
 Just about every bus driver that drove by honked loudly to show support for the bus driver .
 Many people walking by stopped to listen and discuss the issues with the nurses .
 Millions of people around the world rally for environmental justice every year on April 22 . April 22 is Earth Day .
This struggle is more important than ever as capitalist climate change continues to cook the earth . This struggle is the most important ever as capitalism continues to Cook the Earth .
 A big step forward in the environmental movement has been targeting toxic racism . The environmental movement is targeting toxic racist racism .
 Flint, Michigan, children were poisoned by their lead-contaminated drinking water . It's not accidental that children in the Black-majority city of Flint were poisoned .
Water protectors from Indigenous nations fight Big Oil and its dangerous pipelines . Water protectors are fighting Big Oil, its dangerous pipeline systems .
 Hundreds of people who stopped the Dakota Access Pipeline were arrested . Hundreds were arrested for blocking the pipeline .
 Ninety percent of pesticides used in the US are applied in agriculture . The pesticides are used in agriculture.
 Twelve of the 14 markers for harmful pesticides were found in the blood and urine of Black and Latinx people at levels five times that of whites .
 Chemical plants throughout the southern United States are often located in Black communities . Chemical plants in the southern U.S. are often found in black communities .
 Black and Latinx people living in the South Bronx have the highest number of asthma cases in the country . In the North, Black andLatinx people live in the North and South Bronx .
Cancer clusters exist alongside petrochemical plants from Philadelphia to West Virginia to Louisiana and Texas .
Auto companies didn't want to use catalytic converters that have reduced smog . Auto companies didn’t want to using catalytic converter converters .
 VV LE-Nin ao x frets eS Se 2624 Vietnamese Siamp eaehialing 150th Lenin’s s birthday . Until the polluters were fought off, polluters had to fight off .
Capitalist politicians have learned to speak differently than when Ronald Reagan was elected California governor in 1966 . Ronald Reagan is now California governor .
 At the time people wanted to save the redwood forests from clear-cutting lumber companies .
 Socialist countries accounted for nearly a third of the world’s population . Socialist countries account for almost a third.
 The Vietnamese and Laotian people were fighting 500,000 U.S. troops as well as napalm bombs and agent orange pesticides .
 Lenin indicated how strong the movement of workers and oppressed people was . Lenin was the leader of the Bolshevik Revolution .
 Lenin’s writings had been translated into more languages than the New Testament worldwide . By 1970, Lenin's writings were translated into many languages .
 Meetings and events were planned around the world to commemorate Lenin’s life .
 The United States ruling class wanted to divert attention from this important anniversary . The U.S. ruling class also wanted to distract attention from the anniversary .
Environmentalists seek to keep an environmental movement within the bounds of capitalist politics . They sought to keep environmental movement in bounds ofcapitalist politics .
 Capitalists wanted to put socialist countries on trial as polluters . Capitalists also wanted to try to put the socialist nations on trial .
 Many of the socialist countries had been open or disguised colonies of the big capitalist countries . China, Cuba, North Korea, Vietnam, and Vietnam were among the countries that had been opened or hidden colonies .
 These countries that liberated themselves from colonial underdevelopment were always trying to catch up . These countries were always caught up by colonial under development .
 Capitalist media used the slogan “people cause pollution,’ as if it didn’t have anything to do with making profits, the profits-before-people system .
 The Pentagon is the world’s biggest polluter, according to the TV networks .
 Banks, utilities and other corporations claim to be “green’ as the earth continues to heat up . Today the banks, utilities, and other companies claim to have been “ green’s”
 Sharon Black May Day 2022 Continued from page 1 climate catastrophe and looming nuclear war that threatens human existence . The fight to end the intensified United States blockade continues .
 May Day began in the United States in 1886 where workers fought for the 8hour work day . Until 2005/2006 it was most celebrated outside the U.S. and especially in countries that have freed themselves from imperialist domination .
 The three day solidarity gathering culminates on May 2, with a solidarity conference featuring CTC General Secretary Ulises Guilarte de Nacimiento . The conference will conclude with the approval of a Declaration of Solidarity with Cuba .
 Baltimore Safe Haven is a local, trans-led nonprofit that provides the city's at-risk TLGBQIA community with food, housing, health care and more . Founded in 2018.
 Key members of Safe Haven's staff have expressed their outrage and frustration in the wake of this attack . The online harassment that has accompanied the attack has accompanied it .
 Iya Dammons says he's afraid for his own safety and the safety of his staff at this moment . Dammons is the founder and executive director of the company .
 Case manager Nicole Wells was the first to notice the graffiti and shared a similar U.5.-INAA . Continued from page 1 ers’ or pedophiles for supporting gender-affirming care for youth .
 The Florida "Don't Say Gay" law was championed by Gov. Gov. Rick Perry . The law was passed by Florida's governor .
 Ron DeSantis bans any mention of queer and trans issues from schools . British government's decision to exclude trans people from the ban on so-called “conversion therapy” that forcibly seeks to change people’s sexual and gender identities .
 The grotesque anti-trans campaign echoes the rhetoric of other anti-LGBTQ2S witch-hunts, like the one targeting gay men during the AIDS crisis .
 trans community already faces a high rate of murders and violence . It is having dangerous consequences for the trans community, which already faces high rates of violence .
 Trans people have been harassed and threatened on trains and in the street . Trans people are being harassed on trains, in the streets and on the streets .
 State and local protest actions and lawsuits are attempting to hold back the tide . State andLocal protest actions are trying to stop the tide from rising .
 The ultra-right plans to continue riding their hate campaign into the mid-term Congressional elections this November . But it’s clear that the ultra- right will continue riding the hate campaign.
 Democratic politicians are moving to the right on every issue from police brutality to COVID prevention . All while leading the charge for war against Russia, they are moving towards the right .
 antifascists from Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics, the Ukrainian antifascist underground, and troops from the Russian Federation are fighting to stem the tide of a U.S.-NATO takeover of Eastern Europe .
 The former Soviet republic of Ukraine is ruled by a right-wing coup regime installed by Washington in 2014 . The location chosen by the West is the former Soviet Republic of Ukraine .
 The backbone of this regime is neo-Nazi groups that have terrorized leftists, trade unionists, journalists and minority nationalities and immigrants .
 The reality of the situation has been turned on its head by the propagandists of U.S. Big Business and the Pentagon .
 Russia’s government also saw that a complete NATO takeover of Ukraine would endanger its own sovereignty . Russia felt no option but to act .
 It’s the exact same strategy of divide-and-conquer being used to demonize trans people here at home .
 Families of trans children are being forced to flee states that have adopted laws banning gender-affirming care and persecuting parents .
 In the same way, millions of people in Donbass and Ukraine have been forced to flee their homes . beSLL PHOTO support the organization's valiant struggle to uplift the most vulnerable members of our community .
 Dammons: "This is the first time we have ever thrown a major, big Pride like this for the trans community" Dammons says the upcoming festivities will be the first major Pride event .
I would like to see people come out on June 4 and let them know that this will not happen in Baltimore City at all .” classes April 6 cause of the war crisis methodically set up by Washington and its allies .
 Trans people and their supporters are slandered and dehumanized every day in print, broadcast and social media and by elected officials . Trans people are dehumanized in print and on social media, and in print.
 Social-media monopolies, corporate media and Washington officials promote neoNazi-spawned claims of “Russian war crimes,’s claims of Russian war crimes .
 It might seem that geographical distance, lack of mutual understanding and the intensity of the attacks make it impossible for these struggles to unite . It may seem that the attacks have made it impossible.
 It is the job of communists to prove them wrong, says the author . It is a job of Communists to build bridges between diverse sections of the working class at home and abroad .
 Board has recently voted to ped | % public Schools, despite overwhelming opposition from A community . School closures disproportionately harm communities of color, according to the board .
 Teachers and longshore workers in the Schools and Labor Against Privitization coalition are leading the unified labor action .
 The billionaires are after our public resources here in the City of Oakland, Oakland .
 Oakland School Board voted to close 11 public schools, despite overwhelming opposition from the community . The Oakland school board has recently voted to shut 11 schools .
Corporations are part of a long-term plan by corporations to destroy public education . They are selling them off to real estate developers or converting them into charter schools .
 The City of Oakland is planning to spend $855 million in taxpayer money to construct a new A’s stadium and condo complex at Howard Terminal . The new complex is crucial to the port of Oakland .
 privatization schemes are attacking working-class communities, destroying union jobs, displacing low-income residents of the Bay Area . The schemes are part of the gentrification of Oakland, Oakland .
 May Day falls on a Sunday, so our action will be two days earlier, on April 29 . This year May Day is May Day, so this year's action is two days later .
 Oakland is not the only U.S. city under attack from billionaires attempting to privatize/gentrify for personal monetary gain . Oakland is the only American city to be attacked by billionaires for personal gain .
 Black and Brown communities continue to be disproportionately affected by the resulting wealth gap epidemic . We understand that Black andBrown communities are disproportionately affected .
 We understand the continued effect privatization and gentrification have on the working class as a whole . We also understand the continuing effect privatization has on theWorking class as an entire .
 The wealth disparity between the very rich and the majority working class is larger than it has ever been in this country’s history .
 The main reason for this phenomena is that our elected representatives continue to give the rich and corporate America access to public resources and wealth at an alarming rate .
 We say NO to the closing of public schools in Oakland, which provide education and jobs to disadvantaged communities . Fisher family and other privatizers to take over as private charter schools .
 Fisher family's attempt to benefit financially by acquiring industrial public land that creates good union-paying jobs and tax revenue .
 We shall organize to forge a social, economic and political movement for all working people — employed and unemployed — in our own name . We will organize to forged a social and economic movement for working people in their own name.
 We shall spread awareness, influence elections to once and for all provide a voice for the working class, independent of influence by the corporate-dominated political parties .
 We shall work in conjunction with any organization in which the purpose is to put an end to the oppression and exploitation of the poor and working class .
 We shall hold any elected official accountable for catering to the interest of the rich few instead of the majority working class that elected them .
 We will use class-struggle methods to expose and eradicate all efforts to privatize/gentrify any and all public resources for the financial benefit of billionaires, oligarchs or those who represent corporate greed .
 We shall oppose all tactics used to divide the working class, both outside and inside the labor movement . We will oppose all methods used to split the workers and workers .
 We shall create a voice and space for all people regardless of race, sex, age, gender, sexual orientation, ability, nationality, religion or work status .
 This anthology is a call to working people organized and unorganized to unite and mobilize around our own agenda . It's a call for working people to unite, mobilize and mobilize.
 The ILWU shut down the ports to demand justice for victims of police violence . It also demanded universal health care, and to demand workers rights .
 ILWU shut down West Coast ports to oppose wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and in solidarity with Palestine . The ILWu shut down ports in support of Palestine .
Donbass republics of Donetsk and Lugansk are independent, sovereign countries . They first declared independence from Ukraine eight years ago . Russia recognized them as independent countries in February .
 Ukraine and its Western sponsors spent the last seven years sabotaging the 2015 Minsk II agreements meant to end Kiev’s attacks on the people of the Donbass region . Ukraine and the West spent seven years sabotage the 2015 agreements .
 Washington and Kiev spent the last three months preparing an invasion of the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics .
 It is not a question of seizing Ukraine, nor even, in all likelihood, of occupying it and certainly not of destroying it . It is therefore not the question of seized Ukraine, or even of occupying the country .
 The U.S. asserts complete United States world domination in both political and military terms . It asserts complete world domination.
 The U.S. is to be the sole and exclusive superpower on the face of the planet .
 It is to exercise its power not only in Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America, but also on the territory of the former Soviet Union .
 This was a unique opportunity for the U.S. anti-war movement to hear directly from people in the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics . Their voices are silenced by the Western mass media's pro-Ukraine propaganda .
 The history of Ukrainian nationalist collaboration with Nazi Germany and the present alliance between the Kiev government and neo-Nazis. Imperialist propaganda and Ukrainian Jews.
 The March 6 arrest of Aleksandr Kononovich, leaders of the Leninist Communist Youth Union of Ukraine, has been condemned by the World Federation of Democratic Youth and other progressive organizations .
 Ukrainian authorities are in a state of shock and fearing for their fate . The Ukrainian authorities organized a widespread witch hunt .
 Every day in the territories controlled by Kiev, there are detentions, abductions and torture of political activists and civilians .
 Matyushenko is an anti-fascist and a member of Livitsya . The alliance was founded by activists from various social movements in Dnipro .
 United States is using Ukraine as ‘cannon fodder’ Yuliy Dubovyk: Iam a Ukrainian-American .
 I grew up and spent over half of my life in Ukraine, although now live in the U.S. I was born in Ukraine but now lives in the United States .
 I wanted to explain my thoughts on the ongoing crisis with Russia, because mainstream corporate media outlets don’t ever share perspectives like mine . "Mainstream corporate media outlet don't ever share perspective like mine," he says .
 The corporate media claim that all Ukrainians support President Zelensky, who has banned most political parties except his own and the far-right .
 These news outlets also whitewash the fascist gangs — integrated into the Ukrainian army — that engage in torture . The news outlets are also Whitewash.
 This was in addition to the 175,000 NATO troops already on Russia’s border . This was the first time NATO troops had been on the Russian border .
 NATO expansion technically means that the member-nation’s armed forces are ‘integrated’ into the NATO military command . NATO expansion means the member nation’'s armed forces will be “integration” into the military command.
 The smoldering wreckage of a passenger train after being hit by two missiles launched from a NATO F-15, April 12, 1999 .
 Leninist view of how to fight against imperialist war remains controversial and defining characteristics of the communist movement . It means standing up to the capitalist class at the moment its fangs are bared .
 Czarist Russia’s conquering of Siberia meant killing and exploiting Indigenous peoples like what was done in the U.S. and Canada .
 Unlike Poland, which had been a powerful state for centuries before its partition, Ukraine was a nation in formation . Like Poland, Ukraine had been an independent nation for centuries .
 Revolutionaries fought against the oppression of dozens of nationalities in Czarist Russia .
 Before the Bolshevik Revolution, 76% of Ukrainians didn’t know how to read or write . The Bolshevik Revolution was the first Russian Revolution .
 The treatment of the Ukrainian poet, writer and artist Taras Shevchenko was particularly outrageous . The treatment was especially outrageous .
 Born into serfdom, he became the most famous figure of the Ukrainian national renaissance . He was born into a form of feudal enslavement .
 Czar Alexander II had Shevchenko imprisoned for writing a satirical poem . The poem helped shorten his life .
 Taras Shevchenko also opposed the grotesque discrimination suffered by Jewish people . He criticized serfdom and the czarist dictatorship .
Unlike enslaved Africans in the United States, their families couldn't be broken up . But unlike enslaved Africans, their Families couldn't been broken up.
 Poverty and pogroms Ukraine was rich but Ukrainians were desperately poor . Ukraine was poor and rich but Ukraine was desperately poor, according to reports .
 The czarist empire was the greatest exporter of wheat during most of the 1800s . Ukraine produced the greatest share of wheat in the world during the period .
 The United States, Argentina and Canada became major wheat exporters in 1870 . It was only after 1870 that the U.S. and Argentina became major exporters .
Ukrainian peasants who harvested wheat and other crops were often hungry themselves . Yet the Ukrainian peasants who harvest wheat and others were often Hungry themselves .
Farm laborers would suffer night-blindness because of a lack of vitamins . Farm laborers would be unable to take vitamins .
 The Czar sought to turn this anger into racist violence directed at minorities . He has been accused of racial violence against minorities .
 Hundreds of people were lynched were called pogroms. These spasms of terror in which people were killed were known as pogoms .
 The Bolsheviks fought pogroms @teruecuie and the Bolshevik Revolution . The Bolshevik Revolution was the first to take over the Ukraine .
 The revolutionary movement had been centered in the cities and minefields where the working class was concentrated . The working class had been concentrated.
 The greatest center of pogroms was Ukraine and Moldova where the working class was smaller . The working class in Moldova was smaller than in Ukraine .
 None of this prevented the centuries-old czarist police state from being overthrown in 1917 .
 Workers organized into councils known as soviets. Eight months later, workers took power .
 The slogan of "bread, peace and land" appealed to millions of people . Their slogan of “bread,peace and land’s’ appeal to millions.
 Two million soldiers from the former Czarist Empire died in World War I Peasants . The vast majority of society wanted to take the land that they had plowed for generations .
 Bolsheviks told them to kick out their landlords and seize the land . The Bolsheviks said they would seize their land .
 In contrast, capitalists betrayed Black people after the U.S. Civil War, capitalists did not .
 Most Black people became landless sharecroppers. Instead of former slave masters being forced to give up their plantations, most Black people were landless .
 When the peasants and workers took power on Nov., 1917, the Russian landlords and capitalists were demoralized .
 The support given by capitalists in other countries sparked a civil war . The support of capitalists in others countries sparked the conflict .
 The counterrevolutionaries were called White Guards, who were a Russian terrorist army . They were much like the Ku Klux Klan, like the White Guards .
 The United States and other countries sent troops to support the White Guards . The White Guards attempted to drown the socialist revolution in blood .
The Red Army of workers and peasants defeated the White Guards and foreign troops . The Red Army defeated White Guards, foreign troops and White Guards .
 Dock workers in Seattle and Britain refused to load weapons for the White Guards .
 In the Russian Civil War of 191820, most of Ukraine had been overridden by White Guards . Most of Ukraine was ruled out of Ukraine by the White Guards.
 A well-to-do minority of Ukrainians supported the White Guards and joined the pogroms . A well to-do majority of Ukrainians also supported the National Guard .
Today they comprise the fascist Azov Battalion and Right Sector thugs . Their political descendents supported the Nazis in World War II . Today they comprise a fascistAzov battalion and Right sector thugs .
 Ukrainians and other nationalities wanted freedom. After hundreds of years of Czarist oppression, Ukrainians wanted freedom .
 Famines and industrialization The Ukrainian Soviet Republic was established . It was established in the Soviet Soviet Republic .
 In 1922 Ukraine joined with the other soviet republics to form the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . The Soviet Union was formed in 1922 .
In 1980 there were around 1,500 newspapers and magazines printed in that language . In 1980, printing in Ukrainian had been forbidden by the Czar, in 1980 .
 Besides millions of Ukrainian and Russian speakers, there are Greek, Hungarian, Jewish, Roma and other peoples . There are millions of Ukrainians and Russians .
 Some have asked why Bolsheviks included predominantly Russian speaking areas within Ukraine’s boundaries .
 In 1917, the vast majority of Ukrainians were peasants who lived in the countryside . The reason was that in 1917, a vast majority were peasants .
 After the civil war came the famine in 1921-1922 in which millions died . After the war, millions died.
 The loss of millions of agricultural workers because of World War I, the civil war and the 1918 influenza pandemic further reduced the harvest .
 Many Ukrainians claim this famine was deliberate genocide against the Ukrainian people . Many Ukrainians, who are not communists, claim this is deliberate genocide .
 Millions of Kazakhs and Russians outside Ukraine were affected by famine . The famine affected millions of people outside Ukraine .
 This famine took place during the first five-year plan which was rapidly industrializing the Soviet Union . The famine was caused by the rapid industrialization of the USSR .
 These plots were too small to employ modern agricultural machinery . But these plots were not too small for modern agricultural equipment .
 Peasants were encouraged to join cooperatives and form collective farms . Peasant farms were also encouraged to become collective farms. Peasans were encouraged.
 This was an intense class struggle which amounted to a second revolution . This was a class struggle. This was the second revolution.
 Sometimes the worst exploiters are small property owners like small slumlords or other small-time cockroach capitalists .
 Kulaks helped sabotage the harvest by concealing grain stocks and slaughtering livestock . Kulaks help sabotage the crop by hiding grain stocks, killing livestock .
 collective farms went hand-in-hand with constructing factories making tractors and harvesters . The forming of collective farms is a form of collective farming .
 Some argue collectivization should have started sooner and/or more slowly . Some argue that collectivizing should have begun sooner and more slowly.
 Joseph Stalin in his article ‘Dizzy with Success’ urged activists to be more careful . Soviet leader Joseph Stalin urged them to be careful .
Historian Mark B Tauger points out the devastating role of the wheat rust fungus . The fungus is often overlooked in this famine.
 This plant disease would have been disastrous if there had been a collective farm movement or not . This plant Disease would have had been disastrous.
 In 1921, before he became president, Hoover led a relief campaign that aided starving people in the Soviet Union . Hoover led the relief campaign before becoming president .
 In the early 1930s Hoover did nothing, even while many U.S. farmers couldn't sell their crops during the Great Depression . Many farmers couldn’t sell their crop during the Depression .
 Also questioned is that the Soviet Union exported crops while people were starving . Also questioned was that the Soviets exported crops.
 Professor Tauger estimates that as many as two million people might have lived if exports ceased . He estimates that up to 2 million people could have lived.
 NATO is being “transformed’ into a fighting force capable of direct wars on Russia and China, says NATO General-Secretary Jens Stoltenberg . Both Germany and Britain threatened to stop lending credit to the Soviet Union unless Continued on page 7 & China.
 NATO formally launched a 4,0,000-strong rapid response force targeting Russia in February . The force was launched by NATO in March .
 The Pentagon announced March 29 that the U.S. would consider first use of nuclear weapons . President Joe Biden's shift away from “no first use’s’ of nukes is also noted .
 NATO is in the process of making a “fundamental shift from engaging in what he called “tripwire deterrence” to “be transformed into a major force capable of’s direct warfare.’ Stoltenberg said NATO is making a
What the Soviet Union had to sell at the time was largely oil, lumber and wheat . All at the low Depression prices were largely oil and lumber .
 Imports of machinery were absolutely necessary to industrialize the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was in need of industrializing its machinery .
 Five-year plans enabled the Soviet peoples to defeat the Nazi invasion, which killed over 5 million Ukrainians . The industrialization carried out by the five-year plan enabled the Soviets to defeat.
 By 1940, over a half-million Ukrainian workers had high school or college educations . Over a quarter of Ukrainian workers were in college or high school .
78% of Soviet citizens voted to retain the Soviet Union in a March 17, 1991 referendum . This was despite an overwhelming majority of Russian citizens voting to retain it .
 This tragedy was a greater defeat than the victory of Hitler over the bones of the German working class . This tragedy is a greater loss than that of Hitler, says the author .
World capital and its media have been able to poison the minds of too many Ukrainians, Russians and other peoples living in the former Soviet Union . World capital and the media have also been able.
 NATO's defeat and a revival of a revolutionary movement in Ukraine. We look forward to NATO’s defeat and the revival of the revolution .
 NATO has expanded from 16 countries to 30. Following the overturn of the Soviet Union, NATO has expand from 16 to 30 countries .
 For the last two decades, NATO has been expanding into Eastern Europe . NATO has expanded into eastern Europe for the last 20 years .
 In 2004, Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia, Slovakia and Slovenia were incorporated . In 2004,. Bulgaria, Estonian, Latvia and Lithuania were incorporated.
 Leon Panetta was CIA director and then secretary of defense in the Obama administration . The U.S. is expanding its proxy war in Ukraine, he says .
 The United States and its NATO military operation is in a proxy war against Russia, with Ukraine as the battlefield . The U.S. and NATO military operations are in a "proxy war" against Russia .
 The US role, Panetta said, is to provide more and more weapons faster and faster with Ukraine doing the fighting, bolstered by foreign mercenaries .
 More military-technical assistance has been dispatched by the U.S. and its NATO satellites, in a shorter time, than in any previous military conflict in history . It’s amatter of military fact that in the Ukrainian proxy war, more military- technical assistance is dispatched by
 Stop arming Ukraine “Russia warns United States to stop arming Ukraine,’ the Washington Post reports .
 The diplomatic note, titled “On Russia’s concerns in the context of massive supplies of weapons and military equipment to the Kiev regime, was forwarded to the State Department by the Russian Embassy.
 The United States has sent more than $2. billion worth of arms and other military aid to Ukraine since Russia launched its military action in February . The U.S. has sent over $2 billion in military aid since the start of the military action .
 NATO’s military budget accounts for the majority of military spending worldwide . The majority of the military budget is spent on military equipment .
 NATO is the primary force for U.S. dominance and control in Europe, the Pentagon says . The United States commands NATO.
 All NATO countries are under effective military domination of the U.S. All NATO nations are under the effective military control of the United States .
 The governments of the imperialist countries in NATO are not puppet governments . They are unable to take major decisions involving peace and war without the approval of the U.S.
 The civilian governments of the NATO countries lack full control over their own armed forces . NATO countries have no full control of their own military forces .
 NATO was founded as a U.S.-led military alliance against the Soviet Union and the socialist countries in Eastern Europe .
 After World War II, the United States was determined to bring all the imperialist countries under its military control . The U.S. became increasingly its “victorious allies,” Britain and France .
 At the end of the Cold War, the newly capitalist oppressed countries of Eastern Europe were signed up as NATO members .
 NATO has been in the process of unofficially taking in Ukraine — minus Crimea and the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics .
 Following the breakup of the Soviet Union, the socialist industry was dismantled in Ukraine .
 Once the second-largest economy in the USSR, “independent’ Ukraine is now the poorest country in Europe .
 In 2013, the European Union demanded that Kiev impose WashNorth Atlantic Treaty Organization rr . Here is what every NATO country will spend on defense in the year 2021 .
Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych rejected this for a more favorable offer from Russia . Yanukovych rejected the offer for more favorable offers from Russia.
 The Euromaidan coup quickly followed in 2014, openly supported and financed by NATO, to put in a government that bowed to IMF demands . NATO membership was a policy mandate for the government .
 The resistance to the Euromaidan coup and to NATO in Ukraine has been bigger and more widespread than reported in the U.S. corporate-controlled media .
 The resistance has been strongest in the eastern part of Ukraine, particularly the Donbass region . The resistance is strong in the east, particularly in the region .
 Donetsk People's Republic and Lugansk People’s Republic were created when the people there voted overwhelmingly against a NATO-controlled regime and to secede from the Kiev regime .
 The result was a 97% vote in favor of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea seceding, with an 83% voter turnout . The result is a 97 per cent vote.
 Los archivos of los cinco cubanos regresan a Casa re Por Bill Hackwell Hace una semana Cheryl LaBash . The 5 cubanos that with Alicia Jrapko acumulamos durante un periodo of 13 afios
 Junto con las cartas hay material de las muchas campafias y proyectos that tuvieron lugar durante ese tiempo . Junto. Junto with the cartas.
 The Cinco. A cantidad significativa del registro histdrico, no representa toda la informacion acumulada durante ese tiempo .
 La singularidad of the lucha por la libertad of the Cinco Cubanos fue that, a diferencia of the mayoria of the Luchas . A través of esa estrecha ventana that se abriO por un
 Cuando llegamos a Kramer Junction, nuestra ruta era continuar hacia el this hasta Arizona, pero no pude evitar tomar un desvio hacia . 5 Cubanos hasta las puertas de la penitenci
 Fue aqui donde Gerardo termino in el Hueco durante una semana antes of ser enviado a Butner Prison Carolina del Norte donde .
 Fue desde esta prision de Oklahoma donde pudo sacar is a donde lo llevarian pero sabia that su tiempo in California habia terminado is a tiemPO in California .
 Las 3100 millas recorridas are a carga historica fueron para mi, en lo personal, in lo personal . A momento of reflexion and un avance desde el fallecimiento of Alicia in enero pasado .
 Devolver todo esto a sus legitimos duefios, el pueblo cubano, era algo that ella y yo habiamos discutido muchas veces . ahora se habia convertido en el cumplimiento of un
 La entrega de los Archivos a la Embajada de Cuba fue un momento of solidaridad and un paso importante hacia su destino final .
 El cierre del viaje tuvo lugar anoche cuando activistas solidarios con Cuba del area of D.C. y diplomaticos of the Embajada de Cuba se reunieron for compartir recuerdos.
 Resumen Cuban 5 archives begin their journey home . Cheryl LaBash and I started the journey to take home the archives .
 The letters are material from the many campaigns and projects that took place over that time .
 This material is a significant amount of the historical record, but does not represent all of the information accumulated by the international movement that supported the Five .
 The Cuban 5 were arrested in Miami on September 12, 1998, for defending their homeland from terrorist attacks . They were released on December 17, 2014, through a narrow window that opened under Obama .
 The internet was becoming an increasingly prominent organizing tool that connected the movement like never before . It enabled international events to take place in London; Holguin, Cuba; Toronto; Puerto Allegre, Brazil; Tijuana, Mexico, and Washington D.C.
 Cuban 5 Banner Tehachapi Pass drops down into the Mojave Desert with its twisted but majestic Joshua Trees .
 The vehicle is full of the story of the Cuban 5 to the gates of the penitentiary that imprisoned Gerardo for so long taking a modest but significant victory lap for a struggle waged by the Cuban people .
Gerardo Hernandez was sent to Butner Prison, North Carolina, where he reconnected with his brothers . He was sent back to Oklahoma City for a week before he was sent home .
Oklahoma prison where he was able to get out his final prison letter to Alicia . He thanked her for everything she had done and said he didn't know where they were taking him .
 The 3,100 miles driven with this historic cargo was personal for me, and a moving forward since Alicia’s passing this past January .
 Getting this all back to its rightful owners, the Cuban people, was something she and I had discussed many times . Now it had become a fulfillment of a promise in my perceived urgency .
 The delivery of the archives to the Cuban Embassy was a moment of solidarity and an important step to its ultimate destination . The delivery was a moments of solidarity.
 The finality of the trip took place last night when D.C.-area Cuba solidarity activists and the diplomats of the Cuban Embassy gathered to share remembrances of Alicia .