After his arrest he claimed that he was not bound by any oath because he gave it to the Soviet union, not Russia . He said that he did not give it to Russia .
 The explanation offered on Russian television on Thursday by the men known as Ruslan Boshirov and Alexander Petrov for their trip to London and Salisbury throws up as many questions as answers .
 Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia travelled to Salisbury on two consecutive days . They were so keen to visit Salisbury cathedral that they travelled to the city on two days .
 British authorities claim they got to Salisbury train station on Saturday, March 3rd . But they say they were driven back by snow, even though local newspaper pictures show people going about their business .
 They were less than a mile from the cathedral – perhaps a 12-minute walk – but say they could not get there that day . They say they couldn't get there.
 The next day they accept they may have been close to the house of Sergei Skripal at the time his home was sabotaged with nerve agent . But his address is about 3km from the cathedral – their supposed destination in Salisbury .
 They arrived on Friday, March 2nd, and say the UK was gripped by transport chaos . They arrived in the UK on March 2th and say they were gripped by the chaos .
 Storm Emma had met the so-called Beast from the East, causing heavy snow .
 More than 1,900 flights to or from UK and Irish airports were cancelled . More than 2,000 flights were cancelled in the UK and Ireland .
 Petrov said friends had been suggesting for a while that they visit the city of Salisbury . He said their friends were suggesting they visit Salisbury.
 The pair left their hotel in east London and arrived at Waterloo station at 11.45am . They caught a train to Salisbury and arrived in the capital at about 2.25pm .
 They were in Salisbury for just under two hours, leaving at about 4.10pm . They were leaving at 4. 10pm .
 Petrov said the pair had planned to visit Stonehenge and Old Sarum . The ancient settlement is north of the city centre .
 Petrov said they returned to the station and spent about 40 minutes drinking coffee in the cafe .
 The cathedral is only 1.2km from the train station – a walk of about 15 minutes . It is only a walk from the station to the cathedral.
 They could easily have strolled there in the half hour they said they spent there . They said they were able to spend half an hour in the area .
 There was snow on the ground but people were going about their business . There was a lot of snow.
 The Salisbury Journal's live blog showed that by the time the pair were there, the snow on city centre pavements was sparse .
 British counter terrorism police have said they believe the March 3rd visit was a reconnaissance mission .
 Police have only released one image from Salisbury on Saturday – the men at 4.11pm at the railway station . The men were about to return to London at the time .
 No images or timeline have been issued of the men's movements around Salisbury that day .
 The British police have not said if they were seen near the Skripal house .
 The phrase is a little clunky and is not commonly used in modern-day Salisbury .
 Wikipedia does use the phrase and gives details about the spire and clock . But Wikipedia does not use it and does not give details about spire or clock .
 They imply that this time they did reach the cathedral and possibly Old Sarum . They imply this time it was the time they reached the cathedral .
 The pair said they took pictures at the cathedral and would have been spotted by CCTV cameras there .
Counter-terrorism police have released no images of them at or near the cathedral . No images have been released by the counter-terrorism Police .
 Mention of a park will prick up the ears of security officials – and Salisbury citizens – .
 Charlie Rowley and Dawn Sturgess were poisoned with Novichok . A city centre park was cordoned off and searched after the incident .
 Police do not know where the pair dumped the Novichok used in the attack on Sergei Skripal’s home .
 The men arrived in Salisbury at 11.48am on March 4th and did not go straight to the city centre or the cathedral .
 They should have turned right into the city if they were on the tourist trail, says the city's mayor .
Skripal walked directly to residential area northwest of the city where Skripal lived . Instead they turned left and walked straight to the residential area .
 CCTV camera at Shell petrol station on Wilton Road. They were caught at 11.58am by a CCTV camera.
 A tree-lined path leads up to the Skripal house on Christie Miller Road . On the opposite side of the road is a tree-line path that leads to the house .
 If they went straight to the house and carried out the attack, they would have been at the Skripal front door shortly after noon .
 There is no reason for them to be anywhere near it – it is 3km northwest of the cathedral . It is just 3km from the cathedral.
 Attackers were in the city centre on Fisherton Street at 1.05pm, authorities say .
 CCTV footage shows a gap between when the pair were seen in Fisherton Street and when CCTV footage picked them up at the station at 1.50pm . There is a gap of about 40 minutes in the timeline police have provided .
 Skripal and his 33-year-old daughter Yulia were found “slipping in and out of consciousness on a public bench’ near a shopping centre in Salisbury by a doctor and nurse .
 Paramedics found the pair had been poisoned with a nerve agent . Police declared a major incident as multiple agencies were involved in the incident .
 Two police officers were treated for possible minor symptoms, said to be itchy eyes and wheezing . A third, Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey, who had been sent to Sergei Skripal's house, was in a serious condition .
 By 22 March 2018, he had recovered enough to be discharged from the hospital . He had been discharged from hospital by March 2018 .
 Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych has called for ‘direct peace talks’ between Kyiv and Russia-backed separatists in Ukraine’s east . More than 10,300 people have died in the conflict since April 2014 .
 Yanukovych vowed to ask the European Union, the United States, and Russia to assist in organizing talks to reintegrate the territories controlled by the separatists into Ukraine .
 Yanukovych fled Ukraine in February 2014 following months of mass street protests in Ukraine . He has been residing in Russia since then . Russia-friendly Yanukovych fled the country in 2014 .
 U.S. and EU sanctions targeting Russian officials, companies, and economic sectors . Russia’s subsequent seizure of Crimea and its backing of the separatists in eastern Ukraine have triggered waves of sanctions . Russia's subsequent seizure and backing of separatists in Ukraine has triggered wave of
 Yanukovych says he never asked Putin to send troops to Ukraine . Yanukovych also said in the note he wrote to Russian President Vladimir Putin in February 2014, he never sent troops .
 Yanukovych placed the blame on the protesters themselves, saying the buildings that the snipers shot the protesters from were under the activists’ control .
 Yanukovych has been charged in absentia with high treason, violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity, and other crimes . Yanukovych has also been charged with violating Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 His trial is under way in Kyiv. mikenova shared this story from National Post .
 His case has nothing to do with the Trump campaign or allegations that it colluded with Russia in 2016 . He's not accused of colluding with Russia, but his case has no connection to the campaign .
 Special counsel Robert Mueller's investigation has documented evidence of a 10-year scheme involving money laundering, tax evasion and illicit lobbying . The scheme could lead to decades in a prison cell.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin would almost certainly have had detailed knowledge ofafort’s transgressions .
Manafort was promoted to chairman of Trump’s campaign in May 2016 . The Kremlin had vast amounts of material it could use to blackmail him .
 Yanukovych received at least $12. million in secret payments from the pro-Kremlin party of Viktor Yanukovych, Ukraine’s ousted president, in August 2016 .
 Rarely is there a long-term strategy behind it; it often functions as a kind of insurance in business or political dealings .
 The Russian government would have access to kompromat onafort, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Konstantin Kilimnik, who Mueller has alleged had active “ties to Russian intelligence through 2016, is his right-hand man . He has been accused of having ties to the Russian intelligence .
 Kilimnik was integral to the scheme to defraud the U.S. He was part of the scheme that defrauded the United States .
 In Kiev, Kilimnik was known as “Manafort’safort” in Kiev . He probably helped the American lobbyist to set up offshore shell companies that were used to launder some $30 million .
 Kilimnik ran the office in Ukraine, where investigators found forged invoices . One billed a front company $750,000 for hundreds of nonexistent computers .
 The intimate relationship between the two is perhaps best captured by Kilimnik’s frustrated attempts to contact witnesses in Europe to ensure they would not disclose his secret lobbying in the United States .
 If Kilimnik and Deripaska knew ofafort’s crimes, so did the Kremlin .
On June 9, 2016, he met with a Russian government attorney to, in an ironic twist, receive illicit “dirt’ on Hillary Clinton . We can safely assume that he was a compromised man when, on June 10, 2016.
Manafort was not the only person on the Trump campaign vulnerable to potential kompromat possessed by the Kremlin .
 Trump's campaign chairman has been plagued by self-engineered financial distress . Like his campaign chairman, Trump has suffered from self-Engineered financial trouble .
 He has grown reliant on money from the former Soviet Union, including Russia . He has become reliant on cash from former Soviet Soviet Union .
 He worked with politically connected oligarchs and corrupt business partners . He worked closely with politicallyconnected oligarchs .
 His financial empire is shrouded in the secrecy of hundreds of shell companies . He is known for his financial empire.
 The parallels between Trump andafort are many, but they do not end there . The parallels are many but they don't end there.
Manafort’s cooperation with Mueller could soon reveal how the Kremlin employed kompromat to attack U.S. democracy . If Putin had compromising information on the campaign chairman of a major party candidate, he would probably put it to use .
 mikenova shared this story from Skripal – Yanukovych – – Oligarchs – Manafort – Trump . The same applies to the candidate himself .
 The former client of Viktor F Yanukovych's former client, Oleg V, is the chairman of the Trump campaign . Mr Mueller asserted that Mr Kilimnik was now based in Russia .
 Robert Mueller believes Kilimnik is currently in Russia and has ties to Russian . Among his clients were Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska, who became the president of Ukraine in 2010 .
 Konstantin Kilimnik pondered the risks to Russia if the Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska proposed new business during the campaign . Among the clients of Paulafort were Russian oligarchs OlegDeripaska and other Russian oligarchy Oleg Dipaska .
 Prosecutors say they have long suspected former Trump campaign chairman Paulafort of being a back channel to Russia during the election .