 What terrifies him is the prospect of a flourishing Ukrainian democracy, he says . He says he is worried about the future of Ukrainian democracy .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin wants you to believe that it's NATO’s fault . Putin says it's not NATO's fault .
 He frequently has claimed that NATO expansion is the central driver of this crisis . He often has said that not 190,000 Russian soldiers and sailors mobilized on Ukraine's borders .
 The narrative of Russian backlash against NATO expansion has become a dominant framework for explaining Moscow's ongoing war against Ukraine . John Mearsheimer's 2014 Foreign Affairs article argued that “the Ukraine crisis is the West's fault’s fault,’ he said .
 This notion has been repeated by politicians, analysts, and writers in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere . This notion is repeated by politician, analysts and writers .
 NATO forces crept closer to Russia’s borders, provoking Putin to lash out violently, first by invading Georgia in 2008, then Ukraine in 2014 and now a second, likely far larger, invasion of Ukraine today .
 This argument has two flaws, one about history and one about Putin’s thinking . This argument is about Putin's thinking .
 NATO expansion has not been a constant source of tension between Russia and the West, but a variable . First, NATO expansion is not a constant cause of tension.
Over the last 30 years, the salience of the issue has risen and fallen because of the waves of NATO expansion, but due to waves of democratic expansion .
 Moscow's complaints about NATO spike after democratic breakthroughs. In a very clear pattern, Moscow’s complaints about the rise in NATO spike.
 Putin has a de facto veto over Georgia and Ukraine, since the alliance would never admit a country under partial occupation by Russian forces . This fact undermines Putin's claim that the current invasion is aimed at NATO membership .
 The primary threat to Putin and his autocratic regime is democracy, not NATO, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says the threat would not magically disappear with a moratorium on NATO expansion .
 Putin would not stop seeking to undermine democracy and sovereignty in Ukraine, Georgia, or the region as whole if NATO stopped expanding . Putin would also not stop trying to undermine Ukraine's sovereignty and sovereignty .
 As long as citizens in free countries exercise their democratic rights to elect their own leaders, Putin will keep them in his crosshairs .
 NATO and NATO expansion have always been sources of tension in U.S.-Soviet relations . NATO expansion has always been a source of tension.
 Mikhail Gorbachev, Boris Yeltsin, Putin, and Dmitri Medvedev have expressed concerns about the expansion of the alliance .
 NATO has kept its door open to new members who meet the criteria for admission . Since its founding in 1949, NATO has been open to members since its founding .
After the collapse of the USSR in 1991, no one should be surprised that countries formerly annexed, subjugated, and invaded by the Soviet Union might seek closer security ties to the West .
 The United States and other NATO allies have worked hard not to deny the aspirations of those newly free societies . The U.S. has also partnered with Russia on European and other security issues .
 Moscow's rejection of NATO expansion has veered in different directions at different times . Many of those who blame the current Ukraine conflict on NATO overlook the fact that in the 30 years that have elapsed since the end of the Cold War, Moscow’s rejection ofNATO expansion.
 President Boris Yeltsin agreed to sign the Russia-NATO Founding Act in 1997 . The agreement codified into this agreement a comprehensive agenda of cooperation .
 Yeltsin declared, “What is also very important is that we are creating the mechanisms for consultations and cooperation between Russia and the Alliance.’
 Russia's interests will be reckoned with, if it will be an equal partner. Why not, I do not rule out such a possibility, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Presidents Bush and Putin forged a close, cooperative relationship to fight a common enemy, terrorism . After September 11, 2001, President Bush and Russian President Vladimir Putin forged close relationship .
 Putin was focused on cooperation with NATO, not confrontation . At the time, Putin was focusing on cooperation.
 The only time the alliance has ever invoked Article 5 on collective defense was to support a NATO intervention in Afghanistan . Putin supported the action that Putin supported at the UN Security Council .
 He followed up this diplomatic support with concrete military assistance for the alliance . He then followed up the diplomatic support. He then follows up this with concreteMilitary assistance .
 Russia is prepared to expand its cooperation with NATO, Putin said in an interview that month . "Russia acknowledges the role of NATO," Putin said .
 NATO announced in 2002 its plan for a major wave of expansion that would include three former Soviet republics . Putin barely reacted when NATO announced its plan in 2002 .
In 2001, he said he was not in a position to tell people what to do . He was asked in 2001 whether he opposed the Baltic states’ membership in NATO .
 Putin maintained the same attitude when it was a question of Ukraine someday entering the Atlantic Alliance . Putin even maintained his same attitude.
 Putin: Ukraine will not shy away from expanding interaction with NATO and the Western allies as a whole . In May 2002, Putin said he was "absolutely convinced" that Ukraine's relations with NATO will continue .
 Ukraine has its own relations with NATO; there is the Ukraine-NATO Council . Ukraine has a own relationship with NATO .
 At the end of the day, the decision is to be taken by NATO and Ukraine . The decision will be made by the two countries .
 A decade later, under President Medvedev, Russia and NATO were cooperating once again . The two countries were cooperating again .
Medvedev declared, “period of distance in our relations and claims against each other is over now. At the 2010 NATO summit in Lisbon, Medvedev said, ‘period ofdistance in our relationship is over’
 At that summit, he even floated the possibility of Russia-NATO cooperation on missile defense . He even floated that possibility.
 From the end of the Cold War until Putin’s invasion of Ukraine in 2014, NATO in Europe was drawing down resources and forces, not building up .
 NATO's military capacity in Europe was much greater in the 1990s than in the 2000s . NATO’s military capacity was much higher in the '90s than the '2000s.
 Putin was spending significant resources to modernize and expand Russia’s conventional forces in Europe . During this same period, Putin spent significant resources on modernizing and expanding his forces .
 The balance of power between NATO and Russia was shifting in favor of Moscow . The balance was shifting between the two countries .
 Russia-NATO cooperation undermine the argument that NATO expansion has always and continuously been the driver of Russia’s confrontation with the West over the last thirty years .
 The historical record does not support the thesis that an expanding NATO bears sole blame for Russian antagonism with the West and Moscow’s aggression against Ukraine since 2014 .
 Putin's hostility to Ukraine and its Western partners is the real source of his hostility to the West . Putin's attitude to Ukraine is a sign of Putin’s hostility to Western partners .
 Putin believes Russian national interests have been threatened by what he portrays as U.S.-supported coups . Putin believes that Russian national interest has been threatened.
Putin has pivoted to more hostile policies toward the U.S. and then invoked NATO threat as justification for doing so .
 Boris Yeltsin never supported NATO expansion but acquiesced to the first round of expansion in 1997 . He believed his close ties to President Bill Clinton and the United States were not worth sacrificing over this comparatively smaller matter .
 The 1999 NATO bombing of Serbia to stop ethnic cleansing in Kosovo severely tested that strategy but survived in part because Clinton gave Yeltsin and Russia a role in the negotiated solution .
 Russia's new president, Putin, deplored the act but did not overreact. When the first post-communist color revolution overthrew Slobodan Milosevic a year later, Putin didn't overreact .
 The 2003 Rose Revolution in Georgia escalated U.S.-Russian tensions significantly . However, the next round of democratic expansion in the post-Soviet world was not the same .
 Putin blamed the U.S. for assisting in this democratic breakthrough and helping to install what he saw as a pro-American puppet, President Mikheil Saakashvili .
 Putin sought to undermine Georgian democracy, ultimately invading in 2008 . He recognized two Georgian regions as independent states .
 A year after the Rose Revolution, the most consequential democratic expansion in the post-Soviet world erupted in Ukraine in 2004, the Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution was the most significant democratic expansion of the world .
 Ukraine’s foreign-policy orientation under President Leonid Kuchma was relatively balanced between east and west . But with gradually improving ties between Kyiv and Moscow, it has gradually improved ties between the two .
 A falsified presidential election in late 2004 brought hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians into the streets . Putin's handpicked successor, Viktor Yanukovych, was elected to the presidency in 2004 .
 President Viktor Yushchenko and Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko took power . Instead, the prodemocratic and pro-western Orange Coalition led by President ViktorYushchenko took power. The Orange Coalition was led by the president and PM .
 Compared to Serbia in 2000 or Georgia in 2003, the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004 was a much larger threat to Putin . The Orange Revolution was the biggest threat to Russia in 2004 .
 The Orange Revolution occurred suddenly and in a much bigger and more strategic country on Russia’s border . First, the Orange Revolution happened suddenly.
 The abrupt pivot to the West by Yushchenko and his allies left Putin facing the prospect that he had ‘lost’ a country on which he placed tremendous symbolic and strategic importance .
 Russia has a right to veto the sovereign political decisions of its neighbors . Putin believes in spheres of influence; that as a great power, he believes in sphere of influence .
 Russia can be the only great power to exercise such privilege with these countries . Russia can also exercise such power with other countries .
 Ukraine's citizens have repeatedly signaled their desire to escape from Moscow's grasp . This position has hardened significantly since Putin's conciliatory position of 2002 as Russia's influence in Ukraine waned .
 Putin said Ukrainians and Russians were one people he was seeking to reunite, even if through coercion . Putin said in a recent historical article, in his view Ukrainians and Russia “were one people’s one people, whom he is seeking to unite,’
 The loss of Ukraine in 2004 to the West marked a major negative turning point in U.S.-Russian relations . The second wave of NATO expansion that was completed the same year.
 Slavic brethren with close historical, religious, and cultural ties to Russia. Second, those Ukrainians who rose up in defense of their freedom were in Putin’s own assessment, he says .
 Several years later, it almost did happen in Russia when a series of mass protests erupted in Moscow .
 Petersburg, and other cities in the wake of fraudulent parliamentary elections in December 2011 . Petersburg, other cities, in 2011, were hit by fraudulent parliamentary election .
 The largest protests in Russia since 1991 were the year the Soviet Union collapsed . They were the largest protests since 1991, the largest since 1991 .
 For the first time in his decade-plus in power, ordinary Russians showed themselves to have both the will and capability to threaten Putin’s grip on power .
 Putin's return to the Kremlin as president for a third term in 2012 marked another major negative turn in U.S.-Russian relations .
 Democratic mobilization, first the Middle East and then Russia, not NATO expansion, ended this last chapter of U.S.-Russian cooperation .
 U.S.-Russian relations deteriorated ever further in 2014, again because of new democratic expansion . But U. S. relations deteriorated again in 2014 because of the expansion .
 The next democratic mobilization to threaten Putin happened a second time in Ukraine in 2013–14 . It happened in Ukraine for the first time in 2013-14 .
 Putin did not invade Ukraine, but wielded other instruments of influence to help his protégé, Viktor Yanukovych, narrowly win the Ukrainian presidency six years later .
 Yanukovych tried to cultivate ties with both Russia and the West . Yanukovych turned out not to be a loyal Kremlin servant, but tried to cultivated ties with the West.
 Yanukovych reneged on signing an EU association agreement in favor of membership in Russia's Eurasian Economic Union . Putin finally compelled Yanukovych to make a choice, and the Ukrainian president chose Russia .
 Yanukovych’s decision to scuttle this agreement with the EU triggered mass demonstrations in Ukraine again . Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians took to the streets in what would become known as the Euromaidan or ‘Revolution of Dignity’ to protest Yanukovych's turn away from
 The street protests lasted several weeks, punctuated by the killing of dozens of peaceful protestors by Yanukovych’s government . The eventual collapse of that government and Yanukovych's flight to Russia in February 2014, and a new pro-Western government taking power in Kyiv .
 Putin struck back with military force to punish the alleged American-backed, neo-Nazi usurpers in Kyiv . This time, Putin struckback with military forces to punish alleged U.S.-backed neo-Nazis .
 Russian armed forces seized Crimea; Moscow later annexed the Ukrainian peninsula . Russia later annexed Crimea .
 Putin also provided money, equipment, and soldiers to back separatists in eastern Ukraine . About 14,000 people have been killed in the Donbas war for eight years .
 Putin amped up his criticisms of NATO expansion as justification for his belligerent actions . After invading, not before, Putin said he was justified for his actions .
 Putin concluded that cooption through elections and other nonmilitary means had to be augmented with greater coercive pressure, including military intervention . In response to this second Ukrainian democratic revolution, Putin concluded.
 Putin has waged an unprecedented war against Ukraine since the Revolution of Dignity . He has used a full spectrum of military, political, informational, social, and economic weapons in an attempt to destabilize and topple Ukraine's democratically elected government .
 Ukrainian Democracy Amazingly, eight years of unrelenting Russian pressure did not break Ukraine's democracy .
 Ukrainians are now more united across ethnic, linguistic, and regional divides than at any other point in Ukrainian history . Putin’s annexation and ongoing support for the war in Donbas, Ukrainians are more united.
 In 2019, President Volodymyr Zelensky won in a landslide, winning support in every region of Ukraine .
 NATO leaders have remained committed to the principle of an open-door policy . But they have also stated that Ukraine today is not qualified to join .
 Putin has fabricated this crisis about NATO expansion to undermine Ukrainian democracy even more directly, says Putin . Putin is trying to undermine Ukraine's democracy, he says .
 The Russian military mobilization on Ukraine’s borders has triggered significant damage to the Ukrainian economy . Already, it has fueled new divisions among Ukrainian political parties over how Zelensky has handled the crisis .
 Some argue that Zelensky should have created a new grand coalition or unity government . Others lament his alleged inadequate preparations for war .
 Zelensky argued with Joe Biden about the probability of a Russian invasion at a time when unity with the West is most needed . Some contend he showed his diplomatic inexperience.
 Putin's military mobilization already achieved some early successes in his war against Ukrainian democracy . In other words, Putin’s military mobilization has already achieved early successes .
 Putin’s use of force may have strengthened Ukrainian democracy in the short term. Paradoxically, Putin's use of power may have boosted Ukrainian democracy .
 Zelensky's decision to invade Ukraine has united Ukrainians and strengthened his image as a leader of the nation . His decision to send Russian forces into the Donetsk and Luhansk regions has strengthened his popularity .
 Putin's bellicose rhetoric suggests that Moscow's assault is just beginning . But the long-term survival of Ukraine’s democracy hangs in the balance .
 A blitzkrieg invasion and rapid encirclement of Kyiv could result in Zelensky’s forcible removal from power .
 New elections could deliver the desired government, just as they did in post-World War II Eastern Europe in the shadow of Soviet tanks .
 Putin may dislike NATO expansion, but he is not genuinely frightened by it . He is not really frightened by the expansion, he says .
Russia has the largest army in Europe, now much more capable after two decades of lavish spending . Russia has the biggest army in the world, the largest in Europe .
 He cannot tolerate successful, flourishing, and democratic Ukraine on his borders, he says . The Ukrainian people also begin to prosper economically .
 That undermines the Kremlin’s own regime stability and proposed rationale for autocratic state leadership . The Kremlin's own regime instability undermines the proposed rationale.
 Putin cannot allow the will of the Russian people to guide Russia’s future, he cannot allow Ukraine to choose the prosperous, independent, and free future they have voted for .
 The chance of deescalation is remote, but the threat of sanctions could still remain . In theory, a Russian invasion beyond Ukraine’s Donbas region could still be possible .
 The Kremlin will remain committed to undermining Ukrainian democracy and sovereignty for as long as Putin remains in power . But regardless of where Putin finally orders his troops to halt, the Kremlin will continue to undermine Ukrainian democracy .
 There should be no illusions about Putin's long-term strategic goal of stopping democratic expansion in Ukraine and the rest of the region .
 Robert Person is an associate professor of international relations at the United States Military Academy . He is director of West Point’s International Affairs curriculum .
 He is a term member at the Council on Foreign Relations and a faculty affiliate at West Point’s Modern War Institute . He is also a faculty associate at the Modern War institute .