 One year since Crimea was annexed by Russia, polling reveals that the new order enjoys legitimacy among the population . Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea was an illegal act under international law . Russia’s annexation of the Crimea was a violation of international law.
 It is also an act that enjoys the widespread support of the peninsula’s inhabitants, with the exception of its Crimean Tatar population .
 It is now a year since the Russian seizure of the peninsula and installation of a pro-Russia local government . The seizure is a year after the seizure of a Russian peninsula and the installation of the local government.
 The hasty organisation of a referendum held on 16 March, produced a 96.77% vote in favour of joining Russia .
 To grasp the conundrum that Crimea presents to the international community, we need to appreciate the disjuncture between scale and legitimacy it represents . Crimea presents a conundrum.
 Kyiv was an illegal vote by an undemocratic regime installed by an occupying force . For Kyiv, it was anillegal vote by the regime .
On the ground in Crimea, prevailing opinion at the inter-state and state level does not matter . On the ground, on the ground is on the grounds in Crimea .
In 2014, polls revealed rising levels of support for annexation from 64% in March to 73% in September . It is also considered legitimate within Russia itself, where it is considered legitimate .
Public opinion survey on Crimean peninsula was held in December 2014 . The results were based on the results of a public opinion survey .
Levada Center has worked with the Levada Center for over a decade on public opinion polling . In the North Caucasus in 2005, in the breakaway Georgian region of Abkhazia in 2010, in 2010 .
 In April 2014, the Political Science division of the U.S. National Science Foundation awarded us a RAPID research grant to examine public opinion in response to the EuroMaidan protests, the toppling of President Yanukovych, and the annexation of Crimea .
 Initially, we did not propose to sample in Crimea because we didn't consider a reliable survey possible . We didn't propose to Sample in Crimea .
 KIIS and Levada had a long record of cooperation between them . It stretched back to Soviet-era personal networks within the discipline of sociology .
 KIIS's interviewers could no longer work for a Kyiv-based firm . This cooperation became significant when Russia annexed Crimea .
 We conducted an equivalent survey in both southeast Ukraine and Crimea . We thus decided to conduct an equivalent Survey in both Ukraine and Crimean .
 The survey took on average about 45 minutes to complete and was conducted in Russian between 12 and 25 December 2014 . The survey was carried out in Russia between 12-25 December 2014.
 The field report indicated no interference by Crimean authorities with the survey . The survey was conducted by the Crimean authorities .
 Since the last Ukrainian census was 14 years ago, there are no reliable estimates of how many have left Crimea since March . There are innate difficulties with survey research there, before we even consider the political climate .
 63% declared their nationality as Russian, 21% as Ukrainian and 8.5% as Tatar . Of the sample, 63% said their nationality was Russian .
12% of the population in the 2001 Ukrainian census was 12% in 2001 . This last figure almost certainly under-samples this important but difficult-to-survey group . The group is an important demographic in a peninsula with many veterans and others .
 We discuss four key features of the survey, which we hope to publish later . The full results of the poll will be published later .
 Polling by the International Republican Institute found only 6% of Crimeans believed the country was heading in the right direction in November 2009, 11% in October 2011, and 24% in May 2013 .
 A generic question about the direction of a region is a powerful predictor of political preferences . It also encapsulates a variety of beliefs about recent economic performance and future expectations .
 A remarkable difference is seen in the response of the Crimean Tatars to this key question . Only 28% of Tatars agree that life is improving, with only 28% agreeing life was improving .
 The disaffection of Tatars since the annexation is well documented and their political and human rights situation is increasingly precarious . Tatars have been in control of the country since they were annexed by the Russian government .
 Crimeans have different perceptions about Russia moving in the right direction, with over 90% of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians believing it to be so . Only 33% of Tatars feel that way, but only 90% believe it is so .
 The rouble was dropping precipitously in value against Western currencies . Economic sanctions against the Putin administration were being ramped up .
Russian residents of Crimea are much more optimistic than those of the former Soviet Union . Crimea has the highest positive scores on this ‘right-wrong direction’ question .
 The responses to the right-wrong direction question are strongly correlated with the respondent’s own personal outlook . The responses are strongly linked to the respondent's personal outlook, according to the survey .
 Only 12% of Ukrainians and Russians say that their mood could be either ‘stressed’ or ‘angry’ Tatars indicate a rate that is double that of other Crimeans .
 These ratios are very low compared to others in zones of political tension of the former Soviet Union . These ratios, again, are very high compared to other areas of tension .
 The responses are not motivated by material wealth, which is low and quite similar to other post-Soviet regions . The responses have been similar to those of post- Soviet regions .
 Three-quarters of the non-Tatars expect to be better off in two years compared to half of the Tatars .
 The dramatic switch of the peninsula from Ukraine to Russia has even increased levels of optimism about future personal wealth . The dramatic change of the Peninsula from Ukraine has even raised levels of hope about future wealth .
 The annexation of the peninsula by Russia has the support of a strong majority of the Russian and Ukrainian ethnic groups . Crimea has been annexed by Russia by Russia in Crimea .
 When asked if annexation was a ‘wrong decision’ or ‘absolutely the right decision, 84% of this combined group picked the third option .
 The Tatar response on this question is almost split evenly, with about one-third picking each of the first options . Only 20% of the options are the 'absolutely correct' option, Tatar says .
 Crimea would likely have been a majority in favour of leaving Ukraine and joining Russia . These responses indicate that had a legal referendum that met international standards was permitted in Crimea .
 referendum was characterised by all manner of illegal practices and conducted in a coercive environment . As it was, the referendum wascharacterised by illegal practices .
 The Tatars' decision to boycott further underscored legitimacy questions . The decision was made by the Tatars to boycott the country's most expensive property .
 Russians in Crimea have a very negative opinion of the EuroMaidan movement . Russia has been in Crimea since the start of the Ukraine crisis .
After the revolution in Kyiv, the ratio of those who wanted to secede and join Russia jumped due to television-fed perceptions that ethnic Russians would become second-class citizens in Ukraine .
 Russians in Crimea have a very negative opinion of the EuroMaidan movement . Only 2.5% of our sample, thinking it improved conditions in Ukraine, and over 90% believing it made things worse .
 Russian television has a preference for Russia as a guarantor of ethnic Russians’ status, power and future . The ratios presented here reflect a profound sense of alienation from Kyiv and its pro-Western leadership .
 Crimea's population do not perceive themselves as European, unlike western and central Ukraine . The majority of Crimea's residents do not see themselves as Europeans .
 Respondents in the six regions in southeast Ukraine were evenly split on this question, with 45% identifying definitely or probably yes . 45% identified as probably or probably no, while 45% said they were definitely or definitely yes .
 Tatars show some differences on this question from other Crimeans, though it is not as dramatic as others . Less than half of this Muslim minority see themselves as European .
 Our survey and previous surveys show considerable divisions over a European, and especially a Euro-Atlantic, orientation in southeast Ukraine . Our survey shows considerable divisions.
 The extent to which it has become a marker of a ‘civilisational divide’ in Ukraine is an important question . In opposition to a notion like the ‘Russkiy Mir’ , is animportant question .
The Kremlin has invested strongly in this notion, and more recently in the concept of separate civilisations . The Kremlin has also invested heavily in this concept, and recently in this idea .
 89% of respondents agreed that Crimea belonged to Russkiy Mir, the mirror opposite of European feeling . In Crimea, at least, the evidence suggests this is working .
 In southeast Ukraine, 51% strongly or mostly agree that their region belongs to the Russkiy Mir . The equivalent figure underscores the divide in southeast Ukraine .
We should not assume that those holding that their region belongs to Russkiy Mir are supporters of Vladimir Putin . We should also not assume those holding the region belong to Putin .
 Only 2.8% of respondents said they definitely trust the Russian president . In the six southeastern regions we surveyed, only 2.7% said they trust the president .
 Only one-third of respondents in Crimea believe that the annexation has been problem-free in the nine months leading up to the interviews . Despite the enormous support for the annexation, only one- third of respondents believe the annexation is problem- free .
 Tatars overwhelmingly stress the problems brought about by the change of government . Only a derisory 2% of Tatars agree that it has been problem-free .
 Recent journalistic accounts have indicated the significant annexation difficulties, including ready access to the peninsula . The peninsula is now blocked on the Ukrainian side .
 Russian holiday-goers now face declining incomes due to declining incomes . The expected boon in Russian tourism has not materialised .
 Future polling will reveal whether current frustrations wane, and whether high support and expectations for annexation will remain .
 Recent journalistic accounts have indicated significant annexation difficulties . Recent journalistic reports have indicated the significant difficulties .
 Ukraine is the country's largest country in the world . Ukraine has been accused of corruption in recent years . Ukraine's prime minister is accused of a corruption scandal .
 The Kosovo case has important lessons for the international community about the importance of ‘remedial secession’ in cases of active physical oppression of a minority population .
 Kosovo is also held to have ‘earned sovereignty’ through accepting a period of international administration . Kosovo also has 'earned sovereignty' through accepting an international administration period .
 The Kosovo case is clearly different from the Crimean case . By these criteria, the Kosovo cases are clearly different .
 Kosovo became an independent state. Crimea aspired to join another state . Kosovo became a independent state .
 Crimea has become a self-determinating region, says the author . The majority of the current population in Crimea appears to approve of unification with Russia .
 The circumstances of each are distinct but they do share familial origins and resemblance .
Today's debate about the region is in danger of being overwhelmed by homogenising legalism and geopolitical polemic . Today, debate about these regions is in a danger of becoming homogenised .
 We need a geopolitics that is about more than just 'Putin and the West' One that acknowledges past histories of sponsored settlement, forced displacement, war crimes, inept state building and economic marginalisation .
 We need to respect the complexity of places and the local voices of those – in situ and displaced – caught up in struggles over them . We need, in short, to respect those in situ or displaced.