 The plebiscite was a trap for taking the masses out of the revolutionary struggles in the streets and preparing worse attacks over their gains .
 In his new proposal after the plebiscite Tsipras offered immediately that the cuts be for 13 billion euros . The cuts would be for a total of 13billion euros .
 The Greek ship-owners and their bankers en the HSBC collect their money outside Greece and keep their assets abroad . The plan makes sense if Greece, as a debtor, puts all the state enterprises as collaterals .
 The plebiscite was an antidemocratic fraud and an ultimatum at the same time . Speaking clearly, the plebiskite was a fraud .
 Greeks were obliged to vote either for ‘YES’ or ‘NO’ for MerkeTs plan or for Syriza’s proposal . Greeks were forced to vote for “YES” or “NO, that is, for Mer
 The illusions of the masses about defeating the Troika and Merkel with the ‘NO’ without defeating the pro imperialist bourgeois government of Syriza were a trap armed by Tsipras and the entire world reformist left .
 A plebiscite in the bourgeois regime is totally dictatorial and Bonapartist . The regime is completely dictatorial, Bonap artist.
 It's not even a slight piece of formal bourgeois democracy that could be used to its favor by the workers . It has not even been a slight part of a formal bourgeois Democracy .
 The plebiscite, as we insisted in our declaration on July 3, was obliging the workers to opt between the hot embers and the boiling oil . The ple biscite was obliged by the workers.
 Bonapartist institutions for domination of the bourgeoisie, as is the justice, the police forces, and in this case, the referenda or plebiscites, cannot be utilized by the workers, because they are antidemocratic . In2 International Workers' Organizer trinsically
 The plebiscite was intimation to the masses, blackmailed for them to commit self-murdering . The Plebiscites were intimation for the masses .
 Tsipras always made clear that the belonging of Greece to the UE was not into question . Greece's belonging to the EU was not in question .
 All those that collaborated with this trap by Syriza against the masses ought to explain the fraud that they supported. All those who collaborated with the trap should explain it .
 The Greek Parliament is just beginning to meet, the fraud of the YES and the NO will soon be exposed . The fraud will be exposed.
 If there are too much abstentions or votes against, there will be a new election, a new Parliamentary distraction to channel the indignation of the masses . The election will be the first in the UK to be held in a new Parliament .
 If not, the officers’ caste of the Greek Army, a member of the NATO, will be coming to put order, if not .
 Syriza called for a plebiscite for strengthening and legitimizing all the institutions of dominion of the exploiting class in Greece . The false choice between YES and NO was a trap for preventing the REVOLUTIONARY UPRISING of the MASSES when GREECE was
 Tsipras is coming from repaying 7,5 billion euros of the debt in a common memorandum with Merkeldid not call a plebiscite against itself .
 Syriza did not call for a plebiscite to be defeated and make its own government fall down . Syriza didn't call for the government to fall down and instead called for a referendum .
 Tsipras is now applying, which shows that the negotiations in the back room among the capitalist gangs in Europe have never stopped . If that had been the result the politics applied would have been exactly the same to thatTsipras.
 With both options, both YES or NO, the bourgeois institutions of domination would be equally legitimized . This is what they needed amidst the tremendous political crisis that exists in Greece .
 The Parliament is just going to meet to give the deal a final blessing in the form of a law, which will show the fraud committed by the bourgeoisie .
 There will be an absolute majority of the YES and the NO, imposing the worst sufferings to the masses . Maybe the “leff’ and “nationalist” wings break with Syriza, voting against it, but there will be a majority of
Whoever does not start by saying this is a vulgar charlatan that long ago has stopped to confront the bourgeois state and its institutions. Whoever does not begin by saying that is a vulant charlatan .
 The plebiscite was called at the last moment by Syriza for preventing a colossal political crisis and a new revolutionary uprising of the masses .
 Greek masses for stopping the attack and irrupting again with their battles by confronting directly the Greek big bankers and parasites . In this situation, the way was open for the Greek masses to stop the attack.
 Syriza has applied the same plans to attack the masses as Karamanlis and Papandreou . This would have amounted to an inevitable clash with the government .
 Some people want to paint the Greek bourgeoisie as opposite to the vassal treaties proposed by Maastricht’s Europe .
 All the bourgeois fractions and all their governments closed ranks with the Troika -of which they are partagainst the workers .
 The plebiscite was for distracting through a vile lie and a deception, the author says . The pleBiscite is for distracting from the perspective of fighting of the exploited against their executioners, he writes .
 The only one that used the plebiscite was the Troika itself for gaining time, with Syriza, and be able to attack violently the masses, as it is happening now .
Members of the Troika defended their businesses and the social imperialist left was kind enough not to defend the interests of the working class .
 Greece is a small imperialist country in bankruptcy and decadency . The plans of Germany and USA in the backroom, in front of Greece, will be discussed .
 This petty imperialist country, when East Europe fell, took the Balkans together with the U.S. imperialists . The Balkans took the United States with the Balkans .
 Long ago, from early Twentieth Century, the bourgeois states have turned into an absolute obstacle for the development of the productive forces . The bourgeois states are now the most productive states in the world .
 That is what the emergence of imperialism, phase of decay of capitalism, is about . That's what it is about. That's how the rise of imperialism is about, says John Sutter .
 The bourgeoisie does not defend the fatherland, but the markets, the foreign concessions, the sources of raw materials and its spheres of influence . The bourgeoisie doesn't defend the dadland but the market, foreign concessions and foreign concessions .
 The bourgeoisie never defends the fatherland for the sale of the fatherlands in itself . The bourgeoisie does not defend its fatherland.
 When its profits and its businesses are threatened, it is even defeatist against its own nation . When it is threatened, its profits are threatened .
 This is what has just happened in Greece with Syriza and the government of its bankers and big ship-owners . The government of Syriza has been accused of corruption in Greece .
 They have defended their businesses with the EU and Wall Street... and not Greece . They've defended their business with the European Union and Wall St .
 World leftists only devoted themselves to embellish the attitudes of a class that is in decay and bankruptcy, which is the bourgeoisie, and the rotten capitalist system .
 The bourgeois sectors that “defend Greece are up to now marginal sectors that long for getting out of the euro, but not to go to the Drachma . They want to go TO THE DOLLAR instead, as golden Down or the partners of Syriza in the government
 This amounts to a true civil war headed by Merkel and the imperialist Greek bourgeoisie, writes David Frum . Frum says it is not “against Greece, but against the Greek working class and exploited’s working class, he says .
 In both cases, it would be done through an awful trimming against the masses . The trimming would be the same as a trimming.
 IME is imposing a vassal imperialist country as is Greece, the plant they imposed to a semicolony, as is Argentina, in 2005 with the Kirchners .
 In those years they turned an un-collectable debt in a collectable one, with juicy interests already collected and put into their pockets .
 That was a variant being discussed at the board of secret negotiations among the imperialist gang . That was one of a variant discussed at a meeting of the board.
 Ultimately that would have been a “sweeter plan for Greece than the present one.’s current one.
 Morgan Bank and Goldman Sachs has secured the collection of its credits in Greece on the basis of a percentage of the export and import taxes and the games-tax . That is the politics of USA, which through the Morgan Bank, Goldman Sachs have secured the collections .
 USA seeks that Germany does the "dirty work" against Greece, so that by means of future crises, the U.S. government may attract the beaten country under its “protective’s wings.
 The EU's plan was proposed openly by the EU, with Germany at its head . The plan was imposed and the actual negotiation came out.
 The proposal of Europe's main lender to Greece and Germany is about. This is what the proposal is about, says the European Union .
 The Bundesbank is full of Greek junk bonds for a total value of 50 billion euros . As we have said, the Bundesbank has said.
 German state will be obliged to put fresh euros in the coffers of its bank . It has to revalue those papers . If not, the German state has to put new euros in its coffers .
 Syriza has proposed making trimmings for 13 billion euros . It would increase the age threshold for retirement, the percentage for VAT, reducing the amount for pensions, etc.
 This does not suffice 4 International Workers' Organizer Germany to give new value to the junk bonds . This is not enough, says the group .
 Germany demands the suspension of the stability for all the state employees . Germany also wants to get a hig portion of all the funds put hy the EU to rescue the debt .
 German impositions thought to re value Greek external debt and its Junk bonds that are in the Bundesbank coffers .
 Greek bankers want a little of the cake as a prize for getting Greece to kneel beneath the UE impositions . But they also want to get Greece to kneeling beneath the imposions .
 Another 25% should go for the “productive investment’ of the European transnationals that will make business in Greece and all across Europe .
 Greek bankers also take a bit of the rescue packet, after having broken with their crisis the state's finances .
 The masses will pay for the crisis all the way through. The whole crisis will be paid for by the masses . The masses.
Germany behaves to Greece on a large scale with the essence of the mechanics of relationships that capitalists set when their competition goes bankrupt or melts . Germany behaves to Greek, on a big scale.
 When a company goes bust, employers do not pay for the crisis . Neither the creditors nor the debtors pay for it .
 Those who pay for the crisis are the workers suffering dismissals, hunger, factory closures, or with the loss of all their conquests .
 The Government of Syriza is as the directory of a lesser company that is broken .
 New Democracy, a Greek ""right-wing" party, is a Greek party. This directory has a President something everybody is trying to hide .
 This President was voted by all the representatives in the House, starting with Syriza . This President is the first time the House has voted for a President .
 Greek working class threatened to do with its revolutionary struggle . In this broken Greece, the directory put as ""Executive Manager"" of the company a ""Manager of left"" to mislead the workers .
 Workers believe that their company directory is their ally against the creditor . To make the workers believe that they are their allies against the creditors .
 The leftist CEO can thus press best the creditor not to liquidate the conquests of the workers . Alternatively, if the workers are mobilized, they may be convinced that their ""friend" is their "friend"
 The "new left" want the working class to believe in Greece and around the world . It is what the " new left" wants to believe.
 The biggest enemy of a directory is always the workers, either that the company is in bankruptcy or in expansion .
 Syriza has been doing all the left worldwide with Syriza, the left leg of the Greek bourgeois Government . Whoever does not say this clearly lies to the masses, as it has been done all theleft worldwide with the left .
 The broken company will only come out of its crisis by attacking all the conquests of the working class, or by having the State to pay them .
 The Greek Government, as any directory on a broken company, does not mean about the workers .
 It intervenes to defend the bosses’ profits and their future at the expense of workers .
 His ally is the creditor, although this may have taken up the rope to his neck . His ally, however, is a creditor .
Workers must pay for the company’s crisis or be dismissed when the capitalist auctions his property, not just because it is in crisis .
 The role of the reformist left is to blur the boundaries of class and pass enemies of the Greek workers as allies . Syriza promotes a policy of class collaboration.
 Tsipras is acting for what it is, a bourgeois Government filled with parasitic bankers and ship-owners who are partners to Goldman Sachs . The government is under the industrial and commercial control of Germany .
 Tsipras isn't a madman or a pancake that has turned upside down, or a man out of control . The man is not a mad man.
 He is acting as a broken company director discussing with creditors how best wrench his workers and collect himself and his bosses and creditors all that remains of the value of the broken capital .
 Greece is located today in the Europe of the Maastricht Treaty . He defends his business, their market, and their place in the division of labor .
 Those who cannot defend their interests due to the leadership they have at their head are the workers . Those who can't defend their interest due to their leadership are workers .
 The plan imposed to Greece by Germany and the rest of imperialist Europe is the plan . Germany knows and understands the conditions of the economy and world politics perfectly, as it did .
 It seeks to punish, but not "Greece" but the Greek, European and German labor movement in particular . It seeks "punishment, not punishment, but a punishment"
 Eeftists’ patriotic zealotry and pro bourgeois policy cover, ultimately, the real imperialist policy against European workers . The real imperialism is against workers.
 Bankrupt Europe needs the heaps of junk bonds and capital that banks go again to the production process, a labor movement . Merkel and Tsipras want to impose to the Greek working class .
 If Germany and Tsipras manage to impose this plan, all the European capitalists and their imperialist powers will stand up and cheer . The plan would be implemented by the German government .
 A Greek labor movement without retirement, hospitals or public schools, with unemployed starving to death on the streets, is their golden dream . Hundreds of thousands of laid-off State workers, with depressed wages, are their dream .
 Eor the German working-class it is a question of life and death to stop this attack on its class brothers and sisters in Greece .
 The plan is the plan for all European workers 6 I International Workers' Organizer to pay for the crisis of the financial capital .
 Greek working class to impose those conditions throughout the European - and particularly Germanworking class .
 Germany needs to defeat its own working class because the European crisis and crash are already here to stay . America fights to enter Eastern Europe and challenge Germany for control of the sources of raw materials and the Russian military apparatus .
 The one who capitulated was the reformist left calling to rely on the FRAUD of the PLEBISCITE "Syriza betrayed" "It capitulated" and "disappointed the people" "it has disappointed the people," the left now says .
 Germany and the EU do not authorize to sell or rent them. These would be mortgaged and untouchable if the creditor, in this case, does not authorize them .
 This is what a creditor would do with a broken company that is its debtor. This is a creditor's job, and it's not what a creditors would do .
 The creditor would require it to put machines, titles and property as pledge or mortgage in the name of the creditor for the money received . If it makes the latter a loan for it to continue working, the creditor would need to make the latter loan for the latter .
 The directory of the company in bankruptcy wants to collect what they put into the company . But also the directory wants tocollect what they have put in the company.
Under imperialist powers, the PIGS in the South of Europe lost hundreds of millions of dollars with their bankers on Wall Street crisis .
 Syriza has not "betrayed" the class it represents, which governs and manages the interests of all the Greek bourgeois and the European imperialism . Syriza is not a political party but a party that represents all of the Greek bourgeoisie .
 He was loyal to the bourgeoisie and the EU, of which the Greek capital is a part . He was a member of the European Union and the bourgeoisie .
 Among them they of course have disputes; they fight for business . Sometimes they have to shoot shots .
 Stronger imperialist gangs whack the smallest ones, put them on their knees, and submit them . The smallest ones are put on the knees and submit their photos .
 Treaty of Versailles was what opened the way to fascism in the 1930s to lift the great Germany that had been cruelly humiliated .
 Greek bankers, partners of Goldman Sachs, will be ready for any counterrevolutionary adventure in the semi-colonial world and Eastern European countries .
 Neither Syriza nor the treacherous trade union bureaucracy of the PC have prepared the working class. Eor this serious crisis and attack of the capitalists, neither Syriza or the treacherous union bureaucracy.
 There is no possible harmony among the imperialist powers in this agonizing period of capital . The "new left" is a reformism without reforms, a reformist without reforms .
 USA, Germany and to a lesser extent France are doing well at the expense of the crisis and the meltdown of the others . France is doing well, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is no place for everyone in the looting of the world, when the market has narrowed and the crack is here, says CNN's John Sutter . The crack is in the market, he says .
 The United States has thrown its entire crisis to the world and with its hurst. The U.S. has thrown the world's entire crisis into the world .
 We insist, there is no harmonic development of the capitalist system in the imperialist epoch, as everybody in the reformist left paints it . We insist. There is no harmonious development of capitalist system, we say .
 The working class can much less improve their standard of living within this system by pressing the bourgeois parliaments or putting on the political standing of class collaboration with "progressive" and "democratic" bosses .
 1% of the planet has grabbed the 50% of its assets of human civilization . And that 1% has grabbed more than half of the world's assets .
 The Greek crisis is connected with the outbreak of the Chinese stock market, which preannounces that the stagnation of its economy is the product of a new relocation of transnationals to parts of the world where labor is cheaper .
 It is the indication that the capital is coming out of the production process, where the rate of profit has dropped . It is a sign that the city is coming from the process.
 Uncontrolled banks parallel to the official banking have given credits to 90 million savers to invest on the stock exchange . The stock exchange does not find buyers .
 The banks have had to put more assets as collaterals as the stock of transnational companies are devalued .
 The Chinese State has begun to squander its reserves. Thus the hanks borrow and the Chinese State is squandering its reserves .
 The apologists of capitalism already took it for overcome the crisis of 2008 . The apologist of capitalism is already taking it for overcoming the crisis .
Capital had given Capital a short respite strangling the wave of revolutionary offensives of the masses . However it was an illusion; the leaderships of the proletariat had given the capital a brief respite .
Only the strongest were able to absorb the world capitals, as did the United States . Only the strongest could cover its huge deficit, or hold itself.
 The Greek crisis has turned the country into vassal or into a semi-colonial world . The crisis has been dubbed the "Greece crisis" by some .
 Greek bankruptcy and subsequent default and the outbreak of the Chinese stock market announce a new slump in the world economy . The dominant imperialism will show the claws not to allow this crisis to touch them .
 Her plan is to finish getting all conquests off the Greek working class, to turn Greece into a maquila . investing would be a great temptation and big business, she says .
 The Greek capitalists and bankers are not broken. But here the issue is that the Greek capitalists are not break . The Greek government is not broken, according to reports .
 The 8 International Workers' Organizer have already recovered all their 2008 losses . They have become associated with German and American financial capital .
Without proletarian revolution there is no breakthrough for the Greek working class and people . Without proletarian revolution, no breakthrough is possible for the working class.
 Their bosses, the imperialist bankers, will make them play its role by clashing with the world working class .
 The global capitalist system into bankruptcy will not give reformism peace or tranquility . The global capitalism will not be able to give peace and tranquility to the world .
 The reformist "new left" does not say that Greece has no solution for workers if they do not take power . There are already written rivers of ink on the Greek question .
 Greece's reformism never says that Greece has no solution for workers if they do not take power . But what reformists never says is that Greek workers have no solution to the problem .
8 years now, before the crack and bankruptcy. That is the immediate task posed since 8 years now .
 The political struggle of the masses for defeating the infamous regime of the Troika already has shown that is the only possible way of combat of the exploited . The Troika is the most powerful military force in Greece .
 The economic struggle has no immediate solution if it not rises to political struggle . The masses don’t defeat and pull down the regime and the Government of the ruling classes .
 Conditions for socialist revolution in Greece are much more than mature, they are rotting and decomposing openly . The conditions for a socialist revolution are far less mature than they are.
There are high heaps of stupidity of the left following the bourgeois charlatan politicians and journalists . There are high-heaps of Stupidity of the Left following bourgeois politicians and Journalists .
 President De la Rua had to go by helicopter off the Government House before the harsh fighting in the streets . Argentina threw down five Presidents in one week .
Thousands of fights were betrayed by the bureaucracy of trade unions led by the Greek CP, and by the "new left" of Syriza, sustained by the debris of Trotskyism .
 The only way to put a limit to this brutal attack is with a revolutionary uprising of the masses . The Government and Parliament of the parasitic bankers and ship-owners of Greece are to be defeated .
Once again the politicians raised that illusion to prevent a crisis in the heights that would have allowed an independent decisive action of the Greek masses . That was the plebiscite about .
 After so many years, some "leftists" giggle when we speak of Councils of workers and soldiers .
 If councils develop, and extend, their days as Greek working class leaderships will be counted . That’s because if these councils develop and extend their days are counted .
 Syriza want us to believe that the struggle began with the "NO" in the plebiscite of Syriza .
 The masses clashed with this trade union bureaucracy and their armed hands . The Parliament of Papandreou voted the worst attacks against the masses .
 The rebel youth and its self-defense committee immigrants were defended from the beating of the fascist gangs .
Middlemen went to directly sell their products to the city, to break the chain of middlemen that affected the price of their goods . The ruined middle classes of the countryside went to sell products to city .
 The workers and people alliance was within reach of the hand and still is, faced with the "corralito" expropriating the ruined middle-class savings .
 Alexis Grigoropulos was shot by Karamanlis murderous police and Pavlos Fyssas, murdered by the fascist gangs of Golden Dawn . The youth put their martyrs on the ground, as Alexis was shot in the head by the police .
 Those who submitted to the plebiscite and embellished Syriza from the left were those who closed again a revolutionary path to the Greek working class . Then, here are those who capitulated.
 Syriza says it would confront the EU and that it could be imposed with 60% of 'NO' votes in the polls . They capitulated who have poisoned the consciousness of millions of workers worldwide .
 The working class can only be stopped by the working class with its revolutionary struggle. Their attack can only been stopped by their revolutionary struggle .
 Germany's Bundesbank filled with junk bonds of Greek debt, would feel frightened and declare their hanks' default . They capitulated who made the Greek and world working class believe that with ‘the victory in the polls’
 It is about stopping the EU, imperialist Maastricht, the IME and the cynical Greek bourgeoisie, by putting the foot on their chest and making them kneel down .
 That is not made through votes, but with the revolutionary stmggle of the masses . That's not made by votes but by the revolutionary Stmggle. That's what is made by the masses.
Only a provisional revolutionary Government of workers and soldiers can deflne the fate of the masses in their favor over the ruin of the bourgeois state . Only a provisional Government of Workers and Soldiers can deflate the masses .
 A country that invaded Europe twice and unleashed two world wars seeking for a sphere of influence of its own in the old Continent . The country was known for its aggressive tactics and tactics .
 More than a lie this is a tragedy, with which the Greek working class is having very quickly its experience, says the author . The Greek Working class is being very quickly experienced, he says .
 To stop the Troika you should defeat first the Greek Government because the enemy is at home . To stop Troika, defeat the first Greek Government is to stop first the government .
 Stopping the unprecedented suffering of the Greek masses, confronting the Troika and parasites of Greek imperialism cannot be achieved with votes . But with the revolutionary struggle of the masses of Greece and the whole Europe, the revolution will be achieved .
 Syriza is deploying a definite fight for the rupture of the exploited with the imperialist bourgeois Government . The first step to get the masses off the morass is to get them off themorass .
 Combat cannot be other than the fight for rallying decidedly to the streets for seizing the power of the working class, the unions, the factory committees, the unemployed committees and the committees of the rebellious youth .
 Greece must put up self-defense committees and worker militias to fight fascist gangs . Greece must also be prepared to fight for the liberation of the rebel youth in Greece, he says .
 Syriza has settled in counter-revolutionary forces to discipline the exploited . The masses demobilized and reconstituting a reactionary power .
 Reformism cannot regulate any reform, except to be the guarantor of the business of the capitalists openly . Reformism can't regulate any reforms, except for the guarantors of business of capitalists .
 The bourgeoisie seeks to define this clash in their favor with counter-revolutionary blows and fascism . The bourgeoisie wants to define the clash in the favor of the bourgeoisie .
 10 International Workers' Organizer sweat. It will attempt to pull from the Greek working class until the last drop of blood . The exploiters are preparing a hard defeat .
 The Government of Syriza and its plebiscite were a ""siren song" so that the masses crash against the coup of the Greek bankers and Merkel, the ""Iron Lady" The head of the EU, the head of. EU, together with the United States Capital,
 In fact there was a common action of the imperialist forces of Maastricht and its Government in Greece against the working class .
 Syriza, the bourgeois Government, is trying to deliver a severe blow to the Greek working class . Syriza is a bourgeois Government.
 What's next is a mass dismissal of civil servants, plus pension, wage and job loss . Even more unprecedented sacrifices for those already suffering .
 Capital disciplined its agent Syriza / Tsipras, and sent him to attack the Greek working class openly . Capital disciplined his agent, and he was sent to attack working class .
 The bourgeois only delivers some concession when it is on the verge of losing everything . This wasn't the situation created by the plebiscite, but the opposite, according to the author .
 The Greek Parliament is about to meet, which will devote to making law Merkel and Tsipras Pact against workers and people .
 The skyrocketing of the public service fees, the VAT increase, the attack on pensions, the job instability of public employees and the labor flexibility that they want to impose on Greece, if it is not stopped there, will deepen and go against all the European working class .
 There are the same claws of Germany, GREECE 11 US imperialism, the Great Britain and France . They are crushing the Ukrainian working class and massacring the Donhass miners .
Greek workers resist heroically, along with the working class in Kiev, an attack of the same magnitude that Greek workers are suffering . The attack that will deepen in all European countries will deepen.
 It is not just Greece that is bankrupt, it is the whole imperialist Europe . It's not only Greece that's bankrupt, but it's the whole Europe .
 The world crack began in the imperialist gang heads’ home, USA, which is littering the world . Europe in particular with its crisis and its crisis.
 The working class in Europe is forced to choose a location in any of two "blocks" of Greece or Germany . They have thus forced the working class to choose any of the two "block"
 Every working class has submitted by them to its own imperialist bourgeoisie, particularly the German and Greek ones .
 Greece's working class has presented the current struggle not as a fight of the working class in Greece and throughout Europe against imperialist Maastricht, Merkel and the Greek Government .
In fact we have a true class war between the exploited in Europe and the imperialist Governments and regimes . In fact we are a class war.
 The new left has isolated the Greek working class from their class sisters and brothers of Germany . It is precisely where the attack on the Greek and European working class can be stopped .
 The policy of the social imperialist reformist left has been wetting the gunpowder so that the spark is already not even turning in Greece .
 This is the only way to conquer the unity of the European working class in one single fist . This is not the first time a single fist has been used to conquer a working class .
 Eor Merkel, imbibing the Greek imperialist bourgeoisie, in the defeat to the Greek proletariat the conditions to defeat the German proletariat are implicit .
Social Democracy, Stalinism and the threat of the crack have not yet intervened in a decisive form . The latter, gripped by Social Democracy, is gripped by social democracy and Stalinism . The threat of a crack has not yet intervenes in the past .
 German imperialism has been regulating the crisis inside Germany . If the attack in Greece passes, Merkel will return with all her strength to crush the German working class, such as England and all imperialist powers will also do .
 Merkel and Maastricht attacked the Greek working class against the working class . The first task in Germany and the rest of imperialist Europe is to stop and defeat the attack .
 Preventing this is the task of the “nationalist’s notion of the imperialist powers distilled by labor autocracies and bureaucracies of the old continent .
 It is about breaking the unity of the working class and developing the worst chauvinism in the labor movement . It's about developing theworst chauvinistism in labor movement.
 We insist, that is the role of a powerful aristocracy and labor bureaucracy, such as the social imperialist parties and Union bureaucracies, which are responsible for submitting the working class to their executioners .
 The true policy of the German bourgeoisie is making their working class believe that the cause of their misfortunes is the “completely indolent’s Greek working class .
 The German working class has long lost its 36 working hours per week and 25% of its salary . The German Working class has lost 36 hours a week and a quarter of its wage .
 The conditions have been created long ago for the German workers to meet the suffering Greek and European working classes .
 The Greek working class has been put in the hanging rope of its executioner and away from 12 International Workers' Organizer their class brothers and sisters of Germany, France, England and throughout Europe .
 The working class are hung to the coattails of any imperialist gang . They have subjected the working class to 'democratic' or 'unfortunate' imperialism . They would make 'the revolution' in a second stage, they would make "the revolution"
 The fight for the disavowal of the external debt of Greece is the struggle for the expropriation of the Greek bankers and the transnationals . As members of the European and American financial capital they are which created it and cheated the people.
 This is the only program which, breaking with chauvinism, opens the conditions to conquer the unity of the Greek working class with their brethren in Europe . The only program that breaks with chauvism is the first program which breaks with the chauvinistism .
 That opens the way to the defeat of imperialist Maastricht and to the start of a European socialist revolution . That is the first step in a socialist revolution.
 The submission to Syriza’s siren song and all their deceptions are not more than a diversion to hold the stick of Germany and Greek imperialist bankers .
 Eeftist parties won’t save their faces after such capitulation to Syriza and the Greek imperialist bourgeoisie . Eeftsist parties will not be able to save their face after this capitulation.
 The first step to show if they are truly for the workers is that whoever speaks on behalf of working-class organizations must break openly with the Government of Syriza, Independent Greeks... and the President of New Democracy .
 The theory-program has collapsed of "Eet's all of us go with Syriza in the first stage" and then celebrate the plebiscite as they did . In the second stage we can settle scores with Greek imperialist bankers in misfortune"
 The left voted to celebrate the world day of the plebiscite and not tell the truth to the masses . The left vote to celebrate world day.
 Merkel becomes a bit tough, but agrees to everything, and the left celebrates .
 This is a concoction of old recipes of Stalinism and social democracy . This is the "new left"
 Merkel and Tsipras’ attack must be stopped in Berlin, Madrid, Paris, and by making the oppressed peoples in Eastern Europe rebel . The working class of the imperialist Europe would look at itself in the ""mirror"" of those working classes and their squalid living conditions .
Only fighting to unite Greek workers with the European working class is needed to make these to rise to set up combat organizations .
 The fight is about for the Councils of workers and soldiers and workers militias, with representatives of all the oppressed classes of society .
 In the bodies of dual power of the masses, it will be the order of the day the setting of a revolutionary leadership . The Socialist Revolution will only emerge as an expression of the international combat of the revolutionary forces of the fourth international .
First wave of struggles of 2009-2011 contained the first wave of protests of the year . Maghreb and the Middle East were beginning in the spheres of influence of the imperialist powers .
 The imperialists go for Greece, and tomorrow they will go for the entire European working class . The Greek imperialists have been smashed .
 In Greece, as in Ukraine, two great battles of the world working class are being held . In Ukraine, the battle of the working class is taking place .
 Imperialism as a whole is concentrating its forces to smash these two revolutionary focuses . Imperialism is focusing its forces on the political and economic issues .
 If it cannot crush them, they could expand and put all Europe on fire . Both in the imperialist West as in the oppressed Eastern Europe. If it can't crush them.
 There lies the future of Greece and also thefuture of the European revolution. There is also a future of the EU in the future.
 The Greek proletariat only has common interests with the European and World working class .
 Without this as a precondition, no decisive struggle could be taken ahead. Without this, there is no decisive battle to take ahead .
 The first battles of the struggle against the deal MerkelTsipras have begun .
 First clashes have started in the streets against the Parliament of the Troika and the pirates of the Greek bourgeoisie .
 Transport and state workers are already striking and calling to surround the Parliament today . Transport and State workers are calling for the government to take action .
 The KKE and the unions it dominates had an opportunity for calling to defeat the plebiscite, opposing to it, not the ridiculous call to vote NULL, but a courageous struggle of the unions and the whole working class against Syriza . The Troika has come for a time
 Stalinist bureaucracy in the unions also prevented the masses from giving a reply in the streets to the trap of the plebiscite .
 A call for a national congress of the unions and worker organizations, to put up committees of enterprises, of unemployed, of supplies, etc., would open a new perspective for Greek exploited . A call to all workers in Europe for coordinating a common struggle against the imperialist Europe.
 Today they are the great obstacle for opening a revolutionary perspective. Today they're the great obstacles for opening the revolutionary perspective .
 Theses union bureaucracies have imposed on the unions the worst humiliations and separated the unionized workers from the millions of unemployed and immigrant workers . Theses unions have imposed the worst humiliating humiliations on the workers .
 The leash of Capital is uniting all the sections of the working class, including the middle-class .
 The masses are trying to break the contention dams of their leaderships . The masses have been trying to get the leaderships of their leaders .
 This is one of the last opportunities that the Greek masses have to find a breakthrough, says author . This is a poignant warning to all the workers in the imperialist powers .
 No demands in any sector or trade inside the working class can now be achieved without defeating the government and the deal Tsipras-Merkel .
 Golden Down and the whole fascist movement will turn to recruit fresh forces . Big Capitalin will attack labor and the fighting masses .
 Building up a worker militia in Greece is a question of life and death for the exploited .
 It is necessary to set up the committees of selfdefense of the fighting workers alongside the immigrant workers . The Unions are facing any attempt from the part of the bureaucracy to break from inside the struggle of the Greek exploited .
 Bourgeoisie with its class-collaboration governments -of the likes of Syrizacomes putting to sleep and anaesthetizing the masses - so to repress violently and unmolested their left wing .
 In Greece, the latter has been long grinding the workers’ backs with sticks and guns . In the latter, the workers' backs have been long grinded with sticks.
 There are exploiting and exploited classes, in this case capitalists and workers . There are exploited and exploited class groups, including workers and capitalists .
 Marxist law boils down to "the history of mankind is the history of class struggle" During some historical periods, this Marxist law is suspended .
 In semi-colonial countries, the native bourgeoisie clashes with the abuses of imperialism . In the imperialist countries democratic imperialists collide against the "more fascist" ones .
 For them there's a bourgeois block that the proletariat can use for their purposes making political deals with it, thus helping to strengthen the proletarian forces . For them, the bourgeois block is a political block that can be used to make political deals .
 Stalinism was Stalinism in its "popular fronts" policy, according to the theory .
 These old recipes led the working class to the worst defeats by supporting "democratic"" imperialism in the inter-imperialist wars or seconding bourgeois governments, lackeys of imperialism, which were disguised in ""democratic"" clothes to strangle the proletarian revolution.
 We will not enumerate here the huge list of revolutions betrayed by this poison of the reformist left ""two fields"" theory .
 That theory was that choked the 1968/74 revolutionary upsurge and all the fights for national independence in the aftermath of the Second World War .
 imperialism can’t be defeated in semicolonial countries nor will inter-imperialist wars be prevented, if the working class does not join forces with the other oppressed classes of society against the bourgeoisie . Life has showed that not even formal bourgeois democracy is defended .
 Trotsky says if there is no agreement the latter goes away with his wallet, as Trotsky says . There is a bourgeois and thousand workmen, it is the bourgeois who has the upper hand .
 The most serious flaw of this “two fields’s theory is that it poisons the consciousness of the working class and creates in it illusions in its executioners . The mostserious flaw of the theory is to poison the consciousness.
 The law of the parallelogram of forces,e. The product of two forces with opposite direction is zero . As Trotsky would say, on a political front with the bourgeoisie is not the law of mathematics .
 Who gives even the tip of the little finger to the bourgeoisie, or creates political illusions about bourgeois parties and Governments is giving his/her soul to the devil. Who gives the littlefinger to the bourgeois?
 The sin is much more serious, because he/she becomes responsible for the atrocities and the exploitation of a bourgeois Government against the working class .
 But what is more serious still, giving the slightest support to a bourgeois Government is to waive in advance the fight to overthrow it. But what's more serious is to waiver in advance.
 16 International Workers' Organizer is a complete program through which the left refuses to prepare the conditions for a revolutionary overthrow of that Government . In itself, it is a full program of 16 International workers' Organizers .
Syriza has called to a political front with Tsipras by means of voting NO in the plebiscite . And it is not enough to then say "SyriZA has betrayed us"
 Any tactica that does not express the strategy and principles is a betrayal . For us, revolutionaires, anyTactica that doesn't express the strategies and principles are a betrayal. For us.
 There are tactics and tactics, some are treasonous and other are revolutionary . Some are revolutionary, others are revolutionary.
 If these do not pursue the objective of the seizure of power, they turn against the working class .
 There have been "geniuses" of sophistry who have come to say, paraphrasing Clausewitz, "tactics are the actions of scattered patrols" But this is quackery.
 The war techniques are based on a principle, which is to concentrate all forces and means available to overcome the will of the enemy .
 The working class is separating the working class from their torturers, to liberate them from the latter and its institutions of domination in a way that allow the exploited to take power .
 It is not tactical to make a political bloc with the bourgeoisie, unless you want to betray, says the author .
 Any tactical intervention in bourgeois electoral processes must serve to organize the fighting of the masses, denouncing the bourgeois institutions of domination .
For example, we make a military action unity with anyone who faces imperialism if the latter attacks an oppressed country . For example, the U.S. military makes a military act unity with those who face imperialism .
 We do not deny the unity of action for a point in the struggle against imperialism, says the group . The group says the native bourgeoisie are seeking to press it by mobilizing the masses .
 In the elections for parliamentary seats any political working class intervention is based on maintaining the class independence .
 In a plebiscite, no different class blocks hide in the 'Yes' or 'NO' alternative . No different classblocks hide in a 'Yes or No' alternative.
 The bourgeois have very easily agreed and voted together Merkel package. That’s why now the bourgeois have voted together. That's why they are now very easily agreeing and voting together .
 Either in the elections you respect the political independence of the working class or you seal a political bloc with the bourgeoisie and betray the proletariat . That is why, either in the election, you respect your working class.
 Plebiscites as of Greece are the most undemocratic form of wrapping the bourgeois dictatorship and a policy of class collaboration . Tbe working class cannot introduce its program and put it to tbe vote, says the author .
 Some "new left" parties and currents also said that if the 'NO' won, the best conditions were being created to fight .
 The trap of the 'NO' created the worst conditions to fight, not the best ones . As we see today, the trap of "NO" created the best conditions for fighting .
 The last variant did not nor could be with Syriza in the Government, as he did . As we see, this last variant didn't nor could have any impact on the Government .
 If we of the revolutionary parties can develop our positions, we intervene in them to develop the extra-parliamentary struggle of masses. If we are of the revolutionists, we will be able to develop their positions .
 We reaffirm that the ""No"" or ""Yes" alternative in a referendum does not allow to express a class independence policy . We reaffirms that the "No" or "Yes" option is not allowed to express class independence .
 In the "NO" you could find any kind of bourgeois parties, including the fascists of Golden Dawn and bourgeois partners of Tsipras at the Ministry of Defense .
 The division was established around which bourgeois program was to be applied in Greece, whether Tsipras is negotiating a more gradual attack .
 The extreme pressure from Merkel legitimized the "setting in increasingly fewer installments" by Tsipras . The extremepressure from Merkel was legitimized by the German leader .
 The more Merkel pressed, the more and more Tsipras 'gave in', as his sycophants say . The more he pressed, he says .
 Both Merkel and Tsipras played for the same team . Let's say the truth, both of them, Merkel.
 Tsipras was always who worked to impose an ultimatum on the Greek working class . Tsipra was always working to impose on the working class, he said .
 The problem is no one within it denounced that in this plebiscite, both the ""Yes"" and the ""NO" were part of a great anti-democratic trap against the working class . The problem was a fraud of various bourgeois gangs.
 No current, even the more "reddish" ones denounced the referendum trap, nor called to defeat it . No current or even a more "dreadish" one denounced the trap .
 The plebiscite did not elect any members, even of the reformist parties . But the ple biscite didn't elect any member of any party .
 The Government of Syriza had "NO" in its pocket, as Merkel had the ""Yes" vote .
 Calling to vote 'NO', 'though changing its content' is not changing the content, says the author . "The masses believe and develop delusions about that serving to defeat the attack"
 The theory of "two fields" is an openly class collaborationist position . We have here a position that vindicates the theory of two fields .
 For now PO, Antarsya, French NPA and all new European social-imperialist left have long broken with any policy of class independence . For now, the left has broken with the policy ofclass independence .
 The more the bourgeoisie lies to and deceives the working class the more this deception and this lie should be denounced . The more this lie is the more the more that this deception, the more it is a lie .
 Syriza and the bourgeoisie of the 'NO' used it to impose the plan of the Troika .
 Many NO votes come from working-class neighborhoods, not from working class neighborhoods .
 Many workers voted Peron and his party in Argentina to Chavez in Venezuela to Obama in the USA . That does not mean that they were class votes. Also many workers voted for Chavez in Argentina in Argentina .
Because the masses -and not themare who pay the consequences of such treachery and fraud. Because the masses are not the people who pay for the fraud, they are the ones who do it .
 They could not express their yearning for Justice and stopping the terrible attack on them . They were not able to speak out about the attack .
 The 'NO' could not nor can ever be used against the Troika because it was a tool of Syriza, its Government and the negotiating table with Merkel .
 PTS says that the plebiscite was a great trap; that the 'NO' was a fraud . So then PTS is saying that the Plebiscites were a greattrap; that it was a Fraud .
 The PTS was with one foot in a correct position facing the plebiscite . With the other foot together with its friends Antarsya and French NPA which openly supported it .
 Syriza’s fraud and its plebiscite, they will not advance to the Socialist Revolution, they say .
 Telling the working class that it "can use the NO vote to fight" is a lie. Telling that it can use the no vote is "a lie," is a "lie," says the Labour leader .
 The Government has cheated us with the referendum, because it is pro-EU, says David Cameron . It is the "left Manager" of the Morgan banking, so much -or more an enemy of the Greek workers as is Merkel .
 Golden Dawn kills immigrant workers with their sticks . It's that freed with its judges the fascists of Golden Dawn, which kill immigrants .
 The PTS announced the mother of all battles against the referendum, but stayed on the "NO side-walk" The PTS has given Syriza ideology from the left, giving Syriza ideologies from the right .
 The PTS says that this level, which is not yet perceptible, "is the seifperception of the masses of their own strength" "The PTS says this level is not still perceptible"
 The PTS threatened to leave the ""NO field" but came to the edge of the palisade and returned to the 'field' of Syriza again . The PTS threaten to leave.
 If you develops much your "self-perception" you will notice quickly from this . If you develop much your self-perceptions, you will be noticed quickly .
 Nobody invents any position that these people do not have, though they pretend to speak in a highbrow way . Here nobody invents a position that they don't have .
 The 'NO' and the referendum are a defeat for the working class, and they have been used by Syriza to attack it violently . The referendum is a defeat to the workingclass, and it is being used to attack the 'no' and 'the referendum'
 This defeat now the masses must overturn once their struggles were diverted by this Government of class collaboration of Syriza . Syriza turned out to be nothing more than a detour.
 All this left believes that the class nature of the bourgeois institutions of the bourgeoisie can be changed .
 This is the old social democratic theory of Bernstein that the ""State is neutral" This is an "empty bag" that each class may impose their own content to .
 Bernstein's followers say you can press bosses’ justice to get ""good sentences" in favor of the workers .
 The left with 'NO' applies this same theory to the plebiscite . You may give it content in favor of the masses or against them if Syriza uses it .
 We will not tire of affirming that the 'NO' in the referendum was one of the policies of the Greek bourgeoisie and bankers to fool the masses and impose a brutal attack . If the YES had won would have imposed the same attack with few degrees more .
 The NO’S ""bourgeois field" has a “red’s mantle and says that the referendum as an institution has progressive features that can be used in favor of workers .
 The FIT of Argentina is making progress in the school of this "new left" Argentina has openly entered into the FIT school of the country .
 The KKE is far from having confronted the trap of the plebiscite . But this position of the KKE has been far from being confronted by the trap .
 The Greek PC leads the absolute majority of trade unions and whole labor confederations . The PC has not called a single action of the Greek working class to struggle for defeating the referendum fraud .
 It was commissioned to unravel the fabric of the working class, demobilize it and guarantee social peace to Syriza . This rearm the Government of imperialist bankers and, buttressed by Merkel, attack as it is doing now the Greek labor movement .
 KKE washed the dirty laundry of the fight which it did not prepare or organized, in a treacherously deliberate way . KKE's abstention policy faces the plebiscite .
 It will be in the "opposition" for containing the revolutionary masses when they win the streets again, as it is happening at this moment, when the Parliament is assembled .
 The KKE located itself outside of the ""two fields" But to save them both from the fire of the proletarian revolution. I.e.
 Syriza is a Government of popular front, of class collaboration, the bourgeoisie being inside . Many shades of the bourgeoisie: from the Ministers of finance and defense, up to New Democracy’s Pavlopoulos .
 Papandreou and PASOK which was destroyed in the revolutionary processes of these years in Greece gave the post to Syriza so that it implements their plan .
 Syriza is not the expression of the revolutionary process that the Greek masses and its rebellious youth began in 2008 . For this reason, Syriza was not a revolutionary process but its diversion and abortion .
 Syriza is coming to anesthetize the masses, violently repress its left wing as it has done, says the writer . Syriza will be called by big capital tomorrow to crush the masses numbed by Syriza today .
 City of London and Wall Street have stolen the money of the Greek masses, according to Greek media .
 The working class cannot move forward to defeat the EU without taking power in Greece, says the Greek government .
 This revolution would be a link, an episode of a single and unique European revolution . This revolution could be a one-off episode of the European revolution.
 This amounts to asking the Greek imperialist bands to break with its partners of the imperialist gangs in Europe, in favor of the working class . This amount to ask the Greek imperialism bands to split with their partners in Europe .
 It is impossible to fight against oppression and the dire situation of Greek masses unless you expropriate the Greek capitalists and bankers . Call on the German and European working class to confront Merkel, the Bourbons and the IMF together with the Greek masses .
 PTS addresses Podemos of Madrid and Barcelona recognizing that this party is in government with coalitions where the bourgeoisie is in . The party has been in government for years .
 PODEMOS is a force that has been got hegemonic by the rich middle class going down and a faction of the “democratic’s bourgeoisie.’
 PODEMOS is in itself a ‘republican front’ with the shadow of the bourgeoisie inside, but the difference is that this current “republicans front” has put on his shoulders the monarchy and defend tooth and nail it against the masses .
 It is unlikely to demand on supposed democrats - that they aren't even such a thing to carry out tasks that the militant masses of the Spanish State tried to do by a true “outrage” rebellion .
 Podemos himself says that what they are doing in Spain is a “democratic revolution’s central thing of such revolution is the ‘democratic’ reform the monarchy has made itself, he says .
 PODEMOS is the expression of the “outrage’s working class struggle in the Spanish State. They are telling masses that PODemos is theexpression of the 'outrage' working class struggles .
 PTS created the illusion that such a bourgeois front could support the Greek working class . The illusion was created by PTS .
 PODEMOS sustains the monarchy that has in jail the Basque fighters like Tsipras and his bastard left of Goldman Sachs keep in prison the Greek youth for the “crime’ of confronting fascism.
 The bourgeoisie of Spain leamt from the year ’31 when the ‘republican front’ won the elections . After that the mass upsurge overthrew the monarchy by fighting in the street and boycott against the fake Berenguer Cortes .
 Podemos comes to prevent the mass revolutionary upheaval using petty-bourgeois phrases . But he rules for the bourgeoisie against the worker movement .
 PODEMOS pretends not to notice the unions and worker organizations using in his favour the huge discredit of the trade unions . PODemos pretends to not notice the trade union's use of in its favour .
 The Moncloa Pact for the bureaucracy can continue strangling the working class' struggle . They are getting ready to be like Syriza that doesn't have any pressure on the part of the worker movement .
 PODEMOS sweetened by the world reformist left is the twin star of Syriza . Syriza is one of the world's most popular political parties .
 Both are the new stars in the “New Eeft’s world that only irradiate new catastrophe and sufferings for the worldwide working class .
 reformist left wants to convince Greece is a colony or a plundered semi colony . They wanted to show Tsipras as a new "European Chavez" T he reformist.
 The "Bolivarian movement" wants to bring about a "bolivarians" movement in the imperialist Greece . They want to bring to a imperialist Greece .
 Sometimes in semi colonial countries, and under specific historical circumstances, the native bourgeoisie haggles their share of national income and supervalue taken out of the labor movement with imperialism .
 The bourgeoisie blackmails the imperialism mobilizing the masses, up to the point that they can control them . If not they may attack not only the interests of imperialism but also the native bourgeoisie .
 Their imperialist gangs are junior partners of the imperialist domain of the world . Their imperialism is a junior partner of the global imperialist domain .
 Greece is the weakest link of imperialist domain in bankruptcy of Europe . Greece is a country that has been in bankruptcy for more than a decade .
 Imperialist gangs even the smallest ones and minor partners, share out world market and the big or tiny areas of influence .
 Most of European powers have remained vassalage after the 2008 crack . The relationship between them and the imperialist powers that won the commercial battle like the US, Germany and Japan is vassals .
 The imperialist pirates’ winners will keep the losers’ business and even their areas of influence .
 The Chinese crisis is how imperialist powers defeated in the trade war pay the crisis . It is how the victorious imperialist powers will have to pay the next crisis, that is already here .
 If the working class does not take the power, the war will come, the world capitalist system has to solve its chronic crisis . The working class will be the last path that the world capitalism has to take, says the author .
 This is the only way to raise the current situation of Greece from a strategic point of view. This is a strategic way of raising the situation in Greece, says the author . The Greek government is trying to make the country's situation more transparent .
 Greece has the second MILITARY BUDGET of all European countries, and its REACTIONARY OFFICERS, is an ADVANCED DETACHMENT of the IMPERIALIST NATO TROOPS Gentlemen, we must speak clear . Greece has a second MIL
Under these conditions, to prtend the masses believe the emergence of a ""Bolivarian phenomenon" in the imperialist Europe is stupid . Under these conditions. Under these Conditions, toprtend a "Bolvarian" phenomenon is stupid, according to
 In Eastern Europe, in the new colonies and ON GOING DEBATE 23 republics of the former workers states that possibility is open . In Eastern European countries, in new colonies, in Eastern Europe and in former worker states, there is possibility.
 The Greek shipowners are one of the largest shareholders of HSBC . They had put their assets as partners of Banking Morgan and Goldman Sachs on Wall Street .
Germany has the second military budget in Europe, even bigger than Germany . Germany is a small bankrupt imperialist nation .
 Greece and Turkey dispute the southern Mediterranean, the routes of the Black Sea and the Balkans . Greece, Turkey and Turkey have a dispute over the Mediterranean .
 You are talking about transnational companies of the largest ship owners in the world . You are also talking about the biggest ship owners of the world.
 Greece is the outpost of NATO troops to the Balkans, Eastern Europe and the southern Mediterranean . Greece and its genrerals officers, used to make coups and kill workers, are used to kill workers .
 These Greek pirates will never call to support the working class and its organizations of struggle. These pirates will not call for support of working class.
 The world reformist left called to support Syriza, the left cover of these imperialist gangs, some of them run down . Instead, the world reformists called to back Syriza .
 24 International Workers' Organizer is proposing to Syriza, a direct agent of Greek and European imperialism, to face Maastricht. Then, to pretend that Greece is a plundered semi-colony is a fraud, they say .
 They have proposed Hollande and imperialist social democracy to make an "anti-austerity" front . They have already gone too far in proposing Hollande and social democracy .
 These are the doodles the left of Maastricht has to draw to deceive the masses and left support Syriza .
 The pseudo-theory of a "Bolivarian government" the in imperialist Europe of Maastricht is a huge revisionist cruelty and deception for the masses, says the author .
What lies ahead are governments of class collaboration, popular fronts, to rebuild the battered states and regimes of imperialist Europe. What lies ahead is governments of Class collaboration and popular fronts .
 If they fail in their attempts, the next it will be the fist of fascism . The next step will be to try and defeat fascism .
This is the only way to conquer the unity of the European working class . This is the first time the working class has been united in the EU .
 The nationalism of imperialist powers is to break the unity of the working class and develop a worstchauvinism in its labor movement . The nationalists of imperialist power are to break up the unity.
All its deceptions are merely a round-up to support the big stick of Germany and the Greek imperialist bankers against workers . Plebiscites are submission to the siren call of Syriza and all itsDeceptions are just a round up to support Germany .
 If you do not face and defeat the bankers and capitalists parasites of Greece, there is no solution for the working class of this country, says the author .
We are facing a policy of class collaboration, of subordination of the working class to bourgeoisie political fronts . We are facing the policy of Class Collaboration .
 No of Syriza could be tied to the fate of the Greek masses . Syriza and the NO together with Syriza "against the Troika" were the support of the NO .
With the plebiscite, they beautified the good boss, who is ready to hit the working class .
 The Greek government is popular front government, as Stalinism imposed for decades . The government is the most popular government in the country .
 That is, a government of workers' parties with the imperialist bourgeoisie . That's what the government of Workers' parties are with the bourgeoisie .
 In ' 89, imperialist demagoguery promised workers from Eastern Europe they would earn the same wages as the West German workers . Today they have worse wages than those earned by the workers of Congo, Bolivia, China, Middle East, etc.
 Only so they would be able to regroup their forces to stop the attack of the bankers and their Governments that takes from them all their conquests . Only thus they would also regroup the forces to stopped the attack.
 The business of Putin and Merkel around Gazprom is based on the looting of Russia, The Russian Federation and all the nations that constituted the former Warsaw Pact, in complicity with their Governments .
 The workers of the Donbosss^ despite suffering enormous casualties and the massacre against the civilian population, stopped the advance of the counterrevolutionary offensive of the Kievan military forces under the orders of NATO . Their great ally is the working class of Western Ukraine, which refused to fight
 Imperialism has concentrated its forces and makes play to all of its agents to defeat it . Imperialism is making plays to all its agents, making it harder to beat it .
 The Western Ukrainian exploited in Kiev, also face the IMF imposed plans of Poroshenko puppet government . The IMF also faces plans of a puppet government in Kiev .
Workers of the Donbass have slowed the counter-revolutionary offensive of Kiev’s military forces under the command of NATO, suffering huge casualties and massacre of civilians .
 The protagonists of this battle were not Russian troops, under the command of Putin the butcher . They were not the Russian troops. They were the protagonists of the battle .
 The Donbasss are the working class of Kiev's working class . They have been the heroic working class, and its miners .
 The other main protagonist was the heroic resistance of the workers in the West who refused to fight against their class brothers and sisters in the Donbasss . The army UKRAINE 27 of Kiev has disintegrated.
 In January the Government of Poroshenko launched a levy to recruit 50,000 soldiers, but failed miserably . In January, the government failed to recruit more than half the soldiers .
 More than 7500 Ukrainians face criminai charges for evading miiitary service . More than 6,000 Ukrainians face criminal charges in Ukraine .
 Donetsk and Lugansk women are in charge of denouncing the murderous colonels and generals of Kiev . They want to do justice for their dead sons and husbands, for the destruction of their land .
 The only forces that the Government in Kiev can rely on are the fascist militias as Aidar or gangs of outsiders and mercenaries . The masses have already revolted in cities like Konstantinovka.
 This shows that the fight of the masses from East and West Ukraine is one and a single one, for the same demands and against the same enemy . This shows the fight for the masses is one, a singleOne, for a same demands, says the author .
Ukrainian working class struggles to unite its ranks again and again . Despite leadership it has at its head which is trying to split it at every stepthe Ukrainian workingclass .
 Nothing prevents the unity of the exploited from all over Ukraine except this huge conspiracy of the bourgeoisie and the betrayal of the world proletariat .
 The miners in the Donbass have left the leadership of the most heroic of the Ukrainian resistance . These have left them in the hands of Putin and the bourgeoisie of the East . The workers in the West of Ukraine are trying to depict the Eastern workers as their enemies .
 The exploited in the Donbass stopped temporarily the offensive, but the bourgeoisie of East Ukraine and Putin handed that victory over to Poroshenko and imperialism in the negotiations .
 The major point of this agreement was to divide the ranks of the Ukrainian exploited to impose the disarmament of the Donbasss and implement the IMF plans in Kiev .
 Ukraine is the only way to conquer bread, jobs, and wages . The revolution would have meant the beginning of the revolution in the entire nation . It would have been a "demilitarized zone"
 The "demilitarized zones of the Minsk agreement" are nothing but boundaries drawn by a counterrevolutionary plan . Putin and the Great-Russian bourgeoisie are given the central work of disorganizing from the inside the revolutionary process of the Donbasss .
 No doubt if they are able to impose it, the way to the colonization of Ukraine and the privatization of the mines and all the State companies will be at the order of the day .
 Putin is junior partner of Merkel in the gas business, both the Gazprom and the gas trade in Europe . Putin is a senior partner of the German leader in the business .
 Yesterday he supported Yanukovich and today manipulates the resistance of the working class to continue staying, somehow, in business . Today he supports Yanukovich, but today he manipulates his support to stay in business.
 Imperialism snatched from its hit man Putin the control of Ukraine . In return for these services in the region, it left in Putin's hands the peninsula and Crimea .
 The Great-Russian bourgeoisie and their peers and allies of the Donbass did not fight against the Kievan counter-revolutionary forces which are under the command of NATO and "democratic" Obama .
 He proved to be a simple lackey and junior partner of the imperialist bankers . Thus, he proved to have been a simple Lackey .
 With the Pact of Minsk the Donbass is again encircied and the bourgeoisie in Kiev is given time so it can reset its counterrevoiutionary forces . The Great-Russian bourgeoisie disarm the miners’ movement .
 The Ukrainian working class supports the same pro-IMF attack throughout its territory . There is no way to victory without the unity of the entire working class .
 This counter-revolutionary pact aims to prevent the unified exploited in Ukraine sweep away Poroshenko puppet government and defeat the plans of hunger of the IMF .
 The Donbasss seek to submit the masses of the Donbass to the pro-Russian bourgeoisie, disarming them, to implement the plans of the IMF in the West .
 This Pact seeks to "integrate the militias to the new regular army" The forefront of this plan is the pro-Russian bourgeoisie of the East, launching an ultimatum and threatening to declare ""illegal"" any militia who do not want to submit .
 Ukraine has a divided Ukraine, with a false "autonomy" to the rebel areas . The rebels are trying to stabilize the region and ensure the re-colonization of the country .
 Putin and the bourgeoisie of the East used the mobilization of the masses as small exchange for their business . The plan of disarmament is agreed in Minsk and no doubt they will impose it with iron and fire .
 Putin and the pro-Russian bourgeoisie have handed over the military victory of the Donbass’s masses in the Minsk Pact .
 The bourgeois fractions of Kyiv linked to the EU and the bourgeoisie of the Donbasss are the same Ukrainian Moguls and oligarchs who yesterday supported the Government of PutinYanukovych .
 U.S., NATO and the EU are now trying to come as partners of the complete colonization of Ukraine . They are trying to be partners with the Putin butcher, or as partners.
 The same who stole all the riches and key sectors of the Ukrainian economy in '89 . They are nothing more than the old hierarchy of Stalinism, the Gorbachev and Yeltsin's cronies .
 The Ukrainian and Great-Russian bourgeoisie of dread more than the armed workers . The bourgeoisie is not only in the West but in the entire Ukraine .
 Putin and his allies see that their heads may roll if councils of workers and soldiers of the Don come together with their starved and dismissed Russian brothers and sisters who are in same or worse conditions than their brethren in Ukraine .
 Conditions to forge the unity of the masses of Ukraine are not oniy at the order of the day, but they are an absoiute necessity .
 Ukrainian mineworkers can find a breakthrough to Ukraine, strangled by an unpayable debt with the IMF . Only the working class and its vanguard can achieve true unity and national independence .
 Revolutionary Trotskyists know that so that those links do not become chains, the USSR that must return is not the USSR of the Stalinist bureaucracy . The USSR turned into a Russian bourgeoisie, the vendors of the worker States to imperialism.
 Putin is responsible for dividing at each step the struggle of the Donbasss from that of the exploited of Kiev . He uses the blood of the martyrs as currency for Gazprom and the Citibank in Russia .
 The bourgeoisie of Great Russia was the first to sign the payment of the Ukrainian frauduient debt with the tMF in a deai with imperiaiism . Yanukovich, downioad the entire weight of this agreement on the backs of the masses .
 A Ukraine independent from the EU, Maastricht and the NATO as well as from the oppression of Great Russia can only arise as a by-product of a great worker and socialist revolution .
 It would wake up all the Nations of Eurasia oppressed by the boot of Great Russia and the US, French, and English imperialists military bases . The former Soviet republics have settled in all the formerSoviet republics to plunder their riches and super exploit their working class .
 Russian working class would shake from Russia from its foundations . It would be under Putin's fierce dictatorship and the infamous regime of the new Russian oligarchy .
 Putin and the great Russian oiigarchy do fear more the unity of the Ukrainian working ciass of the East and the West, than they fear imperiaiism piaced with NATO aiong Russian borders .
 The revolution of the Councils of workers and soldiers of the Donbasss must succeed in Kiev . The working class will take the political leadership of the war in the first place, expropriating the expropriators .
 The restoration of the dictatorship of the proletariat under revolutionary forms in Ukraine would be a big step forward for making come again the revolutionary Soviet Union of Lenin and Trotsky .
 Obama has convened to hide against the heroic fight of the East Ukrainian exploited . This is what all the left of Obama has convened to hide .
 The Kiev Parliament prepares to vote on a law by which it is prohibited to use symbols from the former Soviet Union in the whole Ukrainian territory .
 Many of these symbols were used or left run by Putin in Ukraine to handle Eastern workers that do not accept to be submitted by the European imperialist banks .
 Putin took very well care not to carry any red flag or claims of the working class . Only in Ukraine, since on May Day there was a mobilization of the Russian unions .
 The demands of salary increases, against the high cost of life and the dismissals, were expressed in that mobilization . Despite this, there were trade unions representing only the privileged layers and labour aristocracy of Great Russia .
 The Soviet consciousness of the Ukrainian masses is based in that a submission to the EU and the iMF wouid mean a massive ciosure of mines and mass iay-offs . Not oniy on the Ukrainian side but aiso on the Russian side .
 France and Germany manage their business through their companies in Ukraine . The dispute is deveioped for who controis the process of semi-coionization the internationai financiai capitai need to make, inciuding over Great Russia .
 mining workers miiitias is because they assert themseives as Soviet Patriots . This identification of the mining workers is due to their claims of being Soviet Patriots.
 Staiinist scourge restoring capitaiism at acceierated pace . Today they have been taken to iiving conditions worse than those they had when aii the conquests of the USSR were vanishing .
 The working ciass of the West cannot consume, since Maastricht bankers have expropriated their wages, jobs, retirement savings and aii their conquests .
 There have emerged contradictions driving to this huge civii ciass war, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It is a hinge revoiution because it puts at the order of the day the unity of the European working c iass against imperiaiist Maastricht
 The Pariiament in Kiev of the iaw that forbids the use of symbois from the former Soviet Union is an indication that the masses take it seriousiy .
 The Donbasss express the opposite of what Putin and the cynical great Russian bourgeoisie do . In their demand 'That the USSR comes again"
 Putin has nothing to do with the October revolution in the former Soviet Union . He is seeking only to keep his business with Merkel and Obama, staying with Crimea and the gas supplies to Europe .
 The Russian bourgeoisie was genocidal towards the masses in the Caucasus and Chechnya . It gave all the technology of the Russian military industrial apparatus to German, French and American imperialism .
 Stalinism waste in Europe will not be able to return to deceive the world working class . For more efforts that Stalinist waste does in Europe, it will not return to deception .
 The pulse of those remains of Stalinism will not tremble in crushing and killing from inside the Donbass masses so that they disarm .
 Ukraine threatens to be the spark -as also Greece for the imperialist Europethat restarts the historic Soviet Revolution of Lenin and Trotsky .
 In the former worker States there had been achieved huge gains that were delivered by Stalinism to the world capitalist system . This does in a new proprietor class, a new bourgeoisie plunging those achievements of the Socialist Revolution .
 The new Great-Russian bourgeoisie established relations with the world economy . It became in junior partner of Citibank and the German BASF in the sacking of Russian gas .
 Actually the Stalinist clique had already UKRAINE 31 long been keeping those trade relations with imperialism .
 Russian working class martyred and over-exploited by the counter-revolutionary boot of the Pro-imperialist Government of Putin . The developments in Ukraine have for the European and world revolution.
 The working class of that country and its fierce vanguard, the miners in the Donbasss, craves to put the USSR again on foot .
 The way for this is the unity with the working class in Kiev and Europe, and Russia in particular, says the Russian government .
 It has been the unprecedented suffering of a torn and martyred working-class as the Ukrainian one . It's been the scourge of Capital which has pushed the masses to revolution and to defend their jobs .
 The working class clings to its mines and steelworks, as outside them lays slavery, migration, and the precipice .
 The historic task proposed by the revolutionary Trotskyist is nothing more and nothing less than giving an immediate objective to any immediate uprising of the working class in countries where it had already expropriated imperialism .
 The catastrophe of the world capitalist system and the Wall Street explosion of 2008 pushes the former launch huge offensives against all the world working class . Spain, Greece, Portugal and all of southern Europe, to which it has imposed true Versailles treaties"" and surrendering
 The working class of the former worker States will continue to fight for regaining its old conquests . These offensives of looting and enslavement against the world's masses have pushed and pushed .
 To do this it must settle accounts with Stalinist rubbish that expropriated the socialist revolutions handing them over to the bourgeoisie and world imperialism . To do it it must settled accounts with the Stalinist  rubbish that ex-Stalinist rubbish .
 In the Caucasus, in the 20th century, workers conquered the first victories by expropriating the bourgeoisie . In the fighting in Ukraine, we see the first steps of a counter-offensive of masses by workers .
 The Stranglers of the Socialist Revolution of the 21st century do not have anything to do with it . Neither Putin, nor the Ukrainian oligarchy, or traitors of the WSF, will have any of it, nor will have it .
Putin and the Great Russian bourgeoisie do not want to lose their business . Putin and the great Russian bourgeoisie are not interested in losing their business.
 The workers in Germany, France, Spain, Greece, Greece and Great Britain have been snatched enormous conquests together with the loss of wages and millions of jobs .
 Maastricht and Wall Street will not stop until they turn all of Europe, from Portugal to the Russian steppes, into a large maquila of slave workers . Nations becoming in colonies and protectorates, under the command of NATO and the imperialist powers .
 In imperialist Europe only it is saved from the attack on the working class a minority of worker aristocrats and bureaucrats .
 The European working class has starred since 2008, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: European working-class has starred in recent years . He says the EU's social imperialist parties have betrayed all decisive struggles .
 The massive general strikes shook Portugal and Belgium . They have led to covenants and agreements with the exploiters .
 Syriza in Greece and PODEMOS are preparing to do so under the orders of the corrupt Spanish monarchy . They are saving the bankers and managing openly the bad business of its financial capital .
 The World Social Forum concealed the worst counter-revolutionary offensive of their imperialist regimes, which together with Obama, have massacred and martyred all the revolutionary processes of the Maghreb and Middle East .
 Putin is the largest agent and partner of Merkel, the Citibank and the IMF . He is also the largest exploiter of the Russian working class and of the peoples that Great Russia oppresses .
 Putin supports Yanukovich, the largest agent of imperialism in Ukraine, as well as providing Bashar dog with weapons to make genocide in Syria . Putin also supports the counter-revolutionary Zionist-fascist State of Israel .
 In Ukraine a decisive match of all the European working class is played in Ukraine . In Ukraine, all the working class are played in a decisive game .
 Ukraine is a link that has dislocated itself from the imperialist US/ Maastricht domination . The masses started a revolutionary offensive .
 A "Floly Alliance" has grouped at the Minsk Conference to prevent the unity of the Ukrainian working class and the standing up of the revolution of workers and soldiers .
 The battle of Ukraine is a decisive battle for the global working class and for Greece and across Europe in particular . The battle is a crucial battle for Europe's working class .
 There fights the advance of the resistance against the plans of hunger and misery of the IMF and the Europe of the Maastricht Treaty .
In Greece, Spain, itaiy, and even in Germany and Western Europe, the imperiaiist pirates are deepening their fierce attacks against the expioited .
 The German working class has already lost its 36-hours-a-week and has received as a "prize" The German Working class has received a reduction of more than 25% of its salary .
 To the reactionary Union of Maastricht of the imperialist Pirates - that punishes the European exploited and plunders the semi-colonial world-, it is necessary to oppose the Revolutionary Unity of the working class .
 Ukraine sacked under the boot of NATO, the EU and the IMF would be a new base for counterrevolution in the region .
 A victorious revolutionary Ukraine would be a huge support for Eastern Europe today. On the contrary, a victorious revolutionaryUkraine would be huge support.
 What's App, which is a computer, an internet program, 50 employees and 2 apartmentsworth 40,000 million dollars, of which few thousand of imperialist parasites cut the millionaire stock . This is ridiculous. That is to say what they all say the apologists of capitalism.
 Capitalism, lives, expands only sending to ruin whole areas of the planet and industries. Capitalism, life, lives.
 Capitalism reconcentrated, with its cartels, and prepare for war . The industry producing goods with an unlimited market, since they are destroyed, is destroyed .
 They are disputing the fate of human civilization between gangs and imperialist bands . They are also disputing human civilization.
Today more than ever, the alternative of civilization is socialism or war . Today more thanever, it is socialism and war, says the author .
 The last word is unsaid yet.08 opened a huge historical crisis in the world capitalist system . The last words are unsaid.
 The crisis gave birth to a mass revolutionary offensive, which hit in every continent . The crisis was the first to take place in Europe .
 The highest point was the tendency of synchronization of revolutions in the semicolonial countries . They were de-synchronized by treacherous leaderships .
 revolutions in Maghreb and Middle East threatened to set on fire once again . In Athens and from there imperialist Europe, we witnessed revolutions .
 Iraq and Afghanistan have opened a ‘Vietnam syndrome’ in the U.S. We also witnesses the defeats and the escapes of Iraq and Afghans .
 USA, WB and IME stabilized their dominance with counterrevolutionary pacts, as Putin, Putin and AlAssad. That is why USA,WB, IME stabilize their dominance, as the one in Ukraine with Putin .
This is what allowed imperialism launching new counteroffensives and generalizing them all over the planet, despite its crisis . This is what allows imperialism to launch new counter-offensive and generalize them all across the planet . This has allowed imperialism to attack the planet.
 U.S. working class to Obama, Colombian resistance, and Colombian resistance . "Bolivarian" governments not only expropriate the revolution in the sub-continent, but also launch retrenchments .
 imperialism had to order and organize all its agents. But to reach this point, imperialism had had to organize all the agents .
 As we saw with Syriza in Greece, those fronts of class collaboration only numb the masses . So then the generals impose a counterrevolutionary order, so then they impose acounterrevolutionary orders .
 The pact with Merkel, Hollande and Obama wants to close the crisis of the ones of the top . The pact is aimed at closing the revolutionary irruption of the Ukrainian masses .
 Obama, Maastricht, Putin and all treacherous leardeships of the world hung on the coattail of Kiev financial bourgeoisiewhich . The same repressive forces who slaughtered in Maidan Square under Yanukovich’s government.
Every time there is a war, every time the fights of the working class “militarize,’s socialdemocrat Kautztis misters say the class struggle stops; working class disappears .
In Ukraine there is a war between Putin and Obama, where masses do not intervene, when they are actually dying in the battle field . They would say that in Ukraine there was a war in Ukraine where masses did not intervene .
 34 International Workers' Organizer want the proletariat to fight each other and do not use exploited people for it . They want the bourgeoisie to believe that bourgeoisie makes wars where 34 workers' are fighting .
 The working class cannot distinguish the interests and needs of the working class neither in wars, nor elections, nor in wars . They cannot distinguish their interests andneeds from wars, or class struggle, or elections .
Workers of Donhasss defend revolution's capital which was diverted and aborted in Kiev and today it stands up in the East .
 Yesterday did it in Athens, to put down the spark of the European revolution .
 It concentrated all treacherous leaderships to put down the fire of the Eatin American revolution and the anti-imperialist uprising and against war of U.S. working class, which even siege Wall Street .
 leaderships prevent the world working class from concentrating their forces to hit centralizedly imperialism in the key places . This means unifying combats of the semicolonial proletariat with the working class of the imperialist countries .
 The masses at international level have a tendency to hit and cause strategic defeats to the treacherous leaderships which imposed the current fence against the world revolution .
 Those are strategic blows of the exploited people because they make run the leaderships that submit them to executioners . Those who submit the leaders to executions are exploited people .
 This is what we see in Brazil, where the left of the social pact cannot enter into exploited’s Brazil . This is despite and despite and against the parties of labour bureaucracy and aristocracy .
For these strategic combatsthere are preparing new forces of the ones who fight to refound 4th International . In this perspective - for these strategiccombatsthere.
 Unify the Ukrainian working class to Putin or the killers of Kiev, means preparing the road to defeat beforehand .
 U.S. imperialism sent Putin this time to complete Al-Assad’s genocide in Syria . He is Obama's hitman, who aiready kneeied before imperiaiism in Ukraine .
 Today they make him work as a hitman, after they made him kneeled in Ukraine . Today they are making him work for them .
As soon as Putin tried to bargain a slice of business, imperialism froze Russian oligarchy’s accounts abroad . It froze their business with military industry and stopped gas exportation imposing the use of United States gas .
 It was the biggest humiliation suffered by the Great Russian bourgeoisie since they exist as such in 1989 . It was a biggest humiliation for the great Russian bourgeoisie .
 Putin attacks and massacres in Syria since he has his hands tree for it. Putin has been known to attack and kill people in Syria .
 Putin knows that smashing Russia, he strengths himself to discipline among the Muslim Republics of former USSR and even the Russian workers .
 It is a good deal tor imperialism having a hitman to use it when they need to smash the masses . And it is a bad deal for imperialism.
 Putin’s army is not the Red Army of the Soviets’ Workers Repubiic . It is a white counterrevoiutionary army, at the service of CiA, sent to kill the rebei masses and the Eastern peopies .
 From the financial point of view, Russia is tied with multiple bonds of imperialist dependence . Russia's economy is in the midst of an economic crisis .
 Citibank has, only in assets, more than $ 10. million, with the largest bank in Russia . The bank's customers include many multinational and Russian companies operating in the country .
 Imperialist companies make huge and bulky business, supplying high technology including to the Russian military industrial complex .
 All Russian navy and army depend on high technology of the imperialist powers . All Russian Navy and army rely on high tech of the imperialism powers .
 Putin signed a contract to acquire two French Mistral helicopter carrier, for 1. billion euros . In 2011 Putin signed an agreement to buy two French helicopter carriers for 1,000 euros .
 The vessels can accommodate up to 16 heavy or 35 light helicopters, 50 military vehicles, including a dozen tanks, four boats of assault and a half thousand soldiers . These vessels can be used to carry up to 30 light helicopters and 50 military vessels .
Up to 30,000 Russian soldiers travel to Germany every year to educate themselves militarily . This camp works virtually, it is a real simulator of any war situation .
 USA jumps with joy for these businesses that lost Russia, making today the French and German imperialism . USA jumped with joy.
 The U.S. is doubly aggressive with Russia in the Ukrainian crisis . The United States has been more aggressive in the Ukraine crisis .
 The situation in Ukraine is serious, because it anticipates that the struggle for the vast Russian market will also be a commercial, political struggle . In the future, military of the imperialist powers who are fighting and the contest will be commercial and political .
 USA has placed in Eastern Europe (in countries like Poland or Hungary) a missile shield . It means a huge business for transnational corporations .
 The economic crisis of 2008 was surrounded by a legion of leaders traitors payments that saved him from the proletarian revolution . The working class was exploited, the looting of the semi-colonial world and developing destructive forces, he says .
 Everything else is a lie of reformism that suggests that imperialism slows its expansion, then the crisis comes and comes and with the same impulse like the previous one it expands again .