 Russian newspaper claims to have an official government strategy document outlining the invasion of Ukraine .
 The APC was seized by the Ukrainian troops in Ukraine's east at an open-air exhibition in Kiev, Ukraine, Saturday, Feb. 2015 .
 Russian-made military trophies seized or destroyed by Ukrainian troops were exhibited in the Ukrainian capital . Ukraine officials said Russia has still denied Russia's military presence in Ukraine's east .
 The editor of Novaya Gazeta, Dmitri Muratov, reported the document during an interview with Echo of Moscow .
 The interview was reported by news outlets Saturday . He did not reveal how the newspaper came into possession of the document . He said he had confidence it was authentic .
 Novaya Gazeta is considered a rarity in Russia these days . It's known to anger the Kremlin on a regular basis .
 The editor said the paper’s plan is to publish the full details of the strategy document next week .
 Russian document appears to have been drafted between Feb. and Feb. last year . Muratov said the document was drafted between February and February 2013 .
 Moscow's tax union has a longer term plan for annexation of Ukraine . The overall strategy includes plans on how to break Ukraine into automonmous sectors, he says .
 The strategy document also calls for a public relations campaign to justify Russia’s intervention . It also calls on Russia to justify its intervention .
 The newspaper did not release further details of the strategy at this point . The newspaper has not released further details on the strategy .
 Muratov said that the strategy paper contradicts the Kremlin’s claim that it annexed Crimea as a reaction to residents in Kiev feeling threatened by Ukrainian nationalists in Kiev . But the paper says that the Kremlin's claim is not true .
 If authentic, the strategy document would appear to have outlined the precise course of the pro-Russian separatist rebellion in the Donbas . It includes two regions, Donetsk and Luhansk, which includes two areas in Donetsk .
 Muratov says he could not definitively show who prepared the document . He could speculate that the authors included Russian oligarch Konstantin Malofayev, who has been reported to have funded the pro-Russian uprisings .
 Muratov said the document was passed from Malofayev to aids of Russian President Vladimir Putin, who then approved of the plan . Muratovsky said the plan was passed to Putin's aids, which then approved it .
 Russian news agency Interfax reported an early text of a Putin address next week for the “Defenders of the Fatherland’s holiday. The report came as Russian media reported a text of the Putin address .