 On September 7, Ukraine inched closer to a globally recognized international church . The church is based in Ukraine .
 Constantinople Patriarch Bartholomew placed Ukraine under the canonical jurisdiction of U.S. Archbishop Daniel of Pamphilon and Canadian Bishop Ilarion of Edmonton who head Ukrainian Orthodox Churches in both countries .
 Since 1685, the Russian Orthodox Church has claimed Ukraine lies within its canonical territory, but no longer . The church claims Ukraine is within its canon, but has no longer claimed it .
 The appointments are preparation for granting the Orthodox Church in Ukraine autocephaly from the Russian Orthodox Church . The two appointments are preparing for granting Orthodox Church autocphaly .
 The granting of autocephaly from the Russian Orthodox Church to Ukraine’s millions of Orthodox believers is as significant as the disintegration of the USSR for Ukraine .
 Granting Ukraine’s Orthodox Church a Tomos is the last step Ukraine needs to take in order to become truly independent .
 Metropolitan Filaret broke with the Russian Orthodox Church to establish the Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kyiv Patriarch . It was never recognized by Constantinople .
 In 1990, under pressure from the nationalist drive for independence, the Russian Orthodox Church revived the autonomous status of its exarchate in Ukraine . There have been two competing Orthodox churches in Ukraine since then .
 The UOC has been loyal to Moscow, while the UOC-KP represents an independent Ukraine . The U OC has been backed by Moscow, but is not affiliated with Russia .
 Russian Orthodox Church and UOC have been unable to maintain neutrality since Russia's annexation of Crimea and military aggression in eastern Ukraine .
 Russian Orthodox Church clergy have blessed Russian nationalists traveling to the Donbas . The Donbas is Russia's largest city.
 Some UOC clergy have refused to serve at funerals of Ukrainian soldiers . UOC Metropolitan Onufry and senior clergy refused to stand in parliament in honor of slain Ukrainian soldiers.
 President Leonid Kuchma was even-handed, while Yanukovych openly backed the Russian Orthodox Church .
Senior UOC clergy have supported the UOC-KP and smaller Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church in seeking autocephaly .
 Poroshenko adopted a legalistic approach to seeking autocephaly that left the Russian Orthodox Church with little room to maneuver . Poroshenko's approach left the church with little time to maneuver.
 Russia also overplayed its hand in the Balkans and this also contributed to the crisis . Russia also played a key role in the conflict in the region .
 Greece and the Constantinople Patriarch have had enough of Russia’s interference and see the emergence of an autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church as a way of cutting it down to size .
 Two-thirds of Russian Orthodox Church parishes were in Soviet Ukraine . In the USSR, two-thirds were in the USSR .
 In the USSR, a majority of Russian Orthodox Church parishes were in western and central Ukraine . That remains the case today .
 Most UOC faithful will peacefully join Ukraine’s new autocephalous church . There will not be a “civil war’ over religion, and most U OC faithful will join the church .
 Russian and Western historiography ignores the existence of Ukrainians until many centuries later and forever links them to Russians and Belarusians .
 Kyiv Rus gave birth to the three eastern Slavs and their desire in the Tsarist, Soviet, and contemporary eras was always to remain in union .
 Nationalists opposed to this idea were working for various Western empires, governments, and intelligence agencies . Nationalists oppose this idea, saying it was working for Western empires .
 In 2007, the Russkiy Mir was meant to unite Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine around the Russian Orthodox Church . It was intended to become the core of the Eurasian Economic Union . It is now part of the European Union .
 Ukrainians and Russians are “one people’’ and, as Putin said to the NATO-Russia Council in 2008, Ukraine is an artificial state . Ukraine is ‘an artificial state’.
 Ukraine rejects Russkiy Mir ideology and support for membership in the Eurasian Economic Union has plummeted .
 Autocephaly will reinforce growth in Ukrainian patriotism, support national integration, and spur a final divorce from Russia .
 An independent Ukrainian Orthodox Church would mean that the Russian Orthodox Church is no longer the world's biggest Orthodox Church .
 The Ukrainian and Romanian Orthodox Churches will be roughly equal in size . The Ukrainian, Romanian Orthodox churches will be about half the same size .
 Constantinople will have a staunch Ukrainian ally in its dealings with the Russian Orthodox Church . Constantinople will also have a strong Ukrainian ally .
 The autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church will be pro-European . While the Russian Orthodox Church is predictably anti-Western like Putin’s regime, it is pro-Western .
Autocephaly will deepen existing changes in Ukrainian identity reflected in opinion polls . Autocephalia will deepen the changes in Ukraine's identity in the coming months .
 Ukraine’s emerging identity is premised upon European integration and distancing from Russia . Ukraine's emerging identity.
 Ukraine's movement out of Russia's orbit is irreversible. With the Russian Orthodox Church as the last source of Putin's soft power now gone, Ukraine’s movement is irreversible . Russia's Orthodox Church is the lastSource of Putin’'s softPower now gone .
 The creation of an autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church is Ukraine's ultimate answer to Putin’s aggression . The church is Ukraine’'s ultimate solution to Putin's aggression .