 The views, opinions, and findings should not be construed as representing the official position of either the Department of Defense or the sponsoring organization .
 In February 2014, Ukrainian nationalists ousted the Russian-supported Ukrainian government in what became known as the Maidan Revolution . The Maidan revolution came after a decade of destabilizing political confrontations .
 Russian annexation of Crimea and covert support for “Ukrainian Russian Separatists’s’ in the Eastern Oblasts of Ukraine soon followed .
 The Russian military intervened overtly in support of the Ukrainian Separatist forces . Nine months later, the Russian military intervention was overtly supported .
 The conflict has settled into a large, complex example of Hybrid warfare in a context reminiscent of static military operations during World War One . The conflict is similar to that of the conflict in the 1930s .
 Interest in mining the lessons emerging from Ukraine has been strong from the conflict’s beginning .
 The conflict in Ukraine represents a 21st-century version of the Boer War or the Spanish Civil War, writes John Sutter . Sutter: Much more needs to be done to develop lessons in the broad middle .
 European military observers of the Boer War noted the effects of machine guns and barbed wire on traditional infantry assault tactics . But these insights were never contextualized for potential war in Europe or war between major powers .
 The failure to do so clearly contributed to the murderous battlefield conditions of World War One a little more than a decade later .
 Learning lessons from these kinds of conflicts require an integrated approach to learning .
 Direct lessons applicable to current capabilities are often obscured by the particular economic, political, and social characteristics of participants .
 Projecting these lessons into the future and more importantly, into conflicts of a different character from the one being examined, requires a different approach .
 Russia intervened militarily in Ukraine, first to annex Crimea and later to support a separatist uprising in eastern Ukraine . The Donbas region is known as the Donbas .
 Russia initially denied being directly involved in the conflict in eastern Ukraine . But it abandoned plausible deniability when it overly committed regular Russian military units in August 2014 .
 Fighting between separatists and the Ukrainian military has continued ever since, often with the participation of Russian units and frequently interrupted by temporary ceasefires .
 Western observers began collecting information on Ukraine's conduct after the conflict began .
 The purpose of this chapter is to characterize those efforts, to identify existing functional or temporal gaps in the literature, and to identify ways forward to address those gaps .
 The study compiled literature from a wide range of military and academic sources to contextualize the breadth of lessons learned efforts .
 Study focuses on operationallyand tactically-focused analyses of Russian and Ukrainian efforts in Crimea and the Donbas . Study was published between 2014 and 2018 .
 The existing lessons learned literature varies in form and focus by the organization that created it .
 Academic contributions are largely structured as geopolitical overviews of the conflict or high-level discussions of the nature of hybrid warfare . Several academic institutions contributed important portions of the available literature .
 Phillip Karber's firsthand accounts at the front in Ukraine comprise a large portion of the lessons learned from the conflict’s early years .
 Several prolific authors on the subject, including Major Amos Fox, have reported extensively on the conflict .
 Karber’s sourcing should be considered with his particular bias in mind, says Karber .
 Karber has long advocated for nonlethal and lethal military aid to Ukraine . He has also advocated for the use of lethal and lethal weapons in Ukraine .
 He also relied largely upon memory in his recollections of interactions in country . He provided no notes and little documentation to confirm his details .
 Karber’s work centrally among reporting on the early years of the conflict . Karber's work was among the first to report on the conflict.
 The Journal of Slavic Military Studies was significant among the literature studied, focusing on the nature of future Russian warfare .
 Numerous Army organizations produced literature on Ukraine from 2015-18, including military lessons from the Army’s Foreign Military Studies office .
 This is somewhat expanded in other sources within the Department . This includes documents from the Joint Forces Staff College and various military journals and quarterly publications .
 The implications on aerial warfare remain largely unexplored in the literature . Several recent theses from the Air War College address Russia’s hybrid warfare in Ukraine .
 NATO’s literature on the subject mainly characterizes high-level implications of hybrid and non-linear warfare in the European context . A prominent organization with interests in understanding the Ukrainian conflict is interested in understanding it .
In general, the existing lessons learned from the Ukraine conflict offer high-level geopolitical and tactical analyses, implications for the Ukrainian conflict, and focus on the land domain . In turn, the lessons learn to apply lessons learned to other conflicts .
 Few of the non-technical lessons can be applied to potential European conflicts with presumably different contexts or characteristics, nor to contests in other regions .
 These other conflicts will also occur across many domains, extending beyond land and the limited discussion of other domains covered in this body of literature .
 Russia has used some of its best units to conduct modern military operations against a capable opponent . The conflict in Ukraine has remained relatively limited .
 Russia has revealed capabilities and concepts that offer important lessons for the U.S. and NATO as they refine their capabilities, posture, and plans to deter Russian aggression . The United States and NATO are working with Russia to improve their capabilities .
 This chapter highlights key trends in Russian military operations in eastern Ukraine . This chapter focuses on force structure and personnel, personnel, ground operations, air operations and air operations .
 The takeover in Crimea was led by Russian Special Operations Forces . They took advantage of the presence of Russian forces and facilities on the Crimean peninsula .
 Russia has various ground forces within its ground forces that fit under the special operations label . Spetsnaz in Russian has only recently established a dedicated SOF Command to oversee specialized, independent combat units .
 units in SOF Command conduct direct, independent military operations . Russian special reconnaissance forces typically conduct tactical support missions behind enemy lines . In contrast to Russian Special reconnaissance forces, the units conduct direct and independent operations .
 There is no evidence that they have been involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine . These units deployed to Crimea and led the nonviolent takeover .
 Paramilitaries Supported by Train and Equip Activities in eastern Ukraine are made up of a number of groups with differing levels of affiliation with the Russian government .
 The first category of fighters are pro-Russian Ukrainian separatists that live in Ukraine and oppose the government . The second category is pro- Russian separatists that oppose the Ukrainian government .
 In some cases, these may be ethnic Russians turned against the government in Kyiv by Russian propaganda and covert operatives .
 Agents from both the Main Intelligence Directorate and the Federal Security Service are operating in Ukraine . The agency is based in Ukraine.
After the conflict broke out, Russian special forces and intelligence operatives trained, equipped, and organized many separatists . After the conflict, Russia's special forces, intelligence operatives and special forces trained and equipped .
 A second category of Russia-affiliated fighters in Ukraine are paramilitary groups, such as the Russian Orthodox Army, Night Wolves, Cossack paramilitaries, and Chetnik Guards .
 These groups often have members from both Russia and Ukraine . Many have military backgrounds or are on leave from the Russian Army .
 More than half of the Russian nationals who have fought in eastern Ukraine have been nongovernmental volunteers . Not official Russian soldiers, not official soldiers, have been recruited .
 The primary advantage of separatist and paramilitary units is that they function as a force multiplier . The main advantage of the paramilitary units are that they can be used as force multipliers .
 Russia is able to hold territory and frustrate Ukrainian military advances without committing a significant number of troops . Russia has been unable to commit significant numbers of troops to Ukraine .
 It is able to avoid sending in conscripts who are unreliable and when significant numbers die, a political liability . It is also able to avoiding sending in Conscripts when significant number die .
 Russian groups operate quasiindependently, they have been far more effective because of Russian training, equipment, and direction . The groups are more effective due to Russian training and equipment .
 Paramilitary groups often conduct operations in coordination with regular Russian military units . They have benefited from Russian operational and tactical reinforcement at key moments .
Irregular units provide other advantages, including the ability to blend in with the local population . Irregular units can also blend into the local community .
 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine (Fort Leavenworth, KS: The Foreign Military Studies Office, 2015), 19.5 years ago .
 The Critical Role of Information Operations and Special Operations is a smallwarsjournal.com.com .
 separatist forces have blended in with the civilian population to avoid direct attack or to sabotage ammunition depots . In other instances, separatists have blended into civilian population.
 The regular Russian Army units that have overtly participated in the conflict in eastern Ukraine have been organized as BTGs . Russian Military Battalion Tactical Groups have been named as BTG .
 Generally, they have been held in reserve, then committed to critical engagements to help the separatists take and hold territory .
 Russian BTGs are combined arms formations organized around a particular mission . The BTGs were formed around a specific mission .
 They are usually composed of a tank company, three mechanized infantry companies, an anti-armor company, 2–3 self-propelled artillery batteries, a multiple launch rocket battery and two air defense batteries .
 The U.S. Army Combined Arms Center holds lessons in the United States . The Center for Army Lessons Learned is based in the Ukraine .
 Russia has effectively degraded Ukrainian military forces with longrange artillery and rocket fire . Combining separatist and regular BTGs, Russia has also degraded Ukrainian forces .
 Russia’s preferred concept of operations has been to keep its fires units at a safe distance . It relies on drones, counter-battery radars, and other intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance assets to target over the horizon .
 The observed combination of increased range and precision tracks with a general trend noted worldwide, particularly with multiple rocket launchers . The observed increased range, precision tracks are noted worldwide .
 Russia has on numerous occasions successfully blunted Ukrainian operations while avoiding significant casualties . As a result, Russia has avoided significant casualties in Ukraine .
 Ukraine, on the other hand, is estimated to have suffered 80% of its casualties from artillery fire . Ukraine is also believed to have been hit by artillery fire.
 Russia has demonstrated that it retains the ability to mass large volumes of fires when necessary . The increased lethality has required fewer rounds, yet Russia has also shown that it has also demonstrated that its ability tomass large volumes.
 Russia has enhanced the speed of its targeting for extended-range indirect fires . Using different types of drones, Russian drones operate at various altitudes .
 The SAIC Strategic Analysis & Assessments group, drawing on on-the-ground reporting by Dr. Dr. John Sutter, of the group, is the head of the SAIC strategic analysis & Assesments group .
 Russian units can integrate multiple sensing platforms into a real-time targeting system . The most notable aspect of Russia's use of drones in the Donbas is not the mix of vehicles themselves or even their unique characteristics .
 Russia has been able to identify Ukrainian positions, combine multiple sensor inputs, and promptly deliver high-lethality indirect fires via artillery and rockets .
 Russia at times has followed with direct armor and sniper engagements . Then, once Ukrainian units have been weakened, Russia has been weakened. Then, after Ukrainian units were weakened, Russian forces were weakened .
 The U.S. Army must learn from the War in Ukraine, says the Association of the United States Army .
 Implications of Ukraine for United States & Allies, Briefing for 1st Special Operations Command, United States Army, U.S. Army, Ft.
 The U.S. often attempts to synchronize artillery strikes and infantry maneuver . The United States, by contrast, attempts to coordinate artillery strikes .
 Ukrainian units report that once a Russian unmanned aerial vehicle is spotted they may receive artillery strikes within minutes . Ukrainian units say that once the unmanned aircraft is spotted, they may get artillery strikes .
 Three factors have enabled Russia to conduct indirect fires with ruthless efficiency . Russia has been conducting indirect fires in Russia since 2006 . Russia is known for its ruthless efficiency.
 Only Russian Army units are operating in eastern Ukraine, which makes it easier to plan and conduct strikes quickly without joint coordination or worry about fratricide . Second, only Russian army units are Operating in east Ukraine .
 Third, Russia is not as concerned with collateral damage as the United States would be, which reduces the information required for strike planning . The United States will not be as concerned as Russia would be.
 Russia has been willing to conduct area fires using Multiple Launch Rocket Systems . Russia has increased effectiveness by relying on Dual-Purpose Improved Conventional Munitions, sensor-fused weapons, scatterable mines, top-attack munitions .
 With increased precision and specialized warheads, the threat to lightly armored vehicles has increased . Dual-Purpose Improved Conventional Munitions and sensor-fused weapons have increased .
 Most light armored vehicles have minimal top armor and are generally designed only to withstand shrapnel from airbursts . To conserve weight, most light armored Vehicles have minimalTop armor .
 Improvised explosive device attacks in Iraq and Afghanistan have focused attention on the vulnerable underside of vehicles . Many vehicles are modified with increased under-vehicle and side armor and v-shaped hulls . Ukraine conflict has highlighted the vulnerability to top attack as well .
Ukrainian units operating light-armored vehicles have suffered significant, at times catastrophic, losses . Ukraine's military forces have suffered major losses in recent years .
 Ukrainian infantry units have taken to riding on top of light-armored vehicles and conducting dismounted assaults to avoid being trapped inside burning vehicles .
 Ukraine has been to increase reliance on prepared defenses. Another response by Ukraine is to increase relied on prepared defense .
 Russian targeting and maneuver has been supported by advanced electronic warfare and cyber capabilities . Russian targeting, maneuver and maneuver have been supported. Russia has been accused of using cyber capabilities to target and maneuver .
 Russia has used jammers to disrupt communications and data links . 15 Fox and Rossow, “Making Sense of Russian Hybrid Warfare,’s” 10. Russia has been using jammers in recent years .
 Lessons, 20. 9 conceal its maneuver units and advanced emission sensors to detect Ukrainian headquarters, operations centers, and maneuver units .
 Russian units jammed and downed Ukrainian drones by disrupting their Global Positioning System links . Russian units have jammed and down Ukrainian drones.
 They have shown their ability to use their EW and cyber assets to detect electromagnetic emissions, geo-locate cellular phones, and generate targeting information for artillery strikes . They have also shown they can also use theirEW and cyber Assets to detect and target military targets .
 Ukrainian units now view nearly all emissions as targetable and have been forced to operate with significantly reduced communications and coordination .
 Russia’s BTGs have also employed modern heavy tanks to conduct effective assaults against Ukrainian positions already softened by artillery fire .
 The Ukraine war has reinforced the difference between U.S. and Russian concepts of armor . The Ukraine conflict has reinforced a difference between United States and Russia .
 Russian tanks have traditionally emphasized features that allow speed, transportability, low observability, and, more recently, armor enhancements and defensive aids to further minimize losses while assaulting defended positions .
 At the start of the war, Ukrainian armor units were poorly trained, operating outdated and poorly maintained equipment, giving Russia a significant advantage .
 Ukrainian infantry units have acquired modern anti-tank guided missiles . Russian armor has posed a significant challenge to Ukrainian forces .
 Air Operations and Air and Missile Defenses has been the near absence of air power on both sides . The conflict in eastern Ukraine has been ongoing for months .
 Carrying out extensive air operations might have motivated the United States or Europe to respond more forcefully to Russia’s involvement .
 Second, Russian integrated air defense has been extremely effective, which has significantly reduced the need for counter-air operations . Second, Russia's integrated airdefense has been very effective, according to the Russian military .
 Ukraine air operations have not been viable for operational reasons . On the Ukraine side, air operations are not viable for operations .
 In 2014, Ukrainian aviation units had old platforms and were poorly trained . Both fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters were exceptionally vulnerable to Russian defenses .
 Ukrainian military quickly all but abandoned close air support after suffering significant early losses .
 Russia’s air and missile defense system consists of an integrated, overlapping network of operational and tactical-level capabilities . Russia's air and missiles defense system includes an integrated network of operations and tactical capabilities .
Russian and separatist BTGs are deployed with Russian and separatistBTGs . Those operational capabilities are supplemented by tactical surface-to-air missile systems .
Many tactical systems are netted together with each other and operational-level defenses . Many tactical systems have been netted together .
 A final important aspect of Russian military operations in Ukraine has been the use of information operations . Information Operations is a final aspect of Russia's military operations .
 Russia has noted the importance of public opinion in Russia, Ukraine, and other countries . Russia has aligned its message and operations to achieve desired outcomes .
 Russia is intervening to protect ethnic-Russians under assault from an illegitimate government in Kyiv . Russia has intervened to protect the people under assault by the illegitimate government .
 Even before the conflict, Russian propaganda arms were used to delegitimize the government in Kyiv and generate support for Moscow among the Russianspeaking population .
 During the conflict, Russia continues to sell its story to this audience and others to improve its chances of operational success .
 Russia has also been cognizant of limiting its operations to avoid provoking a backlash . Russia also has been prepared to avoid a backlash by limiting operations .
 Russia has shunned air operations to make its involvement appear more limited . As noted above, Russia's involvement in air operations has been limited .
 Russia has shown a preference for siege warfare in order to slowly achieve political gains . For 29 U.S. Army Asymmetric Warfare Group, Russian New Generation Warfare Handbook, 8. 12 similar reasons .
 If Russia had achieved quick decisive gains by pummeling the Ukrainian military, the resulting casualties might have set off an international reaction . If, instead, Russia had done a quick, decisive gains, it might have caused international reaction.
 At the same time, Russia has attempted to demoralize Ukrainian troops and the Ukrainian population .
 Russia’s military has hacked into cell networks and sent messages to Ukrainian troops and their families . Using its EW and cyber capabilities, Russia's military has attacked cell networks .
 It has also aggressively conducted cyber operations to disrupt Ukrainian government and business activity and intimidate Ukrainians and those who might support or do business in Ukraine .
 Russia has taken steps to ensure that its message dominates . In various ways, Russia has been trying to ensure its message is dominant .
 Moscow has made a concerted effort to build up its media presence in Russian-speaking areas along its periphery . Moscow has also made an effort to create a presence in Russia's eastern regions .
 Russia made a point of taking over media outlets so it could control what message was disseminated to whom . In both Crimea and eastern Ukraine, Russia has taken over media.
 In drawing implications from the Ukraine conflict for the U.S. military, caution is warranted .
 Russia has instead supported local separatists in the Donbas in an attempt to create a frozen conflict in pro-Russian areas of Ukraine .
 Russia has used limited means, relying primarily on paramilitaries to do its fighting . With this limited objective, Russia has been using limited means .
 Even when Russia has employed regular units against Ukrainian forces, its full capabilities have not been required . Russia's full capabilities are not required, according to Russian officials .
 Ukraine’s military, while modern in many respects, does not approach the capability of a US-led NATO force . Ukraine's military does not have the capability to take on the US.
 Russia would employ different concepts of operation in a more serious engagement with a better trained and equipped US-led force . It is possible, and even likely, that Russia would use different concepts.
 Russia is likely to continue to rely on BTGs, says U.S. analysts . BTGs are the most important question for United States analysts .
 Russia plans to substantially increase the number of BTGs in its force structure . There are indications that Russia will significantly increase BTGs .
 There are signs that the Russian military is preparing for future conflict by reverting to a divisional model that emphasizes larger, heavier formations .
 Russia has moved significant heavy forces from east to west by rail in recent military exercises . For example, Russia has been moving heavy forces by rail .
 If Russia did emphasize BTGs in a conflict with NATO, these units would have a number of clear advantages and disadvantages . If Russia didn't emphasize BTG, they would have clear advantages.
 BTGs can maneuver and conduct long-range fires. The main advantage of BTGs is the speed with which they can maneuver . BTGs are faster and can conduct long range fires .
With organic air defense and ISR, units conducting tactical and operational fires each have their own capability to locate, target, and strike while providing for their own defense . With organic airdefense and ISr, units conduct tactical, operational fires .
 BTGs posed a problem for Ukrainian forces because a standard Ukrainian mechanized brigade was often outgunned . BTGs pose a problem because of the lack of access to the Ukrainian forces .
 The U.S. might require more than one organic field artillery battalion in an Army BCT in order to match Russian BTGs .
Russia gains speed in their indirect fires cycle by delegating to maneuver units with significant organic capability . Russia gains speed by delegate to maneuver unit with significant Organic capability .
Tactical units have operational-range fires, but they are not well coordinated with still longer-range indirect fire capabilities that are controlled at the operational level and higher .
 commanders do not have control over operational-level fire support assets, which can limit their operational effectiveness . BTG commanders have no control over their operations, but they can limit the effectiveness of their units .
 Troops have to wait for a bombardment to stop and advance after volleys have ended or assets have completed their mission . The U.S. Army Asymmetric Warfare Group says it will wait for the bombardment to end .
This indicates a low proficiency in battle tracking which results from the Post-Soviet mission command style . This indicates a poor record of battle tracking, according to the report .
 Operating Under Threat of Surveillance and Targeting Electronic warfare will be a significant part of any future contest with Russia . Russia will be involved in any future competition with Russia.
 In Iraq and Afghanistan, the U.S. military has enjoyed near-constant control of the air and electronic spectrum .
 How Should the United States ABCT Be Organized and Equipped to Address the Current Hybrid Threat? The U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 2017, is in Fort Leavenworth, KS .
 Russia has demonstrated that it can efficiently integrate multiple sources of ISR, electronic detect, spotters, and other means, into its targeting cycle . Russia, by contrast, has shown that it has also integrated multiple sources.
 Operations centers need to limit communications, reduce or conceal the physical footprint of their antennas, and enhance their ability to relocate during an ongoing engagement .
 The U.S. concept of operations for drones is to launch and recover at a location that remains static during the course of a flight operation . This location is likely to be targeted by long-range fires .
 Maneuver units must also be able to operate with a limited electronic and physical signature . Maneuvers units can also be operated with limited electronic, physical and electronic signature .
 The United States military requires secure, jam-resistant, low-probability-of-detection means of horizontal and vertical communication . The U.S. military requires a secure,Jam-resistant and jam- resistant, high-tech communication .
 The Army is emphasizing high frequency radios for former and frequency modulation radios for the latter . In this regard, the Army is also emphasizing high frequencies for the former andfrequency modulation radios .
 There will be constant competition between means of communication and adversary electronic detection and jamming capabilities . But there will be a constant competition.
 The U.S. Army must also reemphasize camouflage, concealment, and deception techniques .
 Ukrainian mechanized units that come to a temporary stop quickly camouflage with netting . They look like vegetation clusters to overhead surveillance .
 NATO mechanized units, by contrast, generally rely on speed and maneuver, not camouflage, for survivability . NATO mechanization units, in contrast, rely onspeed and maneuver.
 On the modern battlefield with shorter targeting cycles for artillery and rocket fires, this approach may not be viable . The approach may be viable on modern battlefield.
 U.S. maneuver units must be better prepared to disrupt enemy ISR and fires . The United States must also be more prepared to deal with ISR.
 Tactical ground units need organic, cost-effective UAV defenses, and improved counterbattery capabilities and training . Tactical ground troops need organic and cost- effective UAV defense, and better training .
 Operating Without Air Superiority The Ukraine conflict demonstrates that the U.S. military will not be able to rely on uncontested air superiority in future high-end conflicts .
 The U.S. relies almost exclusively on airborne ISR, but in plausible Baltic conflict scenarios, Russian integrated air and missile defenses will cover some if not all of the battlefield .
 For the Air Force, this requires renewed emphasis on suppression of enemy air defense, offensive counter-air, and defensive counter- air against high-end surface-to-air missiles .
 Army, Marine, and Air Force aviation units all need to prepare to provide close air support in a heavily contested environment .
 The Army and Marine Corps must be prepared to engage the enemy in high-intensity conflict without consistent, on-call ISR, close air support, or medical evacuations .
Both services should consider pushing more organic capability to maneuver units, including counter-battery, air defense, and electronic warfare capabilities . Both services should push more organic capabilities to disrupt enemy fires without air support, such as air defense .
 Helicopters may need to explore new tactics, such as deemphasizing helicopters . They might also need to use different concepts of operation for medical evacuations .
 The Ukraine conflict has demonstrated that Russia can rapidly move and concentrate forces from across the country .
 In a future conflict in Eastern Europe, the U.S. and NATO will not necessarily have a long period of warning provided by the buildup of Russian forces, which in turn may limit the period available to reinforce United States forces .
 Both sides in the conflict have reportedly experienced high expenditures of ammunition for indirect fire weapons .
 In a future conflict, Russian operations may be constrained by the supply of indirect fire munitions near the front .
 In Ukraine, Russia has often negotiated cease-fires, which were likely partially motivated by the need to resupply artillery units . In Russia, the need for artillery units is likely to be behind the ceasefire .
Future conflict with Russia may be characterized by short periods of intense fires, followed by hours or even days of resupply, then a resumption of hightempo operations .
 Russia’s activities in eastern Ukraine provide a blueprint for future hybrid warfare in the Baltics . Russia's activities in the region provide an example for hybrid warfare .
 A key aspect of the Russian approach and strategy is to capitalize on the presence of significant numbers of ethnic Russians living in the target country or area . The Russian approach is to capitalise on the number of ethnic Russian living in target countries .
 These persons provide both the pretext for Russian intervention and the basis for the formation of indigenous resistance forces . They provide both a pretext for Russia's intervention and a basis for indigenous resistance.
 U.S. and NATO forces must be prepared to operate against a force consisting of paramilitaries and regular Russian units .
 Paramilitaries will be a force multiplier for Russia in conventional operations, while also serving as an irregular warfare asset . Paramilitary forces will be force multipliers for Russia.
 paramilitaries may conduct reconnaissance or sabotage operations while blending in with civilian populations . As they have in Ukraine, paramilitary forces may carry out reconnaissance and sabotage operations .
High-end fires and insurgency tactics will be a difficult challenge for U.S. and allied units .
 Incidents between U.S. forces and local citizens will be exploited to undermine the confidence of the target country’s populace . The United States and NATO forces have foment animosity toward each other .
 The U.S. and its allies must be prepared to counter Russian information warfare by effectively disseminating their own narrative . The United States and its allied allies must also be prepared.
 Ukraine Conflict for Future Warfare. Significant attention has been paid to Ukraine's tactical and technical lessons from Ukraine . The Ukraine conflict is a potential future conflict with Russia .
Far less inquiry has been devoted to analyzing whether those observations are unique or might apply outside the specific context of the current conflict .
 This chapter endeavors to facilitate that discussion by proposing a number of hypotheses about the future of warfare drawn from lessons learned in Ukraine . This chapter is the latest in a series of books to be published in the UK .
 Militaries will have to balance the benefits of greater connectivity against the risk that their opponents will exploit or disrupt those connections . The development and proliferation of information technologies has enabled more coordinated collection from a broader range of sources .
 Forces no longer have to wait for information to flow up and decisions to move down the chain of command . Forces in the field no longer need to wait.
 Decision-making can be pushed down to lower-level units. Instead, they are able to act more rapidly because information can be shared widely across the network .
 Greater band-width communications and more numerous sensors have increased the connectivity and situational awareness of ground forces . More sensors have helped facilitate the conduct of more dispersed operations .
Highly accurate position, navigation, and timing satellites enable precision strike forces . Highly accurate position and navigation can be used for precision strikes .
 Today’s expanded communication networks and information sharing capabilities influence and shape many aspects of military operations .
 Militaries around the world have recognized the potential benefits of greater connectivity and developed new doctrine to take advantage of them .
Multi-Domain Battle, New Generation Warfare, or Informatized Warfare, the emerging doctrine envisions extensive networks with data and information constantly flowing among entities on the battlefield .
The constant transmissions required to reap the benefits of connectivity also provide excellent opportunities for detection and engagement by an adversary . The constant transmissions also provide an excellent opportunity for detection.
 A clear implication for ground forces is that if one can be “seen’s” one can’t be engaged and, if engaged, one could be killed .
 Future forces will need to be able to monitor, manage, and minimize their signatures across the visual, infrared, thermal, electronic and even audible 19 spectrums .
 A necessary first step in emissions control is understanding the signature one’s units are generating . The signature units are being used to generate emissions .
 The Ukrainians, for example, use UAVs to monitor the signatures of their positions . The Ukrainians use the UAVS to monitor their positions.
 Once the signature one’s units are presenting is understood, one can take steps to manage and minimize it .
 Ukrainians bury electronic cables and operate radios and electronic equipment remotely in order to avoid revealing their locations . The Ukrainians bury the equipment and operate the equipment remotely .
 Second, protection from indirect fires will need to be increasingly emphasized. Second, protect from indirect fire will need more protection from fires .
 This may involve some combination of improved camouflage and deception techniques, including improved armor protection on the top of vehicles, improved types of armor, and electronic warfare capabilities to disrupt munitions .
 Ukrainians and Russians are developing heavy armored personnel carriers based on main battle tank chassis’ to provide improved protection for infantry . The Ukrainians, Russians, as well as the Israelis, are developing or have developed heavy armored Personnel carriers .
 In both domains, improved ISR and long-range strike capabilities are making even capable, stealthy platforms more vulnerable .
 power projection may become even more challenging as countries are able to erect detection networks in the home region and rely on longrange fires from their territory .
Future conflicts between major competitors may quickly devolve into standoffs . There are large swathes of mutually denied territory, seas, and airspace .
 Second, militaries may have to reconsider their approaches for avoiding detection . Second, military might have to rethink their approaches to avoid detection .
With more numerous and capable sensors operating across the electronic spectrum, concealment strategies may be more effective than attempts to hide signatures from every conceivable means of detection . With more numerous, capable sensors, concealments may be the most effective.
 connectivity still poses the twin dangers of dependency and disruption. Even in cases where connectivity does not enable an opponent to locate and target one's forces .
 Russian operations in the Ukraine have reinforced that modern conflict will occur in a highly contested electromagnetic environment . The area has been absent from the limited conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Ukrainians have learned to adapt to operating against a sophisticated electronic warfare threat . The Ukrainians have adopted legacy solutions to combat the threat .
 The Russians no longer trust GPS information, for example, because they rely on maps and compasses . They no longer use GPS information because they spoof it so often .
Training must address what to do if advanced communications and information systems are not available .
 The U.S. Navy regularly trains to operate in an electronically denied environment where command and control has been heavily impacted . Ground forces need to do likewise.
Ground-to-air. Joint coordination has implications for Joint coordination . New tactics, techniques, procedures, procedures and capabilities may need to be developed .
 Some reversion to legacy solutions may be the most practical and effective. Conversely, some reversion of legacy solutions might be most practical .
 Ukrainian Air Force grounded because Ukraine lacks the aircraft and electronic warfare capabilities to challenge them . The Russian integrated air defenses have kept the Ukrainian air force grounded .
 More advanced air forces are unlikely to achieve the level of air superiority enjoyed by U.S. forces in recent conflicts .
The viability of helicopters in such future air defense environments is questionable . The viability of Helicopter helicopters is questionable, according to experts .
 Ukrainians have had to fly their helicopters at low altitudes to avoid radar detection . They are vulnerable to man-portable air-defense systems and small-arms fire .
 Ukrainians have suffered significant helicopter losses and are no longer able to fly their helicopters within 30 km of the front lines . The Ukrainians have been unable to use their helicopters for more than 30 km .
 In contested air environments, militaries may still need to find, fix, track, and target mobile entities deep in denied airspace . In contested environments, military may still be able to find and fix the problem .
 This is not only vital for counter-long-range fires battle but also to suppress or destroy electronic warfare and air defense systems . This is also vital for the counter- long-range fire battle and also for electronic warfare .
Ground-based signals intelligence systems and weapon-locating radars can play an essential role as well .
 precision will be essential, but precision will also benefit from more lethal munitions . Precision will also be essential.
 Ground units will also have to protect themselves against aerial attack . Ground units have to also protect themselves from aerial attacks .
 militaries will also be forced to deal with armed UAVs and UAV swarms . Not present in Ukraine .
 The Ukraine conflict has demonstrated that the massing of effects, if not forces, will still be necessary to exercise military power in the future . Militaries will be forced to balance the gains in coordination and capability from fielding larger, more capable units against the advantages in flexibility
 The Russians have been able to deliver devastating volumes of long-range fires and to deny large swaths of territory . The Russian government has been able.
 Russian heavy forces, although not used often since 2014, have proven decisive when employed . Meanwhile, Russian heavy force has proven decisive in recent years .
 Larger units will have access to a greater range and volume of capabilities than smaller ones . Larger Units will be able to have more range and capacity than smaller units .
 They are easier to command and control and require less decision-making at lower levels . They are also easier toCommand and control .
 The Ukraine conflict has also demonstrated that concentrated forces are extremely vulnerable . Yet the Ukraine conflict also showed that concentrated force is very vulnerable .
Smaller units that can disperse on the battlefield have proven more survivable . Smaller units have proven to be more effective on battlefields .
 If lighter units have significant organic capabilities, they may also be more flexible than larger units . If those lighter units are more flexible, they could also have more flexible capabilities .
 Ukraine conflict has not been a significant naval component to the Ukraine conflict . The same observations are likely to be true at sea, however .
 Large combatants, while providing considerable combat power, are likely to be vulnerable . Large combatants may be vulnerable to large combat power .
 Coordinating the actions of numerous small units in a contested electromagnetic environment will be challenging . The actions of those units will be difficult, but they will be helpful .
 Militaries will need to develop organizational structures, operational concepts, and technologies that enable the rapid massing and demassing of military effects in contested electromagnetic and air environments .
 Army War College-Strategic Studies Institute. Carlisle United States, 2016 .
 Turkish Army War College, International Conference on Military and Security Studies, conference paper . The conference paper is published at the Turkish Army war college .
 Kofman, Michael, Katya Migacheva, Brian Nichiporuk, Andrew Radin, and Jenny Oberholtzer are among the seven members of the team .
 Panel of Eminent Persons on European Security as a Common Project, 17 June 2015 .
 A U.S. Army War College Assessment on Russian Strategy in Eastern Europe . Recommendations on how to Leverage Landpower to Maintain the Peace .
 The U.S. ABCT should be Organized and Equipped to Address the Current Hybrid Threat . ABCT will be able to provide information on the current Hybrid Threat.
 Zakem, Vera, Paul Saunders, Daniel Antoun, Dmitry Gorenburg, and Michael Markowitz are among the seven members of the group . The group also include ZakeM, Vera.