 What is now known as the “Ukraine crisis in the international media is hardly a properly Ukrainian phenomenon. The crisis in Ukraine has been dubbed the ‘Ukraine crisis’
 The first uses of this phrase go back to the pro-European protests that started in November 2013 and ended with the revolution that ousted former president Viktor Yanukovych .
 The initial pro-European protests could be considered an internal Ukrainian development . But their trigger lay beyond the country’s borders .
 Russian foreign policy has always been directed at preventing Ukraine from leaving Russia’s sphere of influence . It was always directed at keeping Ukraine out of Russia's sphere.
 Since the annexation of Crimea in March, "the Ukraine crisis" seems an increasingly misleading concept . The Ukraine crisis has been increasingly misleading, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russian authorities designed the plans to annex Crimea and support separatists in Eastern Ukraine several years ago .
 Russia could no longer guarantee Ukraine’s status as a state, he said . He could possibly intervene if pro-Russian regions of the country appealed directly to Moscow .
 The Ministry says it will be investigated and those responsible will be prosecuted and punished persons .
 The President of Lithuania Dalia Grybauskaite also expressed her condolences . She also said her condolences to the Lithuanian President .
 Zelenets was kidnapped 12 days prior by a group of armed terrorists, his whereabouts since unknown .
 Abduction and murder of the Honorary consul of Lithuania in Luhansk Mykola Zelenets was confirmed today .
 This tragedy happened as result of criminal actions of Russia-backed terrorists . This tragedy was the result of the Russian-backed terrorist attacks .
 Hundreds of citizens of Ukraine and other countries of the world have been murdered . At their hands, residents of Donbas region suffer residents of the region .
 Lithuanian authorities extend condolences to the relatives of the deceased and to the friendly people of Lithuania .
 Putin feared Maidan could be transferred to Russia and cause problems to his rule . The signing of the Association Agreement between Ukraine and the EU could effectively pull Ukraine out of the Russian sphere of influence .
 The Russian invasion and the Kremlin’s support – including arms, money and manpower – of right-wing extremists in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts have drawn condemnation from the EU . But this condemnation was not unanimous.
Right-wing and left-wing parties largely approved of the Russian interference in Ukraine . Conservatives, social-democrats, Greens and liberals criticised Russian interference .
 Historically, the strategic alliance between the far right and the left is nothing new, as well as the annexation of a territory of another sovereign state .
 Putin is cooperating with them only to undermine and corrupt their countries. What these little ribbentrops also fail to understand is that Putin is helping them to undermine their countries .
 The far right cherish the utopic idea of returning to a nation state to bring back a mythic sense of national belonging . The far left cherish the idea of return to the nation state.
 Putin aspires to turn Russia into a super power. Through undermining the EU politically, he wants to bind the EU countries to Russia economically .
 liberal democracy, rule of law, human rights, economic freedoms, equal opportunities and progressive values will be eliminated in today's Russia .
Putin's useful idiots and little ribbentrops in Europe do not imagine what Putin has in store for them . The EU may be no bowl of cherries, but Putin’s useful idiots.
 Ukrainian forces are closing in on Russian-backed insurgents in the city of Luhansk, a spokesman says . Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council spokesman Andriy Lysenko says .
 The head of the NGO “Right Cause,’s Dmitry Snehirev, told UNIAN correspondents that street battles had broken out in Luhansk . He said the Ukrainian military took control of the regional hospital and the surrounding area .
 Multiple media outlets have disseminated a source in the regional state administration via Ukrainian News . Forces involving the National Guard had been fighting in Leninskyi district .
 Ostro, a local news outlet, has also compiled eyewitness reports from social media chatter . Ostro did not state independent verification .
Official source in Anti-Terrorist Operation refused to confirm these reports to Ukrainska Pravda at this time .
 Russian-backed militants in Luhansk claim to have captured a group of National Guardsmen . However, the headquarters of the militants say they captured the group in a suburb . The group's headquarters are in a city suburb in the city.
 A column of Russian reinforcements, witnessed by western journalists, entered the Luhansk region as part of an ongoing stream of Russian forces and equipment over the porous border . Earlier today a column of Russia reinforcements entered the region .
 Valeri Bolotov resigned from his position citing injuries sustained in battle . The leader of the Luhansk separatists resigned yesterday .
 UK journalists Shaun Walker and Roland Oliphant seem to think it has, seeing Armored Personnel Carriers with official Russian plates cross the border .
Columns of tanks and other heavy military vehicles heading in the direction of the border. Various other journalists documenting the situation have photographed columns of tanks .
 Self-proclaimed leader of the Luhansk People’s Republic Valeri Bolotov has resigned from his post .
 The news follows a similar departure from the Donetsk Republic’s militant commander Igor Girkin .
 The consequences of my injury do not allow me to continue work from this post for the benefit of Luhansk in a difficult war,’ says Bolotov . ‘The consequences of his injury donot allow me. to continue working from thisPost for thebenefit of Lu
 Igor Plotnitsky recommended current ‘defense minister’ Igor PlotNitsky take his place . He recommended current 'defense minister' Igor Plot nitsky be the new defense minister .
 Bolotov, a Russian native but raised in Luhansk, was a Ukrainian citizen before taking up arms in separatism . He was born in Ukraine but moved to Ukraine in the 1990s .
 Former Soviet soldier worked as a manager at a meat factory before leading a group of terrorists to seize the Security Service building in Luhansk .
 Igor Girkin reported "seriously injured" Igor “Strelkov” Girkin is seriously wounded .
 This is what was reported by the separatist media outlet, Novoros Inform . This is the first time this has been reported by a separatist media outlets .
 The short briefing cites a source in the leadership of the New Russia separatist group .
 The condition of the Minister of Defence of the DPR is severe, the report says . The minister's condition is severe.
 Self-declared Deputy Prime Minister of the Donetsk Republic, Andrei Purgin, could not directly confirm the report . But he did admit that Girkin had recently been in an area of intense combat .
 According to my information, he was not in Donetsk, and near Shakhtarsk, Torez and Snizhne . According to his information, the man is not in Shakhtark, or near Shakhtark.
 Denis Pushilin served as the ‘Prime Minister’ of the DPR before resigning and returning to Moscow . He issued a video address confirming the news .
 Separate DPR representatives, Vladislav Brig and Sergei Kavtaradze, issued identical statements calling the report ‘nonsense’ in talks with Russian media outlets RIA Novosti and ITAR-TASS . Both labelled the report as an attempt at deliberate disinformation
 Former Ukrainian MP Oleg Tsarov also weighed in, saying he was not injured . This was prior to the statements of Purgin and Pushilin .
 Russia announced it would be involved with the Red Cross in delivering humanitarian aid to Ukraine . Questions surfaced on whether the action was unilateral, or with international support, or if the action would simply serve as a pretext to invade the country .
 The ‘humanitarian’ convoy will specifically be aid for the city of Luhansk .
 It will not include soldiers, and in addition to Ukrainian approval, has the backing of U.S. President Barack Obama, AP confirmed .
 The International Committee for the Red Cross office in Kyiv said they did not know anything about the convoy set to enter the country .
 Ukraine President Poroshenko took the initiative to send to Luhansk Oblast an international humanitarian aid mission . The mission is due to the complex humanitarian situation in the Donbas .
 The mission will also include humanitarian assistance provided by the Red Cross, the United States, the EU and Russia . In addition to goods prepared by the Ukrainian side, the mission will include an international component .