 The first detailed account of U.S. policy toward Ukraine, and relations with Ukraine . Ukraine is the second most critical country in the post-Soviet space .
 More than a history, it explains where U.S. policy succeeded or failed, and why . The 1992-2004 period can usefully shape Washington's policy today .
The collapse of the Soviet Union was a seminal event in the late twentieth century . The collapse of Soviet Union in the early 20th century was a major event .
 Vladimir Putin's actions dramatically altered the geopolitical landscape of Europe and Asia . Putin was not the great catastrophe bemoaned by Putin, but his actions changed the world .
 Fifteen states emerged from the territory that mapmakers formerly called the Soviet Union .
 In the mid-1980s, the Soviet Union stood as one of two global superpowers . The Soviet Union was one of the two superpowers.
 Approaching the fifth decade of the Cold War, it challenged the U.S. and the West politically, militarily, economically, and ideologically . The Cold War challenged the United States and West politically and economically .
 Some bloodshed occurred, mainly as long-suppressed ethnic tensions broke out . The end was far more peaceful than might have been expected .
 The collapse saw Ukraine regain its independence from Russia as well as from the Soviet Union . The collapse was the result of the collapse of the Russian Union .
 Ukraine's Cossack leaders signed the Treaty of Pereyaslav in 1654, except for a brief period from 1918 to 1921 . Ukraine had been a part of the Russian Empire or Soviet Union since 1654 .
 Official Washington was slow to recognize the coming collapse and showed a significant degree of ambivalence about the Soviet Union .
 In December 1991, it became clear that the Soviet Union and its leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, had no future . However, it was clear to all in December 1991 that the Soviets and their leader, President Mikhail GorBachev, were no future.
 The U.S. government then moved swiftly to establish relations with each of the twelve New Independent States . Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia had never diplomatically accepted the United States . The Baltic nations had never been formally accepted by Moscow .
 Ukraine was bound to receive a great deal of attention after Russia . Ukraine's new states will receive the most attention of the new states .
 With nearly 52 million people in 1991, it was the second most populous post-Soviet republic . The country had 52 million in 1991 .
 The largest country entirely within borders of the European continent . It lay just to the east of the nations of Central Europe .
 Ukraine would soon join the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Ukraine would find itself bordering two key European institutions as well as share a lengthy border with Russia .
 How Ukraine developed was also bound to have an impact on how Russia evolved in the post-Cold War and post-Soviet world .
 Ukraine seemed to prosper as an independent state and become one of the early post-Soviet success stories . Ukraine seemed well placed to prosper in the post- Soviet era .
 The country also had a good portion of the Soviet Union’s industrial base, particularly in the high-tech, heavy-metal, aerospace, electronics, and chemical sectors .
 Analysts saw interesting prospects for mutually beneficial trade and investment . Many analysts saw opportunities for mutually useful trade and Investment .
 Proximity to Central Europe was seen as an advantage, to the extent that reforms already moving forward in countries such as Poland might serve as a model for Ukraine . Ukraine is expected to set a reform path of its own .
 Ukraine was bound to figure significantly in U.S. foreign and security policy calculations . The existence at the end of 1991 of nearly 2,000 strategic nuclear weapons on its territory meant that Ukraine had a significant role to play .
 This book does not try to capture all that has happened in Ukraine since it regained its independence . It does not attempt to capture any of the events that have happened in the country .
 This book focuses instead on the U.S.-Ukraine relationship from 1991 to the end of 2004 .
 The Clinton Presidential Library has provided the help of the Department of State, the National Security Council, and the Clinton presidential Library .
 The content, opinions, and characterizations in this book are my own and do not necessarily represent official positions of the U.S. government . I should note that the content, opinion, andcharacterizations in the book are his own and are not necessarily representing official positions
 I continued to follow developments there, first with the Center for Strategic & International Studies and at the Brookings Institution .
 The State Department, Pentagon, and the White House have visited Ukraine regularly . The U.S. has had the opportunity to engage with Ukrainian officials .
 U.S. has not had the front-row seat on policymaking that I enjoyed when in government. While I have tried to stay informed about what is happening in Ukraine, I have not had a front- row seat on United States policymaking .
 The latter describes the key developments in U.S.-Ukraine relations from 2005 to 2016 but offers less detail than the previous 13 years . The latter offers much less detail.
 U.S. policies toward Ukraine succeeded, how and why they failed, and how the United States might do better in advancing its primary objective .
 Ukraine is best compatible with broader U.S. interests. That is the kind of Ukraine that is bestcompatible with broader American interests . That's the sort of Ukraine.
 Ukraine is struggling to cope with two daunting challenges . Some lessons from the early years can be applied to U.S. and Western policy toward Ukraine today .
 If it makes genuine reforms that solidify democratic institutions and get the economy growing on a sustainable path, that is not success . But conflict continues in the Donbas, which is not successful .
 Kyiv reaches a genuine settlement of the conflict in eastern Ukraine and finds a way to address Crimea with Moscow . But reforms fail and the economy falls apart, that also is not success .
 The first six chapters of this book describe the history of U.S.-Ukraine relations from 1991 through the end of 2004 . The book includes the first six pages of the book .
 For much of that period, the bilateral relationship was strong, seen in both capitals as contributing to their foreign policy objectives .
 The relationship has found itself in more difficult straits in other years .
 Chapter 1 addresses Washington's ambivalent approach over the course of 1991 toward the Soviet Union's demise . Chapter 1 briefly addresses Washington’s ambivalent Approach to the USSR .
 The sides set about defining an agenda for engagement in the busy early days of Ukraine's regained independence . It also describes the first steps in establishing a bilateral U.S.-Ukraine relationship .
 No goal figured higher on the U.S. agenda for Ukraine than ensuring the elimination of those weapons . Many in Kyiv thought it was the United States’ only goal .
 Chapter 3 covers 1995 to 1997, when the two countries filled out a broader relationship . The two countries fill out a wider relationship .
Vice President Al Gore and President Leonid Kuchma co-chaired a special binational commission . They declared a strategic partnership and launched a specialbinational commission.
 United States assistance to Ukraine began to grow as the two countries discussed ways to increase trade and investment . U.S. aid to Ukraine has grown as the countries discuss ways to increased trade, investment .
 Washington encouraged the establishment of a distinctive NATO-Ukraine relationship in order to deepen Kyiv’s links to the West .
 The relationship made progress, particularly in aligning the countries’ approaches on nonproliferation .
 The limits of the United States’ ability to encourage and affect economic and political reforms became more apparent . Concern arose in Washington that something had begun to go awry in Ukraine’s development as a democratic state .
 The start of 2000 brought a brief burst of optimism that Kyiv might finally get things right on economic reform . Still, the start of2000 brought a short burst of hope that the country might get right on reform .
 Chapter 5 addresses the years 2001 to 2004, when bilateral relations entered a particularly difficult stretch . Chapter 5 address the years2001 to 2004 when bilateral Relations entered a difficult stretch.
Kuchma's approval of arms sale to Iraq badly shook Washington's confidence in the Ukrainian leadership . Doubts grew about Kyiv’s commitment to real democracy .
 The two sides proved unable to find solutions to a growing number of irritating problems that burdened the bilateral agenda .
 Kuchma’s readiness to dispatch troops to join the Iraqi stabilization coalition prevented a near-total breakdown . Only Kuchm's readiness to send troops to Iraq prevented a nearly- total breakdown .
 Chapter 6 looks at the second half of 2004, the run-up to the presidential election, and the Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution is the first time the Orange Party has been in power .
 The U.S. effort to encourage a democratic election process failed to secure a peaceful outcome, it says . It describes the United States effort to promote a peaceful election process and to help secure the ensuing political crisis .
 At the end of each of the first six chapters is a section entitled Reflections . The section is written with the benefit of time and the opportunity to look back .
 Chapter 7 briefly recaps how U.S.-Ukraine relations developed from 2005 through 2016 . Chapter 8 sums up key lessons learned and offers recommendations for how United States policy might today more effectively advance the American vision for a modern Ukraine .
 Washington succeeded in mobilizing the right carrots, and sometimes sticks, to achieve its goals with regard to Ukraine’s foreign and security policies .
 Kyiv agreed in 1994 to transfer the nuclear warheads on its territory to Russia for elimination . It also accede to the 1968 Nonproliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear weapons state .
 U.S. policy proved less successful in encouraging Ukraine to adopt difficult political, economic, and anticorruption reforms .
Promoting reform was high on the agenda when the president and other senior officials engaged their Ukrainian counterparts . Promoting reform is high in the Ukrainian government .
 The U.S. embassy in Kyiv hosted a large United States Agency for International Development mission to oversee American efforts to promote reform . It was a top priority for the United States embassy in the city .
 Washington devoted substantial resources—indeed billions of dollars—to the task . Washington devoted significant resources to the task.
 The U.S. provided Ukraine $225 million per year in FREEDOM Support Act funds . In the late 1990s, the United States provided Ukraine a total of $300 million to $350 million a year .
 Ukraine received assistance and low-interest credits from the international financial institutions, the European Union, and individual Western states . Ukraine also received assistance from the EU, the EU and individual West states .
 The reform push often encountered resistance, which hindered achievement of the U.S. vision for Ukraine . But the reform push sometimes encountered resistance.
 Kyiv's leadership often seemed not to share the vision or lack the will and ability to move in the direction of realizing it .
 As ambassador, I regularly hosted dinners at the residence structured around a theme . As ambassador.
Officials from the ministries of foreign affairs and defense and the National Security and Defense Council attended . The think tank community had a good turnout .
 That prompted a round of laughter, which evolved into a serious and insightful discussion . That prompted the round of laughing, which led to a serious discussion .
 The upshot was that Ukrainian guests saw their country's biggest national security challenge as the inability of the leadership and political elites to agree on a strategic objective .
 The weak leadership included those who eschewed pursuing needed economic reforms because they feared the political consequences of the economic dislocation that might result . The weak leaders included those with the weak leadership.
 It included presidents who got bogged down in political battles with the parliament or fights with their own prime minister . It included President Obama and President Barack Obama .
 Viktor Yanukovych placed greed, corruption, and personal political power above the country's national interest . The epitome of which was Viktor Yanukovych, who placed greed and corruption above national interest.
 The culture of political corruption has posed one of the biggest obstacles to Ukraine’s successful development . Ukraine's political corruption is the biggest obstacle to Ukraine's successful development, according to experts .
 In 1990, the year before the Soviet Union’s end, gross domestic product per capita in Poland was roughly equal . In what was then the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic were roughly equal, according to a report .
 By 2013, gross domestic product per capita in Poland was three times larger than that in Ukraine . Poland's GDP per capita is three times bigger than Ukraine's in 2013 .
 Polish leaders had made tough choices on reform and anticorruption measures . Ukraine’s leaders all too often fell short. That change reflected the fact that Polish leaders made the tough choices .
 Ukraine is a modern Ukrainian state . Ukraine's development of a modern state is posing a threat to their personal economic and political interests .
 That might have led to different, and perhaps more successful, strategies to advance United States reform objectives . That may have been a successful strategy to advance the United States .
 The U.S. government might have mobilized its resources earlier to assist reform efforts in Ukraine . Significant reform assistance programs only began in 1994. The United States government might also have mobilized resources earlier .
 This was not a big surprise, since their political cultures are so different, says CNN's John Sutter . The political cultures of the U.S. and Europe are very different .
 Kyiv is the most successful city in Kyiv . Kyiv has been known for its direct approach to success in recent years .
 Ukrainian officials at times were too willing to say yes to American requests, doing so when they had no plan for getting to yes .
 Their attitude made for a good meeting, with smiles and handshakes all around . But it also led to inevitable frustration down the road when agreements seemed to have been forgotten .
 Ukrainian elite seemed to overestimate Ukraine’s geopolitical value between the West and Russia . The Ukrainian elite assumed that Western support would continue, regardless of what Kyiv did or did not do .
 Many of the problems continue to dog the bilateral relationship today . Many of these problems still exist today .
 A different approach might increase the prospects for a successful U.S. policy in Ukraine . A successful Ukraine policy would be a good example for the United States to support .
 Larry Napper, one of the State Department's foremost Soviet experts, walked the streets of Kyiv on December 1, 1991 . Napper was destined to be the last director of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs .
 Niles to observe the independence referendum that the Ukrainians had held earlier that day . Niles will observe the referendum that had been held earlier this week .
 The results of the vote streamed in, and they sent a resounding message . The results were streamed in .
 More than 90 percent of the voters had opted for an independent state . In the end, with a large turnout, more than 90 per cent of voters opted for a state.
 Independence won even in Crimea, garnering 54 percent of the vote in the only part of Ukraine where ethnic Russians constituted a majority of the population .
 Washington now had to prepare urgently for the collapse of its Cold War rival and the emergence of the New Independent States . Washington now has to prepare for the final collapse of the Cold War rivals, including Ukraine .
 The U.S. government needed to get about the business of establishing a relationship with the new nation . After that happened, the U.N. needed to establish a relationship, the government said .
 At its height in the early eleventh century, Kyivan Rus’ was the largest state in Europe . The state was the biggest in Europe.
 It entered a period of decline and fragmentation in the latter part of that century, culminating in collapse after the Mongol invasion . It entered the second part of the second century of its history .
 The city would not become a major population, political, and commercial center again until the 1800s . The city's population would not be a major city until the 18s .
 The west was where Ukrainian nationalism was strongest, and those holding the memory of the Holodomor often continued to regard Moscow as an adversary .
 Crimea is the only part of modern Ukraine in which ethnic Russians constitute a majority . The population had a more positive view of Russia and of Russians, and they tended to see their identity linked to Russia .
 Ukrainian is more common in the west, while Russian is heard more frequently in the east and south . Russian is the language of the Soviet Union .
 Most people in Ukraine, if they could not speak both languages, had a basic understanding of the other language . The number of those who regarded Russian as their first language far exceeded the number of ethnic Russians .
 Regional, linguistic, and ethnic differences were swamped by the scale of the vote in 1991 . The vote in favor of independence in 1991 was the first time independence was declared .
 Two people in conversation on the street in which one spoke Russian and the other responded in Ukrainian . This division was based partially on language .
 The bulk of ethnic Russians, some 17 percent of the population in 1991, resided in the east and south . The perceived east-west difference also reflected the fact that the bulk ofethnic Russians lived in the west .
 The east-west divide has some value for understanding Ukraine, but it is a useful prism only up to a point .
 The line between east and west began to blur after 1991 . Political parties based in the east began to make some inroads in the west and center .
Residents of eastern areas such as Donetsk and Luhansk wanted good relations with Russia . Polls in April 2014 showed that a large portion of the population in the east wished to remain part of Ukraine .
 In the run-up to its quiet end, the Soviet Union underwent dramatic changes during Mikhail Gorbachev’s time in the Kremlin .
 They foreshadowed his willingness to allow greater political space and a degree of democracy and autonomy internally . They fore shadowed him as a leader of the country's political parties .
 Gorbachev did not intend to bring down the Soviet Union, but the forces he unleashed did .
 In the Caucasus, the dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has weakened Moscow’s hold .
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania had never been recognized by the U.S. The strongest push for independence arose in the three Baltic states .
 As Baltic states pushed for greater sovereignty and ultimate independence, so did other Soviet republics .
 On July 16, 1990, the Rada adopted a declaration of state sovereignty . One month after a similar declaration had been approved by the Congress of People's Deputies of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic .
 The Rada's declaration asserted the primacy of Ukraine’s laws over those of the Soviet Union . The declaration also asserted thePrimacy of the Ukraine's laws.
 Foreign service officers Jon Gundersen and John Stepanchuk and Mary Kruger arrived in the Ukrainian capital in February 1991 to establish a consulate general .
 Earlier attempts to open a consulate there had been derailed, first in 1979 by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . The explosion at the Chornobyl nuclear power plant, just sixty miles north of Kyiv, happened in 1986 .
 The three arrived with a mandate to report on developments and gently encourage democracy and market economy reforms . But to do nothing that would be seen as encouraging Ukrainian independence, they say .
 Ukraine is now a sovereign state free of the Soviet Union . Ukraine's independence is a growing popular sentiment for independence .
 Since the consulate had no classified communications ability, Gundersen and Stepanchuk made regular trips to Moscow . They could draft and send classified reporting at the embassy .
 The embassy found the embassy skeptical about developments in Ukraine and what they might portend for the future of the Soviet Union . They continued to believe the political trend in Ukraine was very clear .
 The consulate managed a stream of visits by congressional delegations and former senior officials . Richard Nixon, Henry Kissinger, and Zbigniew Brzezinski visited the consulate .
 The United States could conclude that Gorbachev was finished, or that he would turn out to be at heart committed to the Soviet system . The focus of American attention to Yeltsin and leaders of the other republics.
 Washington could stick with Gorbachev and the Soviet Union while engaging the republics . The Baltic states were a separate issue, for example, by establishing consulates .
 By the summer, many within the U.S. government had come around to the idea of some level of engagement with the republics .
 The United States’ ability to shape events within the Soviet Union was limited, however . The U.S. could only shape events in the USSR .
The prevailing wisdom recognized that and argued for riding things out and seeing what would happen . The prevailing wisdom recognizes that.
 Hundreds of thousands lined the streets of the president's motorcade route, giving him an enthusiastic welcome .
 Smart had a sense that things were changing after the 1990 declaration of state sovereignty . He had good political instincts, and with good political instinct, he had a good sense of change .
 In the first part of 1991, he sought to be seen as the leader of a new, if not necessarily independent, Ukraine . In the second part of the 1990s, he was seen as a leader of an independent Ukraine .
 At the same time, he showed caution, eschewing any anti-Russian lines in public .
 He indicated his desire to press for greater autonomy though did not raise independence . He indicated he wanted greater autonomy but did not ask for independence .
 Acting prime minister Vitold Fokin asked for most-favored-nation trading status . Fokin has been in charge of the country's economy since 2007 .
 He sought investment, including in the privatization of Ukraine's industries . He also sought investment in Ukraine’s industries .
 He expected more direct dealings with Ukraine and other republics, as would be allowed by the union treaty that the Soviet republics were in the process of working out . But he expected moredirect dealings.
 Consulate head Gundersen was tasked to pull Yanayev away for a few minutes so that Bush and Kravchuk could have a private word . Gundersen is the head of the Consulate.
 Bush stuck with a cautious approach in his speech to the Rada . White House concern that a sudden or violent breakup of the Soviet Union could adversely affect U.S. interests .
 Nearly one-quarter of the seats were empty, though Kravchuk said it was a relatively large gathering for the body .
 He warned Americans will not support those who seek independence in order to replace a far-off tyranny with a local despotism . He warned that Americans will no longer support independence .
 They will not aid those who promote a suicidal nationalism based upon ethnic hatred . They will also not aid the people who promote suicidal nationalism .
 Not yet fully convinced that Gorbachev’s days were numbered, Washington waited for what would happen next .
 If Ukraine breaks away, other republics would follow, and the Soviet Union would fall apart . If Ukraine indeed broke away, others would follow .
 The White House believed the U.S. government should not intervene in any overt way .
 Bush sought to carefully modulate his relationships with Gorbachev and Yeltsin . The former's influence waned while the latter’s was on the rise .
 Washington watched as the Soviet government tried to work out an arrangement with the republics . The Soviet government was trying to get an agreement with Washington .
 The consulate in Kyiv predicted a strong majority vote for independence . The consulate predicted the majority vote.
 The Rukh movement has called for independence from Ukraine . The U.S. community increased its push for diplomatic recognition of Ukraine in the fall .
Ukraine 2000, the Ukrainian National Association, and Ukrainian National Information Service, assisted by the Ukrainian Weekly paper . Three groups targeted at building congressional interest in and support for Ukraine .
 Robert McConnell is a political consultant who served in the Reagan administration . He became Ukraine 2000’s government relations committee chairman .
 The effort produced a draft congressional resolution calling on the administration to recognize Ukraine . The effort has ninety House sponsors and nearly thirty from the Senate .
 Congress did not pass the resolution as a stand-alone measure, but it did pass it as an amendment to an appropriations bill in November .
 The December 1 referendum asked voters whether they supported the August 24 declaration of independence adopted by the Rada . The referendum was held on December 1 .
 Rada has appointed acting president and five other candidates for the presidency . Voters would also choose among Kravchuk, whom the Rada had appointedacting president, and five others .
 Sherman Garnett and Thomas Graham visited Kyiv in late November . They found broad support for independence, including among pensioners .
 The State Department dispatched Niles and Napper to Kyiv to observe the referendum . The referendum is a referendum on Ukraine's status of the country .
 The overwhelming vote for independence was 90 percent in favor, with turnout exceeding 80 percent of the electorate . The vote surprised the consulate staff and many Ukrainians .
 A serious argument within the U.S. government for sticking with Gorbachev was no longer possible . A serious argue within the United States government was not possible .
 On December 3, Bush placed a congratulatory call to Kravchuk, who had handily won the presidential election .
 The U.S. government still holds back from formal recognition . The United States government, however, still held back.
 Napper recalls the turmoil that might be unleashed by plunging a stake into the heart of the beast . No one seemed especially enthusiastic about the turmoil .
 Belarusian Supreme Soviet chairman Stanislav Shushkevich took care of that . Kravchuk, Yeltsin, and Yelts in, and Belarusian supreme Soviet chairman, Stanisla Shushkvich, took care.
 The three announced the end of the Soviet Union as a subject of international law . The Commonwealth of Independent States would link the post-Soviet republics .
 U.S. officials began communicating with Ukrainian leaders . They proposed key principles that would form a basis for recognition and the establishment of diplomatic relations .
 Meeting in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on December 21, leaders of eleven of the Soviet republics endorsed the establishment of the Commonwealth of Independent States .
 Yeltsin's military advisers took charge of the briefcase with the nuclear codes . The hammer and sickle came down over the Kremlin, replaced immediately by the Russian tricolor .
 Bush gave a short televised address to the American people on Christmas evening . Later that day, on Christmas night, he gave a televised address .
 He announced recognition of Russia, Ukraine, and ten other now independent republics . He announced Recognition of Russia and Ukraine .
 Ukraine and several other republics had given the U.S. assurances of their commitment to responsible nuclear security policies and democratic principles . He noted that Ukraine and many of the other nations had given United States assurances .