 Paulafort lied to Robert Mueller after agreeing to a plea bargain, Paulafort says . The convicted felon got a lot of credit for lying to Mueller .
 Donald Trump is the man who took a drifting presidential campaign and helped deliver an unlikely nomination for Donald Trump .
Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych was elected in 2010 as Ukraine's president . Yanukovych was previously unelectable, but was re-elected as president in 2010 . Yanukovych won the election in Ukraine by a narrow margin .
Manafort’s time in Ukraine and a different picture emerges. But dig a little deeper into his time in the country and a new picture emerges . The Ukrainian government has been accused of corruption in recent years .
 Under President Yanukovych, Ukraine was a kleptocracy run by and for a gang of crooks who had carved up the country after the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Yanukovych may have introduced Yanukovych to power dressing, a good barber, and a neat line in soundbites .
 In the end, this made little difference in an election already bought and paid for . But, in the end it made little Difference in the election .
Manafort gave the campaign the international respectability it needed to conduct a huge money-laundering operation necessary to handle the theft of the country’s wealth . It was because it was because the campaign gave it the internationalrespectability it required to conduct the operation .
Manafort was convicted of multiple counts of financial fraud related to his role in Ukraine . He is now in jail, having been convicted of several counts of fraud .
 Robert Mueller is special counsel looking into ties between the Trump Administration and Russia . He was accused by Robert Mueller of lying to federal investigators .
 The underlying criminal charges deal with how he tried to bring the money he had earned in Ukraine into the United States by illegal means . But do not fully explain why he was working for players in Ukraine or the nature of their work together .
 It is true that Yanukovych’s political savvy and experience were attractive to the men behind Yanukovych .
Manafort knew how to lobby successfully in the U.S. and elsewhere . He specialized in representing repressive regimes .
Manafort’s record indicates that he didn’t give a damn who he worked for just as long as the money came in .
 He worked extensively with the Angolan rebel leader Jonas Savimbi . He also worked with Angolan rebels .
 All three resorted to oppression, abduction, murder, and torture to achieve their political goals, and enriched themselves in the process . All three were involved in torture, abduction and murder, according to reports .
 Yanukovych was Yanukovych’s client, but his route to Ukraine was via Russia .
 Oleg Deripaska became one of the richest and most influential men in Russia . He emerged on top from the bloody aluminium wars of the 1990s . His first contact was with long-time Putin ally OlegDeripaska .
 Akhmetov is Ukraine’s wealthiest oligarch and its most influential power broker . He is Ukraine's richest oligarch .
Manafort's role was crucial in legitimizing the Yanukovych presidency and cranking up the kleptocracy .
 Yanukovych was initially unimpressed with Yanukovych, convinced he could never win . Yanukovych was convinced he couldn't win.
 Yanukovych was Putin’s favored candidate, and he wasn’t going anywhere . But he wasn't going anywhere. He was Putin's favored candidate .
With the backing of most of the country's leading oligarchs and the full support of the Kremlin, the party seemed likely to be in power for a long time .
 The party had been caught rigging the election and was deposed in a popular uprising . The party was caught by the popular uprising against the party .
With corrupt leaders unseated by the Orange Revolution, rival Viktor Yushchenko assumed the presidency with a mandate to reform the system and root out corruption .
 Infighting with former President Leonid Kuchma had obstructed party members in Donbas and Crimea, meaning cheating was their only recourse to assuming power .
 Yanukovych and the oligarchs behind him saw Lazarenko’s conviction as a threat to their lucrative racket .
 They needed to improve their image abroad to allow them to clean their money offshore . They need to clean up their money overseas to allow their money to be cleaned .
afort went to work on creating a Western-style campaign for Yanukovych . He introduced him to the world's political elite .
 He was tasked with coordinating the wide network of offshore accounts, businesses, and banks to ease the movement of money abroad .
 He developed relations with powerful U.S. political actors who would be friendly to Yanukovych . He worked to improve the image of the oligarchy abroad .
 Yanukovych regularly visited his opulent Mezhyhirya estate, with its private zoo and gilded bathrooms . In the process, Yanukovych got close to Yanukovych, regularly visiting his estate .
 Yanukovych was Yanukovych’s preferred tennis partner, usually letting him win . They would swim naked together in the private lake next to where Yanukovych's personal galleon was moored .
 Yanukovych's role was crucial in legitimizing the Yanukovych presidency and enabling the cranking up of the kleptocracy following his victory .
 Yushchenko government collapsed after falling out with his Orange Revolution partner, Yulia Tymoshenko . The first was the collapse of the government after the fall out with Yulia.
 President Yushchenko had to make deals with the oligarch Akhmetov to survive in government . This strengthened his hold on power, but stifled his ability to enact reforms .
 The second factor was the Donbas, a region of Ukraine in which Akhmetov had almost total control . The Donbas was the region where Akh Metov had nearly total control.
 Akhmetov's industrial base was dominated by coal and steel, all owned by the company . The company is owned by Akh Metov, which owns coal, steel and coal .
Manafort's role may have been incidental to Yanukovych’s win, but it was crucial in what came next .
 This was equally true of post-Soviet Ukraine, where politics and corruption were indivisible . This was also true of the post- Soviet Ukraine, when politics and Corruption were indIVisible .
 What was purportedly a modern democracy was in fact a kleptocracy, run by about a dozen men made wealthy by privatization deals following the fall of communism and the breakup of the Soviet Union .
 In the Ukraine of the time, it was impossible to separate politics, business, and crime . In Ukraine, crime was a major issue for the country .
 In GDP terms, this is 2,000 times more than is spent on an average U.S. election campaign . This is more than the amount spent on the average campaign .
 Seats in Ukraine’s parliament could be bought and sold, and the millions spent to get elected would be repaid, many times over, with the levers of government at their disposal .
 Speculators would buy a seat and then sell it off to the winning party at a handsome profit . Speculator would then sell the seat to winning party.
 The winning party would sell off government posts that gave opportunities for graft and personal advancement . In turn, the winning party will sell off posts that give opportunities to graft andpersonal advancement .
 Many millions spent to get elected would be repaid, many times over, with the levers of government at their disposal . Many millions candidates and parties spent to be elected would not be repaid .
 Most savvy businessmen would seek to buy and control a bloc of votes to better influence policy and budgets in their favor . The most savvy businessmen want to buy, control and control votes to influence policy .
 There were several ways that a Ukrainian oligarch could divest himself of his ill-gotten gains . There are several ways to divest yourself of his gains .
 This might be through rewards or kickbacks to others who had helped, or currying favor with political leaders in either Ukraine or Russia . This might have been through rewards and kickbacks, or the buying of further political influence .
Rick Gates described in court testimony how he and his business partner had laundered money for several Ukrainian oligarchs by setting up offshore shell companies and bank accounts, mostly in Cyprus .
 Yanukovych and Yanukovych's cozy project came crashing down in early 2014 . The Maidan Revolution toppled the government and sent Yanukovych scurrying to Russia .
 Yanukovych granted hundreds of millions of dollars worth of state contracts to his dentist son, Oleksandr . Yanukovych was one of the wealthiest men in Ukraine at the time .
Serhiy Kurchenko built a business empire in oil refining, media, energy, and banking worth more than $3 billion . Kurchenko was then-twenty-seven-year-old Serhiy. Kurchenko's business empire was worth $3billion .
 A peaceful demonstration about the nonsigning of a treaty escalated quickly into a bloody conflict . The protesters felt that they had less to lose .
 She claims it was their father's idea to ‘send those people out and get them slaughtered’ on the fateful morning of February 20, 2014 .
 The riot police suddenly retreated from their positions surrounding the protesters in Independence Square in Kiev .
 The protesters pursued the police up the hill in the direction of parliament . The protesters followed the police to parliament .
 People around the stage started to suspect something was amiss . The show was held at the main square in London .
 Through the public address system, protesters implored the protesters to return . They implored them to return to the streets .
 The protesters flooded into the area vacated by the riot police only to be met by sniper fire .
 wooden shields and yellow construction helmets were picked off by one by one . With their wooden shields, they were chosen by one.
 Many were killed trying to treat fallen comrades or to drag them back to the barricades . Many were trying to help them to get back to their comrades .
 More than fifty protesters lost their lives in the bloodiest day of the revolution . More than 50 protesters were killed.
 He then returned to America and offered his services for free to the Trump campaign . He returned to the U.S. and offered services to Trump for free .
 It is out of character for Paulafort to work for nothing, particularly when he'd just lost such a lucrative income stream .
Paul Niland: “Manafort’s an opportunist.’
 The smallest amount of due diligence would have brought this to Trump’s attention and highlighted the dangers of associating with a man likeafort .
 Or Trump may have known about all the dirt onafort and just didn’t care about it .
 control of state gas monopoly Naftogaz was the most effective way to acquire wealth . For any oligarch wanting to acquire serious wealth, control of the gas monopoly was most effective .
 Government subsidies kept the price of natural gas piped from Russia artificially low, which benefited Ukrainian households during the cold winters .
 8 percent of the nation’s GDP was spent each year on subsidizing Naftogaz . The main beneficiary was not the Ukrainian consumer .
 businessmen in Russia and Ukraine managed to shave off billions by diverting some of the gas and selling it to industry at vastly inflated rates .
 Gas could be bought at $53 per 1,000 cubic meters and sold for as much as $410 . Gas could also be bought for $53 or $410, according to experts .
 corruption in the gas sector yielded profits of more than $3 billion a year, it is thought . It is thought that corruption in gas sector led to profits of over $3billion a year .
 Ukraine is Ukraine's biggest taxpayer, contributing 14 percent of the total revenues of the state budget . Today, a properly regulated gas industry is Ukraine’s biggest taxpayer .
 Yanukovych doled out large infrastructure projects to friends and family each year . Each year, Yanukovych doling out large projects to family and friends .
 Ukraine was preparing to co-host the UEFA European Championship . He was fortunate to become president just as Ukraine prepared to host the tournament .
 Corruption is not unheard of in government procurement around the world, but kickbacks of 50 percent are unusually high .
 The Yanukovych clan is believed to have enriched the Yanukovych clan to the tune of $2 billion a year . The process is thought to be part of a $2billion-a-year process .
 Ukrainian government says it has its own word for theft from the state budget . It is telling that Ukrainian state budget is for theft .
 Yanukovych clearly mastered this art. It’s difficult to do, but there is an art to it, and Yanukovych has mastered it, he says .
 He is reported to have stolen $3 billion to $5 billion per year from state budgets . He is also said to have stole $3billion to $4billion per year .
Public corruption is only due to public corruption, says John Sutter . Sutter: "They made a lot of money privately, too"
 Yanukovych family forced a sale of a company at a price way below its market value . A key method was “corporate raiding’s” where the Yanukovych family sold the company .
 Yanukovych and his associates stole a total of $40 billion from the state during his time as president, a report says . Yanukovych personally amassed a fortune of $12 billion, according to the report .
 Even in a region where corruption is rife, the scale of the theft is shocking . The scale of theft in the region is shocking, according to reports .
I was relieved to see this excellent article published in a progressive magazine . I was relieved that this article was published in the magazine .
Many leftists dismiss the Maidan Revolution as an American-backed plot against Vladimir Putin aka KGB Thug . Many leftists dismiss it as an U.S. plot.
 Venezuelan dictator Maduro is a target of American-backed opponents, according to the U.S. State Department .