 The recent backroom bilateral talks between the U.S. and Russia about Ukraine have caused anxiety in the region . The talks raised hopes that sanctions could be lifted, and elevated Russian President Vladimir Putin's status to super power .
 Russian proxies in Ukraine responded by moving people and weapons westward from Donetsk and re-escalating violence near Mariupol . The Ukrainian Defense Ministry says the violence has escalated near Mari upol .
 Europe's largest and besieged nation should not be a pawn in some two-way geopolitical chess game concocted by Putin . Europe's biggest and besieged country should not become a pawn.
 Washington must not fall for Russia's attempt to conflate the Ukrainian and Syrian crises. More importantly, Washington should not fall on Russia's attempts to confate the crises .
 Russia is not a solution in either conflict, but an aggressor, directly in Ukraine and indirectly through its support and arms sales to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's murderous regime .
 The ruble has cratered, along with oil prices, making imports and travel unaffordable for Russians . Russia's economy has been hit hard by the fall of oil prices .
 Moscow's social spending has been cut, leaving only shrinking foreign reserves to keep the lights on . Moscow's budget deficits soar, and social spending is cut .
Soros says there is $360 billion left, others say there is only half that amount left .
 The current situation "actually violates the social compact that has made him so popular," he says . The situation is basically financial stability and a slow but steadily rising standard of living .
"He has to do something about it ... the impending collapse of the Russian economy," Soros said .
 Kerry's ebullient statement that sanctions could be lifted this year was unhelpful, handing him a victory at home without cost . Putin's woes are why Kerry's statement at Davos is why he said sanctions were lifted .
 There are some faint signs of capitulation from the Russian side, he added . There are also faint signs.
 Fewer ceasefire violations have occurred since September, local leaders in Donetsk and Luhansk breakaway regions have mysteriously died . More moderate Russian negotiators with close links to Putin have been appointed .
 Ukraine and the West are advised to simply play a waiting game, and reinforce Ukraine's military capability . With Russia on the ropes, Ukraine and West are well advised to play a wait game .
 Kyiv must be able to better defend itself against an escalation, or, alternatively, to start to claw back territory from a weakened adversary . Kyiv has been accused of trying to protect itself from an escalation .
 Putin appears to have begun to corner himself, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Now is not the time to placate Putin especially since it appears that he has, at last, begun to turn himself .
 Evgeny Primakov chaired a group of retired senior ministers, high officials and military leaders from Russia and the U.S. From 2007 into 2009, Primakov and I chaired the group . Some of you present here today.
 The U.S.-Russian relationship was to ease the adversarial aspects of the relationship . Its purpose was to consider opportunities for cooperative approaches .
 In America, it was described as a Track II group, which meant it was bipartisan and encouraged by the White House to explore but not negotiate on its behalf .
 President Putin received the group in Moscow in 2007, and President Medvedev in 2009 . President Putin got the group.
 President George W Bush assembled most of his National Security team in the Cabinet Room for a dialogue with guests .
 All participants had held responsible positions during the Cold War . All the participants had been involved in the conflict .
 During periods of tension, they had asserted the national interest of their country as they understood it .
Technology could disrupt any organized human activity in crisis, says John Sutter . Sutter says he had learned through experience of technology threatening civilized life .
 Upheavals were looming around the globe, magnified in part by different cultural identities and clashing ideologies .
 The goal of the Track II effort was to overcome crises and explore common principles of world order . The goal is to overcome crisis and explore the world's common principles .
 His sharp analytical mind combined with a wide grasp of global trends acquired in years close to and ultimately at the center of power . His great devotion to his country refined our thinking and helped in the quest for a common vision .
 He is missed by all of us and by me personally as a colleague and a friend . He is missing by all. He is also missed as a friend and colleague .
 I do not need to tell you that our relations today are much worse than they were a decade ago . I don't need to say that, but our relations now are much better than they are now .
 They are probably the worst they have been since before the end of the Cold War . Indeed, they are probably worst they've been since the end.
 Evgeny Primakov looked for ways to overcome this disturbing state of affairs . I know that in his last months, he looked for way to overcome it . In his last month, he was seen looking for ways of overcoming this state of Affairs .
 At the end of the Cold War, both Russians and Americans had a vision of strategic partnership .
 Americans were expecting that a period of reduced tensions would lead to productive cooperation on global issues . Americans were hoping that a reduced tensions will lead to a productive cooperation .
 Russian pride in their role in modernizing their society was tempered by discomfort at the transformation of their borders and recognition of the monumental tasks ahead .
 Many on both sides understood that the fates of Russia and the U.S. remained tightly intertwined .
 Maintaining strategic stability and preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction became a growing necessity, as did the building of a security system for Eurasia, especially along Russia’s long periphery .
New vistas opened up in trade and investment; cooperation in the field of energy topped the list . New vistas open up in business and investment .
 Regrettably, the momentum of global upheaval has outstripped the capacities of statesmanship . The momentum of the global upheaval is outstripping the capacity of statemanship .
Prime Minister Evgeny Primakov ordered his plane to turn around and return to Moscow . The decision was symbolic, he said .
 The initial hopes that the early phases of the campaign against Al Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan might lead to partnership on a broader range of issues weakened in the vortex of disputes over Middle East policy, and then collapsed with the Russian military moves in the Caucasus in 2008 and Ukraine in 2014 .
 The more recent efforts to find common ground in the Syria conflict have done little to change the mounting sense of estrangement .
 In each country there is a tendency to demonize, if not the other country, then its leaders . The prevailing narrative in each country places full blame on the other side, says CNN.
 Some of the mistrust and suspicions from the bitter Cold War struggle have reemerged . As national security issues dominate the dialogue.
 Russia suffered a staggering socio-economic and political crisis in the first post-Soviet decade . U.S. enjoyed its longest period of uninterrupted economic expansion .
 All this caused policy differences over the Balkans, the former Soviet territory, the Middle East, and NATO expansion, missile defense and arms sales .
 Perhaps most important has been a fundamental gap in historical conception . The gap has been the most significant gap in history .
 For the United States, the end of the Cold War seemed like a vindication of its traditional faith in inevitable democratic revolution . For the U.S. it seemed like an end to the Cold war .
 It visualized the expansion of an international system governed by essentially legal rules . It was created by the International Court of Justice .
 To a country across which foreign armies have marched for centuries from both East and West, security will always need to have a geopolitical, as well as a legal foundation .
 Russia's security border moves from the Elbe 1,000 miles east towards Moscow . Russia's perception of world order will contain an inevitable strategic component .
 The challenge of our period is to merge the two perspectives -the legal and the geopolitical -in a coherent concept . The challenge is to combine the two sides in a coherent idea .
 In this way, paradoxically, we find ourselves confronting anew an essentially philosophical problem . In this case, we face a philosophical problem.
 Many commentators have rejected the possibility of the U.S. and Russia working cooperatively on a new international order . Many commentators, both Russian and American, have rejected it .
 In their view, the United States and Russia have entered a new Cold War . The U.S. and Russia are in the middle of a Cold War, they say .
 The danger today is less a return to military confrontation than the consolidation of a self-fulfilling prophecy in both countries .
 The long-term interests of both countries call for a world that transforms the contemporary turbulence and flux into a new equilibrium which is increasingly multipolar and globalized .
Until quite recently, global threats were identified with the accumulation of power by a dominating state . Until now, international threats had been identified with power accumulation .
 Today threats more frequently arise from the disintegration of state power and the growing number of ungoverned territories .
 This spreading power vacuum cannot be dealt with by any state, no matter how powerful, on an exclusively national basis . This spread of power vacuum can't be dealt to any state. This is not a state's power vacuum, it's a national basis, says the
 It requires sustained cooperation between the U.S. and Russia, and other major powers .
 Competition must be constrained so that the competition remains within bounds and creates conditions which prevent a recurrence . The elements of competition, in dealing with traditional conflicts in the interstate system, must be restricted .
 There are a number of divisive issues before us, Ukraine or Syria as the most immediate. There are, as we know, many of them before us .
 For the past few years, our countries have engaged in episodic discussions of such matters without much notable progress . The U.S. has been engaged in such discussions without much progress .
 The discussions have taken place outside an agreed strategic framework . This is not surprising, because the discussions have been outside a strategic framework.
Each of the specific issues is an expression of a larger strategic one . Each of the issues is a strategic one, says the author .
 Ukraine needs to be embedded in the structure of European and international security architecture, says U.S. expert . Russia needs to become a bridge between Russia and the West, he says .
Local and regional factions cannot find a solution on their own. Regarding Syria, it is clear that the local and regional groups cannot find an solution on themselves .
 U.S.-Russian efforts coordinated with other major powers could create a pattern for peaceful solutions in the Middle East .
 Any effort to improve relations must include a dialogue about the emerging world order, says the U.S.
 The goal should be to develop a strategic concept for U.S.-Russian relations within which the points of contention may be managed . The goal is to develop the strategic concept.
 In the 1960s and 1970s, I perceived international relations as an essentially adversarial relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . In the 60s and 70s, he perceived the relationship as essentially adversary relationship .
 With the evolution of technology, a conception of strategic stability developed that the two countries could implement, even as their rivalry continued in other areas .
 Russia should be seen as an essential element of any new global equilibrium, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says Russia should not be a threat to the United States .
 Henry A Kissinger served as national security advisor and secretary of state under Presidents Nixon and Ford . Kissinger was president of the U.S. State Department under Nixon, Ford and Nixon .
 This speech was delivered as the Primakov lecture at the Gorchakov Foundation in Moscow .
 The Russian president governs an economy controlled by insiders who pay him homage and royalties in return for favors .
 Russia's oligarchs have amassed some of the biggest fortunes in the world . The takeover has been rapid and in less than one generation, Russia’s oligarchs.
 When Putin took power in 2000, Russia was in economic turmoil following the banking crisis of 1998 . Putin took control of Russia in 2000 .
 Russia’s class of oligarchs -political operators - became billionaires practically overnight in the 1990s .
 Putin began to take steps to consolidate and centralize political control by reining in the oligarchs in 2003 . But in 2003, Putin took steps to centralize and consolidate political control .
 Get involved in politics and there will be a price to pay. Enriching yourself on state resources is condoned, but get involved.
In Ukraine, homegrown oligarchs have profited from the exploitation of state resources . In Ukraine, much like in Russia, the oligarchs are profiting from state resources, like Russia .
 Corruption was rampant through the 1990s and 2000s, and it remains the greatest challenge to the current government . The current government is the biggest challenge to government .
 "Stolen Future" examines in detail the symbiosis between criminals and the expropriation of governance in both countries . The essay is published in the New York City-based book, "St stolen Future"
 For Ukraine in particular, the battle with corruption will make or break the country’s future as a liberal democracy . For Ukraine, the fight with corruption is a key issue .
 President Petro Poroshenko's government is reform-oriented, but reining in the oligarchs is no easy task . President Poroshenko’s democratically elected government is reforms-oriented .
 Russian leaders have developed an aptitude for window dressing . Catherine the Great's favorite minister Grigory Potemkin lined her travel route with sham villages .
 Putin is very skillful in this regard and would have the world believe that Russia is a respectable democracy governed by the rule of law . Putin would have been very skilled in this regards .
 Russia is run for the profit of Kremlin insiders and a small business elite, whose methods would be prosecuted in G7 countries . Under Putin’s administration, Russia is running for the profits of the Kremlin insiders .
 Ukraine suffers from centralization of resources and political power in the hands of a few individuals . Ukraine also suffers from the centralization.
 Russia's oligarchs were eventually brought under the control of the Kremlin . Ukraine’s elite has largely retained its freedom .
 The most powerful oligarchs continue to control the political agenda, often to their own financial benefit . Rinat Akhmetov, Victor Pinchuk, Ihor Kolomoyskyi and Dmytro Firtash are some of the most powerful .
Mass market reforms and privatization created unprecedented opportunities for politicians, as well as for unscrupulous and unsavory groups . What began in each country as mass market reforms, privatization and privatization.
 They accumulated awesome wealth, and then proceeded to destroy governments, individuals or laws in their way . They accumulate awesome wealth and then proceed to destroy government, individuals and laws .
 At the same time, both countries have struggled to modernize their economies . Both countries are struggling to modernized their economies.
 Russian incomes today are one third of those in energy-rich Saudi Arabia . Russian incomes are a third of the Saudi population .
 Ukraine has fallen far behind economically. Compared to other Eastern European post-socialist countries, Ukraine is far behind .
 Between 1992 and 2015, Ukraine’s gross domestic product per capita rose from $428 to just $2,109, even as GDP in Latvia soared from $631 to $13,729 .
 In 2015, 1,815 individuals were worth $50 million or more, and 93 were billionaires . Meanwhile, as the ruble halved in value, many Russian oligarchs still managed to retain their wealth .
 In 2014, 80 percent of Ukrainians were impoverished while five were billionaires and 98 were worth over $50 million . In 2014,. 80 percent were impoverished, while five of them were billionaires .
 Energy prices had been falling since 2014, pushed one in every seven Russians below the poverty line in 2015 .
 Political instability incentivized businesses to stash vast quantities of cash abroad . Political instability in both countries incentivized business to stash cash abroad.
 Ukraine loses an average of $11.68 billion annually, and a 10-year total of $115.642 billion . Ukraine loses a total of about $11 billion a year, and the total is $115 billion .
 Russia is unlikely to change much in the near term thanks to the tight control established under Putin . Russia is likely to remain tight under Putin.
 The country's civil society is active and has a strong core of reformers who cut their teeth on the Maidan Revolution of 2013–2014 . At its core, it was a democratic movement against the rampant political corruption of former President Yanukovych's government .
 Ukraine's economy has been further damaged by Russia’s intervention in the Donbas and Crimea . But Ukraine has also been damaged by Russian intervention in Crimea .
Russian meddling in Ukrainian politics has stymied political development . Russian meddling in Ukraine's political development is stymying political development.
 Ukrainian political elites worked hand in glove with the Kremlin before the Maidan Revolution of 2014 . Ukraine used state resources to gain political gains .
 The oligarchic system of governance began to take root in Ukraine after the collapse of the Soviet Union . It was firmly established under President Leonid Kuchma in the second half of the 1990s .
 Under Kuchma's administration, corruption flourished, with Ukraine’s vast state enterprises used as personal and political piggybanks .
 Along the way, Naftohaz was plundered and the Ukrainian treasury along with it . The Ukrainian treasury was also plunders .
 Ukrainian oligarchs bought gas from the monopoly at far below market prices . The gas flows became an arbitrage dream, as company officials colluded to flip cheap gas offered by Russia for re-export at higher prices to Europe .
 In 2005, then-Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko called for the sale of privatized assets to be annulled . The Orange Revolution unraveled the scale of thievery under Kuchma .
 Kuchma’s son-in-law Victor Pinchuk and oligarch Rinat Akhmetov acquired the Kryvorizhstal steel factory in 2004 for about $800 million .
 A year later, the next government reversed the sale and held a televised, public auction that netted $4. billion from Mittal Steel . A year after the sale, Mittal's sale was reversed, and a televised auction was held .
 Pavlo Lazarenko was one of Kuchma's prime ministers who was also close to Tymoshenko . He fled the country and was sentenced to prison in the United States for money laundering, wire fraud and extortion .
 According to authorities, he transferred roughly $114 million in funds from the government of Ukraine to banks in San Francisco from 1996 to 1997 .
 The network of corruption hurt, most of all, the Ukrainian people, as the government shoveled in subsidies to keep Naftohaz afloat .
 Ukrainian-Canadian academic Basil Kalymon says no direct subsidies were given to industries . The numbers do not include any direct subsidies, he says .
 Naftohaz bought 17 billion cubic meters of domestically produced gas at a set price of $53 per thousand cubic meters . For instance, the price was $53 a thousand cubic meter .
 Deputy Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman disclosed later that 40 percent of this was diverted through unknown intermediaries close to Yanukovych and sold at $410 per thousand cubic meters .
 Those who dared report on political corruption, meanwhile, were intimidated by political and criminal forces . Those who dare report on corruption were intimidated, while others were intimidated .
 Between 1995 and 2001, three journalists covering corruption issues were murdered . Igor Hrushetsky, Igor Aleksandrov and Ukrainska Pravda’s Georgiy Gongadze were killed .
 In addition to intimidation, arbitration fraud and asset stripping were rampant, according to the report .
 Naftohaz was restructured into regional power generation companies that were partially privatized for oligarchs' gain .
 One offshoot, Donbasenergo, was forced into near bankruptcy by Naftohaz subsidiaries, then forced to sell off power plants and privatize 60. percent for below market value .
 The stake was purchased by an offshore Dutch holding company owned by Igor Gumenyuk, a man allegedly connected to Ukraine’s richest oligarch, Rinat Akhmetov .
 A Ukrainian court agreed the sale was "illegitimate" because only a fraction of its value was realized . In February 2015, a Ukrainian court said the sale of the property was 'illeg legitimate'
 Victims included the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which had loaned Donbasenergo $113 million years before . The bank was loaned $113m years before.
 Yanukovych’s minister of energy, Yuriy Boyko, ordered Naftohaz to buy two offshore rigs for Black Sea drilling at a cost of $800 million . Another blatant asset strip was caught in 2011–2012, involving Yanukovych's minister ofenergy .
 A television documentary uncovered that the seller in the United Kingdom was a company that belonged to Boyko . Boyko had paid only $470 million recently for the rigs .
 Boyko remained minister until Yanukovych fled Ukraine in 2014 . Despite the revelation, he remained in the post until 2014 .
 He then ran successfully for election that October as a member of parliament, thus providing himself with parliamentary immunity from prosecution . He also ran for election in October, thus giving himself parliamentary immunity .
 Naftohaz’s former CEO Yevhen Bakulin was arrested in March 2014 as part of an investigation into major gas industry corruption . He was appointed in 2010 by Yanukovych, appointed by Yanukovych.
 In September 2014, the investigation was scrapped after records of the transactions could not be found .
 A public outcry ensued, forcing the Prosecutor General's Office to announce resumption of its probe . The Prosecutor General’s Office is now investigating the case .
 In October 2014, the prosecutor general’s office reversed its statement and said it was not investigating Bakulin . The prosecutor general's office has since said it is not investigating the case .
 The case was dropped against Bakulin, who had won a seat in Parliament in October 2014, giving him parliamentary immunity from future prosecution . Bakulin is a former member of Parliament, but he has been cleared of any criminal charges .
 corruption in the gas sector benefited Ukrainian oligarchs loyal to Putin . Corruption in the energy sector benefited Ukraine's oligarchs, according to reports .
 Kuchma and Putin gave exclusive rights to intermediary RosUkrEnergo to sell all gas to Ukraine . In 2004, Kuchman and Putin given exclusive rights.
 The intermediary was the brainchild of Dmytro Firtash, a Ukrainian trader with reportedly close connections to the Kremlin . The intermediary is reportedly the son of a Ukrainian businessman .
 Firtash allegedly owned 50 percent of the company with a junior partner and Gazprom the other 50 percent . The company allegedly owns 50 percent. The company has been accused of being in the hands of a junior partners .
 RosUkrEnergo was set up to funnel funds into the hands of Firtash and his allies . Evidence points to the fact that Ros Ukr energo had a role in funneling funds into his allies.
 RosUkrEnergo bought 20 billion cubic meters of gas from Russia at below market prices . It paid $230 per thousand cubic meters, or one-third of what Gazprom charged Naftohaz Ukrainy .
 The Ukrainian press had reported that RosUkrEnergo’s beneficiaries included Mogilevich, who is on the Federal Bureau of Investigation's most wanted list and lives in Moscow .
 Firtash said it was impossible to interact with a government official “without also meeting an organized crime member,’ he wrote in his cable .
 RosUkrEnergo was a tool to enrich both Russian and Ukrainian elites . It was also used to extend Russian political influence .
 Gazprombank, tied to Putin ally Yuri Kovalchuk, financed Firtash’s business transactions, according to Reuters . The bank is not affiliated with Gazprom but tied to the Putin ally .
 Yanukovych and his cronies grabbed tens of billions of dollars during his presidency . During his presidency, Yanukovych's cronies grab tens of millions of dollars .
 Yanukovych's son became a billionaire in three years, winning 50 percent of all government tenders while his father was in office . For instance, Yanukovych’s son, a dentist, was a billionaire .
 Ecology Minister Mykola Zlochevsky became a major player in the production of oil and gas in Ukraine during his tenure . He was the first Ukrainian Ecology Minister to be elected to the post .
 He claimed to have cornered a quarter of the country’s private hydrocarbon market .
 Hunter Biden put “trophy foreigners’ on his board of directors, such as Hunter Biden, son of U.S. Vice President Joseph Biden . Aleksander Kwaśniewski, former president of Poland, was also on the board .
 He abused his ministerial position to give a Cypriot company, which he controlled, extraction licenses without tendering for them . The company he controlled was not given the licenses .
 Yanukovych fled after Yanukovych's fall and is on Ukraine’s wanted list for alleged financial corruption . He has gone missing, along with an estimated $156 million. He fled after the fall, but he is on the wanted list.
 Those who profited from corruption schemes under Yanukovych have not been prosecuted . Those who benefited from the corruption schemes have been not prosecuted .
 Firtash was initially arrested in Austria under an extradition request from the United States . He has since been released under an Austrian judge’s ruling that the request was politically motivated .
 Firtash continues to influence Ukrainian politics, according to his own admission . He says he still has a role in Ukrainian politics .
Firtash told the Austrian court that before the 2014 fall election, candidates Petro Poroshenko and Vitali Klitschko flew to Vienna for a meeting with him . Firtash said the candidates had flown to Vienna before the fall election .
 Perhaps Firtash’s self-aggrandizing was simply bravado, but perhaps not bravado .
 Some experts maintain that Poroshenko granted immunity to former Energy Minister Yuriy Boyko and Yanukovych’s Chief of Staff Serhiy Lyovochkin .
 In 2005, Kolomoyskyi showed up at parliamentary hearings into re-privatizing Ukraine’s government assets to help pay off its debts .
 Pinchuk denied the allegations and said Kolomoyskyi was trying to stir up trouble in order to get him to drop a $2 billion lawsuit against Kolomoysskyi in London . The lawsuit was over an iron ore asset.
 Kolomoyskyi was rumored to have paid Pinchuk $500 million . Years later, in October 2015, the two supposedly settled their disagreement .
 Perhaps the oligarchs helped bring about Yanukovych’s demise because he went too far, according to the Russian media .
 Oligarchs control state apparatus, mass media and whole sectors of industry . Oligarchy control the state apparatus and mass media .
 Leshchenko: "They can simply put the brakes on reform as soon as their financial interests are threatened. They can just put the brake on reform," he says .
 Influence peddling, graft, collusion, injustice, bribery, extortion, fraud and asset stripping are systemic and have placed Ukraine in a catch-22 . Ukraine is now in a Catch-22.
 International pressure has helped somewhat, as has Poroshenko’s appointment of outsiders as ministers and governors .
 Naftohaz has significantly reduced Russian gas imports with supplies from European countries . It has jacked up domestic gas prices to world levels as a means to prevent arbitrage profiteering .
 The budget deficit has been brought under control and the most corrupt expenditures have been eliminated . The most corrupt spending has been eliminated. The most corruption expenditures have also been eliminated in the budget .
 Ukraine's former Finance Minister Natalie Jaresko restructured the country’s debts, got bailout help from the IMF, replenished reserves, verified social payments, put all treasury payments online and implemented electronic tax and excise tax systems .
 Many potential investors are still wary of entering Ukraine, due to doubts about the government’s ability to uphold the rule of law . The Naftohaz reforms and fully transparent procurement systems were implemented .
 Abromavicius resigned in February 2016, citing his frustration with entrenched, corrupt officials blocking reforms . In a blow to the reform effort, Abromvicius said he was frustrated with the corrupt officials .
 Jaresko suggested new government of independent technocrats to push through needed reforms . He suggested that the only hope for Ukraine was to lead an independent government .
 Abromavicius’s resignation signaled that attempts to fix the country will continue to be rebuffed, stalled or sabotaged . Control of the state has not been fully seized back from vested interests, he says .
 The solution is removal of any politician from office who served the old regime before 2014 . The end of immunity for politicians is also the end of the immunity for lawmakers .
Without these radical steps, reforms will likely be slow and ineffective . Without these radical Steps, reforms may be slow, ineffective .
 Poroshenko also caught in controversy for setting up an offshore account in the British Virgin Islands for his confectionery business .
 Some demanded impeachment, but the special prosecutor said no tax evasion had occurred . The special prosecutor says no tax evasion occurred .
 An adviser to Poroshenko said that the transfer was to third parties in a blind trust as a step to divest the business . The transfer was promised in 2014, the adviser said .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk resigned on April 10, more threatened resignations, the resignation of Jaresko and delays in IMF funding due to concerns about the slow progress of reforms .
 Putin’s economic and military war will continue to destabilize the region . Reforming Ukraine's economic and political systems is a geopolitical priority, says CNN's John Sutter .
 His tactics have also spread to the Middle East and the Syria crisis, where he is sabotaging allied efforts . His tactics are also spreading to the Mideast.
 If Ukraine implodes, millions of Ukrainian migrants seeking asylum could flood Europe in greater numbers than those from Syria caused by the war .
 Soros believes that the country could go bust by 2017, due to the combination of low oil prices and sanctions .
 Putin’s strategy of partial occupation -in Crimea and the Donbas -is turning sour .
 Both are troublesome and expensive, as is Russia’s support of pro-Russian breakaway regions in Georgia and Moldova . Both are expensive and troublesome, as are Russia's support for pro- Russian breakaways .
 The tide will only turn in favor of Ukraine if its oligarchy is brought to its knees, hopefully without further violence . But the tide will be in favor if Ukraine's oligarchs are brought to their knees, maybe without more violence .