 Russia’s long planned pivot east found itself unexpectedly wrong-footed in early 2014, following the Crimean referendum and subsequent western rebuke .
 The global collapse of oil prices – and that of the ruble – later that same year further eroded Russia’s leverage in Asia .
 Fast forward to the present and we’ve seen substantially more bark than bite .
 Russian sights are still firmly set on the east as it seeks long-term energy investment and political relevance . That said, the fundamentals have not changed, and the fundamentals are still not changed .
 China's pivot has been a marginal success to date, though it has been hamstrung by substantial reluctance on both sides . Previously, those goals largely started and ended with China .
 Gazprom has cut spending on the Power of Siberia pipeline . Initial deliveries are expected to be lower than originally planned . The much heralded $400 billion gas deal between the two countries is still on .
 China's commitment to Russia’s Yamal LNG is promising and will allow the project to move forward fully financed . But Russian companies have not seen the show of solidarity that was anticipated amid western sanctions .
 No Russian company has raised debt or equity on Chinese capital markets in the last two years . In fact, no Russian firm has raised equity or debt in the past two years.
 Chinese equity investments in upstream oil and gas activities in Russia's Far East have been slow to develop .
 China’s position – while still central – gives way to the field . As the pivot evolves however, China's position is still central .
 India and Southeast Asia are rapidly growing, hydrocarbon poor, and politically receptive to Russia’s advances . India is rapidly growing and is politically receptive.
 Any pipeline between the two nations is as unlikely as it would be long. To be clear, any pipeline between them would be short .
 Gazprom and Russia frankly aren't in a position to overinvest in land-based transport infrastructure . Gazprom, Russia and Russia are not in a positions to over invest in land based transport infrastructure.
 Other avenues for cooperation are quite viable, and have been prosperous in the early stages . Still, other avenues for cooperating are still viable, according to experts .
 Russia’s Rosatom State Nuclear Energy Corporation recently opened a regional office in Mumbai to facilitate project expansion in India and Southeast Asia . The company is capitalizing on already strong nuclear ties .
 At Kudankulam nuclear power plant, Russia and India’s largest energy project, construction is ready to begin on the third and fourth reactors .
New sites for as many as six reactors across the country are forthcoming . New sites for up to six reactors are expected to be built .
 India's ONGC Videsh purchased an additional 11 percent stake in Russia's Vankor oil fields in October . In October, India’s ONGCVidesh bought 11 percent of the oil fields .
 Indian companies have now invested $5. billion in Russia’s east Siberian fields .
 As the pivot develops, the number of interesting subplots in the Asia Pacific region and at home have grown too great to count .
 Russia's nuclear and LNG courtships of the likes of Vietnam, Cambodia, and Thailand to name a few are something to watch .
 Russia and Japan’s ongoing territorial dispute over the Kuril Islands .
 Relations between the two countries are warming and a resolution may only be an energy deal or two away . The two countries have been warming since the start of the year .
 Russia's Minister of Economic Development Alexey Ulyukaev detained on allegations of corruption in Rosneft’s acquisition of Bashneft . The Russian state seized the company from oligarch Vladimir Yevtushenko in 2014 .
 Russia is seeking to define what has been a meandering, though moderately successful path east . As China demonstrates its willingness to wait, Russia is still seeking to redefine its path east.
 No international observers could possibly be there in time for the “referendum’s’ referendum . No reasonable campaigns and social debate could be had in such a short time .
 The counting process was not controlled by any reputable international observers . The counting was not monitored by any international observers.
 The Ukrainian Constitution only allows secession referenda to be held on a national level, not regional level . The Crimean Parliament "decision" was illegal anyway, so the decision was illegal .
 The Crimean Tartars, who are native inhabitants of the peninsula, predominantly did not take part in the “referendum’s” as it was obviously illegal and completely controlled by Russian forces .
 The “referendum” only gave the options of independence and re-unification with Russia . There was no option to stay with Ukraine .
 tens of thousands of soldiers of ‘unknown army’ set up checkpoints all over the republic and hold the “voters’ at gunpoint .
 The downing of Malaysian MH-17 flight by a high-altitude anti-aircraft system Buk, which was smuggled into Ukraine by Russian Army . Russian Army officers operated the Buk system at the time of launch .
 The open invasion of Ukraine by regular Russian Army forces in August 2014 at Ilovaisk and in February 2015 at Debaltseve . The Russian Army has been involved in the Ukraine crisis since then .