 The European Union Liaison Committee of Historians/ Professor Emeritus. Gérard BOSSUAT is a member of the EU Liaison committee . The committee is based in Paris, France .
 Prof. Wichard WOYKE, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Munster, Germany, is a professor in Germany .
 Dr. phil. habil Michael GEHLER, Universität Hildesheim, Germany, is a professor at the University of Hildeheim . He says he is a member of the German National Council of Germany .
 Prof. Reinhard MEYERS, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Munster, Germany, wrote the book .
 Prof. Dietmar WILSKE, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Munster, Germany, is a German professor .
 Sylvain SCHIRMANN is the Director of the Institut d’études Politiques Politiques de Strasbourg . He is also the head of the Institute of the Politiques of Strasbourg, France .
Gilda TRUICĂ, European Institute of Romania, Head of Communication Unit Editorial Staff Prof. Gilda TRuicĂ is the head of communication Unit of Romania . She is also a member of the European Institute for Romania .
Reinhard Meyers Professor emeritus of International Politics, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster meyersr@uni-muenster.de Abstract .
 There is no agreement on the exact content of the concept, nor on its qualitative characteristics, nor its political implications . There is also no agreement.
 Some sources stress its newness and see Hybrid Warfare as a further development of asymmetric warfare . Others maintain that a combination of regular and irregular forms of war fighting has been with Humanity at least since Antiquity .
 Hybrid warfare; Add-on concept of hybridity; Hybrid warfare plus; Gray zone; Warfighting in the 21st century . War fighting in the 20th century.
 In February 1848, again a “…spectre is haunting Europe…’ – now, now, no longer that of Communism as stated by Marx and Engels in their famous Manifesto (Manifesto, 2010, p..), but rather that of renewed Russian expansionism
 Hybrid Warfare is a cleverly fiendish ruse by which Dark Vader undercuts and evades the defensive promises of Art .
 “strategically innovative use of ambiguity…’ – conveys to the offensive party qualities of camouflage, invisibility, and nonattributability, the likes of which originally have been, long ago, ascribed to Alberich the gnome2 .
 NATO has not yet found its Siegfried successfully grasping the magic cap in order to demystify and debunk the more bizarre outgrowths of the hybrid warfare discussion . We would submit, however, that the difference between Wagner’s Rhinegold Ring as of yore and
 We use a combination of military and non-military means to stabilize countries . We use both military andNon-Military means to stabilize countries .
 This volume includes a fair arc from Russia’s aims and policies in Georgia, on the Crimean, in the Ukraine and elsewhere . We invite the reader to follow us on this little critical journey .
 H Carr, Henry Kissinger, Zbigniew Brzezinski, or Ernst Haas. The explanation could be found in the dominant global role of the United States in the post-World War II world .
 John R Davis strongly advocates the formation of a hybrid mindset rather than adding up of known forms of regular and irregular warfare to make up the new hybrid concept . More on this below .
 The German strategic community has really risen to the Hybrid Warfare debate only as a consequence of the occupation of the Crimean peninsula by Russia in 2014 .
 The debate is slowly percolating through to the CEE and SEE members of the EU . paradigmatic examples are Jagello 2000, Prague, Sandor, Budapest and Josan/Voicu .
 Anton is dealing with the cognitive skills necessary in dealing with future war forms and hybrid threats . Anton is also dealing with a number of hybrid threats and threats .
Military theory circles became a mainstream term used to describe security and defense challenges to the West . It was dragged out from the relative obscurity of military theory circles to become a mainstream word .
 The invention of new terms to describe and explain challenges we face is a common tendency among security and defense analysts and practitioners .
 HW has received a substantial amount of criticism for its use of new terms . The term has become widely used .
 The concept was deduced from looking at the enemy, thus shifting its definition and meaning according to the subject of analysis . HW lacks conceptual clarity .
 It has been attacked for being a catch-all phrase or a buzzword with limited analytical value that does not contain anything distinctly new .
U.S.-American discussion of Hybrid Warfare has been dominated by the U.S. debate on the issue .
 Hybrid wars can be multinodal, conducted by both states and a variety of nonstate actors . hybrid wars can also be carried out by states and non state actors .
 These multimodal/multinodal activities can be conducted by separate units or even by the same unit . They are generally operationally and tactically directed and coordinated within the main battlespace to achieve synergistic effects .
 Hybrid threats blend the lethality of state conflict with the fanatical and protracted fervor of irregular warfare .
 In such conflicts, future adversaries will be stretched so broad as to become conceptually synonymous with grand strategy itself .
 The concept of HW is still an open and heated question debate. Just how far to extend the concept to include the full spectrum of conflict without denuding it of its utility is still open .
 The literature on HW provides fertile grounds for discussing the future of war and warfare as well as broader security and defense challenges to which the West currently lack responses. While these criticisms remain valid, it is also clear that the literature of HW is valid .
 The additive character of the concept is the stringing together of a larger number of attributes around a common kernel or gravity center formed by a combination of regular and irregular and/or unconventional types, strategies, and tactics of warfare .
 ‘hybrid’ may well form a hybrid set of threats and strategy, but it is not clear why the term should be used . ‘This may well be a hybridSet of threats, but not a hybrid,’ says author .
 Marx and Engels would live today to see the effects of the 4th industrial revolution (Schwab 2016) They would still point to the development of the forces of production and digitalization as the main driver of the development.
 Cyberattacks are enabled not through the generation of force but by the exploitation of the enemy’s vulnerabilities .
 The medium is fraught with ambiguities about who attacked and why, about what they achieved and whether they can do so again . The medium has been fraught with ambiguity about who attacks and why .
Deterioration and warfighting tenets established in other media do not necessarily translate reliably into cyberspace . Thus, deterrence and war fighting tenets established by other media don't necessarily translate into cyberpace .
 Schreier 2015; briefer Klimburg 2014, and for a more critical discussion Gartzke 2013. Schreer 2015: "Schreier 2016"
 English and German language articles in Sicherheit und Frieden/Security and Peace 33 2014 . Useful starter collection of English andGerman language articles .
 Hybrid Warfare is a new concept of state-vs-state zero-sum game . The concept is being debated over and beyond the traditional competitive state-v-vs. state zero- sum game perspective .
 It implies a blurring of the distinction between military and civilian. It implies that the distinction is between the military and the civilian .
 States can intentionally act in “hybrid manners’s” when they choose to blur the lines between covert and overt operations . In other cases, states can also intentionally act as ‘hybrid’ States can also act in 'hybrid manner
 of particular interest in this context are irregular forces clothed in uniforms without national identification tags . Of particular interest, this context is irregular forces in uniforms with national ID tags .
 irregular actors often are provisioned with modern military equipment . They can perform and resist organised military assaults in force-on force engagements .
 hybrid actors seize every opportunity to engage in whatever space is available . Hybrid actors seize each other's opportunity to take advantage of the space available .
 The main intention in the strategy for political subversion is to isolate and weaken an opponent by eroding his legitimacy in multiple fields .
 It is a war that appears to be an incomprehensible sequence of improvisations, disparate actions along various fronts . humanitarian convoys followed by conventional war with artillery and tanks in, for instance, eastern Ukraine, peacekeeping operations in Transnistria, cyber-attacks in Estonia
 The diversity of hybrid tactics masks an order behind the spectrum of tools used . It's not the first time hybrid tactics have been used in the past.
War is an extension of politics by other means, says Carl von Clausewitz . It is incumbent upon political leaders and strategic thinkers to classify such activities accurately within the political objectives discussed by Clausewitz.
 A lot of these instruments and building blocks are of course not new at all, but part of the time-honoured toolbox of conventional warfare .
 The attribution of individual acts of violence is left in the vague, or made unclear on purpose . It is not the blending of elements of regular and irregular, symmetric and asymmetric kinetic warfare which produces the specific character of the hybrid .
 In the past, irregular tactics and protracted forms of conflict have mostly been marked as tactics of the weak, employed by non-state actors .
 Others have argued that the concept is overhyped, ahistorical, and perhaps even meaningless . 16.
 If the spectrum of conflict is conceived as a line running from peaceful interstate competition to nuclear Armageddon on the far right, gray zone conflicts fall left of center . If the line is drawn up, it could be a line between peaceful interstate conflict on the left and nuclear Armageddon.
 There is a yawning conceptual gap between the traditional models of war and peace that U.S. strategists employ to pace plans and capabilities . The simple answer is that there is a gaping conceptual gap.
 revisionist and rejectionist actors and forces exploit the “gray space in this gap,’s author says . U.S. efforts to effectively match and reverse mounting strategic losses, he says .
 A holistic materialistic view of history has become somewhat unfashionable over the last quarter century or so .
 It may also spread disinformation (in target and third countries), exert economic pressure and threaten energy supplies . It could also threaten energy supply .
In order to be successfully executed, a degree of integration between these elements is required . In order to achieve this, the elements are subordinated to some sort of strategic command .
 If we want to differentiate between hybrid warfare and classic war, the main demarcation criterion is the use of the means that are primarily used to achieve the objectives of war .
 In hybrid warfare, it is important that non-military means of subversive nature play the leading role .
 Ideally, an attacking state need not make explicit use of military force . An attacking state needs not make explicitly use military force.
 The aim of the attacker is to control the minds of the political leadership and the population of the attacked state through propaganda, deceptive campaigns and intimidation by terror .
 NATO’s Comprehensive Approach, the planned, pre-arranged, and centrally coordinated use of diplomatic, military, humanitarian, economic, technological, and information technology tools for the achievement of political aims .
 The Comprehensive Approach might originally have intended to solve hard conflicts by coordinated soft power, civilian actors, and well-minded international organizations . The military provides only technical assistance from the wings .
 Institut für Sicherheitspolitik an der Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel . Institut is a Christian-albrecht-universitayt. It is an institution for the Sicher heitspolit
 Asymmetrische und hybride Konflikte in einer multipolaren Weltordnung . In ein multipolare Weltordsung, Konflkte is in a multipolararen Welordnund .
 ‘hybrid warfare’ a new systematic element was established in scientific research . With introduction of the concept ‘Hybrid Warfare’ the concept was introduced .
 The concept is discussed rather controversially and often its scientific value is questioned . Nevertheless, the concept is often discussed rather controversial .
Most of the literature describes the empirical phenomena of hybrid warfare, but does not provide a theoretical based argumentation . Most of the material is based on empirical evidence, but not theoretical .
 The paper addresses the neglected aspect of systemic analysis by focusing on vulnerability of modern societies . It outlines a concept based on the theoretical idea of safety, security and certainty .
 The analysis presented here shows that sociology and system engineering have already developed valuable conceptual definitions of safety, security and certainty that can be used for the analysis of asymmetric conflicts .
 The missing link, closed by this paper, was an interdisciplinary approach to integrate these concepts into an analysis framework . It was an Interdisciplinary approach.
 The findings indicated that the new forms of asymmetric conflicts can be understood as a concise and precise analysis of the systemic weaknesses of nation states and their societies .
 Western European nations focus their security policy mainly on past challenges of war and peace . Still, Western European countries focus their Security Policy mainly on the past .
 societies of these nations remain highly vulnerable to safety threats and uncertainty . Therefore, societies of those nations remain very vulnerable to danger .
 The presented theoretical framework supported this result and should be of value to analysts and scientists alike . The present theoretical framework supports this result. It should also be ofvalue to scientists and analysts alike .
 Theoretical framework. Hybrid warfare; Safety; Security; Certainty; Systemic analysis . Theoretic framework .
 Difficulties arise when an attempt is made to develop new concepts in the light of new emerging phenomena .
 Crimea has seen a number of sophisticated attacks in the cyber space in 2014 . But with events in the Crimea during 2014 and the occurrence of the attacks in 2014, the attacks are still occurring .
Analysts struggle with the challenge to explain the innovation in asymmetric conflicts .
 The concept of hybrid warfare should solve the problem to explain why a nation state is using asymmetric methods and tactics and why this kind of conflict does not escalate into an interstate war . The concept should also explain why this type of conflict doesn't escalate into a war .
 Existing research often concentrates on the categorization of conflicts and has not treated the underlying systemic drivers for asymmetric conflicts systematically .
 This is especially true in the case of hybrid warfare, in which western societies are attacked not with conventional means, but with asymmetric methods . This is particularly true in this case, with irregular actors like insurgents, guerrillas or terrorist .
 Overall the new kind of asymmetric methods try to exploit the inherent vulnerability of western societies . The new type of asymmetrical methods are used to exploit Western societies .
 Inherent vulnerability refers to the systemic interdependency between security provided by nation states and safety demanded by the society . Inherent vulnerabilities refers to a systemic inter dependency between national security and safety .
In western European nations with a high degree of interdependent social, economic and political processes is undermined. One core assumption of this paper is that in western Europe, security and safety is undermined .
 This is rooted in the observation that the safety demand of the society is not met by the available security instruments of the nation state . This is based on the fact that the country's security instruments are not available to citizens .
 The nation state as security provider does not fit into the requirements of a highly networked, data driven, globalized and specialized society and economy .
 The aim of this paper is to support the argument above by outlining the challenges of existing definitions of hybrid warfare . The aim is to focus on the missing part of a systemic perspective to this kind of conflict .
 hybrid warfare does not implement a new instance of asymmetric conflict or warfare. It will be argued that hybrid warfare doesn't implement new instances of warfare .
 hybrid warfare as part of an innovative development of asymmetric warfare and conflict . In contrast, it will be examined whether the perspective of systemic vulnerability can be helpful to understand the existence of hybrid warfare .
 Hybrid warfare is a phenomenon without epistemological surplus value . There is a degree of uncertainty around the terminology of hybrid warfare .
 The concept as it is discussed recently by scholars is by far not as precisely and concisely defined as necessary for a sound analysis of the phenomenon . The concept is not as precise and concise.
This definition highlights the variety of actors involved in such kind of conflict . It stresses the importance of a comprehensive strategy and leadership . This definition highlights a variety of actor involved in conflict .
Hoffman assumes a coherent planning and decision making process during warfare campaigns and operations . By that Hoffman assumes aherent planning and decisions making process .
 This assumed strategic coherence can be challenged by questioning the coherent intentions and objectives of actors involved in the conflict .
Experiences from the comprehensive approach 18 in Western European nations confirm difficulties to implement a synchronized and complementary strategy both in international missions and in national or European missions .
 Hoffman’s definition is too broad to be very specific for analytical purposes . It is necessary to think beyond the categorization of the phenomenon .
 Traditionally, there is a clear distinction between peace and war in international law . The Peace of Westphalia 1648 and the Treaty of Utrecht 1713 limit the exercise of armed force to sovereign international actors .
 Classical concept of interstate war and peace 18 Comprehensive approach is a strategy that combines military, political and civilian instruments to achieve common goal in crisis and conflict management .
 Both Hoffman and Münkler try to grasp the complexity of the phenomenon by describing its very character and nature .
 Münkler outlines legal implications for security policy and international relations . Hoffman stresses the point of how hybrid warfare is conducted from leadership and decision-making point of view .
 Neither Hoffman's definition nor Münkler’s statements do support the idea that the concept of hybrid warfare can really provide epistemological value for research and analysis .
Münkler's notion about international law is valuable to investigate Münklers' notion of international law . If in international law indicators exist that can help in understanding the new conflict form.
 For a conflict to be labelled as a non-international armed conflict it is necessary to identify the involved actors and the minimum level of intensity of the conflict . As shown in figure 2, for a conflict. to be labeled as a Non-International armed conflict.
 If nongovernmental forces are supported, organized or even informally manned by another nation state the configurations of the conflict get even more complicated . The status of such forces is not clarified by the concept .
 The unidentified forces were the so-called ‘little green men’ during the Crimean conflict in February 2014 .
Russian soldiers entered and occupied terrain on the Crimea and sized military facilities, public administrations and important businesses and companies .
 Accompanied by information and cyber operations this conflict has shown a new brand of elements not covered by international humanitarian law .
 hybrid warfare uses an innovative brand of elements and presumably involved actors . In total the new aspect can be seen in the participation of nation states via an interface, ally, ally or proxy .
 Hybrid warfare by implementing asymmetric strategies via non-governmental actors. In conclusion, new and complex definitions of hybrid warfare do not grasp the underlying systemic interdependencies and influences .
 The new forms of hybrid warfare can be understood as a form of asymmetric conflict and warfare enhanced by the active yet covert support of a nation state .
 This is the essence of hybridization, and in the following hybrid warfare will still be labelled as asymmetric conflict and warfare . In the future, hybrid warfare is still called asymmetric war and warfare.
 Vulnerability – key target for asymmetric operations . To understand the new form of hybridization it is more important to understand why actors apply such elements and which intentions of actors can be identified .
In asymmetric conflicts nation states as well as non-governmental actors try to target the weak points of the adversary by asymmetric means . One of the central arguments of this paper is that in asymmetric conflict nation states try to targets weak points by asymmetry .
 weak vulnerable points are critical assets within a social, political, economic or military system. Mostly, such weak points are important assets within the system, says the author .
 High risk means high costs in a case of possible damage of an asset combined with a rather easy way to attack it . High risk is high in the case of a possible damage to an asset.
 It is crucial to understand vulnerabilities of a system to understand potential targets for actors using asymmetric methods . It is also crucial to understanding vulnerabilities of the system to understanding potential targets .
 One is that it reflects the security policy of western European nations and hence supports the empirical view of the phenomenon . Another is that the phenomenon reflects Western Europe's security policy .
 The concept of vulnerability is one of those rare sources that clearly define the concept of vulnerable . The concept is a conceptual view that supports the conceptual view .
 The inherent logic of center of gravity is that not only the core strength but also the crucial vulnerability can be found in the capabilities and requirements to implement a successful policy or strategy .
 The main intention of an asymmetrically acting adversary is to exploit exactly those weak points that can endanger easily the overall strategy of a targeted actor . The main goal is to attack exactly the weak points.
An internet based economy for the purpose of achieving sustainable growth of the national economy in a highly competitive and computer technology driven globalized world . Another example could be the development of an internet-based economy for a sustainable growth.
 The identification of weak points in the systems starts with the identification of critical capabilities for the center of gravity . For both examples, the identification is the same as the identification for weak points .
 As depicted in figure 4 this could be the policy to unify actors in a coalition like NATO or to support innovation in internet based businesses .
 The second step investigates the critical requirements necessary for the functioning of capabilities . The third step investigates critical requirements for the function of the system .
 For the unity of actors in a coalition political decision-making processes that result in a political consensus or at least in a reliable majority are necessary. For a coalition government, the unity is necessary, says David Cameron .
 The reliability and sustainability of internet services and infrastructure is a necessary precondition for innovation development . The reliability of the internet based economy is a crucial preconditions for innovation.
Having identified the requirements, one can logically derive the critical vulnerabilities of the system . Having identified the requirement, one could logically derive a critical vulnerability .
Political actors can be seen in the latent conflicting interests of allies as well as in latent free-riding tendencies . With respect to the consensus finding of political actors a vulnerable point can be clearly seen .
 IT services and infrastructure is a weak point for the internet driven innovations of highly connected businesses . Just as well as the technological availability of IT services, infrastructure is an issue for businesses .
 A promising strategy in an asymmetric conflict will always target this chain of value for the center of gravity . Center of Gravity and Critical Vulnerabilities Overall is a promising strategy .
 If this is done systematically and with narrow focus on the weak points it is hard to counter such strategies successfully. If this was done systematically it is difficult to counter these strategies successfully .
 Russian operations in reaction to the expansion of NATO into Eastern Europe . This can be seen as center of gravity of Russian operations .
 Cyberattack on Estonia 2007 can be understood as a strategic proof of a concept to harm innovative internet based economies . Estonia 2007 was a direct attack on IT infrastructure of a nation state .
 In a larger scale this demonstrates the vulnerability of the Western European nations to such attacks . In a bigger scale, this demonstrates how vulnerable Western European countries are to attacks .
 The concept of center of gravity provides a better idea about the interdependencies between capabilities and requirements . But it still does not explain the underlying causes for the vulnerabilities .
 A triad that is not easily understood by English-speakers, but much better grasped by speakers of German .
 The interesting finding here is that Burns, McDermid & Dobson already in 1992 mentioned this very aspect in an article about computer and system engineering .
 Kaufmann had already discussed different aspects of security by addressing the interdependency between external threats to a society and individual stability of persons within this society .
 German speaking author was not addressing the conceptual distinction between ‘safety’ and ‘security’19 . He developed a notion about the development of security with respect to the developing of modern societies and people’s demand for security .
 Later Daase worked on the conceptual notions of ‘security’ and based his analysis on Kaufmann . Kaufman has influenced the discussion at a very early stage .
 German terms like ‘Geborgenheit’ do not capture the distinctive meaning of this term in the German language .
 Based on the perspective of system engineering the concepts can be useful to grasp the nuance of risks and threats to an object, society or actor .
 Such a model can help to differentiate observable phenomena and by that support the categorization of risks and vulnerabilities of modern societies . The model is based on a model that can be used to identify risks and vulnerability .
 This will result in better analytical approaches to the impact of asymmetric or hybrid warfare . This will lead to better analysis of the impact on asymmetric and hybrid warfare.
 Bauman's definition of the three different terms are helpful to develop a conceptual model . Bauman is a starting point to develop the concept of Bauman .
 Later these definitions will be contrasted with definitions of the system engineering domain . Later this definition will be different to those of system engineering domains .
 Whatever has been won and gained will stay in our possession, says the writer . The world is steady and reliable, and so are its standards of propriety, the learned habits to act effectively .
Knowing the symptoms, the omens and the warning signs which allow us to guess what to expect and to tell a good move from a bad one. Knowing the difference between reasonable and silly, trustworthy and treacherous, useful and useful and useless, useful, useless, proper and improper, profitable
 A more indepth analysis of the definitions reveals an overlapping between security and safety . The definition of security is more complex than security .
 The triad aims to distinguish between different vulnerabilities and the necessary requirements for protection . The core idea of the triad is useful to distinguish different vulnerabilities .
 Good conceptual models support the analyst and researcher in their scientific endeavour to produce new insights into a problem . The model really helps to differentiate between specific causes and consequences .
 A precise delimitation between explanans and explanans in the model's arguments is needed, says the author .
 If actors are threatened with irreversible loss of ...then they feel personal existence and health... unsafe. If actors feel personal life and health, they feel unsafe .
 Certainty if actors are threatened with self-inefficacy … ...then they feel uncertain. Certainty If actors are threatening to self-infficacy, they are uncertain .
 System engineering perspective can help to solve the problem of lacking precision in Bauman's definitions . An interdisciplinary approach can help solve the issue of lack of precision.
 In engineering safety and security terms are often used to outline different aspects of risks of technical systems and processes . The term is often used in engineering to outline various aspects of the process .
 There is no common and comprehensive definition in a single norm or standard in engineering. In contrast to the fact that these terms are used frequently in the engineering domain there are no common or comprehensive definition .
 In different international norms one can find singular definitions, but an overall definition is missing . In different countries, the definition of international norms is missing.
 Authors looked for a more generalized definition of computer and software engineering . Remarkably, the authors looked for more generalized definitions .
In their analysis they specify the concept with regard to critical services and the absolute or relative harm done to resources . Later in their analysis, they specify how critical services should be dealt with .
 Philosophy of security Frederic Gros works on the different meanings that the term security has had in western societies and the historical development of the concepts . Gros: Security has had a long history in Western societies and in the past .
Until today linkages between these developments and the current understanding of security, Gros argues . Until today, there were no links between the developments and security, he argues . Gros says .
 The concept of security began with the tranquillity of spirit or serenity . Later philosophers define security as the protection of a state and the guarantee of individual rights .
Today's security of resource, labelled as biosecurity, means the protection, monitoring and regulation of massive movements of people, goods and data . Today the security of resources means the security, monitoring, regulation of large movements and data that characterize modern globalization .
 He points to the influence of globalization and the importance of continuity and safety in modern societies . He says globalization is a key part of modern society .
 The following table gives an overview of the definitions and shows the connections to the conceptual analysis framework of this paper . The following model gives a look at the definitions of the Integrated model .
 Gros Own Analysis Framework Safety Guarantee of Absence of direct Protection of the Providing system of survival and harm to a user of individual being .
Security Protection of Absence of other's Monitoring, Protecting system of vested rights and ability to harm a control and systems that social user of a system. Security Protection of the other's monitoring, Protects System of vested Rights .
 No relative harm resource flows to state resources, no relative harm, no harm to the nation's resources . "No relative harmresource flows"
Certainty Decision-making system of based on reliable of resources. System that indicators and guarantee existing and prognoses. functioning of nation state or society .
 Integrity Absence of harm Implementing system to services by of systems that safety-critical or guarantee existing and security-critical functioning of nation events. state or society .
Modern nation states guarantee the safety and certainty of their societies by providing security against external threats . The above provided distinction between security and safety .
 The relationship between safety and security equals to the centre of gravity of nation states . For the following analysis it is stated that precisely this relationship between security and security is to the center of gravity.
 The author's opinion is exactly the case in the phenomenon called hybrid warfare . This is in the author’s opinion exactly the cases called hybrid Warfare .
 A nation state together with its asymmetrically acting allies, proxies or interfaces to attack another nation state in its safety domain. What can be seen there is an innovative approach of a nation state with itsymmetricallyacting allies, says the author .
 nation states are faced with challenges that no longer target the classical domain of security . The phenomenon of asymmetric warfare one can see that nation states face challenges.
The main focus is not the threat to the existence of a nation state in itself . The main focus of the nation state is not a threat to its existence .
 policies that are trying to secure the existence of a nation state per se will fail to tackle most of the asymmetric challenges .
 Unlike war between nations, new threats are no longer targeting the physical and political existence of a state with its basic elements of territory, people and power .
 Increased investment in conventional defence policy and by that in conventional armies will not solve the problem . Increased investment will not solved the problem, according to experts .
 Classical distinctions between foreign and domestic policies on the one hand and civil and military domains on the other hand could not easily be harmonized .
 This is especially true for highly interconnected and globalized societies with a high degree of interdependent markets and chains of production . This is particularly true forhighly interconnected societies, says the author .
 It is not the security of such a nation state that experiences the biggest vulnerability, it is its safety. Therefore, it's not the biggest security of the nation state .
 The vulnerability gets even bigger if uncertainty is taken into account . The vulnerability is even more vulnerable if the vulnerability is not taken in account .
 Modern societies are dependent on reliable and sustainable economic growth and development . Modern societies have to rely on reliable, sustainable and sustainable growth .
This in turn needs a business friendly environment and stable democratic majorities . This in turn need a businessfriendly environment and a stable democratic majority .
With progress of internet driven economies and acceleration of information flows in societies the disturbance of trust into future developments is having a greater impact on social and political cohesion than some decades before .
 The disturbance can have its origin in information manipulation, interruption or delay . Such disturbance can be caused by information manipulation or interruption .
 Western societies are confronted with a high demand for complex problem-solving capabilities . Western societies face a high need for complex solutions .
Western societies are losing trust in political processes and hence certainty in their development or even existence . Due to the increased demand for problem-solving processes in policy making and at the same time shrinking returns of such policies western societies are lost trust in such policies .
 Actors of hybrid warfare and transnational terrorism have recognized the vulnerability of modern societies to safety challenges long before .
 They do not target the security of nation states directly and therefore do not aim at the existence of the targeted nation states in itself . They don't target security of nations directly and do not focus on nation states .
 Rácz outlined a set of asymmetric methods and strategies which facilitated the success of Russia’s operations in the Crimean conflict .
 Clever acting actors try to hit the safety of a society and undermine the legitimacy of a national security policy .
 It is more effective to threateng. Information infrastructure and the public information domain to endanger social safety in a society. It is better to use the information infrastructure and public information domains .
 The impression is created that national security policy is not able to cope with security challenges . Combined with hard power elements which challenge national security, the impression is that the country is not capable of coping with the challenges .
 It is enough to keep the threat on a high abstract level to undermine the legitimacy of national security policies. So, it is enough.
International humanitarian law and the challenges of contemporary armed conflicts. International humanitarian law.
 Report of 31nd International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent . Report: Red Cross, Red Crescent and Red Cross. Report of Red Cross International Conference .
 Untersuchungen zu einer Wertidee hochdifferenzierter Gesellschaften, Soziologische Gegenwartsfragen, N.F.F., 31, 2., umgearb. Untersucheden z
Strategic Concept for the Defence and Security of the Members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization .
 A social-constructivist interpretation will show that an important part of Russia’s ‘hybrid warfare’ revolves around ideational factors and discourse constructions .
 The first part will briefly present the origins and features of hybrid warfare . The second part will brief the origins of the hybrid warfare.
 Second part will tackle Russia’s hybrid warfare as a response to asymmetry at the global level . The second part will also tackle Russia's hybrid warfare. It will be the second part to tackle Russia.
 Hybrid warfare; Russia; Eastern Ukraine; Constructivism; Narratives; Ideational factors. Hybrid warfare.
 The most recent concept which stirred up both controversy and adherence is hybrid warfare . The concept has stirred up the controversy and has been dubbed hybrid warfare.
 The non-linear form of warfare had been observed by American strategists already during the Cold War period .
 Most in the field of strategic studies thought in terms of separate worlds of conventional interstate and unconventional intrastate military activity . Most of the strategic studies are thought to be in the form of strategic research .
 The term hybrid warfare has been used over the last ten years in reference to nonstate actors waging wars against militarily superior state adversaries . It also as illustrative term for Russia’s strategies in eastern Ukraine .
 Franck Hofmann tackled hybrid threats as those that are simultaneous, fused and subordinated to one command unit in 2007 . It was in 2007 that he tackled hybrid threat.
 Hoffman uses the “multi-modal’s underlying nature in hybrid warfare to distinguish it from previous guerrilla tactics or from compound warfare . The aim was to pose a persistent threat by protracting the conflict .
 In such a scenario, the militarily, technologically, technologically and numerically weaker side aimed at avoiding direct confrontations with the opponent and decisive battles were not strategically envisioned .
 "Instead of separate challengers with fundamentally different approaches, we can expect to face competitors who will employ all forms of war and tactics," says Hoffman .
 Criminal activity may also be considered part of this problem as well, as it either destabilizes local government or abets the insurgent or irregular warrior . Hybrid wars, therefore, neither supplant conventional warfare, nor do they confine future threats to mere sub-state or trans-state irregular
 hybrid wars will retain basic and brutal forms of violence, trying to instil terror and human costs, while exploiting virtual dimensions of warfare .
 Hybrid wars basically combine cyber, kinetic, media, terrorist, and military command structures .
 They blend malware and hacking with conventional military decision-making . They blend Malware and hacking in the military .
 The terms ‘hybrid warfare’ and “hybrid threats’ seem to have been gradually incorporated in institutional lexicons . “Hybrid Warfare’s” and ‘Hybrid threats' seem to be gradually incorporated into institutional lexicon .
 Mogherini: “The security environment has changed dramatically. As a result, the security environment is changing dramatically.
 Hybrid warfare and Russia’s response to asymmetry at the global level. A considerable amount of recent literature links hybrid warfare with Russia's actions in eastern Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea .
 Russia’s recourse to information warfare and cyber attacks are considered crucial in transforming the modes of waging war against Ukraine .
 Other approaches focusing on the “hybrid’s strategies in eastern Ukraine reject the intertwining elements of hybrid warfare and the beginning of a new form of Russian belligerence .
 The author shows that hybrid warfare is not necessarily a model for the future of warfare . It does not indicate Russia’s mixed strategies “born out of weakness” or determined by global asymmetries .
 Such strategies are effective only when directed against a weaker neighbour and only when some endogenous elements or situational factors facilitate their success . But such strategies are only effective when directed towards a weaker neighbours .
 ‘hybrid threats’ and “hybrid challenges’ are often emphasized in a post-conventional international security framework . Russia’s actions in 2014, “Hybrid threats, and ’s threats” are often discussed in a
 The most convincing criticism focuses on the speedy identification of a pre-planned new form of warfare which Russia has been designing over the last years .
 Russia’s strategies and combined tactics in eastern Ukraine amount to a novel and distinct category, labelled by many as “Russia's hybrid war” We should first consider the goals of Putin's Russia .
 This would also enable us to problematize whether Russia acted out of a weaker position, and in this sense we witnessed a form of asymmetric warfare, says Peter Bergen .
 Putin’s ultimate goal is not just to weaken former Soviet republics, but rather to react to global asymmetries .
 Russia needs to preserve its status of great power and to counteract not only a militarily stronger coalition of adversaries, but a Western ascendancy and a form of advancement of discursive power .
 The U.S. and the European Union play key roles in international order . The United States and the EU play the key roles .
 Putin ultimately wants Russia to be on equal footing with other major players of international politics . What Putin ultimately want for Russia is to be in line with international politics.
Part of Russia’s hybrid warfare is propaganda and the construction of a Russian version of events. Therefore, part of Russia's hybrid war is propaganda, says CNN .
 This represents a discourse construction meant to reverse uneven global conditions and the impaired status of post-Soviet Russia . This represents an important discourse construction, says the author .
 Putin resorts to a narrative meant to rationalize and justify Russia’s actions. This is precisely why Putin resortes to a story meant to justify Russia's actions .
 Russia should strive, according to the rationale, to regain its great power status and reverse post-Soviet international order . Russia should also strive to regain the power of the U.S. and Western Europe, Russia says .
Bachmann and Gunneriusson: hybrid warfare entails, inter alia, the use of media as “force multiplier’s”
 The use of media is the common denominator, but there is a huge difference to be noted . Media is the most popular way to use media.
 Non-state actors like “Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab try to translate tactical success into terror, while in the Crimean and Ukrainian examples, Russia tried the opposite while denying being an active agent .
 Putin's Russia tried to not openly reject the rules of war in international law, but to elude and alter them . Putin’s Russia tried not to openly reject international law but to alter them.
 Russia's ‘hybrid war’ is a reaction to a stronger opponent (the West, represented by two important actors, the U.S. and EU) The West's weaknesses and vulnerabilities are identified and targeted by Russia, the author says .
 Russia's combined tactics reveal a very improved form of asymmetric warfare . Russia’s combined tactics show a very better form ofymmetric warfare.
 Russia’s tactics and modes of warfare could be best described in terms of the combination of covert small military operations with criminal disorder and hijacking social media . The blending of special forces, intelligence, malware, and local militias could be described in ideational terms .
 Putin’s Russia resorted to a construction of international reality in which international law and norms are not rejected as Westernmade, but reinterpreted and amended in Russian-made rhetoric .
 Russia’s hybrid warfare – corollary of the distribution of both capabilities and ideas . This section will analyze Putin's speeches referring to events in Ukraine . It will identify systematic attempts to counteract a Western discourse .
Building on conventional constructivist claims we shall try to show that an important part of Russia’s ‘hybrid warfare’ revolves around ideational factors and discourse constructions .
 Putin’s decisions pertaining to intervention in eastern Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea are embedded in an international material and ideational structure .
 The material facts of international systems and the distribution of capabilities have always been considered decisive factors for assessing state behavior in Realist and Neorealist accounts . The materialfacts of international system and the Distribution of capabilities are considered decisive factor in assessing state behaviour .
 Russia's recent foreign policy decisions are seen as corollary of both capabilities and ideas . In this section, we treat Russia’s recent policy decisions as corolary of a distribution of both.
 A Realist interpretation of events would focus solely on Russia’s decision to use threat and military power against the territorial integrity of a weaker neighbour . It would validate the states’ strength in military terms and the weakness of norms, rules and international law .
 He was doing more than simply trying to fend off criticism or military reaction . But he was trying to protect himself from criticism and military reaction, he said .
 Russia fought a war against Georgia in 2008 (and supported breakaway Abkhazia and South Ossetia) There was no such drastic response from the international community .
 Former Russian TV producer Peter Pomerantsev says Russia's decisions towards Ukraine amount to much more than information warfare operations .
 He argues that “the new Russia doesn’t just deal with the petty disinformation, forgeries, lies, leaks, and cyber-sabotage usually associated with information warfare .
 A careful reading of Putin’s statements reveals a re-description of events based on cautiousness towards international law .
 Russia's armed forces never entered Crimea; they were there already in line with an international agreement . Russia's military never entered the Crimea .
 In our interpretation, alongside all blended strategies employed by Russia an ideational force multiplier was also at work . In our interpretations, we found that Russia had a force multiplier in its strategy .
 The construction of reality and the Russian-made narrative about the nature of intervention in Ukraine indicate the role of ideas and meanings, says the author .
 Russia's constructivist interpretation stresses the role of perceptions, meanings, and shared beliefs which accompanied cyber, information and military means employed by Russia .
 Such a narrative is meant to persuade audiences and to gradually shape Russia’s great power status in international politics . Such a story could help shape Russia's great powerstatus in international Politics .
 Russia would be confronted with the status of outcast in international politics . Relying exclusively on combined tactics (as those employed in Ukraine) Russia would have to use combined tactics .
 Russia’s main concern is to become an equal partner with the Western world . Russia's main concern for Russia is to be equal partner.
 Putin’s Russia resorted to a narrative, a re-description of events which aims at shaping the construction of international reality . We argue that Putin's Russia has used a Russian-made rhetoric to create a narrative .
 This is a process wherein ideational facts and perceptions complete the military, cyber or technological strengths . This is the process wherein Ideationalfacts and perceptions are complete .
 Putin’s narrative and efforts to confer legitimacy and to employ the key terms of international law represent a speech act . Putin's narrative and attempt to use international law represents a speechAct, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Alexander Wend’s social-constructivism is symbolic interactionism . One major conceptual pillar in Wend's social- constructivism is symbolism . Wend is known for his work on social interactionism.
 Social interaction plays a major role in the development of the self, says the author . Social interaction is a key part of a person's self-esteem .
 states tend to take on the perspective of the generalized other in international politics . By extrapolating the role of meanings and symbols to state behaviour, we could examine how states take on this perspective .
 Russia can only be a great power when the others acknowledge it and treat it as such. Russia can't be a big power when it is treated as such, says CNN.
 Russia's great power status is dependent on the socially constructed recognition of such attributes in international politics . Russia’s great powerstatus is dependent upon the socially built recognition of these attributes .
Great power status in this respect entails much more than regional hegemony . Great power status is more than Regional hegemony, rather than regional dominance .
 The ultimate goal is to push Russia’s preeminence so as it can act as key player in international politics . Russia is on equal footing with the U.S. and the EU and to persuade international audience of such status held by Russia .
 The formulation of such claims by Putin or other Russian political figures is not enough, it's not enough . The formulation by Putin and other political figures are not enough.
 Putin is constructing a great power identity for Russia. What is needed is the recognition of the international community in relation with which Putin is building a greatpower identity .
 This assertion is valid for any state and was applied to the U.S. in various works . This assertion has been applied to any state. It's valid for the United States in various work .
 One might argue that Putin’s Russia found itself in stark military and economic competition with the West .
 Not only physical security needs are at stake here, but also self-esteem needs, says CNN.com .
 Putin is not formulating a worldview against international law or against the United Nations, but a reinterpretation of events . As some of Putin’s statements indicate, he is not forming an international worldview .
 discourse and ideational factors are at work, much more than tanks or price of gas . In this sense, discourse and Ideational factors is at work.
 The aim was to tackle a different form of ‘hybridity’ in Russia’s recent actions . In this article the aim is to tackle the different type of “hybridities’
 Putin's attempts to construct Russia’s identity in relation or co-dependence with the others are highly relevant . The latter are very relevant in Putin's attempt to construct his country's identity .
Georg Fuchs Lieutenant Colonel, German Armed Forces Lecturer for Intelligence, Security and Strategic Studies . Fuchs: Modern warfare “blurs the lines between war and politics, conflict and peace, soldier and civilian, and battlefield violence and safe zones.
 It is more important to understand the potential aggressor and its motivation to conduct aggressive action, than discuss the ways and means he will deploy during confrontation .
 The adaptability, agility of forces and access to modern, global communication and modern technologies, as well as resources, enables actors other than states and increases states’ portfolios during modern war fighting . The adaptable, agility and access of forces is a key part of the
 The difference between asymmetric or irregular warfare and hybrid warfare is not academic only . The discussion of the difference between the two is not only academic only.
 It is even to question if the so-called hybrid warfare is something new at all . It is also to question whether it is a new form of warfare .
 hybrid warfare is just a new abbreviation for an old type of warfare . More frequently it is stated that there is nothing new regarding hybrid warfare .
 The legal framework for international conflict is not meeting modern conflict realities . It is required to review and adapt them accordingly, says the author .
 Traditional mechanisms for conflict mitigation and the relevance of time and space during conflicts are changing dramatically and will inflict a far more complex conflict environment .
Near real time access to information, powerful pictures, and access to resources will increase the power of small proxies or networks . The availability of the internet and the availability of resources and high sophisticated technology will increase.
 The state will lose its monopoly of power and the borders between internal and external security within states and regions will diminish . The borders between external security and internal security will diminish.
 Modern warfare will be adaptive, agile, well-resourced and very unlikely conducted between states in a conventional manner . Modern warfare is very unlikely to be conducted in conventional manner.
 The better states are willing to accept these changes and conduct modernization accordingly . The better state will be prepared for future conflicts, the better they are .
 Hybrid warfare; Future conflicts; Permanent war; Dark networks; Cyber space. Hybrid warfare. Cyber space .
 The western countries are expected to bring home the so called ‘Friedensdividende’31 and conflict seemed to be far away .
 Some political and intelligence analysts predicted a troublesome future, especially along the former borders of the Soviet Union . They had been accused by the majority of pessimism and negativism in their analysis .
 The two superpowers resolved their controversy over political ideas . For most analysts nothing could endanger the now likely everlasting peace after the controversy .
 Russia analysts thought about giving up their professions and wondered if they were still relevant and required . It seemed even that Russia analysts were thinking about quitting .
 The large block confrontation was just overshadowing smaller conflicts which emerged out of the shadows after the Wall came down in 1989 .
Organized crime groups gain enormous amounts of money and influence . They are able to provide financial support or access to other resources like weapons and global terrorist groups . Thousands of casualties were caused by organized crime groups .
 The second Gulf War fought after the Iraqi military occupied Kuwait . But the core problem for nation states started with the second Gulf war .
 The greatest challenge for the global society inherited by these conflicts is that they question the western nation state model . But the greatest challenge is that the world is still to question the Western nation state.
 humanitarian principles had ensured for centuries that humanitarian principles and protection of the civilian population during conflict, as well as brutality against enemy military, was regulated . If not followed, responsible actors prosecuted, says author .
 All this was fundamentally questioned during the comparable short period of time since 1989, in overall less than 30 years . The same short period was questioned during a similar short period since 1989 .
 These developments had an impact on the mechanisms for crisis prevention and on warfare. These developments have had a impact on how to deal with crisis prevention .
 This article will discuss modern types of warfare and immanent transformation of warfare since the end of the Cold War . The article will also discuss the role of the U.S. military in modern warfare .
 It will give a perspective for future warfare and what is to be expected during future conflicts . It will also give a view of the future of future warfare .
Since the Wall came down recent conflicts and emergencies heavily influenced the development of new concepts concerning future warfare . Since the Wall comes down recent wars and emergencies have influenced new concepts of modern warfare .
To emphasize and discuss the most important ones, it is necessary to understand the situation in which these concepts had been developed . To emphasize and talk about these concepts, it's necessary to talk about them .
 The only remaining superpower, prepared to fight and win conventional battles, dominated the power structures globally . The world's only remaining power structure is the U.S.
 The U.S. was able to defeat all potential military threats due to technological supremacy and overwhelming resources . The United States of America in concert with its Allies was able.
 During two Gulf Wars, this Coalition did destroy a strong conventional Iraqi military force in weeks, if not days .
 Potential opponents needed to develop methods to threaten, defeat and weaken these mainly western powers .
 On the western side, the military did understand that their conventional power was not well prepared to defeat such an enemy . On the west side, they did understand the military's conventional power .
 Identifying shortfalls strategists, academia and military did respond in developing concepts to better prepare the forces for similar conflicts . Identifying these shortfalls was key to developing concepts for future conflicts .
 The hybrid warfare concept is one in a row of many such concepts or models . It is one of many concepts and models that have been developed .
Most popular ones had been first the Unrestricted, second the contemporary, third the Fourth Generation and finally the Hybrid Warfare concept . The most popular ones were first the unrestricted and second the modern, contemporary and third the contemporary .
 All four did reflect different military and political perspectives, explaining future conflicts based on experience made in current and recent conflicts .
 The hybrid warfare concept is the most recent. Out of this short and not comprehensive selection the hybrid Warfare concept is most recent . It is not comprehensive.
 It became especially prominent during the Russian aggression against Georgia and Ukraine . It became particularly prominent during Russian aggression.
 The 4th Generation Warfare concept was developed because of a major geopolitical shift in which the fall of the Soviet Union ended a bipolar world . Many ethnic and national groups quickly sensed a new opportunity for freedom or recognition .
 We should not be surprised by these actors’ innovative methods and techniques of warfare, says John Sutter . They release pent-up energy and pursue long-held ideological and nationalistic objectives .
 The concept focused a little more on the development of military methods developed by nation states using the successful irregular warfare methods and integrated them into their conventional military .
 If hybrid warfare is the way future conflicts are conducted and what hybrid warfare means is the question since many years. If hybrid wars are conducted in the future, what will it mean?
 His paper had been based on the insights from the Israel Defense Forces in Lebanon and Gaza .
 The question remains if the three selected aspects are really predicting the future of warfare or if they are just a reflection of past experiences . The question still remains if these three selected parts are really predicted the future.
 In his doctrine and following papers he was far more trying to predict future warfare and review Russian doctrine accordingly and prepare his military forces to meet future requirements .
 No, this knowledge was already available in concepts mentioned earlier . No, it was already known in concepts discussed earlier .
 Future adversaries exploit access to modern military capabilities, including encrypted command systems, man-portable surface-to-air missiles, and other modern lethal systems .
 Gerasimov published his prominent article in the Voyenno Promyshlennyy Kuryer, “The Value of Science is in Foresight’ in 2013 . Four years later, he published his article four years later .
 NATO’s comprehensive approach concept32 developed at the Lisbon Summit, in November 2010, described a very similar approach already three years earlier . NATO's comprehensive approach was developed at Lisbon Summit .
 Most experts tend to “win the last war’s last war, as Sir Basil Liddell Hart once wrote . It is more likely that most experts tend.
 In doing so they frequently reflect past conflict forms and methods of warfighting . But they are not predicting the future .
 Military means are not enough on their own to meet the many complex challenges to Euro-Atlantic and international security . Military means, although essential, are also not enough to meet many challenges .
 This is the first time in this paper that the cause of conflict becomes more relevant then the methods used to achieve identified objectives . This is a first time that the causes of conflict become more relevant.
 The competitor’s in Future Warfare is to believe that a different way of discussing future warfare is necessary .
 The named or identified objectives of an actor are the driving factor for political as well as military action and decision .
 It makes a difference if you want to invade a country, or if you just want to destabilize a region in order to stabilize your country internally and in parallel weaken a coalition . It's not a matter of whether you want a country to be destabilized.
 The goals an actor wants to achieve or the purpose why he deploys power. These objectives can be described as ends, meaning the goals are ends .
 In order to achieve these ends, it is necessary to choose appropriate tactics, techniques and approaches following different ways .
 Adversaries, either states or non-state actors, who employ irregular and hybrid warfare approaches, are far more likely to shape the concept of future warfare .
 This requires the employment of means which can be explained as resources, weapons, propaganda, etc., in order to achieve the actors’ ends . This requires to be explained by means such as resources and weapons, and the actors' ends .
 Opponents employ these means not only to kill, kill, and manipulate, but they do so for a purpose . Opponents use these means to destroy, kill and manipulate .
 This approach to explain future warfare makes it easier to understand different methods used by state and non-state actors . This approach makes it harder to understand how to use different methods.
 Either can choose to deploy irregular, terrorist or conventional methods to achieve its goals .
 The difference is far more framed by available resources or means than by the status of an actor as a state or a network .
 states are threats to each other due to their capabilities . It is very unlikely that they develop an intent to attack other states by conventional means in the near future .
 Non-state actors and networks are far more likely to pose threats to our societies than state actors . Non- state actors are more likely than state groups to pose threat to society .
Dark networks are becoming increasingly capable due to technological proliferation and access to sophisticated knowledge via the internet . These dark networks are being increasingly capable of accessing sophisticated knowledge.
 If the new terrain in which conflicts are waged is the mind of the people, the cyber space becomes more important than geographical territory .
 This virtual space becomes real when people come to believe that it is worth joining a network or just accept a narrative . The world of virtual space can become a reality when people believe it's worth joining or accept a story .
 The cyber space facilitates the spread of ideas and thoughts without any regulatory mechanism . Cyber space is a free space for ideas and ideas without regulatory mechanisms .
 Daesh or the so called Islamic State is a good example how the cyber space can be used for spreading information . The cyber space is an idea and concepts for attacks .
 TED33 claims that it spreads ideas and spreads ideas . A different but positive one is TED33 which claims to spread ideas . The TED33 website claims that TED33 spreads ideas.
 At the end, it is to understand why and how decision makers and leaders as individuals act under certain conditions, to understand a developing threat . At the beginning, it's to understand how and how leaders and leaders act under specific conditions .
 It was the narrative which could either be religious, cultural, ethnological or political which influenced threat groups . It helped identify other actors than the state .
 The narrative is the most important driver for individual’s activities, according to the author . Besides the technological dimension which was already discussed, the narrative is already discussed .
 It is to be developed in line with social examination and leads to decisions about organizational structures . It will be developed to meet social and social examination .
 Daesh did chose the lost caliphate as the narrative to convince people to join and develop a structure in line with former caliphates .
 To differentiate conflict forms and the ways wars are conducted it seems to be necessary to discuss the narrative or cause of a potential future conflict .
 The term hybrid warfare describes the way conflicts are conducted but not the reason of a conflict . It does not differentiate actors and does not distinguish actors .
Both sides are closely linked together . It is nearly impossible to discuss the potential form of a conflict without reflecting its potential cause .
 The conflict form is just a developing and transforming way of warfare based on the cause, the source, the availability of weapons, manpower and resources as well as the geography34 of the battlespace .
In this understanding the competitors, including available resources, as well as the circumstances in which a conflict is conducted, do influence heavily which type of warfare is chosen .
 The attacker or aggressor is potentially choosing the methodology first and will impose power against the rival .
 It is up to the defender how imaginative, agile, adaptable he and his forces are to meet these challenges successfully . It's up to him to be imaginative and agile.
 It is reflecting the concept of 4th Generation Warfare or the Contemporary Warfare model . It is developing models for ways warfare is conducted but more focused on potential choices of an aggressor .
 Everything which seems to help him to be successful will be chosen or conducted against a defending or invading enemy . Everything which appears to help his success will be decided by his actions .
 Success in warfare is the capability to impose the aggressors will over the defenders and sustain it . Success in war is the ability to impose aggressors over the defender and sustain them .
 It remains to discuss whether any element of warfare has changed over time . It is unclear if any element has changed in time .
 If the assumption is still valid that an aggressor’s will to achieve its objectives or ends is not necessarily a question of attacking or defending space, but the will of the population, this would change ways and means dramatically . If the assumptions are still valid,
 Historically an attacking country does conquer land to impose its will over the opponent . Historically an attack country does not conquer land. Historically an attacked country does Conquer land to imposing its will .
 The territory is conquered against the will of the defender mostly against his military force which is to be defeated by the military force .
 The attack is mostly conducted out of a situation in which the attacker has a superiority over the defender . It is far more difficult to control and defend the conquered territory over a long period of time .
 The Wehrmacht won every major battle and conquered huge territories but was not capable to completely control either . This was the case for Nazi Germany during WWII .
 Two different entities are to be recognized as potential aggressors . In this context one has to mention, that two different entities have been recognized as possible aggressors. In this case, this is a matter of concern .
 One is still the nation state; the other is a non-national group or network which might be supported or sponsored by a nation or nations . The other is the non-nation group or group which may be supported by a country or nation .
 The circumstances which are framing the opportunities for either entity are different . The circumstances that are framed the opportunities are different.
 The nation state agreed on the legal framework at least once in the past, the non-nation did never . The nation's legal framework was never agreed on by the nation state .
 It is necessary for the non-nation to become recognized internationally to become a state at a point to become firstly a legal body and secondly a politically relevant entity .
 The two current examples are Russia which conquered Crimea and attacked Eastern Ukraine indirectly by proxies and the so called Islamic State which was a non-state network and became a state-like construct . The current examples of Russia are Russia who conquered Crimea.
 Both used military power to impose their will against a defending nation and conquered territory . Both used their military power. Both used it to impose its will against the defending nation .
 Military action was always supporting political objectives over centuries . Military action has always supported political objectives .
 It might be necessary to highlight that it was a way to an end but rarely an end in itself . It may be needed to highlight it was an end.
 It is not as important as how someone defines modern warfare, and it really does not matter . What is more important is to understand the reason and narrative of a potential aggressor or opponent .
 The symptoms might change within each conflict but the reasons for attacking are to be differentiated and identified to avoid confrontations .
 These are regularly blurring the lines between combatants and civilian population . They include all possible or necessary means, cross-departmentally and if possible internationally .
 The challenge to identify either the activities or the individuals conducting violent action remains . For the western nations, including their intelligence and military, this does mean that the challenge is still to be identified .
 Our governments decide only in electoral periods and are just limited to threaten their political success by engagements in foreign countries . Our governments decision only in elections and are only limited to threatening their success by engaging in foreign nations .
 McCulloh and Johnson demonstrate throughout their study that context is critical . The 37 See also demonstrate that context was critical .
 Since these entities do not have to win a conflict, they just need to avoid losing it, or at least neglecting a defeat . Since they don't have to lose it, these entities need to be careful to avoid a conflict .
 Taking the mentioned circumstances into account a potential western success in such conflicts is very unlikely, says the author . The author says the circumstances of such conflicts are very unlikely .
 The available capabilities and resources are shaping the ways and means of warfare . The available capability and resources is shaping the way and ways of warfare, says the author .
 The reason why nuclear weapons are becoming important again is the fact that they, in the same way as sophisticated anti-access and areal denial weapons, are providing the environment in which a potential military engagement will be so tremendous that no decisions are made to openly defend a threatened partner .
 The deterring function of such weapons is not so much that of avoiding conflict entirely anymore, but to limit the measures against an opponent’s approach .
 This has changed the way deterrence worked during the Cold War, in which the functionality was to avoid direct conflict entirely .
 A hybrid confrontation below conflict level and a subsequent escalation of force is far more likely . Nowadays the conflict is already eminent due to assumed involvement .
 Russia did assume an offensive campaign by NATO to expand its territory to the East to its disadvantage . In assuming it already became a competitor, Russia assumed it already was a competitor .
 It is not important if this is true or not, it is not enough to enforce or allow action . The assumption is enough to allow action, says the author .
 A2AD weapons could be sophisticated air-to-air weapons or improvised explosive devices . The opponents will to continue or begin an engagement or his freedom of maneuver, decision and action, is limited due to the cost of lives and resources .
 Access to resources, by gaining territory, criminal activities, or support from sponsors do enable the development of improvised and adapted weapons . Also enables actors to restrict freedom of action.
 The most critical factors in a hybrid environment are time and information as the graphic shows . Time and information are the most important factors in the hybrid environment .
 The momentum is always with the aggressor and it does not matter which kind of actor he is, says director .
 The longer a hybrid phase lasts undetected or without appropriate counter measures taken, the less likely is a potential success, even if combat starts . The longer it lasts, the more likely it is to be a possible success .
 The actors are using this window of opportunity to prepare for offensive action . The actors have been using the opportunity to get ready for the offensive action.
 Western states and coalitions are unable to respond timely because of the intended activities below conflict level . Western states or coalitions can't respond timely due to the intended activity below conflict levels .
 This gray zone during which different activities are conducted is legally problematic and is very unlikely supported by the western population . The western population is unlikely to support this gray zone .
 The threat will seek to wage war in more battle spaces and populations than U.S. forces can directly control . The threat is an acknowledgement of the ability to protract war.
 In order to overcome these large grey spaces, it is important to understand their existence first . The world's largest grey spaces are often filled with grey spaces .
 Traditional rules and mechanisms like a formal declaration of war do not work under these circumstances . The separation of combatants and non-combatants or civilians does not work.
 It may even be questioned if the so-called hybrid warfare is something new at all . The hybrid warfare may be a new thing.
 hybrid warfare is just a new shorthand description for an old type of warfare . More frequently it is stated that there is nothing new regarding hybrid warfare .
 Academia and practitioners alike are claiming that hybridity is exactly what happened during previous conflicts .
 The Russian doctrine of deception, misinformation and resistance was developed after a foreign occupation developed since the Russian Revolution40 .
 It is to a lesser extend a totally new phenomenon but it is enabled by modern technology and conducted within today’s societies .
 Information dominance in the cyber space is probably the most crucial capability in the future . Information dominance operating in cyber space will be crucial in future .
 The fact that actors are able to spread information with extremely high speed to never before existing recipient numbers within our societies, not being limited by borders or state control, changes a lot . It's a good thing that actors can spread information.
 The concepts which explain ways and means of warfare are not as important as the narrative and potential ends of an aggressor . But the discussion about it is and will remain important.
 If opponents are understood and their capabilities and available resources are not overseen, conflicts are manageable if the leadership is adaptable, agile and willing to make unpopular decisions . If opponents' capabilities are not understood, they can be managed by the leadership .
 Future conflicts will last long and time is working against western states and coalitions due to their tendency to avoid casualties and political turmoil .
 The territory will not be geographically defined anymore but contains the narrative, fighting for the hearts and minds and potential support, cross borders and outside traditional legal and ethical rules .
 It is necessary to develop agile processes, forces and modern legal frameworks to meet the challenges of blurring lines between internal and external security, law enforcement and military, civilians and combatants .
 If these types of future wars are to be won it will take time, confidence and endurance . The future wars will take more time,confidence and endurance, if they are won .
 The threat will not stay in foreign lands but will come to the West, as attacks in London, Madrid, Paris, Brussels, and Berlin have shown .
 If the opponents are not able to achieve their goals within their countries or regions they will continue to spread into Western communities and attack at their weak spots . If they are not successful they will be able to reach their goals in Western communities .
 Borders are not providing security anymore and the capabilities of the cyber space are just beginning to emerge . The cyber space is becoming more sophisticated and more sophisticated .
From the existing concepts of hybrid warfare, we retain the central themes of a deliberate synergistic effect . The rapid organizational adaptation of hybrid threats will continuously frame further discussions .
 Guerrilla Strategies – An Historical Anthology from the Long March to Afghanistan, London . Guerrilla strategies.
 Hybrid Warfare Concept, Directorate of Capability Integration, June 2012, was released .
 Reprogramming the Pentagon for a New Age, in: Foreign Affairs, January / February .
 Teaching Strategy for 21st Century Conflict, Strategic Studies Institute, November 22, 2014 .
 The U.S. House of Representatives Armed Services Committee will hold a hearing on the issue on February 13 .
 From Fourth Generation Warfare to Hybrid War, US Army War College is a new project . The project includes Strategy Research Project .
Georgia in 2008, East Ukraine in 2013, Crimea in 2014, and Syria in 2015 . Georgia in 2008 and East Ukrainian in 2013. Georgia in 2010 and 2013 .
 The NATO military doctrine of deterrence has become obsolete, says the authors . The authors say it is still envisaging the possible threats posed by Russian involvement in the Baltic and Eastern Europe in cold-war terms .
 New ‘Russian invention’ could very well be used in the future against NATO member states in the Baltic region or Eastern Europe .
 The frequency with which the term is employed alongside Russia’s military involvements in the former Soviet space or furthering Russian interests abroad seems suspicious .
 A ‘hybrid war’ is composed of conventional and unconventional military tactics and operations . It includes direct foreign involvement such as the support of political protests, economic warfare, cyberwarfare and informational and propaganda campaigns .
 In one opinion, the emergence of “hybrid warfare’s” poses a series of interesting yet potentially dangerous consequences . In another opinion, in one opinion. In another, in another, the emerging of ‘hybrid Warfare’ poses a
 The Russian Federation switched from its former ‘vital-space’ doctrine to the “Velikiy limitrofnyy doctrine’42 and then towards the so-called “Gerasimov doctrine”43 in just a decade .
 Russia possesses huge territory and large uninhabited hostile environment . Some argue that this type of geopolitical thinking is outdated . We disagree, as we believe that this concept is very much in line with Russia's main strategic advantage .
 Acts of aggression are defined as armed invasions or attacks, attacks, bombardments, blockades, armed violations of territory . Other states can use one's own territory to perpetrate acts of aggression and employ mercenaries .
 A war of aggression is a series of acts committed with a sustained intent, says the author of the book . The book is based on the book "A War of aggression"
Not every act of aggression would constitute a crime against peace; only war of aggression does . The definition's distinction between an act of aggressiveness and a war of aggressions is clear .
 States would still be held responsible for acts of aggression. States would nonetheless be heldresponsible for acts.
 ‘hybrid warfare’ cannot be totally equated or considered as Russia’s definitive replacement doctrine or as a purposely novel military theory or particularly, a new type of Russian threat towards NATO's borders. As such, we consider that “hybrid Warfare” cannot
It seems difficult to assume that any military doctrine involving the hybridisation and combination of Cold War era tactics with modern ones will become an original concept employed only by the Kremlin .
 Russian involvement in Ukraine and Crimea is a reaction to a rapid upscaling, military investment and political muscle-flexing on the part of the Russian Federation . Nobody seemed to think the same in 2008 as Putin invaded Georgia .
 NATO and the EU felt seriously threatened by the Russian annexation of Crimea and the war in the Donbass . NATO and EU felt threatened by Russia's annexation of the Crimea .
 A plethora of military analysts have rushed to classify the 'new Russian threat of hybrid warfare' in an effort to understand why all except the Russians have been caught off-guard in the shifting realm of modern warfare .
 The Kremlin's actions in Cold War terms poses in our opinion two significant draw-backs . But continuing to envisage the Kremlin’s actions in cold war terms poses two significant draws-backs, we say .
 NATO cannot respond fast enough to non-linear threats of today’s challenging security environment . NATO's strategic imbalance in which it finds itself as its military doctrine of deterrence has become obsolete, says the author .
 The term ‘hybrid warfare’ is not a new choice of words48, neither from the syntax nor from the rhetoric aspects .
 War has never been a static field, it changed alongside the development of human society . All wars were more or less hybrid, in the sense that they combined different tactics, aspects, instruments and methods to insure the victor's advantage .
 This happened not particularly in the sense of a positive shift towards modern military technology and increased capabilities, but in thesense of a limitation of traditional operations . This happened in the form of a change in the way of the military's technology, but not as much as a
 This is characterized by a change from the classic land-air-sea based warfare, theorized in the Cold War period, towards a more subtle deployment of forces such as surgical defence systems .
 The scene was set for hybrid warfare as a novel area for discussion in academic circles . If we consider the heavily criticised conceptualisations of Smith’s ‘modern wars’ and Kaldor’'s “new wars”
 The asymmetric element became the defamatory characteristic of hybrid warfare . This changed because in the aftermath of the 9/11 and with the War and Terror and other non-linear conflicts, this changed .
 The year 2014 was a defining point from which hybrid warfare changed, says Wither .
 The focus on Russia’s perceived success was at an all-time high in 2014 . Former NATO Secretary General Rasmussen affirmed that the Russian involvement was a hybrid warfare .
 The U.S. Joint Forces Command defines the concept as being “any adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs a tailored mix of conventional, irregular, terrorism and criminal means or activities in the operational battle space .
 The current Russian ‘Gerasimov doctrine’ can be considered as being a new type of ‘hybrid warfare’ or has completely switched to “hybrid Warfare’s main military doctrine. This is important if we desire to discern if the current “
52. The first is the existence of a non-standard, complex and fluid adversary52.52.
 Another is the employment of all types of war, conventional, irregular or terrorist, including even criminal behaviour . Another is a criminal behaviour 54 .
 hybrid warfare is a relatively widespread tactic, not at all limited to only a handful of actors . This interpretation shows that strictly from the standpoint of the military, hybrid warfare has been used in the past .
 As a result, they become immoral and barely-legitimated methods of eluding international responsibility for acts which in normal circumstances would attract the culpability of the state in question .
Kennan 56 proposes a hybridisation between political interests and compound military tactics . The definition of ‘political warfare’ can very well overlap with the one of “hybrid warfare”
 Operational art integrates ends, ways, and means across the levels of war . The concept of ‘political warfare’ could be explained as a means to limit the effects of a conflict or any other possible threat to national security .
 This is largely due to the extreme difficulty in dissociating politics from the military, especially in states without a clear separation of powers, and where the society is more or less familiarised with authoritarian regimes .
 The Russian Federation’s military doctrine has evolved and was integrated into the larger geopolitical context of the time . Discussing the perception of the recent Russian involvements in East Ukraine and Syria, it is important to understand how it has evolved .
After the fall of the Soviet Union, the Kremlin opted towards a doctrine characterized by revolutionary expansionism and initiative-taking actions . The Kremlin opted to insure its defence and interests abroad .
 NATO cannot initiate any retaliatory actions outside the provisions of Article 5, being limited only to deterrence measures . The end-result will be difficult to interpret.
 The deployment costs of a deterrence force and the difficult decision-taking process at NATO's level are, in absolute terms, a significant drawback to any re-deployment plans . This is particularly so in the Baltic region .
 Putin does not have the desire to provoke a conflict between NATO and Russia . But it is also true that the so-called “red line’s never been crossed .
 NATO's bellicose posture in which NATO finds itself now is not actually needed, says NATO chief . NATO's posture is a badly needed reassurance factor for the Baltic and Eastern Europe NATO member states .
 Russia has been accused of attacking Russia in the past . However, it's very difficult from the perspective of abovementioned states to ‘trust’ Russia with not attacking them .
 The 2007 cyberattacks on Estonia, Georgia in 2008, the coup de main in Crimea58 and the protracted conflict in East Ukraine all attest to the reluctance of Eastern NATO Member states in their relationship with Russia .
 This tactic has been used in the Luhansk and Donetsk regions (the Russianspeaking minority) This tactic is a possible vulnerability for a Russian involvement in the Baltic States .
Deterrence59 has always been seen as the best option. In addition to complicate the situation, deterrence59 is always seen as a best option .
 This was seen as crucial after the independence of Kosovo in 2008 and the so-called “five-day’s war in Georgia in the same year . This was also seen as important after Kosovo independence in 2008 .
 Russia decided to destabilise Ukraine and annex Crimea . This was the case until recently, when Russia took over Crimea .
 In 2015, Russia decided to simultaneously involve itself into both the Syrian Civil War and the fight against Daesh, taking the world by surprise once more .
 Russia’s actions can be, 59 Discussing about deterrence, it is important to add that this concept were devised to deal with the threats posed by the former Soviet Union and not the Russian Federation .
 NATO’s defensive stance is not sufficiently aggressive to achieve the deterrence result. In today's terms, NATO's defensive stance has not been sufficiently aggressive .
 NATO requires a complicated system of prior approvals integrated in a slow decision-making process . This is due to the fact that NATO, as comprised by its 28 member states, requires a complex system of approvals .
 NATO was designed not as a pro-active and offensive military alliance, but as a passive-defensive emanation of a political consensus in the military sphere . This clearly shows that NATO was not as pro- active and offensive, but rather as passive- defensive .
 NATO’s response to the Russian threat of “hybrid warfare’ would be a ‘hybrid Warfare’ of its own, to ensure that the deterrence factor is being implemented .
 The Russians have the advantage in using a relatively flexible decision-taking system . NATO's system is characterized by the fact that it uses complicated and timeconsuming consensus .
 NATO is forced to act as a defensive alliance and at the same time invest in deterrence moves to counter the “hybrid threat’s posed by Russia to reassure its members .
Light counter-terrorist and counter-insurgency units were replaced by light counter-terrorism units . They were better suited to counter the problems posed by today’s security threats and were shaped by the expeditionary tactics used in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 NATO abandoned ‘standard tactics’ to mount a defence against a possible traditional threat from Russia . The threat would involve in its majority, conventional weapons and not elements of hybrid war .
 One of the biggest problems we see when countering Russian hybrid tactics is their flexibility and adaptability . In addition, one of the big problems is when countering Russia's hybrid tactics .
 Putin has placed the entire Russian military and its population “at or near war footing’s, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Putin has centralized and restructured the entire decision-making system .
 NATO troops, trained to counter hybrid treats, will meet conventional enemy troops on the battlefield . It will be very problematic if NATO troops are trained to combat hybrid treats .
 This is done by assuming that it, more precisely the highly controversial Russian-style of “hybrid warfare, is in fact legitimate or gains legitimacy as a valid countermeasure . This is not true, it's done by assumption that it is more precisely a highly
 Russia will continue to view the U.S. run NATO as the main antagonist and as its principal security threat .
 Russia and the West will always be marred by fears of conflict, in spite of any actions undertaken to stabilize the situation .
 The Kremlin considered that is in fact the U.S. launched a ‘successful operation’ to replace the former President Yanukovych with a puppet government, he writes .
 Russia's defence has been used to consolidate against all possible threats . Russia have been able to use the past experiences to consolidate their defences .
Charap is an analysis of the ways and methods used by the U.S. in their military involvements abroad . Charap continues with the fact that this is not actually a new military doctrine, but in fact, it is a military doctrine .
Tensions in Eastern Ukraine erupted into an allout civil war in March 2014 . This lead to the Annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in March 2013 . This led to the annexation of the Crimea Peninsula .
 In the first phase of the conflict Russian military personnel contributed to the defeat of the Ukrainian army . In the second phase Russian troops contributed to defeat of Ukraine's army .
 Russia supplied separatists with military hardware and ammunition in November 2014 . In November 2014, Russia used humanitarian aid convoys.
 OSCE reported a number of special transit zones alongside the Donbass-Russian porous border, controlled by mixed separatist-Russian security forces . These events repeated in August 2015.
 In the early 2015, the Kremlin decided to abandon the ‘hybrid tactics’ it has used up until then and concentrate on ‘traditional tactics” such as shelling Ukrainian Army positions from over the border .
 Some evidence has surfaced which positively identifies elements of Russian armour used by separatist forces . Also, some evidence has emerged which positively identify elements of Russia's armour .
 The Russian intervention in the East of Ukraine is not at all due to their ‘new type of war’ or the greatness of the “Gerasimov doctrine’ But rather due to the special characteristics of Ukraine and the very special circumstances in which it finds itself .
 The relative ease with which Russia annexed Crimea and the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine are mostly due to the pre-existing connections and interests in the region which pre-date the Soviet era altogether . Second is the relative ease of the Crimea annexation and ongoing conflict .
 The bi-dimensional characteristic of Russia’s ‘hybrid warfare’ is ‘war during peace’ and “neo-imperialist’ tendencies .
 The Russian Federation did not receive sanctions after the Annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 . It gave Moscow a reason to strengthen the cooperation with the rest of the BRICS countries .
 The EU suffered more because of the sanctions imposed, as it had to find different economic partners to whom to sell their goods .
 “war during peace”63 can also refer to the actions of Moscow with regard to the situation in the East of Ukraine .
 Russia must never allow that. First, it represents a potential threat to the regional hegemony of Russia in the post-Soviet space, it says .
 The West is weak and reactionary. Second, in which the now Western-supported Ukraine will be forced to yield before Russia, it will show that the West isweak and reactionary .
 Russia is reenacting previous scenarios. This is because we have long been accustomed to see an enemy in Russia, says Peter Bergen .
We understand that times have changed, yet we still use pre-Cold War instruments to analyse and predict Russian foreign policy . To cut a long story short, we understand that time has changed, but we understand it has changed .
 NATO member states are still not a viable solution to choose not to invest in real technologies . The economic ties and proximity to each other could be key to the future .
 Putin's Russia is not doing what some Western countries have been doing for a long time, irrespective of the reasons or rationale behind their actions . We do not agree with what the Russians are doing in Ukraine, we cannot say that .
 Russia is not capable to sustain a veritable hybrid conflict outside its area of control . Georgia, Ukraine, Moldova and the Baltic States are located in the region .
 The second dimension is the neo-imperialist dimension of ‘hybrid warfare’ seen from the perspective of Russia’s resurgence as a great power . The seconddimension is the Neo-im Imperialist dimension.
Van Harpen argues that Russia is both a post-imperial state and a pre-im Imperial state . Van Harpen says the Kremlin made moves to insure its interests in the adjacent regions are respected .
 He also discusses that the political philosophy of Russia has changed little from the Soviet era . He says that Russia's political philosophy has not changed little since the Soviet period .
 The motivations behind the Kremlin’s actions are difficult to discover, due to the sheer number of scholars and analysts which still consider Russia as the direct descendant of the Soviet Union . The Kremlin's actions are hard to discover.
 Russia's aggressive stance of Russia from the point of view of domestic politics, as a means to distract the populace's attention from the difficult situation which gripped Russia after the Financial Crisis and the drop in oil and gas prices .
 ‘hybrid warfare’ has become a new trend in the scholarly field concerned with the subject of military and operational tactics . Trying to make sense of “hybrid Warfare’s’ new trend has become new trend .
 hybrid warfare is mixed with power politics and ruthlessness in pursuing national interests . The answer to this comes when hybrid warfare and power politics are mixed .
 It blurs the lines between opposites and creates a grey space where nuances are more important than the relative truths . It is the first time a book has been published in the UK .
 Hybrid warfare has multiple dimensions, each specifically connected to a set of objectives and precise purposes . Hybrid warfare is a form of warfare that can be tailored to specific purposes .
 The chances of a repeat of so-called Crimea or a Donbass scenarios elsewhere are fortunately low. Russia’s intervention in Ukraine and the claims that it is using the concerted attacks as a rehearsal for a future involvement in Eastern Europe are low .
 "hybrid warfare" is a weak concept, but its current interpretation is somewhat lacking . We do not believe that “hybrid Warfare’s” is a strong concept .
 The Russian plan for world domination is just not feasible. Simply equating “hybrid warfare’s’ with a Russian plan is not feasible, it is not .
 Russia’s intervention in Ukraine should be interpreted using a different set of optics, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says Russia's intervention should be considered to ensure its vested, national or vital interests are protected .
 ‘hybrid warfare’ has become the “catchall phrase’ for a number of highly controversial actions undertaken by the Kremlin . “hybrid Warfare’ is not a new invention.
 The West has made the West blind to the real problems as terrorism has become the major threat for Europe’s well-being . In our opinion, the rhetoric used in Western circles, or more correctly, the over-emphasis on trying to discern the ulterior motives in all of
 The increasingly cordial relations between Turkey and Russia, the economic and financial partnership between Russia and China is heralding a ‘golden age’ of Eurasian economic ties . The words of President-Elect Donald Trump who no longer considers Russia an existential threat, are clear signs that
 China, Japan, Iran, Iran and Saudi Arabia will see more of this ‘hybrid warfare’ in the future, but not between the old powerful actors but rather between the regional powers .
 Also, between state actors and non-state actors, revealing once more the threat posed by terrorism . Also, from the U.S.
 Europe is not threatened by Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia is the primary concern in Western Europe, Sutter says .
In Eastern Europe, where the terrorist threat is minimal, the major concern remains Russian aggression . The major concern is Russian aggression.
 This dichotomy is important because it shows the differences in the approach and interpretations on the foreign policy moves made by the Kremlin . This is important to show the differences between the Kremlin and the Kremlin.
 The West has always taken advantage of the fear and complex historical relationship between Russia and Eastern Europe . This dual approach is not to be taken lightly, says the West .
 The West has always used the East as a bargaining chip in its dealings with Russia . On the opposite side, the close relationship between Russia and countries like France, Germany, and even Italy constitutes the argument behind the idea .
 blaming the Kremlin of ‘inventing’ and ‘deploying” hybrid warfare or hybrid tactics against NATO and the EU are, in our opinion, speculations and machinations in the grand scheme of legitimating NATO’s ever fledgling purpose
 Russia does not have many options. Addressing the problem from the perspective of international law, Russia has many options . Russia has not been able to find a solution to the problem .
 The UN Security Council is no longer possible, let alone achievable by Russia . A repeat of the United Sates’s endeavours in Kosovo and Iraq are no longer Possible .
 The use of hybrid warfare is a feasible bargain, says the U.S. Embassy in London .
 Blurring the lines between war and peace and the use of “war during peace’ may be the only way to achieve the compromise between state interests and the current rigid international framework .
 hybrid warfare will not be associated with Russian interests, but with the interests of all important international actors . If we accept this rationale, then hybrid warfare won't be linked to Russian interests .
 NATO has taken the ‘initiative’ of switching from its characteristically defensive posture of deterrence . In a similar optic, we see that NATO has changed its posture to a more defensive posture .
 A step forward in itself, it seems like a timid effort to keep-up to the changing times . But it seems a step forward.
 The façade which NATO has put up until now rested on the image of Russia as the everlasting enemy of Europe .
 The weak Russia of the 90s exists only in history books and biased interpretations . The weak Russian of the 1990s is only in History books andbiased interpretations .
 To keep-up the façade in order to continue to give NATO a raison d’être seems unwise, if not foolish . NATO has been given a raisons d'être to keep up the faecade .
 If we take the positive aspect, it will encourage cooperation at the national level, it would give NATO the muchneeded breath of fresh air . If we do it, it could give NATO a much needed breath offresh air, NATO says .
 If it will backfire, it will, paradoxically, make Europe and NATO weak by over-investing in countering the so-called hybrid threats from state actors . However, if it will be backfire it will make Europe, NATO weak.
 The danger is that, whilst investing in defences against a clear source, it will also mean ignoring the serious threats posed by hybrid threats originating non-state actors .
 The solution for such conflicts is in the best interests of Georgia and the Black Sea region, as well as of the European Union . The EU has two member countries from that region .
 Georgia can provide corridor for energy resources from the basin of the Caspian Sea to Europe . Another issue is the security role Georgia can play by providing energy resources . Georgia can also play a role in providing corridor to Europe from the region .
 The stereotype of these conflicts is that they exist in Georgia between different ethnic groups and become active from time to time . The stereotype is that these conflicts are in Georgia.
 The 2008 war was not an intrastate war which happened inside the country between different groups, but it had also two participants from the international system . This article argues that the 2008 war had also been a war between the two groups .
 The article will fill the gap to some degree. It is an analytical comparison of the conflicts in Georgia in the 1990s and in 2008 .
 There are various studies written about the war in 2008 and the conflicts in the 1990s in Georgia . They mostly offer a mere history of the conflicts and not the comparative analysis of the conflict .
 I will draw parallels with the Ukrainian conflict and show the similarities and differences there are with the conflicts in Georgia and how these experiences from Georgia can be applied to better analyse the current conflict in Ukraine . I will also show how Georgia's experiences from the past can be used to
 Many local conflicts have gained international importance and become matters of international disagreement . To explain more why I have opted for this question for my research, I will mention later, I shall state that nowadays many local conflicts are important .
 Georgia's case is the exact situation in Georgia. As I will show in this article, I will prove it, I'll prove it . As I'll show in the article, this is the same situation.
 The local ethnic conflict not only gained major importance for the international society, but it also de facto and de jure evolved from a local to interstate conflict .
 The main research question of this article is very important and provides new insight into the so-called frozen conflicts in Georgia . This is the reason why the main research questions are very important .
 In the 1990s, the conflicts in Georgia were considered to be ethnic conflicts . They were regarded as an intrastate war,e. one that happened inside Georgia .
 In 2008 there was a military conflict between two independent states – the Russian Federation and Georgia . It became an international military conflict .
International relations. I have reviewed the methodology through which the research question is answered . I have resorted to different schools of international relations and decided which ones are better suited to current cases .
 Theory and Methodology for any article is important and adds scientific value . For any article, theoretical consideration is important .
 The author has decided to base his work on the constructivism theory and explain the case with the help of the latter . He has also decided to use the theory of constructivism to explain his work .
 International Relations School is one of the International Relations schools I feel comfortable with . Nevertheless, I do not intend to give myself the benefit of choosing one of them .
 I will challenge the explanatory power of constructivism with realism, which is one of the leading and most interesting schools in the field of international relations . I'll challenge accordingly the explanatorypower of constructivist with realism .
Two theories best explain the cases mentioned here. To answer the first question, I plan to argue in the main part of my article that these two theories best explains the cases .
 The second question already deals with methodological aspects, which I prefer to also include in the introductory part of my work . The third question is the second question, which deals with methodology .
This article is grounded on qualitative research, where analysis relies on argumentation and the findings stemming from it . This article is based on quantitative research, which relies on the findings from it.
As far as the field of qualitative research methodology is concerned, I mainly use the comparative approach, which best suits the tasks and goals I aim to reach . As far as I am concerned, the field is concerned.
 The 2008 war exhibits some similarities but was different in essence from the conflicts of the 1990s, says the author . "My purpose is to show that the 2008 war exhibit some similarities"
 The comparative method enables me to compare not only the cases, but also two international relations theories/schools which best explain the situation and offer possible solutions .
 The main reason for the intrastate conflict is the outside force and the behaviour of it can be explained by Realism .
 I will provide a theoretical explanation from Realism in the conclusive part of the article . The article will be published in the next week .
 South Ossetia is a territory of 3900 square kilometres located within the Caucasus . The territory is located in the Caucasus, and is located on the border with Russia .
 South Ossetia considers itself as an independent State since its declaration of independence of 29 May 1992 . It has also been recognized by five Member States of the United Nations in the aftermath of the military conflict between Russia and Georgia in 2008 .
 The present-day conflict between South Ossetia and Georgia is rooted in a different understanding of historical facts and developments . The conflict between the two countries is based on historical facts.
 It is necessary to thoroughly explore history. For a better understanding of this work what will be made below, it will be necessary to explore history .
 In 1989, South Ossetia lobbied for joining its territory with North Ossetian in Russia or for independence . In 1989,. South Ossetsia lobbied to join its territory in Russia.
 Georgia's own declaration of independence from the former Soviet Union triggered conflict in 1990 . Georgia’s own declarations of independence triggered conflict with former Georgian President Gamsakhurdia .
 In January 1991, hostilities broke out between Georgia and South Ossetia, reportedly contributing to an estimated 2,000-4,000 deaths . Tens of thousands of people were displaced .
 Russia brokered a cease-fire in June 1992, and Russian, Georgian, and Ossetian "peacekeeping" units set up base camps in Tskhinvali, South Ossetia .
Monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe did most of the patrolling . Monitors from OSCI did most patrolling .
 A Joint Control Commission composed of Russian, Georgian, and North and South Ossetian emissaries ostensibly promoted a settlement of the conflict . OSCE was a facilitator, with the OSCE as facilitator .
 Some observers warned that Russia’s increasing influence in South Ossetia and Abkhazia over the years transformed the separatist conflicts into essentially Russia-Georgia disputes .
 One must highlight the last fact about passportization from this historical review . The last fact is that passportization is still a matter of life .
After the independence of Georgia from the Soviet Union, the Russian Federation gave its citizenship to the majority of the people who lived in other independent countries and were not citizens of the Russia Federation .
 The hypothesis of this article claims that Russia is using different methods for reaching its interests so as to keep its influence on Post-Soviet Georgia . One of the methods used is granting Russian citizenship as leverage for manipulation .
Georgian and Ossetian forces in and around the region's capital, Tskhinvali . The Georgians had declared a unilateral ceasefire several hours earlier .
 Georgia’s defence ministry said South Ossetian militias had still continued into the evening to heavily shell Georgian villages and positions . But Georgia's defense ministry said the militias had nevertheless continued to shell Georgian village and positions.
 Georgian troops launched a large-scale military offensive on Tskhinvali, supported by artillery, and advanced quickly .
 At approximately 1:30am, tank columns of the Russian 58th Army started crossing into Georgia from the Roki tunnel separating North and South Ossetia .
 The Russians had anticipated, if they did not actually entice, the Georgian move . Apparently, the Russian move was not a surprise .
Security situation in South Ossetia had deteriorated sharply before 7-8 August . The security situation in the region had worsened sharply .
 In July, four Georgian soldiers serving in the Joint Peacekeeping Force 3 were detained by South Ossetian de facto authorities .
 Russian warplanes flew over Georgian territory in an open warning to Tbilisi . They were released after an ultimatum by Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili .
 The South Ossetians and Georgians reinforced their forces and weaponry in the zone of conflict, in violation of ceasefire agreements . The conflict was between the two countries .
 Russia also had been bolstering its position in both South Ossetia and Abkhazia . In the past months, Russia had also been bolstered its position.
 talk of war had been rife in Tbilisi since March . The southern part of Abkhazia has been hit by an attack on the south .
 A senior European diplomat said that U.S., German and European Union leaders had on repeated occasions talked Saakashvili out of launching an attack . The diplomat said.
 A South Ossetian told Crisis Group in late July that Russian advisers and military officers had recently arrived in the town of Java .
 Russia sent extra “peacekeepers’ into Abkhazia in April and army railway workers on 30 May . Russia also sent extra "peacekeepers" into Ab Khazia and army workers in May .
 The rail link from Sukhumi to the city of Ochamchire had been broken for years . In two months the railway crew repaired the rail link in two months .
 Moscow’s initial moves into South Ossetia as large-scale violence broke out there on 7-8 August were in part a response to a disastrous miscalculation by a Georgian leadership .
 Russia’s disproportionate counter-attack, with movement of large forces into Abkhazia and deep into Georgia, accompanied by the destruction of economic infrastructure, damage to the economy and disruption of communications .
 It has undermined regional stability and security. It has threatened energy corridors that are vital for Europe . It has shown disregard for international law . It also made claims with respect to ethnic Russians and other minorities that could be used to destabilise Ukraine .
 Russian actions reflected deeper factors, including pushback against the decade-long eastward expansion of the NATO alliance, anger over issues ranging from independence of Kosovo to the placement of missile defence systems in Europe .
 Georgia, too, has mishandled its relationships with Russia, South Ossetia and Abkhazia since 2004 . Georgia has abandoned real confidence building and often following confrontational policies towards the conflict regions .
 President Mikheil Saakashvili and a small inner circle of bellicose officials used menacing and arrogant rhetoric . Moscow and the conflict regions are bitter and personal .
 conflict between two ethnic groups has roots that date back to the Russian Empire . The Russian Empire was trying to create different identity groups on the territory of Georgia on the grounds of various ethnicity and ideational structures .
 Ossetians have the belief that they are closer to Russians and have the right to join North Ossetia and Russia . Ossetian believe they are close to Russia and have a right to move to Russia .
 Canada and Cuba both exist alongside the United States, but the balance of the military power cannot explain the fact that the former is a closer American ally, and the latter a sworn enemy .
 The material balance of power between Canada and the United States has radically different meanings . The ideas about identity, the logic of ideology and established structures of friendship and enmity lead to the fact that the U.S. and Cuba have radically different meaning .
 The South Ossetia case in Georgia is an example of how Russia tries to create leverage so as to control Post-Soviet countries .
 During the 1990s, Russia’s policies towards the conflicts were largely supported by the secessionist forces . Russia's policies were largely backed by the separatist forces .
 The main type of Russian support was directed through the conflict settlement mechanisms . The main kind of support is directed through conflict settlement mechanism .
 Russian-led peacekeeping operations have de facto guarded the borders of the secessionist entities, helping to maintain a status quo that was favourable to secessionist sides .
 The open phase of the conflict in South Ossetia lasted between 1990 and 1992 . The conflict claimed approximately a thousand lives .
 As a result of the ceasefire agreement, there is a trilateral peacekeeping operation . Russian, Georgian and South Ossetian troops are involved in the operation .
 Russia, South Ossetia and Georgia oversee the security situation and pursue negotiations on conflict settlement . A Joint Control Commission consisting of Russia, North Ossetian and Georgia oversees security situation .
 The OSCE (Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe) supervises the situation . OSCE is the body of the OSCE for security and Cooperation.
 conflict in Transnistria lasted for a few months in the spring and summer of 1992 . The conflict lasted for several months.
 The Russian 14th Army intervened on behalf of Transnistria and defeated the Moldavian troops . The war ended after the Russian 14st Army intervened.
 A trilateral peacekeeping operation has been in place since the ceasefire was declared . The ceasefire has been declared since the truce was declared.
 As in South Ossetia, the peacekeeping troops consisted of military forces from the two parties in conflict . Russia as the leading peacekeeper .
 The negotiations on conflict settlement were carried out in the so-called 'five-sided format' Moldova and Transnistria as conflict parties, and Russia, Ukraine and the OSCE as mediators .
 Russia uses similar tools to reach its goals of influence to the ones mentioned above . From these two cases, we can conclude that the main outside force is Russia and that it uses same tools .
 The securitization of the issue happens according to this perception and not according to the real, materially existing threat . As Barry Buzan states in his book, danger/threat is a social perception rather than existing materially, he says .
 The perception of threat is the result of shared ideas, beliefs and values, according to constructivists . This perception is a result of the shared ideas and beliefs, which according to Constructivists, have structural characteristics .
 Another tool for creating different identity groups so as to possess ground for influence in a country is to strengthen the affiliation of ethnic minority groups to Russia .
 Social perception of the threat dilutes. Maybe they will change their mind in the future and claim they can live in a country next to the majority ethnic group .
 Russia implemented an illegal passport policy in Georgia, so as to claim it had citizens living there and thus it benefitted from the right to protect them . This was the reason why Russia implemented the policy .
 Russia asserted its sovereign right to protect its citizens against the aggression of another state . Russia is trying to legitimize its invasion of Russia .
 The focus was on the proportionality of Russia’s response and not whether the invasion was actually justified or legitimate .
 Russia’s policy of conferring its citizenship en-masse to the citizens of another country seems like just such an arbitrary and abusive use of an acknowledged right .
 Russia's passport policy is viewed as a creeping annexation or naked aggression . Author believes it does not, legitimate such a scheme, and international law should not .
 Ukraine, with its Western predilections and NATO ambitions, is potentially vulnerable to this doctrine . Ukraine has been criticized by some for its lack of transparency in the past .
 The Baltic States have the protection of membership in the EU and NATO but also the vulnerability of large ethnic Russian populations . The Baltic states are also vulnerable to large ethnic Russia populations .
 The next step to a passport policy was to strengthen its influence and prepare the ground for a possible necessary invasion of the country, which eventually happened in 2008 . In 2008, the next step was to tighten its influence.
 Russia's politics became more aggressive and merely supporting separatists to maintain the status quo was impossible . Georgia's integration was a real issue after the Rose Revolution .
 In 2002, Georgia officially declared its Euro-Atlantic aspirations, thereby starting its NATO integration process . The NATO Summit of Prague was held in 2002, in Prague .
Since 2003, NATO-Georgia relations became more intense and dynamic . Since 2003, following the "Rose Revolution" in Georgia, relations have become more intense .
 The decision marked a qualitatively higher level in NATO-Georgia relations . It was a logical step forward from a partnership format towards the membership candidate status of Georgia .
 The decision is a momentous political message on the way to Georgia's NATO membership . Georgia is the first member of NATO in Georgia .
 Russia invaded Georgia in 2008 was the old tool of controlling and manipulating Georgia with frozen conflicts was not effective anymore . Georgia made a different choice, to integrate into western economic and security alliances, and the new reforms in Georgia made this a real perspective .
 The main reason for the war is a geopolitical one Georgia was looking to the west and this was unacceptable for Russia . Georgia was trying to get out of the war with Russia .
 Russia had as its strategic goal to stop Georgia from developing pro-western aspirations and preserve its influence on it. I shall now present another two arguments to prove that Russia genuinely had as a strategic goal .
 Russia was conducting military operations outside the conflict zone, which is a clear indicator that its official reason was simply untrue, because in territories outside the South Ossetian region there were no Russian citizens .
 Georgia had never recognized the passportization policy of Russia in South Ossetia . Any person with this kind of passport would not be able to live outside Georgia .
 The answer lies in what we have already mentioned, to control the whole of Georgia, to change its foreign policy priorities and pro-western integration .
 Moscow has opposed the expansion of the Western military alliance to include former Soviet republics such as Georgia and Ukraine . Moscow has strongly opposed the move to include ex-Soviet republics.
 NATO promised Georgia eventual membership at a summit in 2008, but enthusiasm for Tbilisi's entry cooled after the brief war later that year . Russian troops invaded Georgia to protect Georgia's tiny rebel region of South Ossetia .
 Ethnic minorities demand the separation from Ukraine, as it was the case of Georgia . These similar circumstances make it possible to generalize some of the analyses and conclusions of this article .
 In the 1990s, the conflict was located inside the state of Georgia . The 2008 war happened between Russia and Georgia, both members of the United Nations .
 The conflict changed from a local to an international one. This means that the conflict has changed from an local to a international one . The conflict is now a global conflict .
 The second characteristic of Russia is the different status of Russia from what we have seen at the beginning of this article . The second characteristics of Russia are the differentstatus of Russia .
 Russia had been the mediator in this conflict since 1990s, but after 2008 it became part of it . Russia was part of the conflict in the 1990s.
 Geneva talks mark the official international platform of negotiations after the Five-Day War in 2008 .
 The initiative goes back to the "Six-Point Ceasefire Plan" reached by the French President Nikolas Sarkozy and his Russian counterpart, Dmitry Medvedev . The initiative brought to an end the military confrontation between Moscow and Tbilisi .
 Officials from Abkhazia and South Ossetia were also included in the talks . On Russian request, officials from Ab Khazia, South Ossetsia and Abkhazi also included .
 Moscow's demand coincided with that of the EU and OSCE, the latter also considering that the talks should be all-inclusive . Moscow’s demand coincides with the European Union and the OSCE .
 Geneva talks started over Abkhaz and South Ossetian conflicts in October 2008 . In October 2008, an international mediation process – the Geneva talks – started over the Abkhazi and South Caucasus conflicts .
 The main failure of the talks has been the inability to prevent Russia from vetoing the extension of the UN and OSCE missions to Georgia’s breakaway regions .
 Russia’s decision to withdraw its military troops from Perevi, a small Georgian village beyond the South Ossetian border .
 Russia lost the status of mediator and became part of the conflict which in itself changed from a local to an international one . Georgia's choice and successful reforms after the Rose Revolution, meant to implement this new approach .
 The fact that Russia became part of the conflict can be seen from the abovementioned chapter called "Eruption of Clashes" It is shown that the Russian army invaded Georgia and was involved in a fight against the Georgian army .
 The second argument is the Six Point Ceasefire agreement . The agreement was negotiated between Georgia and the Russian Federation on August 12, 2008 by Nicholas Sarkozy .
 The Russian Federation does not have the status of mediator in the Geneva Talks . Georgia unarguably is one of the sides in the Five-Day War .
 The main format for discussing Georgia’s occupied territories involved official parties from Georgia, the Russian Federation, as well as OSCE, UN, and EU representatives and the United States .
 I have striven to give this article a nonbiased and high scientific value, which has been my main goal . I have been trying to give it a non biased and high Scientific value, that has been his main goal. I've striven. to give the article aNonbiased
 For more thorough analyses we also need to discover how interests work according to constructivism .
 "Identities are basis of interests" "The Social Construction of Power Politics" is a book on the social construction of power politics .
 Interests of identities are formed in the process of social interaction, according to the study .
 The same social interactions and perceptions of danger define enmity and friendship . Social interactions and perception of danger are the same as those of friendship .
 Ethnic conflicts with Georgia at the beginning of the 20th century and in the 1990s . These minority groups believe they possess different ethnic identities .
 Only Russia and another four countries recognize them as independent states . They try to balance this perceived danger through the alliance with Russia .
 Georgia will continue to move towards NATO until it becomes a member state . Otherwise, if these conflicts are solved and Georgia is able to restore its territorial integrity, it will remain in the region until it is member state.
 It is in Georgia's best interest to be a member state of NATO because it provides collective security to all its member states . Georgia is in the best interest because it is in its best interest.
 Georgia's citizens voted on January 5, 2008 . The vote was approved by the plebiscite conducted on January 4, 2008.
 77.0% of Georgian citizens answered Yes . Georgia should pursue integration into NATO, according to the survey .
 At the beginning of the article I set out to provide an analysis from the standpoint of realism and constructivism . At the start of the articles I provided an analysis of realism, constructivism.
 There are issues where the explanatory power of one of the theories is weak and another theory offers a better explanation . When a researcher chooses only one theory it can provide good explanations.
 The principle I have used has enabled me to exploit the potential of both theories. So, the principle has enabled him to exploit both theories, he says .
 I have divided the issues that would be better explained by constructivism and the other issues that are better explained. I have also divided the issue of realism and constructivism .
 This kind of method is correctly used if they do not produce controversial results . This type of method can be used in the future if it is not used in controversial situations .
 The scientific value of a study will be stronger than in the case of using one theoretical school for explaining all the issues that a researcher wants to discuss . If they produce the results which answer to the researcher’s main research question and prove the hypotheses that the researcher suggests at the beginning
Local interests are partly, if not significantly influenced by the interactions at the international system level . On that level interacting actors are already independent sovereign states, and realism is the theoretical school that provides a strong explanation on the behaviour of states .
I do not support too much division between theories or explain all issues only from one theoretical perspective . As the reader may notice, I do not Support too much divide between theories .
 What I will do again is take the issues and explain them through the premises from realism, as a family of different dimensions. What I'll do again will be take a look at the issues from realism .
 The premises/suggestions which will be used for the explanation can derive from neo-realism, from classical realism or from other dimensions . The premises and suggestions can be used in the explanation .
 This makes the ongoing work issue-driven, which means that I write the work not to adjust to any of the theoretical schools or even to any dimension inside a theoretical school . First I discuss the issue or suggest the hypothesis and then employ the theories which I believe best fit the explanation .
 Realism makes to explain why the Five-Day War erupted in Georgia in 2008 . The case is useful for analysing the ongoing conflict in Ukraine .
 This concept defines the autonomy of politics, and allows for the analysis of foreign policy regardless of the different motives, preferences, and intellectual and moral qualities of individual politicians .
 International politics is for Morgenthau a struggle for power because of the basic human lust for power . Furthermore, it is the foundation of a rational picture of politics .
 The view that he shares with Hobbes is a questionable premise . But regarding every individual as being engaged in a perpetual quest for power is questionable, he says .
 In the fourth principle, Morgenthau considers the relationship between realism and ethics . The fourth principle is the relationship Between realism and Ethics .
Realists are aware of the moral significance of political action, he says . He says they are also aware of tension between morality and the requirements of successful political action .
 Human nature could be inherently selfish and there is no chance for it to be changed . Human nature is inherently selfish .
 humans will act to further their own interests even if the implementation of these interests is against and harms the interests of others . As a result, humans will be more likely to act on these interests .
 International institutions and law play a role in international relations, but are only effective if backed by force or effective sanctions . International institutions, law and institutions play a part in international relationships .
 I have already discussed the interests of the ethnic minority groups when I explained them by means of constructivism . Another reason for this is that I have discussed the interest of the minority groups .
 Russia's interests were to stop NATO enlargement in Georgia and to keep its influence on Post-Soviet Georgia . As we have seen, Russia wanted to keep influence on post- Soviet Georgia .
 Russia successfully implemented/pursued its interests even though this was detrimental to the interests of Georgia . Russia stopped NATO enlargement in Georgia .
 The next assumption of realism claims that international institutions and law play some role . But they are effective if they are supported by the power .
 Russia recognized the two breakaway regions of Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states . Effective sanctions also suit this case of Georgia .
 The Crimean Peninsula is now occupied by the Russian military . The second is the Crimean Peninsula, which is now occupy by the military .
 The Kremlin views Ukraine’s European choice as a major security threat and the 2014 overthrow of President Viktor Yanukovych as Western-backed and aimed at isolating Russia .
 Ukraine wants to keep Ukraine under its pro-Western leadership unstable . It wants to return it eventually to its sphere of influence .
 Moscow often seems to play with several options, but its tactical fluidity is dangerous . Moscow often plays with several choices, but it is dangerous for the city to choose from .
 Ukraine was promised together with Georgia to become a member of NATO . The Russian Federation has the same goal in Ukraine that it had in Georgia .
 These interests are to stop Ukraine's western integration and keep it under its influence . These interests want Ukraine to stop its western integration .
 Russia has similar interests in Ukraine to Georgia to the ones it had in Georgia . Russia shows the will to use military power and even get involved in war and invade the neighbouring country to reach its interest .
 If Russia is not able to reach its strategic interests with the support of ethnic minorities, it will use its large army and start a full-scale war against Ukraine .
 Russia will only avoid this kind of large military conflict if it sees a power and serious international support behind Ukraine . For states, interests are the most powerful driving force and they will implement them even if they are against the interests of others .
International institutions and law work or are effective if they are supported by power. Another assumption which I will repeat is that international institutions work or work if they're supported byPower .
 All OSCE member states, including Russia, have sworn to uphold these principles . All OSce member states have swore to uphold the principles of the OSCE .
 Ukraine has the right to choose for itself whether it joins any treaty of alliance, including NATO's founding treaty . In line with such principles, Ukraine can choose whether to join any treaty .
 This is why realism is right about institutions and law in international relations. This is the reason why it is right to be realistic about international relations . This is how to make a difference in the world's relations with other nations .
 Russia used another type of reasoning to invade another country, he says . This reason was a resurrection of historical justice, he adds .
 If other countries uphold the same reasoning to resurrect historical justice, there is a high possibility that wars will erupt in various places in the world .
 The Five-Day War in Georgia in 2008 and 2008 were fought in the 1990s and 2008 . Georgia and Georgia have been involved in the conflict for more than a decade . Georgia has been fighting in the past two years .
 The European Union’s Eastern Neighbourhood Today. The EU is the European Union's Eastern Neighbours .
 The Fallout, Tbilisi/Brussels, International Crisis Group, Report N°195 . The Fallout is Tbilis/BrUSsels, T Bilisi/ Brussels .
 The emergence of this kind of war specifically for the new globalized economy, increasingly integrated and polarized, has questioned traditional and conventional military thinking, says the author .
 The violent conflict between Russia and Ukraine that broke out in 2014 has become a case study for hybrid conflict thru . Russia revealed only the tip of the iceberg when it comes to reinforce its imperialistic view on foreign policy .
 Russia will continue to wage a massive propaganda and information warfare campaign with the ultimate goal of undermining NATO and the EU . Russia will create a pro-Russian narrative and even political change.
 This article focuses on the Russian strategy of indirect warfare during the Ukrainian crisis . It provides an analytical overview of the political developments of relations between Russia and the EU following the 2014 events in Ukraine .
 The concept of hybrid warfare is not new, and definitely was not invented by Russia . The concept is not a new, but definitely not new .
 In 1941, Adolf Hitler used a deception within a deception to surprise the Soviet Union with an invasion involving three million men . In 1944, the Allies provided the truth with what Winston Churchill called a “bodyguard of lies’s lies.’
 The Kremlin’s information war is part of a deliberate disinformation campaign supported by actions of the intelligence organs designed to confuse the enemy and achieve strategic advantage .
 The nature of hybrid operations makes it very difficult to detect or even determinate ex post facto when they begin, since confusing enemy and neutral observers is one of its core components .
 Russia is actively using its information warfare techniques in support of a hybrid-warfare effort to achieve its current objectives . It has become clear, however, that Russia is using information warfare technique to achieve current objectives, namely federalization of Ukraine or Kiev’s concession of special legal status
 Russia considers Ukraine and Belarus as parts of itself, something that was lost with the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Belarus is considered to be a guarantee of Russia’s territorial integrity . It is considered, together with Belarus, to be the guarantee of Russian territorial integrity.
 This explains why it expanded its borders to the West as far as possible . This explains how it did it to expand its borders .
For Russia, it was already difficult to accept Baltic States becoming NATO members in 2004 .
 Moscow claims the West guaranteed that former Soviet republics and satellites would be left as a natural buffer zone . Moscow claims that the former Soviet Republics and satellite satellites would have been left as natural buffers .
 The city of Belgorod that was deep inside the Soviet Union would be on the border with Ukraine . This is more than a sufficient motive for the Kremlin to take action against this hypothetical situation .
 Ukraine considers involvement of the U.S. and European Union in Ukrainian internal affairs to be a direct confrontation to its regional interests . Ukraine is supposed to be close ally or neutral, at least, neutral, it considers .
 Moscow is convinced that Washington and Brussels are working to attract the Ukraine to their sphere of influence . Russia's natural right to the region is not to be ignored by Moscow .
 Russia's goal has always been to make Ukraine a friendly and subordinate partner . Russia’s goal is to make the country a friendly partner .
 Russia did exactly what it knows best, to destabilize a region in order to control its future . For the Kremlin, after the West's interferences, this seemed to be further out of reach than ever .
 The Ukrainian crisis generated the Ukrainian crisis, and the events up to May 2014 . The conflict and the aftermath of the ceasefire of September 5 are the focus of this article .
Strategic lessons might be drawn from this most recent stage in the conflict, looking at the concept of hybrid warfare .
 The third part of this essay provides an analytical overview of the political and institutional development of relations between the EU and the Russian Federation after the latter’s invasion in Ukraine .
 Russian behavior during the Ukraine crisis was based on the traditional Russian idea of a sphere of influence and a special responsibility . Russian behavior in Ukraine is based on a traditional Russian concept of a spheres of influence, and on the right to interfere with countries in its near abroad .
 The former soviet states are nowadays sovereign countries that have developed differently and no longer have much in common . The formersovereign states are now more common than they were before .
 Ukraine’s membership aspirations have been on the agenda since 2010, and NATO, as Mearsheimer suggested, did not trigger the whole crisis . The Ukraine-European Union Association Agreement Agreement provoked it .
 The Russian leadership felt threatened by NATO's open door policy, but not that much as by the prospect of the EU’s soft power transforming its neighbor, the brother nation or Little Russia as Ukraine has been referred to since the 18th century .
 Anatoly Serdyukov's replacement from the position of Minister of Defense was Valery Gerasimov .
 Any analysis relies on inferences about Russian President Vladimir Putin’s objective and calculations . Until more will be revealed about the Russian decision-making process .
 Putin viewed the break-up of the Soviet Union as a retrograde step . Russia's adversaries will not hesitate to exploit, he said .
 Moscow came to consider the overall political orientation of Ukraine as a vital interest .
 Ukraine urged Ukraine to join the Russian-led Eurasian Union, but under firm Russian leadership . Instead, Ukraine was urged to join with the European Union, which is modeled after the EU concept .
 The deal also included the lowering of the price for Russian gas delivered to Ukraine by about a third . The former Ukrainian president, Viktor Yanukovych, and Russia’s Vladimir Putin, also agreed to the deal .
 Putin's intervention raised the stakes in the battle over Ukraine’s future . Putin’'s intervention raises the stakes.
 Former Polish Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski suggested that this was combined with a threat to seize Crimea and possibly personal blackmail . It has also been suggested by former Polish foreign minister that this is combined with an organized corruption of Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovich's government .
 Ukrainian intelligence had been aware of Russian operatives moving into Crimea earlier in the decade . The possibility of annexation was discussed from the middle of 2013, when the question of EU versus Eurasian Union was moving up the agenda .
 The former soldier fled the capital for Kharkiv, travelling next to Crimea, and eventually to exile in southern Russia . He was later exiled to southern Russia, where he is now living .
 Yanukovich's turn to Russia triggered the revolt in Kiev, the overthrow of his government and an apparently decisive Western turn of Ukrainian policy . Yanukovich’s turn to Russian triggered the uprising in Kiev .
 Russia may have hoped to retain annexation as a threat to encourage Kiev to reconsider its West-oriented position . However, given the revolutionary enthusiasm in Ukraine, concessions to Moscow were less likely to happen .
 Crimea was a definitive move and introduced a problem into all later attempts to achieve a political settlement . The annexation of Crimea was the definitive move .
 Russia has been trying to force Russia to hand Crimea back from Crimea . However, nothing concretely happened in order to force Crimea back, just a few agitations .
 Russian efforts concentrated on the Donbas region and in particular, the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics .
 The loss of territorial slices directly challenges Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . If the whole price was taken, the rest of the country would be left hostile to Russia, and more important.
 This would permit its embrace by the EU, and even NATO, in order to continue their approaches . This would allow the EU to continue its approach to the EU and NATO .
 The question of why Putin took this step is of more than historical interest . The question is why Putin decided to take this step was more than history .
 Crimea annexation was a response to the threat of NATO's further expansion along Russia’s western border . The first one is that Crimea annexation is a response.
 The second interpretation casts the annexation of the peninsula as a part of a Russian project to gradually recapture the former territories of the Soviet Union . The second interpretations cast the annexation as part of an effort to gradually regain the former territory .
 The imperialist mindset of Vladimir Putin never allows him to accept the loss of Russian prestige that followed the end of the Cold War .
 Russia almost solved the problem of its naval presence in the black Sea and of its military base in Sevastopol . Doing so, Russia nearly solved the issue of its navy presence.
 Crimea relies almost entirely on Ukrainian supplies for power and water . Crimea relies on Ukraine for power, water and electricity .
 Crimean energy ministry says peninsula’s own power generation capacity covers less than 20% of peak demand .
 Ukraine briefly switched off power to Crimea in December 2014 . Russia considered annexing more Ukrainian territory to secure a land bridge between Russia and Crimea .
 Crimea was separated from main Russian military capabilities, thus, the peninsula is difficult to defend . Crimea is separated from Russia's main military capabilities . Crimea was also separated from the main Russianmilitary capabilities .
 Security of the peninsula should be part of a new Russian strategy towards Ukraine, says the Russian government .
 The second Russian move in this crisis was the support for uprising in Eastern Ukraine . The second move in the crisis was to support the uprising in eastern Ukraine .
 It started in April 15, 2014, when irregular armed groups seized a couple of cities in the Donetsk region .
 The uprising escalated in a full-scale war between separatist military forces and the Ukrainian army .
 Donetsk and Lugansk regions could be considered to become federal entities in Ukraine . The causes of the uprising may be considered the desire to become a federal entity in Ukraine.
 Journalists reported that applications for Russian passports in Eastern Ukraine were being encouraged with food packages . This action increased the number of Russian citizens that have to be protected .
 In the beginning, one explanation was that Russian soldiers turned up in Eastern Ukraine by mistake .
 Donetsk Airport in Donetsk has been closed since May 26 . The airport is located in Donetsk, Ukraine . Donetsk Airport is a city in Donetsk.
 The concept of "Novorossiya" emerged and the people's governor Pavel Gubarev proclaimed it on May 24, 2014 . With Russia’s true ambitions still unclear, the concept of ‘NovorOSSiya’ remains unclear .
 The Kremlin began in 2013 to set up a pool of rapid deployment forces in order to be able to intervene in its neighborhood .
 Airborne Forces, GRU Intelligence Special Forces brigades, three or four elite Ground Forces units, as well as air and naval support . These well-equipped, well trained, well-trained, modern forces consist of Airborne forces .
 The conflict became less of an external sponsored insurgency in eastern Ukraine and more of a limited war between Ukraine and Russia . The conflict has become less of a externalsponsored insurgency in east Ukraine .
 Russian information war is part of Moscow’s method of conducting hybrid warfare . It consists of a deliberate disinformation campaign supported by actions of the intelligence organs designed to confuse the enemy .
 The nature of hybrid war operations makes it very difficult to detect or even determinate ex post facto when they begin, since confusing enemy and neutral observers is one of its core components .
 Russia's information warfare approach is designed to work within the limitation of the 21st century strategic environment and within Russia’s budget constraints . Russia's Information warfare approach will work within Russia's budget constraints.
 The crisis in Ukraine turned into a hybrid war because of the use of Russian army special forces or elite units, supported by volunteers and irregular groups . Ukrainian volunteer battalions and the regular Ukrainian army.
 Vladimir Putin suggested Russia should reassure its role in a multipolar world . No single regime has sovereignty in the world where no one has sovereignty .
 Putin also tried to develop friendly ties with the West, especially with the U.S. There were clear signs of deepening the Eurasian trend in Russian foreign policy .
 The United States – Russian Strategic Stability Cooperation Initiative of 2000 is one example . The U.S. is one of the countries involved in the initiative .
 NATO has wiped out politically and militarily most of Russia’s natural potential allies .
 NATO's expansion into the former Warsaw Pact space can be exemplified by NATO’s expansion into ex-Warsaw Pact space . This can be seen as an example of NATO's expanding into the space .
 Vladimir Putin believes external factors can influence internal ones, and result in Russia’s crush .
 Russia succeeded to use its influence on separatist authorities of Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and even Nagorno-Karabakh as leverage to control internal and foreign policies of former Soviet states .
 Russia blocked all attempts of some former Soviet Union states to join NATO and EU because of unsolved territorial conflicts . So, Russia successfully blocked some attempts to join the EU and NATO .
 Russia plays key roles in negotiations between separatist and central powers in the post-soviet area . Second, usually Russia plays role in talks between separatists, central powers .
 Russia is a part of the Minsk group on Nagorno-Karabakh . It deployed its peacekeeping forces in Transnistria, South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Also a member of 5+2 format negotiations on the Transnistsrian conflict .
 The Kremlin pushed this kind of solution in the Ukraine but President Petro Poroshenko quickly rejected this proposal . President Poroshenko rejected this plan .
 Regional actors need to pay attention to what kind of separatism was the Russian Spring in Eastern Ukraine . Third, the regional actors must pay attention.
 The Crimea region has a pro-Russian, anti-Ukrainian and anti-Western appeal . The region is a buffer zone between Russia and the West .
 The Novorossiya project failed, as well as Russians hopes to build a land corridor to Crimea and a friendly buffer zone . The project failed .
 Pre-war Donbas was essentially on par with Kiev, significantly surpassing other Ukrainian and most Russian regions . In terms of prosperity and the quality of life, pre- war Donbas is essentially onPar with Kiev .
 The Eastern Ukraine is also very important for Moscow because twelve types of Russian intercontinental ballistic missiles, along with spare parts and maintenance, come from the city of Dnepropetrovsk .
 Fourth, the war in Eastern Ukraine caused additional pressures on the Ukrainian economy . The war caused additional pressure on the Ukraine economy .
 Ukraine became more dependent on Russian energy imports because of this war . All its coalmines were situated in the Donetsk region .
 President Poroshenko affirmed, for several publications, that every day of war Ukraine is spending 6-7 million dollars . But one can assume it is on military costs, army maintenance, the usual costs of war .
 Russia succeeded to establish a couple of comfortable negotiation groups to deal with this crisis . Russia succeeded in setting up a pair of comfortable negotiating groups . The crisis has been dubbed a crisis in Russia .
 Moscow strongly needs a diplomatic formula to solve this crisis. Rising complaints against Russian use of force in Ukraine have proved that Moscow needs to solve the crisis .
 The success of all negotiations depends on partners and on format . Success of all talks depends on partner and format .
 The group has been in existence since 2014 and has been the principal international mechanism for settlement of the Ukrainian crisis . The group is based in Kiev, Ukraine, and was founded in 2009 .
 OSCE Contact Group that played the first violin in the political settlement process was repurposed into technical executive . It is the “Four’ who made the key political decisions’s political decisions. The ‘four’ were the ‘Four�
 The main decision is the so-called Minsk II Agreement . It stresses the complex of measures for realization of the Minsk Agreements . It contains the chief principle of political settlement of the Ukrainian conflict .
 Excluding Poland and the United States from this group was a net gain for the Kremlin . Russia managed to isolate Ukraine by excluding Poland and EU and isolating Ukraine .
 The Minsk groups also were very comfortable for Russia, consisting of Ukraine, Donetsk and Lugansk separatist republics, OSCE and Russia .
 The Minsk Agreements were signed on September 5, 2014, at the peak of the armed conflict between Ukraine and the unrecognized rebel republics in its Donbas region . The agreement calls on the sides to stop the clashes .
 OSCE cannot realize important steps to solve the conflict without Russia, it says . This approach helped to solve some low-politics issues and to establish a solid base of dialogue between Kiev and separatist regions .
 Russia preserves the veto on the Ukrainian rapprochement with the EU . It discusses the Ukrainian problem directly with Germany and preserves its rights to be the arbiter in the conflict .
 The EU is not facing such a choice yet, but there is a context in which the political choices currently being made are degrading the principles and the integrity of European politics .
 The crisis in the Ukraine can be seen as a culmination of a negative trend from the post-Cold War era . The Ukraine crisis is seen as the result of a lack of stability in the country .
 Armenia, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine were on Vladimir Putin's list . The real target and prize of Russia’s actions was Ukraine .
 Putin's power play in Ukraine was impulsive and improvised, but recognizing the limitations of Russia's hybrid warfare is as important as recognizing its strengths . Putin’s power play is impulsive.
 Its success depends heavily on certain conditions holding in the minds of the adversary . The company's success depends on the conditions held in the mind of the opponent .
 Hybrid warfare relies for success on taking advantage of the vulnerabilities of a stronger adversary .
 Russian information warfare, particularly the doctrine of reflexive control, is a critical component of Russia’s hybrid warfare .
 It plays on the reluctance of the Western leaders and peoples to involve themselves in conflict by surrounding it with confusion and controversy .
 Russia's information operations have provided support to the policy of inaction in Ukraine . In the case of Ukraine, the West chooses inaction, and Russia’s information operations has provided support for inaction .
 The EU was forced to take a tougher stand after MH-17's shooting down . It was not until the shooting down of Malaysian Airlines passenger flight MH- 17, on July 17, 2014, that the EU took a tough stand .
 At the end of July 2014, the EU agreed to impose tier three sanctions, a shift from a focus on sanctioning individuals to sanctioning key sectors in the economy .
 This restricted Russia’s access to capital markets in the EU, prohibiting the buying or selling of bonds and equity as well as services . This restricts Russia's access to the capital markets.
 The extension of sanctions signaled to the Russian leadership that the status regarding sanction would continue . The EU will not give up easily in front of this type of aggression .
 Russian political nervousness, sanctions diminish Russian fiscal reserves and endanger its economic policies at home . Low oil prices, which is the real reason for Russian political nerves, is the reason for the nervousness .
 It is true that sanctions, low oil prices or diplomatic talks will not change Russian policies regarding its neighbors . It is also true that high oil prices and diplomatic talks won't change Russia's policies .
 This would be a situation that entails serious dangers for the EU and Russia as well as the countries residing in-between . This would also be a serious danger for the European Union and Russia .
 The rhetorical flirtations with Russia’s basic incompatibility with Western ‘repugnant liberalism’ already evident before the crisis have been followed with an all-rhetorical assault combined with determined steps to use the full spectrum of Russian power .
 To a degree, the crisis in Ukraine is in fact a proxy conflict between the EU and Russia . The crisis is a proxy war between theEU and Russia.
 Russian leadership claims to draw legitimacy from a special path of Russian development . Some are seeing as a surprise in recent Russian politics is, in fact, the outcome of the current leadership .
 The EU internal split on Russian policy is less obvious, but it exists, says David Frum . Russian intervention in the Ukraine remains a fact with unforeseeable consequences also internally in the EU, he says .
 Letter to Lloyd George on 13 August 1938, just before the Munich Conference .
 Winston S Churchill's companion volume V, part 3: The coming of war 1936- 1939, London: Heinemann .
 The Russian Leader used the Ukraine Crises to Consolidate his Dictatorship .