 Russia’s actions in Eastern Ukraine qualify as offensive coercion, author says . He says Russia's actions in eastern Ukraine are offensive coercion .
 Russia demanded Ukraine implement a decentralization process and grant a part of Eastern Ukraine special status . Backed up by force, Russia demanded that Ukraine implement the process .
 Russia's aim is to use Donbas as an instrument to control its political future . Ukraine refused to acquiesce to Russia’s demand without restoring its sovereignty in Eastern Ukraine .
 With both sides refusing to budge, the crisis turned into a zero-sum game . Both sides refused to budgge .
 This article seeks to contribute to research on coercive diplomacy by focusing on offensive coercion . This article is a look at coercive diplomacy in a bid to find out more about coercive diplomacy .
 Russia, Ukraine, Ukraine and Ukraine. Alexander George, International Crisis, Foreign Policy, Eastern Ukraine, Donbas .
Artículo examina la estrategia de Rusia in Ucrania del Este y aborda la cuestión de por qué Rusia no ha logrado sus objetivos .
 A través del análisis de nociones de nopiones como el “status quo’s” and “derecho internacional’. The Este califican como coerción ofensiva
 Ucrania se negó a aceptar la demanda de Rusia sin restaurar su soberanía in UCrania del Este .
 Con ambas partes partes negándose a ceder, the crisis se convirtió in un juego of suma cero .
 Este artículo busca contribuir a la investigación sobre the diplomacia coercitiva enfocándose in the coerción ofensiva .
Rusia, Ucrania, Diplomacia coercitiva ofensiva, Relaciones bilaterales, Política exterior, Donbas .
 U.S. President Victor Yanukovych’s refusal to sign an Association Agreement with the European Union led to the beginning of a serious crisis in Ukraine .
 Ukraine's Parliament removed Yanukovych from office on February 21, 2014 . Yanukovych was removed from office after months of unrest in the country .
 This act was followed by Russia’s military interventions in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine . This act is the latest in a series of Russian military interventions .
 Russia invaded Crimea, which it then annexed following a controversial referendum . Russia then annexed Crimea following a referendum .
 Russia has consistently denied Russia’s military involvement in the conflict in Eastern Ukraine . Despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, they have consistently denied Russian military involvement .
 Alexander George, who coined this term, divided the concept into offensive and defensive variants . The term was coined by George .
 As George himself focused on the defensive variant, most authors opted to use coercive diplomacy as a general label without making a distinction between offense and defense . The concept has remained underexplored.
 It is asserted that Russia’s strategy in Eastern Ukraine fits the pattern of offensive coercion . It is claimed that Russia's strategy in eastern Ukraine fits a pattern of coercion .
 George underlines these notions to make an aggressor-defender distinction in international crises . He underlines the notion to make a aggressor–defenders distinction in crises .
 Russia employed military force against Ukraine in breach of international law, says author . Russia used force to force Ukraine to implement a decentralization process and grant separatist-controlled areas in Donbas autonomy .
 Russia's aim was to secure an enclave in Eastern Ukraine that it could use as a lever to control Ukraine's political future . Russia’s aim is to secure the enclave in eastern Ukraine.
 Through the use of force, Russia also violated the agreements it had signed with Ukraine, thus disregarding its commitments to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty, borders, and territorial integrity .
 The fact that Russia’s actions constitute an offense is evident in its denial of its military activities in Eastern Ukraine . Russia's actions are an offense, according to the Russian government .
 Russia sought legitimacy by referring to certain principles of international law . In Eastern Ukraine it adapted an approach based on strategic denial, which arguably amounts to a tacit acknowledgment of the offensive characteristics of its actions .
 George proposed by George but overlooked by his followers, he says . He says it enables one to make more astute assessments about coercive strategies .
 Russia pursued a strategy of offensive coercion with the aim of turning Eastern Ukraine's Donbas region into a tool of Russian leverage . A highly motivated opponent strove to deny the coercer the ability to obtain a sphere of influence inside its borders .
 Ukraine wanted to resolve the crisis peacefully, according to the Ukrainian government . This involved ensuring the continuation of western sanctions against Russia, which was requested by the West .
 Ukraine enacted certain legislation regarding separatist-controlled areas . As a proof of this will, Ukraine enacted some legislation .
 Ukraine’s continuing refusal to settle the conflict in a way that favors its opponent, Russia also found itself having to bear the cost of keeping war-torn Donbas as a functioning region .
 In defensive “coercive diplomatic gambits’s’ (Art and Greenhill 2018, 16), mechanisms such as the carrot-and-stick method can serve functional roles in facilitating a peaceful resolution to crises .
 There is a high likelihood that the crisis will turn into a zero-sum game, says the author . The coercer’s acts will likely have implications for the survival, territorial integrity, or political sovereignty of the target country .
 Russia has been unable to exact compliance from Kiev regarding Eastern Ukraine . This explains why Russia has not been able to comply with Kiev on Eastern Ukraine.
 Russia's coercive gambit is made more difficult by the fact that it had already annexed a part of the disputant's territory . Ukraine's resolve to resist Russia’s demands regarding its Eastern Ukraine regions.
 Russia’s strategy in Eastern Ukraine must be understood in the context of offensive coercion. Overall, I aim to show why Russia's strategy in eastern Ukraine is to be understood .
 Russia has been unable to bring its coercive campaign to a successful conclusion. I also seek to explain the implications of this chosen strategy with reference to the question of why Russia's coercive campaign has not been successful .
First, I clarify offensive and defensive forms of coercion and show why making a distinction between offense and defense in coercive diplomacy is necessary .
 Russia’s coercive diplomatic gambit in Eastern Ukraine through an analysis of how it evolved through different phases. Second, I discuss Russia's coercive diplomaticgambit in eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine relations with reference to international law. Third, I collate the factors that led to the collapse of the status quo in Russia .
 Russia's coercive diplomacy in Eastern Ukraine is a key issue in the Ukraine crisis . Russia's influence in Ukraine is seen as a key part of the conflict .
 George conceptualized coercive diplomacy as a form of forceful persuasion . He drew a distinction between offensive and defensive forms of coercive strategies employed in crises .
 Employing a carrot-and-stick approach when necessary, coercive diplomacy, as developed by George, serves an alternative strategy . It enables actors to achieve the desired outcomes without resorting to war .
 Some authors find it problematic to associate coercive diplomacy with defensive behavior due to the difficulty of making a clear-cut distinction between offense and defense .
 George's conceptualization can be found to distinguish between offensive and defensive forms of coercion . By drawing on George’s conceptualization, an objective standpoint is found .
 Such an attempt is analytically useful because, by identifying the position of the coercer, one can make better judgments about the characteristics of coercion and thus more accurate judgments .
 The target country is expected to show greater resistance to an “aggressive’ demand, such as territory or regime change, than to a “modest’s demand, than a ‘modest' demand, according to CNN .
 The attempt to overturn the status quo via a fait accompli point to the employment of offensive coercion . Conversely, attempts to overturn status quo by a fave accompli points to the use of offensive coerced .
 Policy makers should examine the disputant's attitude toward established norms and rules in the international system, George says . George also notes that to ascertain the opponent’s motives, it is imperative for policy makers to examine the opponent's motives .
 attitudes to the principles of international law are a useful indicator in judging an actor's tendency to adhere to the status quo .
 Actors' approaches to international agreements and/or treaties serve a similar function . Actors’ approaches to treaties and treaties are similar to that of international agreements .
 Maintaining the stability in interstate relations provided by signed agreements requires a commitment that both sides will continue to honor them .
 states may withdraw from agreements or act in violation of commitments stipulated in them . However, states may also withdraw from deals. States may also act in breach of commitments.
 States may produce justifications for violating obligations arising from international agreements by declaring that they had signed them under pressure or the terms of the agreement in question are no longer applicable . States may also produce justification for violating international agreements .
 Other signatory countries may find the abrogation of an agreement threatening, especially when it concerns security-related issues .
 There are cases where a mutually agreed-upon status quo is absent such as the Aegean and Kashmir disputes involving Turkey–Greece and Pakistan–India .
 George’s offense–defense distinction offers a useful perspective through which coercive diplomatic gambits can be analyzed .
 In making this distinction, one must try to find an objective standpoint, which requires paying less attention to how the protagonist describes its position and actions . States almost always present themselves as defensive.
 states tend to portray their actions as defensive, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Even if an action is conspicuously and overtly offensive and results in the violation of another state’s sovereignty or territorial integrity, states often portray it as defensive .
 A better way of determining whether the coercer has engaged in offensive or defensive coercion requires an examination of which side is responsible for the breakdown of a status quo . The question is whether the coercion is offensive, defensive or defensive .
 Russia’s Coercive Campaign in Eastern Ukraine is a direct continuation of what was undertaken in Crimea . Russia's activities in this region were a direct extension of what is done in Crimea, says CNN .
Highlighting some key individuals that played instrumental roles in both Crimea and Eastern Ukraine on behalf of Russia would suffice to underpin this contention . Highlighting some of these individuals would be enough to underpin the contention .
 Russia's Black Sea Fleet troops played leading role in occupation of Crimea . Russia's military operation against Ukraine in Crimea began in March .
 Other pro-Russian elements also contributed to the operation by providing leadership and manpower . However, other pro-Russians also contributed.
 Igor Girkin was an ex-GRU/FSB employee . He was one of the leaders who took part in the occupation of Crimea .
 Pro-Russian militants played an active role in the creation of a new political order in the peninsula . Pro- Russian militants also played a key role in creating a political order.
 Girkin and his 52 combatants’ arrival in Slovyansk was significant for the separatist insurgency . They were able to add momentum to a rebellion that had proved weak and ineffective during the early stages .
 The Russian leadership also made clear that it was ready to protect this population . The Russian leader also said it was prepared to protect the population .
 Moscow conveyed certain demands to Kiev and expected its counterpart to fulfill them . The separatist movement in Eastern Ukraine has emerged .
 Russia signaled its intention to push for political decentralization in Ukraine . By questioning the sustainability of a unified Ukrainian state, Russia signaled a push for decentralization .
 According to Matveeva, individuals like Gubarev came to Russia’s attention after they had initiated a separatist movement against Kiev .
 Russia seized upon the separatist momentum and demanded Ukraine address local population’s grievances, as expressed by the self-declared mayors .
 Russian leaders’ statements served to underpin the ‘political warfare’ that was being waged at this stage .
 Ukraine’s acting President Oleksandr Turchynov announced the beginning of an Anti-Terrorist Operation on April 15, 2014 .
Russia increased its military involvement in the conflict in the face of the Ukrainian army’s advances . Russia increased its involvement.
 Russia engaged in “demonstrative military action’s’ actions, signaling to Ukraine that it could escalate the pressure if its demands remained unmet . Russia is seeking to increase pressure on Ukraine .
 Despite weapons and manpower provided by Russia, its military actions proved insufficient in stopping Ukraine’s advances . Russia's military action proved insufficient.
 Ukraine remained adamant about restoring its territorial integrity, despite softening its stance on certain occasions, such as declaring ceasefires as happened in June 2014 .
 Ukraine made critical attempts to seize control of the border with Russia . Russia's unwillingness for a broader military involvement is seen as a reason for the move .
 It had become clear in Ilovaisk that even if it required carrying out conventional interventions, Russia would not allow the Ukrainian army to seize strategically important locations .
 Ukraine suffered crushing defeats in Ilovaisk and Debaltseve . Kiev felt compelled to sign two separate Minsk agreements in their aftermath . Russia's success in exacting compliance proves Russia’s success.
 The second agreement, currently in force, was signed on February 12, 2015, and contains 13 provisions . It is the second agreement in force and is in force .
 Despite its military activities in Eastern Ukraine, Russia has never admitted its involvement in the conflict . Russia has not admitted its role in the Ukraine conflict .
 After annexing Crimea, Russia provided various explanations to justify its military actions .
 Black Sea Fleet troops in Sevastopol and their obvious role in the occupation of Crimea were not applicable .
 The phrase ‘strategic denial’ was employed by Burke to explain Russia’s policy during the Crimea operation . However, with regard to Donbas, an approach based on “strategic Denial” was espoused .
 Russia could not refer to the principle of self-defense because it never admitted to using force in Eastern Ukraine . Similarly, Russia never admitted using force.
 separatist leaders have admitted to the presence of Russian troops in Eastern Ukraine . However, despite Russian leaders’ denials, separatist leaders on certain occasions did admit to presence of troops .
 UN resolution 2625, adopted in 1970, has key stipulations relevant to the subject matter .
Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing or encouraging the organization of irregular forces or armed bands . Every State has a duty to stop organizing, encouraging or encouraging such groups .
 Russia’s supply of fighters and weapons on a continuous basis to an armed insurgency in Donbas, as well as its direct interventions against Ukraine, constitutes a clear violation of these resolutions . Russia's supply of fighter and weapons is a continuous source of weapons and weapons .
 Russia overturned the status quo sustained by various bilateral and multilateral agreements . By using force against Ukraine, Russia overturned a number of bilateral andmultilateral agreements.
 As the conflict unfolded in Eastern Ukraine, the U.S. and the UK provided only limited support in the form of non-lethal aid . The United States and the United Kingdom are not legally bound to help Ukraine .
 Russian leaders continued to deny the Russian military’s role in the conflict in Eastern Ukraine . This can be interpreted as a tacit acknowledgment of the illegitimacy of their actions .
 Russia continued to present the armed conflict in Eastern Ukraine as an internal affair . However, the provision of such assistance was never admitted .
 Russia’s coercive gambit proved successful in persuading the Ukrainian government to seek a non-military solution to the crisis . Two separate Minsk agreements resulted in the signing of two separate agreements .
 This arduous process imposed significant costs on Russia politically and economically . However, this arduous and lengthy process imposed major costs on the country .
Key provisions of the Minsk Agreement have not been implemented yet . It is not clear whether Russia will be able to realize its ultimate objectives regarding Eastern Ukraine .
 Russia had decided to scale back its goals in Eastern Ukraine by choosing Donbas as the only area to be secured from Ukraine . Donbas was chosen by Russia to be secure from Ukraine.
 Ukraine’s motivation was a key factor in this process, as Russia found itself facing an opponent more formidable than expected . Ukraine's motivation was the key factor.
 Ukraine lacked the combat readiness it needed to deal with an armed insurgency . It soon gathered enough strength to take on the Russian-backed separatists in Eastern Ukraine .
 Crimea was the main development that fueled Ukraine’s motivation was the loss of Crimea . The main development in Ukraine was theloss of Crimea.
 The pro-Russian mobilization in Eastern Ukraine was a continuation of the separatist trend that had started in Crimea . From Ukraine’s perspective, the pro- Russian mobilization was a continuing trend .
 As the separatist wave reached Eastern Ukraine, Ukraine faced not just the prospect of the loss of Donbas but also that of Kharkiv, Dnipro, Kherson, Zaporizhia and Odessa .
 Ukraine's conflict in Eastern Ukraine is Ukraine's motivation to put up a determined struggle . Russia's Crimea operation is the main reason for Russia encountering a difficult conflict .
 Ukrainian army's advances could be stopped with conventional intervention by Russia . Only with conventional interventions by Russia could the Ukrainian army’s further advances be stopped .
 Russia managed to secure Donbas from Ukraine, but it found itself in a position of having to shoulder the economic burden of keeping the region as a functioning entity .
 Damaged infrastructure in separatist-controlled areas adds another layer of difficulty to Russia’s efforts to create a viable living environment .
 Russia's relations with the West took a notable downturn with the MH17 incident . Russia’s relations with West have also taken a significant downturn .
 European economic measures in finance and energy sectors against Russia put a strain on the latter's economy . Russia and the EU have close economic ties between them .
 The EU took steps that have contributed to Ukraine’s geopolitical estrangement from Russia . The EU also took steps.
 The EU did not backtrack on its plans to sign an Association Agreement with Ukraine . Despite the unrest in Ukraine following the ousting of Yanukovych, the EU didn't backtrack.
 The agreement was finally signed on June 27, 2014, and came into effect on September 1, 2017 . The agreement, which was first signed in June 2014, was signed in July 2014 .
 Ukraine’s implementation of its provisions has facilitated its westward orientation . The Association Agreement does not envisage membership per se .
 Ukrainian citizens and Ukraine’s access to the European Single Market are landmark events in this process . Visa-free travel for Ukrainian citizens is a landmark event in the process .
 Ukraine’s increasing estrangement from Russia is visible in other areas . Ukraine's increase in tension with Russia is seen in other parts of Russia .
 The Ukrainian Orthodox Church's split from the Moscow Patriarchate in January 2019 .
 During the post-Minsk phase, Ukraine further hardened its stance toward Russia by passing a law known as the “reintegration of Donbas,’ approved by Poroshenko on February 20, 2018 .
 Ukraine announced the end of the ATO and its replacement with Joint Forces Operation . The reintegration law was passed shortly after the passing of the reintegment law .
 Ukraine’s hardened resolve demonstrates the difficulties encountered by Russia during its coercive campaign .
 Russia's main demand from Ukraine is to adopt a decentralized system, which would enable Ukraine’s eastern regions to have relative autonomy . Since the removal of Yanukovych, Russia has been urging Ukraine to adopt decentralized system .
 Putin has emphasized the necessity of granting self-declared republics “autonomous rights’ through constitutional amendments . The word ‘autonomy’ is not mentioned in the Minsk Agreement for a peaceful political settlement .
 Kiev has rejected this demand because it understands that making constitutional changes without restoring security in Donbas would mean ceding control of the region to Russia’s proxies . Kiev has refused this demand.
 They would, in turn, become legitimate political actors because they would be guaranteed to win local elections . They would be able to win elections if they were able to do so .
For Kiev, only after fulfilling the necessary safety conditions and requirements, will it be possible for political parties to undertake electoral activities in the region . For Kiev, just after fulfilling safety conditions, it will be possible to conduct electoral activities .
 Differences over priorities reveal that the situation in Eastern Ukraine takes on the characteristics of a zero-sum game .
 Ukraine has been forced to accept diminished sovereignty over a part of its territory . As the case of Ukraine proves, the coercer's plans will be met with resistance .
In cases of offensive coercion, as the coercer’s actions will likely have implications for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the target country . concepts such as “proportionality” and the “carrot-and-stick approach’ lose their functionality .
 Ukraine understands that handing the control of Donbas over to Russian-backed separatists would mean that Russia will retain leverage with which to influence its internal political dynamics .
 During the pre-Ukraine crisis period, when Russia wanted to apply pressure on Ukraine, it used Crimea for this purpose . Russia used Crimea as a point of pressure for Ukraine .
 Crimea's annexation rendered the peninsula a de facto Russian territory . Crimea’s annexation is a loss of ability for Russia to exert influence on Ukraine from within .
 Donbas has the required characteristics to serve a similar function as Crimea . But Donbas is not the same type of Crimea as Crimea. Crimea has the same characteristics as Donbas .
 Moscow’s plans to transform Donbas into a type of Russian leverage meant Ukraine needed to be prevented from defeating the separatists .
 Ukraine realized that the stalemate in Donbas had also imposed costs on Russia . Russia achieved this goal, as time progressed, but Ukraine realized it would be difficult to settle it .
 The post-Minsk phase witnessed Ukraine’s employment of counter-coercion against Russia . Western support is crucial for Ukraine, for which western support is key .
 Ukraine is also playing its part to ensure that the West maintains its sanctions against Russia . Ukraine is seeking the West’s political and diplomatic support .
 Ukraine has taken steps such as the passing of two separate laws in September 2014 . To demonstrate its willingness for a political settlement, Ukraine has shown it is willing to accept political settlement .
 The passing of this law is an attempt to prove that Ukraine maintains the political will it had demonstrated in 2014 for a political settlement and that it is committed to the Minsk process .
 Ukraine refuses to implement constitutional reforms without restoring its territorial integrity . The likelihood of Donbas turning into a frozen conflict increases with each day .
 The region would become a geopolitical burden for Russia. That scenario means that the region would be a geopoliticalurden for Russia .
 This article offers an in-depth explanation of Russia’s strategy in Eastern Ukraine . It draws on the concept of coercive diplomacy .
 I argued that Russia has engaged in offensive coercion against Ukraine by forcing its disputant to enact constitutional changes aimed at decentralization and granting a part of its territory autonomy . I argued the changes were intended to grant the country autonomy .
 Russia violated general principles of international law by resorting to the use of force against another sovereign state . Russia pursued this goal, but it violated international law, it said .
 Ukraine had promised not to resort to the threat or the actual use of force against Ukraine except in self-defense . But it also violated agreements it had signed with Ukraine .
 Russia’s actions against Ukraine suggest the use of offensive coercion, George says . George says Russia's actions suggest use of coercion .
 Russia's coercive gambit in Eastern Ukraine was not to gain territory but to secure an enclave with which to control Ukraine’s political future . Unlike the goal it pursued in Crimea, the goal was to secure a political enclave .
 Russia took Ukraine's Russian-speaking population as its referent and demanded Ukraine address these people’s grievances following the ousting of Yanukovych . In the pursuit of this objective, Russia took the Russian-language population as the referent .
 Russia’s military actions have taken a heavy toll on Ukraine, causing it to lose more than 13,000 people as well as parts of its territory .
 The fact that Russia has refused to acknowledge its military activities in Eastern Ukraine demonstrates the illegitimacy and offensiveness of its actions . Russia has not acknowledged its military activity in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia lacks the legal right to employ military force against the target country . Russia's coercive campaign lies in that it retains no strategic or moral high ground to justify its military activities .
 Russia prevented Ukraine from achieving this objective by defeating the Ukrainian forces, as witnessed in Ilovaisk and Debaltseve .
 Russia’s offensive coercive gambit, however, encountered serious difficulties . Russia's offensive coercivegambit has faced serious difficulties.
 Ukraine waged a determined military campaign not to lose more land in Eastern Ukraine . Having lost Crimea already to Russia, Ukraine waged an aggressive military campaign .
 Russia minimized its goals in Eastern Ukraine and chose Donbas as the only area to be secured from Ukraine . In the face of Ukraine’s determination, Russia minimize its goals.
 Russia's coercive campaign has proven to be a much more arduous and costly undertaking than its Crimea operation . Facing western sanctions and bearing the costs of keeping the DPR and LPR as functioning entities, Russia’s coercive campaign is more costly than its Crimean operation .
 Russia’s coercive gambit in Eastern Ukraine is indicative of the necessity of making this distinction . George's division of coercive diplomacy into offensive and defensive variants offers a useful framework .
 Some authors have remained skeptical of the idea of making offense–defense distinction in the analysis of coercive diplomacy . They argue that what is offensive and defensive are determined by the subjective viewpoints of actors involved in an international crisis .
 It is asserted in this article that actors may be aware that their position is indefensible, even though they may produce justificatory statements to defend their position .
 Turkey's offensive coercive diplomacy has been a failure in this case, as the Assad government is still in power . Expectedly, Turkey’s offensive diplomacy has not been a success .
 With more case studies, more rigorous assessments can be made on the success ratios of offensive and defensive coercive diplomatic gambits .
The likelihood of success in cases of defensive coercion is expected to be higher than those of offensive coercion . The likelihood of successful cases of coercion is higher than that of offensive coerced .
 If the coercer engages in acts that have implications for the target state’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, constitutional order, or regime, coercion is much more likely to be met with resistance .
 Russia faced formidable difficulties in its coercive campaign in Eastern Ukraine . This analytical context explains why Russia faced difficulties in the region .
 Russia's coercive gambit succeeded in bringing Ukraine to the negotiation table to solve the crisis through dialogue . Russia’s coercivegambit succeeded.
 Ukraine has consistently refused to take the required political step, which means implementing the key provisions of the Minsk Agreement, without restoring its sovereignty over Donbas . Ukraine has repeatedly failed to take a political step.
 Russia has continued to insist that constitutional changes be implemented by Ukraine and elections be held in Donbas to bring an end to the conflict .
 With both sides refusing to budge, the crisis has become a zero-sum game . The crisis has now become aZero-Sum game, with both sides refused to budged .
 Russia cannot convince Ukraine that its demands are proportional, especially after invading Crimea . Russia can't convince Ukraine it is proportional, even after invasion of Crimea .
 Ukraine is trying to persuade Ukraine to soften its position with a carrot-and-stick approach . Ukraine says it will not be able to use this approach to change its position .
 The likelihood of Russia’s coercive diplomatic gambit delivering the desired outcome is uncertain at best . Russia's coercive diplomaticgambit is uncertain.
 Ukraine’s new president Volodymyr Zelensky reached an agreement with Russia on troop withdrawal and prisoner exchange . In a bid to demonstrate his willingness to end the conflict in Donbas, he reached a deal with Russia .
 The prospect of ending the stalemate over Donbas remains uncertain . As the fulfillment of this condition would amount to a failure of Russia’s coercive campaign, the prospect of a failure is uncertain .
 The argument developed in this article also has implications for policy makers that might engage in acts of offensive coercion . The argument is based on the argument that policy makers should not engage in offensive coercion.
 Actors have a higher chance of succeeding, if they prosecute and complete their offensive campaigns swiftly . Actors are more likely to succeed if they complete their coercive campaigns quickly .
 The Crimea operation is a case in point because Russia seized the peninsula through a swiftly executed fait accompli, enabled by its already-present military units on the ground .
 The second scenario would occur when the target country manages to resist the coercer’s demands and even engages in counter-coercion, thus imposing costs on the coercers .
 It is also important to emphasize given Russia's actions in Eastern Ukraine that balance of motivation is perhaps as important as balance of power in coercive campaigns .
 Policy makers in coercing states must ponder beforehand how their request would be viewed by the target country, which would consist of various political and societal actors . It is in this respect that policy makers in coerced states must think about their request .
Political leadership in the target country may come under significant pressure from societal actors to defend their country’s rights and dignity in the face of coercion .
 As the Ukraine case proves, a coercer’s actions may galvanize nationalist feelings and foster internal unity in the target country . The Ukraine case may galvanized nationalist feelings.
As the state prosecuting offensive coercive diplomacy lacks the means to justify its actions on legitimate grounds . There is a very low likelihood that it can employ diplomacy as an effective instrument, says the author .
 Russia had this opportunity, as it had relied mainly on proxy forces, and this would have allowed it to reverse course when it had become clear that Donbas would be a chaotic conflict zone . Russia had a chance, but it had used this opportunity to change course .
 Russia further immersed itself in the conflict and ended up incurring significant costs . But as a result of misjudgment, Russia continued to engage in its conflict .
 In United States and Coercive Diplomacy, edited by Robert J Art and Patrick M Cronin, 3–20. In U.S. and U.N.
 In Coercion the Power to Hurt in International Politics, edited by Kelly M Greenhill and Peter Krause, 3–32 .
 Center for Transatlantic Relations & German Council on Foreign Relations . Center for transatlantic Relations and German Council.