 Col McLay served as the Commander of the 98th Flying Training Squadron and Air Force Parachute Team . He was the commander of the Air Force's 98th flying Training Squadron .
 Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and swift annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 put the West on notice . In the final analysis, it is only through resolute action in implementing policy recommendations that encompass all instruments of power .
 The U.S., in particular, led the push to secure early NATO membership for the Baltic republics . The Baltic nations moved quickly to cement links with the United States and Western Europe .
 Russia's main interest in the Baltic nations appears to be rooted in reviving nationalist pride . Putin and Russian elites view the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 as ‘the greatest catastrophe of the 20th century’ and a cause for continuing embarrassment .
 NATO's primary raison d'être – countering Soviet Communist expansionism – no longer existed . As the primary architect of the Alliance, the United States has championed NATO .
 President Bill Clinton led diplomatic efforts to bring the Baltic republics to the forefront of NATO's second round of expansion in 2004 . Since that time, prominent U.S. leaders and academics have criticized this expansion as a reckless ‘political act’
 Schelling’s criteria is an important assumption that the object of deterrence must be capable of rationally considering the consequences stemming from the threatened use of force . Schelling's criteria is a key question for Schelling .
After Baltic States gained independence, some ethnic Russian residents were never granted ‘full citizenship’ This could become a point of exploitation, especially considering Russia's use of ethnic Russians or Russo-phone Ukrainians living in the Donbass region of Ukraine .
 The NAC must decide whether to act or accept the risk from inaction . When such events become apparent, the NAC will decide if to act .
 A predetermined trigger might come in the form of positive identification of a Russian military presence in the Baltic republics . For example, a predetermined trigger may come in a positive identification.
 The U.S. should contribute assets such as Close Air Support aircraft and Air Defense assets to the Baltic States, which would have a strong deterrent effect. Third, the United States would contribute assets like Close Air support aircraft and air defense assets .
 The U.S. should make its economic assistance targeted and conditional on actions that minimize the Baltic states’ vulnerabilities . The Baltic states face a hybrid threat from Russia and the United States .