 The DPR, along with the Lugansk People’s Republic, broke away from Ukraine in May 2014 . The two republics declared a confederation, Novorossiya .
Far-right groups hijacked the "Euromaidan" protests after the February 2014 fascist coup in Kiev . They grew out of the “Anti-Maidan” movement in the largely Russian-speaking Donbas, Odessa and Crimea regions .
Fighting has never really ended and there are reports of civilian casualties caused by Ukrainian strikes on the rebel republics .
Obtaining accurate figures for casualties in the war in eastern Ukraine is extremely difficult because of the unstable and insecure situation on the ground . The conflict is highly politicised and controversial .
 The total number of conflict-related casualties since the Ukrainian government launched its “Anti-Terrorist Operation’ in April 2014 was 30,729, including 9,333 killed and 21,396 injured .
 The report provides no breakdown of where casualties have occurred in the conflict area . There is no indication of which side was responsible for the casualties .
 In February 2015 press reports quoted claims from German BND intelligence service that 50,000 civilians and servicemen had died in the Ukraine conflict . That was almost 10 times greater than figures given by Ukrainian president Petro Poroshkenko only days before .
The Ukraine government does not appear to have any accurate figures for civilian casualties in the conflict . The Ukraine government doesn't appear to be giving accurate figures.
Russia-backed militants have killed 10,000 Ukrainians and injured more than 20,000 over the past two years, a report says . No breakdown of civilian and military casualties or locations .
 Relations between the DPR and LPR governments have been deteriorating for months . The people's republics claim it is biased towards the Ukrainian side .
 The OSCE mission failed to report heavy shelling of Zaitsevo, a village close to the front-line, by Ukrainian forces .
 At the time Zaitsevo was a flashpoint stoking fears of a return to all-out war . Over a thousand people were without electricity, gas or humanitarian aid for several months .
 According to reports from the DPR side, 6 civilians were killed and 10 wounded in the two strikes .
 Russia remains an active OSCE member. Russia would play a major part in any implementation of the Minsk agreements .
 The OSCE has declared every election in Ukraine since the February 2014 fascist coup legitimate . The coup was carried out by armed Nazi-supporting groups . The removal of Viktor Yanukovych was in breach of the Ukrainian constitution on several counts .
 The OSCE clearly saw no problems with the fact that many violent Nazis were elected to parliament . 84 neo-Nazi battalions continue to run amok in Ukraine, attacking, murdering and kidnapping any opponents of the regime .
 A ceasefire was announced on 1st September by the Trilateral Contact Group . The ceasefire has been renewed twice since then, sources say .
 The Donbas International News Agency and the OSCE have reported hundreds of violations in the past week . Both the Donbas and OSCE are reporting violations .
 The truth is that there are no internationally accepted figures for civilian deaths in the Ukraine war . As in Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Iraq and Gaza, many thousands have died as a result of wars launched by US-NATO imperialism .
 The people of Ukraine are languishing under an effective dictatorship, under which no democratic rights exist . No opposition to ultra-nationalism or outright fascism is tolerated, says the writer .