 Ten of the 23 ex-Berkut riot police officers suspected of gunning down protesters in the last days of the Revolution of Dignity in Kyiv have received Russian citizenship . A further two men have been given ’refugee’ status.
 Kremlin-backed militants in Donbas have added three ex-Berkut officers charged with the deaths to their list of people to be handed over in exchange for Ukrainian POW and civilian hostages .
 The figures were reported before another suspected killer Vitaly Honcharenko and three other former Berkut officers fled to Russia in April 2017 .
 There is no reason to believe that Russia is unaware of the role played by these men and other former Berkut officers . Russia is not aware of the roles played by the men.
 Two men wanted by Ukraine for crimes against Maidan activists have been spotted in Moscow . They are helping the regime of Russian President Vladimir Putin crush protest at home .
 Ukraine would like to try for his leading role in the bloody dispersal of Maidan activists on November 30, 2013 .
 Kusyuk was then the Berkut unit commander in charge . Petro Fedchuk, who is also wanted for his role during the suppression, was the deputy head of the Kyiv police .
 Alexei Navalny was seen on December 30, 2014 in Moscow . He, or his double, was seen during a protest against the sentences passed on him and his brother Oleg .
Ukraine’s Berkut units were disbanded after Maidan . The units had been so discredited by their violent suppression of the protests .
 Crimea Berkut unit who betrayed their oath after Russia’s invasion and annexation of Crimea have since helped Russia to imprison Ukrainian activists in trials of astounding lawlessness .
 Two men are currently imprisoned in Russia for ‘offences’ which they allegedly committed in the capital of Ukraine before Russia’s invasion of Crimea .
More ‘prosecutions’ were planned by the de facto prosecutor installed on Russia’s invasion, according to the Russian government .
 The two cases make it abundantly clear that no Ukrainian who took part in Maidan should consider going to Crimea while it remains under Russian occupation . They travel to Russia at great risk also.
Kyiv Berkut's ex-chief spotted in Moscow dispersing rallies . Former police officer who took part in Euromaidan from the beginning .
 He was arrested in Russian-occupied Crimea on Feb 5, 2015, and savagely tortured for over 24 hours before the officially recorded time of arrest . He was held in Crimea on February 5,2015 .
 The only ‘lawyer’ present was one appointed by investigators . A ‘confession’ was obtained from Kostenko, as well as a statement that he had been beaten on the street by unidentified individuals .
 Kostenko retracted all such ‘confessions’ as soon as he was able to see to a real lawyer .
Kostenko was charged with inflicting minor injuries to a Ukrainian Berkut officer in Kyiv on Feb 18, 2014 . Ukraine's chief prosecutor expects completion of Maidan investigation by year-end .
 Simferopol court found Kostenko guilty of both charges, sentencing him to 4 years in prison . On May 15, 2015, court found him guilty of two charges .
 The Memorial Human Rights Centre declared Kostenko a political prisoner soon afterward . He was declared a political prisoners .
 He was living in the North Caucasus with his partner, now wife Galina and her children . He is from the Kyiv region, and was living with his wife and children .
 He was seized by local police on May 15, 2015, tortured, and taken to Crimea . He was then taken to the Crimea, where he was detained by police .
 Kolomiyets was sentenced to 6 years on the ‘attempted murder’ charges and 4 years over the drugs charge . He was also sentenced to six years for the 'attempting murder' charges .
 The Memorial Human Rights Centre also declared Kolomiyets a political prisoner . The Human Rights Center also declared the political prisoner of the political leader .
 Russia dismissed the first charges as something Russia has no jurisdiction over . It believes it likely that the drugs were planted .