 Moscow could 'defend' Russia-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine if Ukraine launches an all-out assault on separatists there .
Russia has also been building up troops on the border with Ukraine . Russian-backed separatist rebels and Ukrainian troops have been clashing in the east of the country .
 Ukrainian military says one of its soldiers was killed on Thursday by shooting from the separatists . The military says the soldier was killed by the separatists.
 The rebels used machine-guns, grenades and mortars several times and Ukrainian forces fired back, the military was quoted as saying . The Ukrainian army commander, Gen Ruslan Khomchak, said "we see the build-up of Russian troops near Ukraine's state border"
 rebels say one of their fighters was killed when Ukrainian troops fired mortars at a village on the outskirts of the city of Donetsk . Earlier the rebels said one of them was killed by Ukrainian troops .
 The United States and Germany have both expressed concern at the increase in tensions . The U.S. and Germany are concerned about the increased tensions .
 Russia has been increasing the number of troops at the Ukrainian border . Russia maintains that they should not be seen as a threat .
 White House press secretary Jen Psaki says Russian troop numbers there were the highest since 2014 . The conflict in eastern Ukraine began in 2014 .
 Ukraine says some 20,000 Russian troops have been moved towards Ukraine's border . Russia has not detailed troop numbers, but the Ukrainian military asserted at the end of March that the move was made .
 Video has emerged on social media of Russian trains moving heavy weaponry . It is apparently towards the region .
 For months there have been sporadic clashes between Ukrainian troops and Moscow-backed rebels in the Donbas region, violating a fragile ceasefire .
 Ukraine says 25 of its troops have been killed in the conflict zone so far this year, and 50 died in the whole of last year . Eastern Ukraine peace deal explains Ukraine's peace deal .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel discussed the conflict in a phone call with Russian President Vladimir Putin . She urged Russia to "de-escalate tensions" by pulling troops back . Putin accused Ukraine of inflaming the situation in the east .
 Mr Kozak likened the current situation of the separatists to Srebrenica, the town in Bosnia-Herzegovina where 8,000 Muslim men were killed by Bosnian Serb forces.
 President Putin first suggested in 2019 that Russian-speaking residents might suffer a Srebrenica-like massacre if Ukraine regained full control of Donbas without guarantees .
There is no sign that Ukraine is preparing any such Bosnian Serb-style "ethnic cleansing" campaign .
 The roots of the conflict go back to March 2014, when Russia annexed the Ukrainian region of Crimea .
 Pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych fled the Ukrainian capital Kyiv in February . Yanukovych had fled after massive street demonstrations and clashes .
 Russia's military intervention sparked a major rift with Western nations . The European Union and the U.S. imposed sanctions on Russia .
 A month later, Russian-backed rebels in the mainly Russian-speaking Donbas seized much of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions . A month after the rebels took over the Donetsk region, the region was seized by the rebels .
 Ukraine's President Zelensky came to power promising to bring about peace . A ceasefire was signed last July .