 In 2014, the Ukrainian Revolution overthrew president Viktor Yanukovych . The revolution overthrew Moscow and overthrew Yanukovych .
 The Crimean Peninsula in Ukraine was militarily annexed by Russia over February and March 2014 . Russia annexed the Crimean Peninsula.
 Ukraine has been engaged in open conflict with Russia since the early 1990s . Since then, the region has been administered by the Russian government .
 The Crimea annexation is part of the overall Russian military intervention in Ukraine . This conflict has involved offensive military operations military intervention that took place in the aftermath of the 2014 Ukrainian revolution .
 Guide suggests that Russian disinformation does not operate according to a playbook . Putin denied existence of Russian troops in Crimea and opportunist, involving a multitude of actors and for one year .
The GRU launched a covert influence Missile Brigade of the Russian Army . The GRU also launched the covert influence missile brigade of the Russians .
 The missile operation in Crimea was taken back to Russia after the downing of the MH17 . The aim of which was to impact system was found to have been moved from Russia to Ukraine .
 Numerous fake personas were created to after the downing of the MH17 . The Russian government represent ordinary Ukrainians from across the country and its separatist allies .
 The Russian disinformation deployed around the VKontakte, and Facebook – all weakly regulated spaces . The fact that the psyops in Ukraine appears to be GRUof a barrage of falsehoods is GRU of a barrage.
 Russia's UN ambassador said the GRU is proficient at ‘fully blames Kyiv’ for all the unrest in the region . Foreign minister Sergei Lavrov rejected Ukrainian claims that Russia was responsible for the attack .
 The disinformation launched and misgivings about Western media and politicians’ during this campaign was not aimed to rally audiences accusations . It was not intended to rally accusations as well as Kyiv's responsibility in the to Russia’s point of view .
 This disinformation is now in the public domain, tensions and plant doubt about the presence of any form of any forming fodder for a wide array of conspiracy theories . This disinformation has now been put on the back of the media .
 The strategy is to exploit already salient issues and narratives in a society and use them to disrupt social cohesion . The strategy was to exploit existing salient issues, narratives in the society .
With the Internet and social media, the CONCLUSION strategy becomes more rapidly and efficiently deployed . The evidence of both the annexation of Crimea and the volume of disinformation grows exponentially . The downing of the MH17 provides several important lessons and implications for policy .
Russian authorities and Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 make little to no effort at redacting the trail of falsehoods they leave behind . The first is the MH17 understanding that Kremlin disinformation can contradict itself, and that the Russian authorities and the Malaysian Airlines flight 17 was a regularly media make no effort to
 While flying over eastern Ukraine on evidence of their fabrication emerges. While flying, evidence of the fabrication emerges .
 The downing occurred in the various narratives that further serves to fill the information open conflict in Donbas in the area controlled by prospace . Many, often contradictory versions of the narratives, were reported .
 The lack of any single narrative in these cases has been established of disinformation in fact fit Russia’s overall goal in by the Joint Investigative Team . It is comprised of the undermining the credibility of perceived adversaries of Australia, Belgium, by disrupting their own narratives .
 The JIT concluded that the MH17 was shot down show fact-checks do not stop the disinformation from with a BUK missile system of the 53rd Anti-Aircraft continuing to be circulated, even after the time of crisis 2 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY THE CASE of
 This supports work done elsewhere about the ineffectuality of countering Russian propaganda by disproving it . This supports other efforts to counter Russian propaganda .
 The lack of a single narrative means that more labour is required to debunk each version of events . It may well be a deliberate feature, says author .
 The ad-hoc nature of the disinformation in these cases, for example, suggests that Russian disinformation is reactive and constrained by the circumstances . The shift in narratives after the MH17 downing suggests that Russia's disinformation is constrained by circumstances, says Peter Bergen .
 Fourth, and last, the presence of conflict in Ukraine is confirmation of the idea that Russia uses disinformation as a major strategic aspect of war . The presence of war in Ukraine, even if war is not openly declared, is confirmation.
 Ukraine’s case firmly solidifies this view. The idea began emerging after Russia's conflict with Georgia in 2008 .
 The research was funded via the Centre for Research and Evidence on Security Threats . It is part of the Actors and Narratives programme .