 EU powers and U.S. urged Kiev not to resist Russia’s invasion of Crimea .
 The minutes of Ukraine's National Security and Defence Council were published on Tuesday . The document was published by a Ukrainian parliament committee on Tuesday.
 The meeting, chaired by then acting president Oleksandr Turchynov, was called one week after former president Viktor Yanukovych fell from power . One day after Russian special forces seized government buildings in Crimea .
 ministers and others warned him that Ukraine couldn't do it alone and that the West wouldn't help . But ministers and other ministers warned him he could not be helped by the West .
 It was systematically destroyed by Yanukovych and his entourage, Ihor Tenyukh said .
 Russia is holding military drills on Ukraine’s eastern border which involved 38,000 troops with armoured, air, and naval support . But he said Russia was holding military exercises on the Ukraine border .
 Other ministers told Turchynov not to expect popular resistance because the “dominant mood of people in Crimea was on the Russian side’s side .
 Russian propaganda had broadcast fake stories that Kiev "fascists" were coming to massacre Russian-speakers . They blamed Russian propaganda, which had broadcast false stories, they said .
 Russian intelligence linked it to years-long “subversion’s operations in Crimea by Russian intelligence . They also link it to ‘subversion operations’ in Crimea, they say .
 Arseniy Yatsenyuk, then PM, told Turchynov that the country had no money for a war because Yanukovych had stolen it . The then PM had taken office just one day earlier .
 The United States Sixth Fleet pulled back two warships which had been stationed in the Black Sea . Yatsenyuk said it's ‘a pity’ that the U.S. Sixth Fleet had pulled back the warships in a sign of Western intentions .
 The 2008 war began when Russia-controlled fighters in the breakaway South Ossetia region in Georgia escalated skirmishes against Georgian troops .
 Mikheil Saakashvili fired back on the South Ossetian capital, Tskhinvali, Russia invaded Georgia proper .
 Tymoshenko: "Remember how Saakashvili swallowed his bait and lost?"
 Valentyn Nalyvaichenko, Turchynov’s intelligence chief, echoed her warning .
 The meeting bandied round ideas such as calling for UN Security Council talks . Ukrainian expats were urged to picket Russian embassies around the world .
 The Ukrainian army, joined by volunteer brigades, did fight back when Russia’s hybrid forces invaded the Donbass region in east Ukraine . Russia's hybrid forces also invaded the region shortly afterward .
 conflict has so far claimed at least 9,200 lives and displaced more than 1 million people . The conflict has also claimed more than a million lives .
 Ukraine hasn't declared a state of war with Russia and Western powers still haven't given it military assistance . But Ukraine still hasn’t declared aState of war.
 The West is angling for Russian cooperation on Syria and on the refugee crisis . But with the West angled for Russia's cooperation on the crisis, these could end in July .
 The EU and U.S. say they won’t recognise Russia’s annexation of Crimea . sanctions on doing business there will stay in place for the long term .
 Ukrainian diplomats don’t think they’ll get Crimea back unless Russia changes . In the 1990s, when the collapse of the Soviet Union undid former conquests, they were undid .