 Putin shamelessly lied to the world about Crimea, and now proudly admits it in new film . The film is based on a documentary about Putin's role in Crimea .
 Only a few short months into the year, 2015 is already turning out to be a year of sobering realities about Russia .
International relations with Russia seem to have taken on an atmosphere frighteningly similar to scenes from Leviathan . The film depicts the stark unrelenting reality of beating one’s head against the wall of a regime of corruption .
 World leaders pull all-nighters in Minsk despite world leaders pulling all- nighters . We've watched the war in east Ukraine escalate.
 Anyone not supportive of Putin is deemed unpatriotic, even traitors . We've seen ordinary citizens, even mothers, arrested for treason under the most tenuous of circumstances .
 Russian opposition leaders and their families were harassed, jailed, and even killed . Most notably the brazen assassination of former Deputy Prime Minister Boris Nemtsov at the foot of the Kremlin .
 Putin inexplicably disappears for nearly two weeks, and the rumors of his demise turned out to be premature .
 Putin's political colleagues even hosted Europe’s fringe far-right in St. Petersburg, Russia .
 Ostensibly this film is a documentary reconstructing the dramatic and glorious events leading up to the reunification of the Crimea peninsula with Mother Russia .
 The slick and engaging film, complete with action-film graphics and soundtrack, undoubtedly serves multiple purposes . The slick, engaging film is complete with the soundtrack and graphics .
 The film turns out to tell us more about Putin and today's Russia than merely the story of territory changing hands .
 Interspersed throughout the many dramatic scenes are clips from an interview with Putin . One in which he openly confesses Russia's role in seizing Crimea .
 The President of Russia has now come out with the “true story’s” story of his victory in Crimea . Putin has said every appearance and official announcement concerning Crimea was a big lie .
 Oleg Kashin, a prominent journalist and political commentator, has given us his assessment of Putin's admissions . Kashin is a prolific political commentator .
 Kashin has been watching events in Crimea since the crisis began last year . Kashin reported from the peninsula last March .
 Kashin has also been an outspoken critic of Russia's Ukraine policy . Kashin considers Crimea's annexation to have been an illegal seizure from Ukraine .
 Putin's reputation will suffer no damage for his bold admissions, Kashin says . Kashin argues that Putin’s reputation will not be damaged by the comments .
 Putin's authority grows stronger because of Putin’s authority, he says . To the contrary, Putin”s authority grows strong because of them.
 Kashin calls this the height of cynicism which has now become the foundational principle of Russia’s regime today . Kashin says this has now quite clearly become the first principle of the Russian regime .
 The official Russian narrative prior to the release of this film was that there were no Russian troops in Crimea . There were no Russians in Crimea, according to the Russian government .
 Putin and Russia’s media insisted over and over again that Russian troops were not Russian troops .
 Western media played along too, repeating the Kremlin's assertions that there was no proof of Russian troops in Crimea .
 The troops even became an internet meme of “polite little green men,’ named for the green camouflage uniforms . The uniforms were suspiciously missing any insignia .
 Putin went so far as to offer a seemingly off-the-cuff suggestion/explanation that anybody could have gone out to a store and bought those same uniforms .
 "They might have looked like Russian troops to you and me, but they were definitely not Russian troops," he said . "They were definitely Not Russian troops, we were supposed to conclude," he added .
 Russia only annexed Crimea after the people of the peninsula voiced their true desire to be part of Russia in “a popular and fair” Referendum of March 16, 2014 .
 A year after the Annexation Ceremony in Moscow, Putin now backtracks bigtime . Putin now backs down on the ceremony .
 He says the decision to “return’s Crimea to its rightful historical owner, Russia, was made personally by him . He says he made the decision by him.
 The decision was made even before Viktor Yanukovych fled Kyiv as president of Ukraine . He says it was made before Yanukovych fled.
 We all remember those disturbing images of voting places surrounded by armed gunmen .
 Kashin wonders, perhaps Putin might be unaware of the potentially devastating consequences making such confessions could have on his grip of power in Russia . Kashin: Perhaps Putin might not be aware of the potential devastating consequences .
 Kashin helps us understand how scandalous such admissions truly are with a historical thought experiment . Kashin is a historian who has written a book on the subject of historical thought experiments .
 The Soviet regime had one and only one official version, that Baltic workers and peasants overthrew their bourgeois government . The Red Army called in the Red Army for assistance .
 Soviet ideology reigned supreme, even if it had no relation to reality . Soviet ideology. Soviet ideology was the most powerful ideology in the world .
 In fact, diverging from the ideology was seen as undermining the very foundation of the state .
 The Soviet Union was never, under any circumstances, prepared to admit that it behaved like a commonplace imperialist aggressor State .
 The collapse of the State’s ideological foundations would have constituted a major shock to the State . This would have meant the collapse of its ideological foundations .
We can safely say that cynicism is the ideological foundation of the post-Soviet Russian state . The Russian state is a post- Soviet state, and the country is a state of its own .
 Cynicism took the place of what was to Stalin and Brezhnev the Marxist-Leninist doctrine .
It turns out that such a framework is more durable than any religion or ideology . It turns out the framework is better than any religious or ideology.
 It is pointless to reproach leaders for lies, broken promises, corruption or irregularities of elections in a system based on cynicism. It's pointless to Reproach politicians for lies and broken promises.
 To the contrary, to lie or steal in this coordinate system is considered prowess, because, firstly, everyone is doing it, and secondly, whoever outplays them all is the one who is right . To the Contrary, to lying or steal is considered skill
 It doesn't matter what methods he might have used to get an advantage – he has no moral or even legal restrictions . And it doesn’t matter what method he may have used. He has no legal restrictions.
 Kashin provides further evidence of this cynical ideology with a brief discussion of Russia’s judicial system . Kashin also provides evidence of Russia's judicial system.
 The courts are useless because Russia’s judicial system is anything but independent, and therefore Putin's, power, is in power .
 This stark assessment truly mirrors the mind-numbingly ruthless and corrupt landscape that so thoroughly oppresses Russia in Leviathan .
 Russia's head of state now openly admits to having invaded a sovereign state and changed its borders by force . It only pretended that ordinary Crimeans made Russia their choice and not the other way around .
 Putin's admissions about Crimea extend to the current situation in the Donbas in eastern Ukraine, where fighting has destroyed countless cities and villages .
 Putin, Lavrov, Churkin, and the entire Kremlin spokesmen have stuck to an official line of flat-out denying Russian troops are fighting in Ukraine .
 Russia insists “separatist rebels’ are choosing to fight against the new Ukrainian government in Kyiv . The narrative goes, from an American-backed coup d’etat, according to Russia .
 Such statements are repeated again and again, despite the wealth of evidence to the contrary, including eyewitness reports and satellite photos of the amassing of Russian troops and equipment .
 Much of the international media have unwittingly repeated the Russian version of events, as well as the many denials, that the war in Ukraine is Russia's war .
 Putin’s own admissions confirm the truth, and that Russian authorities brazenly lied about their troops in Ukraine . Only a fool would believe Russian authorities’ continuing denials today .