Russia is hurting economically and Ukraine knows it, says Switzerland's DAVOS .
 Ukraine is suffering massive financial stress as well, but it has the International Monetary Fund and the European Union on its side .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko speaks during his annual news conference in Kiev, Ukraine, Thursday .
 Poroshenko's comments come a day after negotiators in Belarusian capital Minsk agreed to make new efforts to enforce the shaky cease-fire .
 Russia sent its new envoy, former parliamentary speaker Boris Gryzlov, to Kiev . He made a rare visit to Kiev earlier this week .
 Ukraine has decided to push to get it all back, Crimea and East Ukraine that is. Sensing Russian economic weakness, Ukraine is pushing for a return to Crimea .
 Ukraine plans to launch a fresh diplomatic initiative to recover the Crimean peninsula from Russia . Russia annexed the peninsula in 2014 .
 This will be the year we really begin pressing forward on a process to return Crimea, Yaresko said . The Crimean peninsula has been in Crimea since Crimea was seized in March 2014 .
 In East Ukraine, Russia seems to be pushing for a solution to a very expensive problem . Russia is pushing for an expensive solution to the problem .
 Since Kiev halted government payments to citizens in the region, Moscow has picked up the tab . Moscow has also picked up its tab .
 These transfer payments have become a burden the Kremlin no longer wants to bear . The Kremlin is no longer wanting to bear the burden of these payments .
 Putin insider Vladislav Surkov recently met with Victoria Nuland in Kaliningrad to discuss East Ukraine . The Kremlin is serious about ending the conflict and the drain on the Kremlin's resources at a time when they can least afford it .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said he expected territory in the east held by Russian-backed rebels to return to Ukrainian control before the end of the year .
 Russia annexed Crimea in 2014, which Russia annexed in 2014 . At the same time, he hopes to set into motion mechanisms that would lead to the “de-occupation’ of Crimea, he said .
 Mr Poroshenko said he would propose ‘setting up an international mechanism for de-occupation of the peninsula’ He plans to engage the European Union and the United States .
 Russia could have most likely withstood the economic pressure put in place by the West, due to its actions in Ukraine . The price of crude oil in Ukraine is $100 .
 The price of a barrel of oil is headed to $20 . There is no way the Russian economy can survive as its currently structure long-term in this environment .
 Ukraine has decided to go on the offensive. In light of all of these geopolitical developments, Ukraine has gone on theoffensive .
 Putin has spent two years spraying the Russian public with a firehose of nationalist propaganda over the glories of Crimea returning to Russian control .
 Losing this gambit would mean nothing less than the end of the current Kremlin regime . Losing the gambit will mean nothing more than a end to the current regime, says the Russian president .
 Ukraine defaulted on $3 billion bond payment Kiev recently defaulted. It's possible Ukraine is just using the Crimean agenda as a negotiating tactic against Russian threats to sue Ukraine .
Dreams of a Ukrainian Crimea once again are just that — dreams. However, dreams of a Ukraine Crimea again are only that – dreams .