 Russia has begun issuing Russian passports to residents of Crimea . Russia says they are now Russian citizens .
 Ukraine has said the Foreign Ministry will start introducing a visa regime for Russians wanting to visit Ukraine . The Foreign Ministry has said it will introduce a visas regime for Russian visitors to Ukraine .
 Russia says it will study Ukraine's move before deciding whether to introduce a visa regime for Ukrainians . Russia said it would study the move before making a decision on visa regime .
Pro-Russian forces seized at least one Ukrainian naval base there on March 19 and captured Ukraine's naval chief . With tensions high on Crimea, pro-Russia forces seized the naval chief.
 Ukrainian forces evacuated their facilities in Ukraine . There were no reports of violence as Ukraine forces evacuated facilities .
 officials in Ukraine also said they would withdraw from the Russian-led Commonwealth of Independent States . Officials in Ukraine said they will also withdraw from Russia's ex-Soviet countries .
 Ukraine, along with Russia and Belarus, was among the founders of the CIS after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union . Ukraine was one of the first countries to join the CIS in the 1990s .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and pro-Moscow Crimean leaders signed treaties making Crimea part of Russia . The announcements came one day after Russian President Putin signed treaties with Crimea .
 The annexation has been condemned as illegal by Western states . Western states have vowed to punish Moscow over the step .
 In another development, Ukraine's government said it is drawing up a plan to withdraw its troops from Crimea .
 Ukrainian troops are ordered to either join Crimean forces or surrender their arms and leave the peninsula . Earlier, the pro-Russian Crimean authorities issued an order to Ukrainian troops to join the Crimean forces .
 NATO chief Anders Fogh Rasmussen sharply criticized Russia's annexation of Crimea . He said the number of elderly and children entering Russia has doubled since early March .
 White House spokesman Jay Carney said Russia's seizure of a Ukrainian naval facility created a "dangerous situation"
 The U.S. urges Russia to start discussions with Ukrainian officials to ensure the safety of Ukrainian forces in the Crimean peninsula .
 Germany has suspended a military deal with Russia in response to the annexation of Crimea . Meanwhile, Germany has announced it has suspended the deal in response.
The Economy Ministry said the export of a combat simulation center is "not justifiable" in the current situation . The Economy Ministry says the export is not justifiable .
 Prime Minister David Cameron tells parliament Russia should be cast out of the Group of Eight leading economic nations . Cameron says Russia should not be included in the group of eight leading economies .
 Ban Ki-moon is expected to discuss the crisis when he visits Russia on March 20 for talks with Putin .
 Ban is then scheduled to travel to Kyiv on March 21 to meet with Ukrainian acting President Oleksandr Turchynov and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk . Ban will then meet with Ukraine's acting President and Prime Ministers .
 A free press is banned by the government or not fully established in 23 countries . Free press is not allowed in any of the 23 countries where it is banned . The news is reported in 27 languages in 23 languages .