Western policymakers will come to regard Donbas war as comparable with so-called &quot;frozen conflicts&quot . In the former Soviet republics of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Moldova, fighting has ended but without a political solution .
 It would give the Kremlin powerful leverage over Ukrainian politics . It would also leave a question mark over the very concept of Ukrainian statehood .
 Ukrainian government ministers and defense officials say the conflict is far from being &quot;frozen&quot. For their part, Ukrainian government officials say it is very much a &quat;hot&quots; one .
 Former prime minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk says the west has not sent a clear-cut message to Putin . He says that the west will never abandon Ukraine, that Ukraine is part of the western world .
 Alexander Valchyshen, head of research at ICU, doubts the sanctions will change Russian behavior .
 The Russians are not resource-constrained in Donbas and Crimea. I&#039;m says that they are not counteracting Russian intentions .
 Western capitals would like the government in Kyiv to make a more serious effort to win the hearts and minds of the roughly 4m civilians caught up in the Donbas conflict . I am sceptical that the Russian government is so overburdened that it will withdraw.
 Russia&#039;s intervention in Donbas has been the single most important factor of the past quarter of a century in accelerating the process of Ukrainian nation-building .
 Ivanna Klympush-Tsintsadze is Ukraine's deputy premier for European and Euro-Atlantic integration . The Javelins are important in symbolic as well as material terms, she says .
 Some policymakers in Kyiv were aghast to hear Mr Trump speak warmly of Mr Putin and make no public criticism of Russian policies . But Kurt Volker, U.S. special representative for Ukraine negotiations, says these worries were overblown .
Russian-led forces amassing military hardware in occupied Donbas JCCCRussia denies direct involvement in the confrontation . Ukrainian military analyst Oleksandr Danylyuk: "They'll do whatever they can to undermine Ukraine's democracy and its pro-western course"
 Some politicians in Kyiv seem lukewarm about reintegrating Donbas civilians into Ukraine's democratic life . Russia's intervention in Donbas has been the single most important factor of the past quarter of a century, politicians say .