 United Nations S/PV. 7886th meeting Tuesday, 21 February 2017, 10m. U.N.
 Mr Rosselli Agenda Maintenance of international peace and security Conflicts in Europe Letter dated 3 February 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to Secretary-General .
 As President of the Security Council, I propose that the Council observe a minute of silence in connection with the death of Vitaly Churkin .
 The Russian delegation is grateful for the warm words and expressions of condolence on Russia’s irreparable loss of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin .
We have lost an outstanding diplomat, a great professional, a talented orator and polemicist . We have lost a soulful and kind-hearted person .
 He had encyclopedic knowledge that he often applied in practice, delving into the finer points of all issues discussed .
 Vitaly Ivanovich has defended the positions of his country for more than 40 years . He has worked at the forefront of international diplomacy and occupying the most critical posts .
 Thanks to his talent and brilliant mind, he often found solutions to what seemed to be impossible situations . He often finds solutions to difficult situations .
 He always sought ways to unify efforts and strike a balance of interests, while carefully listening to the views of his partners in debates . He also sought ways of unifying efforts and striking a balance.
 He was respected by all who worked with him, even those who may not have agreed with his approach . That is why he was respected, even though he was not seen as a good man .
 The hundreds of calls and letters of condolence that continue to flow into the Russian Mission bear witness to that .
 Vitaly Ivanovich will always remain in our memory as a principled diplomat of the highest calibre . He demanded much but also upheld the highest standards, says the Russian diplomat .
 The Government of Uruguay expressed its deepest sorrow over the passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin . He was a highly seasoned diplomat who represented his country responsibly .
 The Government of Uruguay offers its sincere condolences to family of Mr Churkin and Russian Government .
 We should have wished to express our great admiration of Vitaly personnally, we should have expressed our admiration of his professionalism and our pleasure in sharing his experience .
 China is deeply shocked at and regrets the untimely passing of Ambassador Churkin following a brief illness .
 Russian Federation offers condolences to bereaved family and Government . Russian Federation's Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation expresses deep sorrow .
 As the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation for over 10 years. As a Permanent Representative for over ten years . As a member of the Federation for 10 years .
 He made enormous contributions to the United Nations and multilateralism . He made huge contributions to U.N. He also made contributions to Mideast.
 He worked right up to the last minute of his life as an exemplar of dedication and professionalism . He was thus an outstanding representative of diplomats .
 We are deeply saddened by his passing, which is a loss for the entire U.N. diplomatic corps . The United Nations is deeply saddened.
 China joins with the Russian Federation and other Council members in playing an active role in upholding multilateralism and the Charter of the United Nations .
 The passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin is a great tragedy for the Organization and multilateral diplomacy . The United Nations is needed more than ever, he says .
 This is a period when we need a person like Vitaly — a patriot for his country, no doubt, but also a diplomat . Vitaly is a diplomat whom we could trust at a time when that quality is not found in abundance .
 He would never mislead you and was a person who allowed space for mutual accommodation . He would not mislead you, he would never misleading you .
Russian President Vladimir Putin expresses condolences to his family, colleagues, U.N. family and Government of the Russian Federation . Putin: "I want to express condolences to my Government"
Russian ambassador Vitaly Churkin was a great exponent of global diplomacy . He was killed in the crash in Bolivia on Sunday night .
 The Bolivian Mission to the U.N. regrets the loss of one of the most brilliant Ambassadors in our forum . Ambassador Churkin was a fervent defender of multilateralism who always managed to build bridges for dialogue .
 His principled position was also apparent in other situations, such as that in Palestine and his opposition to neocolonialism .
 Ambassador Llorentty Soliz is travelling and therefore not able to attend today’s meeting . Ambassador Churkin is due to attend the meeting in London .
 Ambassador Llorentty Soliz considered him a brilliant colleague and a close, beloved friend . The ambassador was a close friend and colleague .
We appreciated his eloquent speeches, which contributed greatly to the debates held in this Chamber . We appreciated his speech, which added greatly to this Chamber.
 Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin, Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, died yesterday . He was a member of Russia's Russian Federation .
 Kairat Abdrakhmanov was a brilliant diplomat . He was a member of the Kazakh Foreign Affairs Ministry .
 Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin was an outstanding individual who defended the interests of his country . He made a significant contribution to strengthening the principles of multilateral diplomacy .
 He was an outstanding person, a good friend, a reliable ally and a true professional . He was a great friend and a good colleague . He died at the age of 50 .
I was deeply shocked and saddened by the news of the passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin . I was deeply saddened and shocked by the death of the ambassador .
 I happened to meet him on Sunday at lunchtime; coincidentally, we were seated next to each other at a restaurant . He was in a restaurant.
 He was with his wife, I was with my wife, and we were all very happy at the time, he says . He says he and his wife were very happy .
 In fact, he had arrived a bit after I did, so I did not realize that he was there . He had arrived in a bit of time, so he didn't realize he had been there .
 Vitaly looked happy, looking very well and with his usual big smile . I looked back and there was Vitaly, looking happy.
"I always had something that I felt for him. We happened to be of the same age," he says . "We happened to have a lot of heated discussions," he adds .
 He worked hard for his country, but at the same time we all loved him for his humour and his willingness to try to resolve issues . He was known for his work hard for the country but also for his openness and humour .
 I should like to express the deepest condolences of the United States on the passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin .
 I did not have the honour of working with Vitaly for very long, but his diplomacy will be long remembered . He will be remembered for his diplomacy, says David Cameron .
 Vitaly also recognized the value of closer ties between our two countries . Vitaly spent the early part of his career in the United States .
 U.S. offers thoughts and prayers to Vitaly's family, colleagues at Russian Mission and people of Russia .
Vitaly Churkin is a former member of the Russian Federation . He has served in the Russian army since 2003 . He is a member of Russia's military council .
 Russian diplomats everywhere. My thoughts go out to Irina, to their children, and to their family, to all Russian diplomats Everywhere .
On behalf of France and on his own behalf, I should like to pay special tribute to our colleague and friend Vitaly Churkin .
 I should like to convey to his wife, Irina, and to his family our most sincere condolences . I would also convey to all of the Russian Mission. I should also convey our deepest sadness, which we would also give to all the Russian mission .
 Vitaly Churkin was an exceptional representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations . The Russian Federation was a member of the U.N.
 "We always worked in a spirit of mutual respect and personal friendship," says the pair . "Beyond our differences, we always worked with each other"
 Vitaly Churkin was more than an exceptional diplomat, more than a fearsome negotiator . He was a master of diplomacy, says former diplomat .
 We will miss him greatly, and his spirit will remain here in the Security Council with us . We will also miss him much, and he will remain with us. We will not be able to see him again .
 The Secretary-General, as has been said, has contributed to a surge in diplomacy .
 The Russian Federation has called on the Council to make more active use of the toolkit of preventive diplomacy .
 I also wish to express my personal sorrow and that of my authorities for the loss of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin . I also wishes to express his personal sorrow .
 He was a loyal colleague, someone who was always transparent and able to serve the best interests of his country. Above all, he was a loyalty colleague .
 I admired him — we admired him. We will miss his professional abilities and his warm, personal human touch. I admired them — we admire him — and we will miss him .
 Mr Iliichev's wife and children and the rest of his family, his friends and colleagues at the Russian Mission, and Russian authorities .
 Ambassador Vitaly Churkin was killed by an explosion in the Russian city of Moscow . He was killed in the explosion of a bomb in the city of St. Petersburg . Russian President Vladimir Putin was the first Russian ambassador to the United Nations .
 Ambassador Churkin was an exceptional diplomat when it came to the U.N. and the Security Council . In our view, we say, he was a exceptional diplomat .
 The Swedish Government, our Permanent Representative Olof Skoog, who is travelling, is deeply saddened by this news . The Swedish government is saddened by the news .
 Iliichev: I would like to express our sincere condolences to the family of Vitaly Churkin . The Russian Government and the people of the Russian Federation are among those to express condolences .
 I always felt that he was one of those persons who represent life itself. I had not had the opportunity to work with him for a long time, as has happened with many other members of the Security Council .
 It was not a joke in bad taste, nor was it misinformation; it was the truth. Unfortunately, it was a joke.
 Vitaly Churkin was not only an outstanding diplomat, but an extraordinary human being who possessed a unique combination of intelligence, knowledge, and firmness in his beliefs .
 He was a man with a remarkable sense of humour and an enormous warmth that would make us all feel a natural tendency to become friends . He was also a man who would make you all feel like a friend .
 Vitaly Churkin’s colleagues in the Russian Mission and in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs . Irina Churkina, to Vitaly's family, to the Government and the people of the Russian Federation .
 Vitaly’s passing represents a deep loss for all of us at the United Nations, including for the members of the Security Council, where his distinctive voice was ever present over the past decade .
 I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished representatives present in the Security Council Chamber . The Security Council chamber is held in London and London .
 Their presence today emphasizes and underscores the importance of the subject matter under discussion .
 Albania, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belarus and Belarus will participate in this meeting . The Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Serbia and Slovenia will also participate in the meeting .
 Mr Lamberto Zannier, Secretary General of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, is the head of the OSC .
 Helga Schmid is Secretary General of the European Union’s European External Action Service . Schmid has been in charge of the EU's European External action Service .
 The Council's provisional rules of procedure are in accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rule of procedure .
 A letter dated 3 February 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the item under consideration .
 Ukrainian Presidency convening meeting to build on last month’s debate on preventing conflict .
 The two global conflicts that ignited in Europe during the first half of the last century played a foundational role in the United Nations . The Security Council was horn from an overwhelming conviction that such wars can and must be prevented .
 For the past 70 years, the countries of Europe have been at the forefront of conflict prevention . Europe has been at forefront of preventing conflict prevention for 70 years .
 European leaders have developed a sophisticated collective peace-and-security apparatus . They have striven to promote human rights — civil and political rights, as well as social, economic and cultural rights .
 Many European societies are multicultural, multi-faith and multi-ethnic . Many European society is multicultural,multi-faith, andmulti- ethnic .
 The countries that have invested politically and economically in cohesion and inclusion have shown that diversity spawns creativity and innovation . The countries and communities that have invest politically and economic in cohesion have shown the importance of diversity .
We should not take peace and prosperity in Europe for granted. That being said, we should not be taken for granted . That is what is being said .
 The transition to a multipolar world has increased uncertainties and risks . The transition has increased uncertainty and risks, according to experts .
 We need multilateral institutions and sound regional organizations to maintain peace and stability . We also need to address today’s new and dangerous challenges as we address today.
 Security Council seized of many of the conflict situations in the region . At a time when serious conflicts persist in Europe, new issues and threats have emerged .
 The United Nations is working in a complementary way with regional organizations and mechanisms that were created to deal with those challenges in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the UN .
We are leading some of the peace efforts in Europe, including negotiations to reach a comprehensive and durable settlement to the long-standing Cyprus question . We are leading the efforts to reach an agreement on a permanent settlement .
 The United Nations is at the disposal of the two Cypriot communities and of the guarantor Powers to support a search for a solution that is acceptable to all . The U.N. and I personally are at the disposing of two Cyriot communities .
 The United Nations is working alongside the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union in co-chairing international discussions on Georgia .
 The United Nations is facilitating discussions aimed at addressing the so-called name issue between the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Greece .
 Our work complements the efforts of regional actors and mechanisms, including the OSCE, the EU and others, to address situations in the South Caucasus and Moldova .
 The United Nations system is also fully engaged on the ground in peacebuilding, governance, human rights, development and the rule of law . The U.N. system is fully engaged in peace building, governance and human rights .
Multi-dimensional work is at the nexus between conflict prevention and sustaining peace, supporting stability in the region and beyond . Such multi-dimensional works is at a nexus between peace and conflict prevention .
 The term ‘frozen conflict’ is often used to refer to conflicts in Europe . The term is misleading, according to experts .
Until peace agreements are signed and implemented, the risk of renewed violence remains . Last April in Nagorno-Karabakh, in the South Caucasus, saw violence in the region .
 The United Nations fully supports the efforts of the OSCE’s Minsk Group and urges the parties to de-escalate tensions and fully implement agreed conflict-prevention measures .
 I urge all concerned to show greater political will, so as not only to strengthen the ceasefire regime and implement previous commitments but also to renew a sustainable and comprehensive negotiating process .
 The 5+2 process, led by the OSCE, has made some progress but more needs to be done in order to achieve a lasting settlement for the benefit of residents on both banks of the Dniester river .
 In the Western Balkans, the devastating conflicts of the 1990s have left a damaging legacy . reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts are incomplete, according to the UN .
 It is crucial to guard against the erosion of the progress made over the past 20 years in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
 I urge continued efforts to promote the normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina . Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia have a long-standing “name issue’s’.
 The crises in Georgia in 2008 and in Ukraine in 2014 show that Europe remains at risk from new outbreaks of conflict . The crises are similar to those in Ukraine and Georgia in 2014 .
 The United Nations fully supports the Geneva international discussions, which will soon enter their tenth year . U.N. urges participants to demonstrate the political will to find creative solutions for the benefit of all .
 Some progress has been made, including on humanitarian issues, but much more should be done to resolve key security issues .
 There is an urgent need for agreement on the non-use of force, the freedom of movement and internally displaced people . There is a need for agreements on non- use of force.
 The ongoing conflict in Ukraine illustrates that localized violence has the potential to escalate into more serious confrontations . The ongoing tragic conflict in the Ukraine illustrates the potential for localized violence to escalate .
Geographic consequences can have geopolitical consequences that risk undermining regional and international peace and security . They can also have geopolitical implications for the region .
National sovereignty and territorial integrity are challenges to national sovereignty . We must collectively work to preserve and strengthen a rules-based international order, in accordance with the Charter .
 The United Nations remains committed to supporting a peaceful resolution of the conflict, says the U.N. In accordance with the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, the United Nations says . The U.S. is committed to upholding the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Ukraine .
 The United Nations fully supports the efforts within the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group, and the OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission . The UN has repeatedly called for the full implementation by all sides of all of their commitments under the Minsk process .
 I take note of the Normandy format meeting on 18 February, endorsing the most recent ceasefire measures agreed by the Trilateral Contact Group .
I hope that that will finally translate into real progress towards peace, which is long overdue for the people of eastern Ukraine . I hope that this will eventually translate intoreal progress, which has been long overdue .
In Ukraine and in all other conflicts, I urge all stakeholders to avoid unilateral steps or attempts to create facts on the ground . In Ukraine and all other conflict, I urges all stakeholders in Ukraine to avoid unilaterally steps, which further complicate efforts to find negotiated settlements .
 That is especially relevant in view of the latest actions taken in relation to the conflicts in eastern Ukraine and the South Caucasus . That is particularly relevant in the case of Ukraine and South Caucasus.
 Conflict in Europe is not only a tragedy for those directly involved . Those killed, injured or displaced may be unable to access health care and are missing vital years of their education .
 It is also reversing development gains and preventing communities and societies from achieving their full potential and contributing to regional and global prosperity . It's also preventing communities from achieving full potential .
 Economic progress and sustainable development are based on long-term stability, which, in turn, requires peace and security and respect for human rights . Human rights are a key part of economic progress, according to the UN .
 No single factor can be blamed for the emergence and continuation of conflicts in Europe . No single reason can be blame for the rise of conflicts.
 Other factors include challenges to democratic governance and rule of law, and the manipulation of ethnic, economic, religious and communal tensions for personal or political gain .
 Regional and international institutions are failing to prevent and resolve conflicts, authors say . The inability of regional institutions to prevent conflicts is undermining their credibility, they say .
 U.N. Secretary of State John Kerry urges the U.S. to intensify efforts to define a peace and security agenda . He urges the United Nations, the Council, regional mechanisms and all stakeholders to intensify their efforts .
Member States and regional mechanisms engaged in such efforts. They are readily available to Member States and Regional mechanisms .
 I urge all those with influence to step up their efforts to resolve existing conflicts and to prevent tensions from escalating into new conflicts . I urge everyone to take action to prevent new conflicts.
 That is essential for safeguarding stability and cooperation in Europe and beyond, based on mutual trust and respect . That is important for safeguarded stability and Cooperation in Europe .
 I fully share and support his point that the entire notion of frozen conflict is completely misleading . I fully support his points that the whole notion of Frozen conflict is misleading .
 Ambassador Vitaly Churkin has died at the age of 48 . He was a member of the Russian delegation .
 Ambassador Churkin will be remembered and missed by many inside and outside this Chamber . He will be the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo .
 I would like to thank the Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council for the invitation to address members during today's open debate .
 U.N. SecretaryGeneral says ensuring lasting peace and security in Europe remains a major objective of the United Nations .
 Both organizations are united in their shared priority to address conflict situations in a complementary and mutually reinforcing manner . I am glad to say that both organizations areunited in their share of priority .
After the end of the Cold War, the promise of a common and indivisible security space from Vancouver to Vladivostok was outlined in the Charter of Paris for a New Europe .
 The vision of a cooperative and rules-based order on the old continent appeared irreversible . The vision appeared irreversible, according to the author .
 Many across the Euro-Atlantic space looked to the OSCE with high hopes and great expectations . The OSCE is the largest body of the European Union's space agency .
 The conflicts that followed the violent break-up of Yugoslavia and the dissolution of the Soviet Union shattered that emerging security paradigm .
 Borders shifted and re-emerged, dividing peoples and minorities, engendering crisis and human suffering, sowing mistrust .
 The order that materialized after the end of the Cold War failed to bring about full stability or balance . Looking back, we must recognize today that the order that Materialized after a Cold War didn't bring about balance or stability .
 Where trust is lacking, it becomes difficult to predict State behaviour, it is hard to predict behaviour .
 uncertainty and lack of transparency are intentionally used as political tools. That is especially true in times when uncertainty is used as a political tool .
 OSCE has been a primary actor in addressing conflicts in Europe throughout the last two decades . The OSCE is a key figure in the OSCE's efforts to address conflicts in the region .
 The organization was transformed in the wake of the optimism of the early 1990s . The organization evolved again in response to the ensuing conflicts .
 OSCE continues to change today in response to both traditional and emerging challenges, but the fundamental characteristics of the OSCE remain the same .
 It offers a genuinely holistic view of how different elements of security interact and must he addressed together . It is a genuine view of what security needs to be addressed together.
 It can provide a bridge between sides that sometimes have radically different visions of what security means . It continues to invest in efforts to prevent destabilization and conflict, and deal with the consequences when they appear .
 The OSCE has played a clear and active role as a regional arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the U.N. Throughout its history, the OSCE have played an active role in the region .
 In some cases the relationship with United Nations structures has been explicit . The relationship with U.N. structures have been explicit.
 The OSCE Mission in Kosovo was linked to resolution 1244 . It was assigned the lead role in matters relating to institution-building and human rights .
 The Kosovo Judicial Institute had a clear lead in establishing key democratic institutions such as the Kosovo Police Service School . It had aclear lead in setting up key institutions like the Judicial Institute .
 Since the first OSCE field operations were established, the Organization’s role in south-eastern Europe has adapted and changed in response to changing needs and persistent challenges .
 The OSCE continues to maintain its largest field presence in the region . The region is operating for stability, dialogue and security, the OSCE says .
 We have long focused on supporting election systems in which people have confidence, and on promoting peaceful inter-ethnic relations . We have also focused on helping people in which they have confidence .
 We need a new generation able to act as a positive force for change and stability . We need to question old, divisive messages, and call for accountable and transparent Government and institutions .
 In south-eastern Europe, we face increasing threats from violent extremism, radicalization and terrorism . The OSCE region, as elsewhere across the world, faces increasing threats of violent extremism .
 The challenge of countering these threats transcends old dividing lines and national interests . The challenge is to counter these threats, says the author .
 OSCE will continue to work with a wide range of partners to support our participating States in confronting this challenge . The OSCE is working with a variety of partners.
 The crisis in and around Ukraine continues to be a major source of tension and instability in Europe .
 OSCE has marked the return of geopolitics on the OSCE agenda . It is challenging our model of cooperation. Sadly, it has marked a return of geopolitical politics on the agenda .
 Inter-State relations are now more than ever before governed by a zero-sum mentality that we hoped we had left behind .
 In too many parts of the OSCE region, we still find conflicts and competition continuing, re-emerging and developing, both locally and regionally .
 OSCE's swift and flexible response to the unfolding crisis in and around Ukraine in 2014 is the most visible example of the OSCE’s ability to live up to its Chapter VIII responsibilities .
 The Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine is larger than any mission we have run before . We established and continue to run the Special Monitoring mission in Ukraine .
 The Mission is performing quasi-peacekeeping functions, such as monitoring and verifying the ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy weapons . Although unarmed and civilian, the Mission is doing quasi- peacekeeping functions .
 The Mission has established productive working relationships with various U.N. bodies, including the Security Council .
 The Chief Monitor in Ukraine, Ambassador Apakan, and the OSCE representative in the Trilateral Contact Group, Ambassador Sajdik, have briefed the Council .
Recent increases in fighting remind us of the very real risk of escalation, says author . "We are looking at the suffering of the populations affected by combat. Despite the tremendous efforts to work for peace," says author.
 SMM remains closely involved in supporting adherence to a ceasefire and the implementation of the Minsk Agreements . The SMM is also involved in support of adherence to the ceasefire and implementation of a ceasefire .
 Russian recognition of documents issued by self-proclaimed republics. "This complicates implementation of the Minsk agreements," he says .
 The SMM cannot prevent ceasefire violations or force the withdrawal of weapons that have returned to the line of contact . It has a view to ensuring the security and freedom of movement it needs to do its job .
 For that, we need the political engagement of the various sides and the international community . For that we need political engagement, we must be engaged in political engagement .
 We are now monitoring the recently announced ceasefire, and we are ready to observe the much-needed withdrawal of heavy weapons . This is a key step towards de-escalation, says the U.S.
More generally, we are drawing on lessons from our current operation in Ukraine to develop a framework for future missions and crisis response . More generally, the team is drawing on Lessons from the current operation.
 SMM moves into areas of work new to the OSCE . We have also appreciated the advice of the United Nations on the use of unmanned aerial vehicles .
 The Department of Field Support is in negotiations to use United Nations system contracts in Brindisi . They are in negotiations with Field Support to use U.N. system contracts .
 The agreement will be modelled on similar arrangements with the African Union . We intend to conclude it soon, and we intend to end it soon .
 The crisis in and around Ukraine continues to dominate the OSCE agenda . We should keep in mind the other protracted conflicts in the OSce area, says the author .
 The OSCE has played an active role in their negotiating processes since the 1990s . The organization has played a role in the negotiating process since the 90s .
We support and facilitate contacts through institutional support and the work of representatives of the annual OSCE chairmanship . We support andfacilitate contacts through institutions and representatives .
 The readiness of the parties to take responsibility for resolving conflicts remains key to breaking out of the current stalemates . As we step up efforts to prevent further crises and facilitate the resolution of protracted conflicts.
 The Nagorno Karabakh conflict has seen a worrying deterioration on the ground . The conflict has been seen as the worst in the country's history .
 The hostilities that erupted in April 2016 contributed to the highest number of soldiers and civilians killed and wounded in a single year since the May 1994 ceasefire . The hostilities were the highest since the ceasefire in May 1994 .
 The use of heavy weapons and the clear targeting of villages set a disturbing precedent . The heavy weapons are often used to target villages .
 So far they have not been able to secure agreement to implement even modest confidence-building measures . So far, they have been unable to secure agreements to implement any measures .
 Their work keeps a space open for discussions and helps to manage the conflict . It is for the parties to use that opportunity to take a step forward towards peace .
 The Transnistrian settlement process may be less fraught with the risk of violence, says the author . "We need a fresh determination to move forward," he says .
 Last year Germany's Chair of the OSCE achieved renewed activity in the 5+2 format . The OSCE has been in charge for more than two years .
 Berlin Protocol last June marked an encouraging commitment by the sides to work for agreements . The Berlin Protocol was signed by the Berlin Protocol .
 Following the conflict in 2008, we have not managed to return to our presence on the ground in Georgia .
 The OSCE’s track record of strong relations with the United Nations provides a solid basis for further development of our relationship, says the U.N.
 We work closely together with the United Nations and the European Union as co-chairs of the Geneva international discussions . We are co-facilitator of the Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism meetings in Ergneti .
 The OSCE contributes to confidence-building in the region through targeted initiatives on the ground . The OSce also contributes to the region's confidence- building in the area .
 Secretary-General Guterres has sought to launch a surge in diplomacy for peace and to adopt a comprehensive approach in conflict prevention that marries peace and security, sustainable development and human rights .
 I strongly support his initiative and look forward to working with him to achieve that . I strongly supported his initiative. I strongly supports his initiative .
 Effective conflict prevention and resolution require strong coalitions, not only among international organizations, but also with civil society and the private sector . Effective conflict Prevention and resolution requires strong Coalitions .
 OSCE has developed structures and policies to help its membership implement resolution 1325 . The OSCE wants women to form a natural part of its peace-building efforts .
 Secretary-General Guterres' interest in mediation is a priority, says U.S. Secretary-general . He says it is his view of it as a priority .
In particular, I look forward to his launch of the mediation initiative to enhance capacities both in the field and at Headquarters. In particular, he looks forward to the launch of his initiative .
 The U.N. has pursued the same goals, within its modest resources, as well as developing cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations in this area . "We look forward to further developing cooperation," he says .
 The OSCE has already established a joint strategic work plan with the Department of Political Affairs . The U.N. Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers are also working with the OSCE .
 U.N. and OSCE have been working together to close the gap between early warning and early action . There will be lessons we can learn and share from the experiences of the United Nations.
 The OSCE will continue to nurture and holster this valuable relationship with the United Nations . The potential of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the UN continues to be underutilized .
 OSCE Secretary General has strived to operationalize U.N. cooperation, not only in mediation, conflict prevention and resolution, but also in other equally important areas .
 The establishment of the United Nations Liaison Office for Peace and Security in Vienna is a tangible outcome of these efforts . The U.N. Liaison office for peace and security in Vienna has been established for years .
 Secretary-General says he would like to pursue the practice of retreats with heads of regional organizations .
 We could look into ways to establish a follow-up mechanism to exchange best practices and promote cooperation among regions in the field of conflict prevention and resolution .
I am grateful for the opportunity to speak today and look forward to an interactive discussion . I am grateful to the chance to speak. I am looking forward to the interactive discussion, I say .
 It is an honour to be here on behalf of the European Union’s High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica Mogherini .
Ukrainian presidency convenes meeting to discuss Ukraine's future in Ukraine . Ukrainian president says he would like to thank the Ukrainian presidency for convening this meeting .
 Ambassador Vitaly Churkin has died at the age of 48 .
 He not only played a leading role on the Security Council for so many years, but he was also a very respected and important interlocutor for the European Union .
 I was actually supposed to meet with him yesterday, and I was deeply shocked and saddened to learn the news upon arrival . I was really supposed to meeting him yesterday. I was very surprised to learn of the news on arrival .
 For many of its citizens, the European Union remains a unique path to lasting peace, stability and prosperity . For many, the EU remains a special path to stability and stability .
 I very much agree with the Secretary-General that we cannot take peace for granted . I verymuch agree with him that we can't take peace.
As conflicts grow more complex, our efforts to address them need to evolve . As conflicts grow, we need to change our approach to dealing with them .
 These efforts now involve action at multiple levels, from early warning to conflict prevention, mediation, crisis management and post-conflict reconstruction .
 Secretary-General has said right from the beginning about his focus on conflict prevention and mediation . This is why we so much welcome what he has said, says the Secretary- General .
 European Union’s global strategy is to address conflicts at an early stage while building the resilience of societies around us . This goes hand in hand with the key objective of the European Union's global strategy .
 I very much associate myself with Lamberto Zannier when he speaks about the need to include women in all stages of the conflict cycle .
 European Union on the European continent. Allow me to highlight the implementation of this approach by the European Union .
 promoting stability in the countries closest to the European Union in the western Balkans is a natural strategic priority . First of all, promoting stability is a key priority in the region .
 The accession perspective to the European Union has carved out a path to heal the wounds of the past and foster stability in the region . European Union's accession view to the EU has carved a path.
 The EU has encouraged transformation and modernization among countries to whom we have given a firm commitment that their future lies within the European Union .
 At the same time, the region’s fragilities deserve our continued attention, says CNN.com .
 The Belgrade-Pristina dialogue, as facilitated by High Representative Mogherini, has already led to substantial progress in the normalization of their relations .
 stabilization has been placed at the heart of the recently reviewed European neighbourhood policy . European Union offers further cooperation on civilian security sector reform, tackling terrorism and extremism .
 This means taking new approaches, such as strengthening institutions and good governance, taking advantage of market opportunities, and enhancing mobility, people-to-people links and interconnectivity . This is a way to take advantage of the market, and to improve people's mobility, and people's links
 The European security order is firmly based on the principles of sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of States . The inviolability of borders, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the free choice of countries in deciding their own future .
European security principles have not been respected, according to the European Union . The European Union has been criticized for its lack of respect for these principles .
 Ukraine's support for Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence is unwavering, according to General Assembly resolution 68/262 .
 We continue to condemn and will not recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol . We will not accept Crimea's annexation. We will also refuse to recognize the annexation of Crimean Crimea .
 The EU remains firm in its call on all sides to swiftly and fully implement the Minsk agreements to pursue a sustainable political solution . In accordance with resolution 2202, the EU continues to call for swift and full implementation of the agreement .
We call in particular on Russia to use its influence with the separatists . We call in particularly on Russia.
 The EU and its member States are the biggest contributors to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine . The OSCE is doing a very important job .
 The continued fighting and loss of life in eastern Ukraine demands redoubled efforts to fully implement the Minsk agreements . The continuing fighting and death of life is the reason for redoubling efforts.
 Lamberto Zannier says measures that increase tensions and are not in the spirit of the agreements must be avoided .
 The EU stands ready to increase its support for the implementation of the Minsk agreements . Mogherini has stated that the EU is ready to increased its support.
 unresolved conflicts pose an obstacle to peace, stability and regional development and require a consolidated effort to manage and resolve . Fourthly, unresolved conflicts poses an obstacle. Fourthly,. unresolved conflicts posing an obstacle for peace and stability .
 The EU supports a peaceful settlement of the Transnistrian conflict that is based on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova . The EU also supports a special status for Transnistsria .
 OSCE Chair in Office of the OSCE in Europe in Europe is committed to active involvement in the settlement process within the 5+2 agenda . In that regard, we remain committed toactive involvement.
 The EU Special Representative for the South Caucasus and the crisis in Georgia is tasked with engaging with all stakeholders on measures aimed at peaceful conflict resolution .
 Our cooperation with the U.N. and the OSCE is particularly advanced in that area . The U.S. and OSCE are working together in the region .
 The EU also supports civil society and promotes peacebuilding activities across the conflict divide .
 U.N.-facilitated talks between the two Cypriot leaders reach their end game . The two leaders have been in talks for more than two years .
 The EU has a special role to play, because a future united Cyprus will be a member of the European Union . Cyprus will become a European Union member in 2015 .
 President Juncker and High Representative Mogherini are represented at the highest level in the Conference on Cyprus in Geneva .
 The European Union will continue to be a first supporter of the multilateral approach and a strong United Nations . The EU will remain a very reliable and predictable partner in striving for common ground and win-win solutions in crises.
 I shall now make as statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine . I will now make a statement in his capacity as Foreign Affairs Minister for Ukraine .
 The annual Security Conference was held in London . Security in Europe was at the centre stage . The conference was held on Friday night .
 In his many previous encounters there, I have rarely experienced the level of concern that was expressed this year . In my many previous meetings there, he has rarely experienced a level of concerns .
 The age of detente and the common purpose of making our continent a safer place appear to be in great danger right now .
 We have travelled down a long and difficult road to reach today’s state of affairs in Europe .
 I do not believe that conflicts in Europe have received the attention that they deserve . I don't believe that Europe's conflicts have been given the attention they deserve.
 European conflicts can send around the globe, with grave implications for international security and stability . Europe needs to be redressed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As events have demonstrated, ignoring conflicts in Europe and failing to learn from them are no longer an option. As events over the past decade have demonstrated.
 We need to put security in Europe back into the focus of the Security Council, says David Cameron . Security Council needs to focus on Europe, he says .
 The Ukrainian presidency has convened this open debate so as to address the fundamental challenge facing Europe . The Ukrainian president has convened the open debate to address Europe's challenges .
 Our world has become dangerously insecure, and that trend is developing further . Our world is becoming dangerously insecure. We need to change that, and we need to make sure we do so .
 If we do not adequately respond, the rapidly evolving crisis may bring us to a position where it will be impossible to implement one of the most important commitments that we have as U.N. Member States, says .
 Strong institutions and shared standards and principles were supposed to serve as effective safeguards for the international security order . Strong institutions, shared standards, and principles should be used to protect international security .
 Peaceful inter-State dialogue based on the sovereign right of every State to choose its own destiny and on respect for human rights are the core elements . Peacefulinter-state dialogue is based on sovereign right to choose own destiny .
 Transatlantic unity has made Europe a security role model and a crucial contributor to global efforts to ensure stability and security . Europe is a key role model for global efforts.
 Europe has evolved to become a champion of security across the globe . Europe has been the cradle of two world wars, and has been a champion for security .
 The unresolved conflicts facing Europe have one common feature — the active involvement of Russia in particular . Europe's unresolved conflicts are a common feature.
 Russia has used a strategy of instigating, participating in, supporting and then derailing instead of mediating . Russia has created a number of volatile hotspots across the continent .
 Russia can be activated whenever Russia decides that it is in its interest to do so . They can beactivated when Russia decides to activate them . Russia can also be activated when it decides it's in its interests to act .
 If that kind of aggression goes unchecked, every protracted conflict could become a hot one . The aggressor State continues to create new threats and challenges in other places .
 The architect of that strategy is sitting at this table as a permanent member of the Security Council . The problem facing the United Nations in that connection is that the architect is sitting in this position as a member .
 The Russian aggression against Georgia in 2008 became a litmus test for European security . Russia's aggressive behavior against Georgia became a test for Europe's security .
 The aggressor was just slapped on the wrist by the international community and took that reaction as a green light . It was not the first time the aggressor had been slapped by the community .
 The appeasement of aggressors and the lack of consequences merely encourage more aggression . The lack of consequence merely encourages more aggression, says the author .
 Russia has vigorously implemented that strategy in Ukraine since 2014 . Since 2014, Russia has aggressively implemented that Strategy in Ukraine .
 Ukraine is enduring direct military aggression, as illustrated by the illegal partial occupation of Crimea and part of the Donbas . Ukraine's military aggression is illustrated by an image of Crimea .
 Russia unveiled to the world its strategy of hybrid warfare combining military action with concerted and well-funded propaganda throughout the world .
 Ukraine’s unilateral nuclear disarmament in 1994 could hardly have been envisaged . Following Ukraine's unprecedented act of unilateral disarmament, more disastrous results for Ukraine could have been expected .
 Crimea has become a grey zone marred by injustice, terror and repression . To date, 10,000 people have been killed and more than 22,000 wounded in Crimea .
 The occupying authorities commit systematic violations of human rights and seek to destroy the identity of Ukrainians and the indigenous people of the peninsula, namely, the Crimean Tatars . The occupying Authorities commit systematic human rights violations.
 The European security system was considered as one of the most stable in the world . It has now been put seriously in doubt .
 A peaceful, democratic and strong Europe is a significant contributor to global peace efforts . But now the continent's own security has been damaged by frozen conflicts and acts of aggression .
 Today, the global and European order based on the rule of law has reached a tipping point .
 Russian aggression against Ukraine targets European and transatlantic unity, which are basic elements of the global security order . Russian aggression on Ukraine targets Europe and the United States .
Reversing the breakup of the Soviet Union has been a kind of obsession for the Kremlin for a long time . The breakup of Soviet Union took place a quarter of a century ago .
An effective mechanism to hold the wrongdoer responsible for its violations has not yet been consolidated . An effective mechanism for holding the wrong doer responsible is not yet consolidated .
In times of systemic crisis and geopolitical uncertainty, we require strong institutions that protect international law, says U.S. ambassador .
 Only strong institutions — the Security Council first of all — can provide international security, says U.S. President Obama .
 We urgently need to reform the Security Council in order to remove veto-power abuses . We need to change the security council's rules to remove abuses of power .
 The Security Council should be able to efficiently address conflicts, regardless of the possibility of a permanent member being a party to the conflict . The Security council should be capable of efficiently addressing conflicts .
 It is no longer acceptable that paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter of the United Nations continues to be blatantly ignored .
 It is imperative that clear proceedings be introduced for the proper implementation of that Article . It is also imperative thatclear proceedings are introduced for that Article.
 Europe has a central role to play in the global quest for sustainable peace . Europe has an important role in the quest for peace in the world .
 We hope that sustainable peace in Europe will start with Ukraine, but other conflicts cannot be forgotten . We hope for sustainable peace with Ukraine .
 We believe that the existing situation in Europe is not a deadlock and that protracted and active conflicts in Europe can he effectively resolved and potential tensions prevented .
 The U.N. should not shy away from taking a more proactive approach in conflict management and resolution . The United Nations should not hide from taking more proactive approaches to conflict management .
 The Organization is only as strong as its Members want it to be, according to the Organization .
 The United Nations needs the support and political will of its Members to take necessary action .
 We may recall examples of preventive deployment in the Western Balkans that helped avert a spillover of violence .
Good offices and fact-finding missions of the Secretary-General facilitated the orderly withdrawal of Russian troops from the region .
 The Council needs to make greater use of the options laid out in Chapter VI of the Charter . We fully agree with the Secretary-General that the Council needs more use of its options .
 In our opinion, that is the way out of the deadlocks we have in the negotiations processes around Europe, we say . In our Opinion, that's the way to end the deadlock we've had in negotiations around Europe .
 Secretary-General’s expressed readiness to support the Members through the use of his good offices and through his personal engagement .
 The Secretary-General should also not shy away from bringing to the attention of the Security Council any dangerous developments, as envisaged hy Article 99 of the Charter .
 Neither of these tools was used in 2008 or 2014 by the previous Secretary-General .
 The United Nations should take more initiative in providing options for conflict resolution, U.N. says . U.S. should also consider cooperation with regional organizations, says the U. N.
 Europe has powerful regional and subregional organizations, and they must be used . Like no other region, Europe has power, and it must use it, says the European Union .
 The OSCE, the European Union and NATO have proven their capacity to deal with conflict management and post-conflict situations in Europe . The EU, NATO and the EU have shown their capacity.
 The experience gained through joint work during conflict management in the former Yugoslavia and elsewhere in the world now needs to be applied to other areas of Europe .
 We also believe that it is worth reflecting on the existing experience of conflict resolution in other regions .
 Security Council ad hoc working group on conflict prevention and resolution in Europe could increase the focus of the Council on conflicts in Europe .
 It could also provide assessments of the implementation of resolutions and make recommendations as to how to improve cooperation among the United Nations and the OSCE, the European Union and other regional organizations .
 I would be very grateful to U.N. Members for their input and suggestions on these issues during today’s discussion .
 It is also the right time to open a fresh chapter in European history, a Europe once again characterized by peace and progress . It's also the time to start a new chapter in Europe's history.
 Foreign Minister Klimkin is chairing this important and timely open debate . I thank foreign minister for chairing the debate .
 I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres, Secretary General Zannier and Secretary General Schmid for their comprehensive briefings . I would also like to thanks Secretary- General Guterre, Secretary general Zanner and Secretary general Schmid .
 Europe is a continent of flourishing economies that benefit from close cooperation . Europe is one of the most successful economies in the world .
 Europe faces serious challenges, most acute of which are Russia's attempts to destabilize Ukraine and infringe upon Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 The United States is committed to the institutions that help keep Europe safe . The U.S. is committed.
 We will not waver in our support for NATO, which is the strongest alliance in history . We will support NATO, according to CNN.
 We are working to make NATO even more effective, deepening cooperation among existing members . We are also working to keep the door open to new allies who fulfill membership requirements .
 NATO is providing training and assistance to build the defensive capabilities of Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova . In addition, NATO is also providing training, assistance to help build defensive capabilities .
 The United States also supports the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . U.S. also supports OSCA, which helps to resolve Europe's conflicts .
 The bonds of the U.S. with NATO and the OSCE have stood the test of time . The bonds have been tested by NATO and OSCE .
 The Atlantic Ocean is a partnership between the two nations . It is a joint effort to defend our shared ideals . It's the first time two nations have joined together in the Atlantic Ocean .
 The partnership of the United States with the European Union is deep and enduring . The U.S. and the EU have a long and enduring relationship .
 The EU binds together countries that believe deeply in the cause of democracy, human rights and economic freedom . The EU is one of the largest economies in the world .
 The United States may, from time to time, disagree with the perspectives of the EU, as friends do .
 At the end of the day, no one should misinterpret occasional policy differences and debates as a signal of a commitment to our alliances in Europe .
 More than three years ago, the Ukrainian people took to the streets to speak out against political oppression and corruption . The Ukrainian people have been fighting political oppression for three years .
 Those protestors demanded freedom, democracy and respect for the rule of law . They succeeded in creating a new Ukraine .
 Russia has tried to prevent the change that the Ukrainian people demanded . But Russia has been trying to stop the change .
 Russia occupied Crimea and attempted to annex that piece of Ukrainian territory, an act that the United States does not recognize . The United States doesn't recognize that act .
 Russia then armed, financed and organized separatist forces in eastern Ukraine . More than 10,000 lives have been killed in the Ukraine conflict .
 The scenes of destruction in the town of Avdiivka in recent weeks show the consequences of Russia's ongoing interference in Ukraine .
 Russia's recognition in recent days of purported passports and other illegitimate documents distributed by Russianbacked separatists in Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk regions is another challenge to efforts to bring peace to eastern Ukraine .
 The United States believes that it is possible to have a better relationship with Russia . But greater cooperation with Russia cannot come at the expense of the security of our European friends and allies .
 The U.S. calls on Russia to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Russia must show a commitment to peace by fully implementing the commitments made under the Minsk agreements and ending its occupation of Crimea . That is why we continue to urge Russia to fully implement the commitments .
 The U.S. and the EU remain united in that approach, keeping sanctions in place until Moscow fully honours its Minsk commitments . The United States and the European Union remain united.
 Crimea-related sanctions will remain in place until Russia returns control over the peninsula to Ukraine . Our separate, Crimea- related sanctions will continue in place .
There are still significant political and development challenges to overcome in Europe . Elsewhere in Europe, there are still major political, development challenges.
 Georgia’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders must be affirmed and respected . Georgia's sovereignty, sovereignty and independence must be affirmed and respected, says Georgia .
 In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the country's people are still waiting for their leaders to stop playing politics with ethnic divisions and to focus on rooting out corruption .
 leaders are working to end the long-standing division of the island in order to achieve a settlement . The United States strongly supports the move, which the United States supports .
 U.S. calls on sides to respect ceasefire, implement agreed-on confidence-building measures and resume negotiations . The United States remains committed to the Minsk Group process .
 In Moldova, the United States continues to support a comprehensive settlement of the Transnistria conflict . Moldova's sovereignty and territorial integrity is affirms Moldova’s sovereignty, while providing special status for Transnistsria .
 The U.S. believes that the international community must recognize the great strides Kosovo has made since it became independent .
 It deserves to take its rightful place in the international community of nations, including as a full member of the U.N. The United Nations.
 The United States will remain Europe’s strongest partner in promoting peace and prosperity . The U.S. will be Europe's strongest partner.
 The U.S. will stand by the institutions and alliances that make us all more secure, says President Obama .
 I would like to begin by thanking the Ukrainian presidency for organizing today’s important debate on conflicts in Europe . I would also like to thank the Ukrainian president for organizing the debate .
 I am grateful to the Secretary-General, Mr Antonio Guterres, and Secretary General Zannier, of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . I also align myself with the statement delivered by my friend and colleague.
Helga Schmid, Secretary-General of European External Action Service of the European Union, will be delivered later on behalf of Nordic countries . Schmid is the head of the EU's External Action Services .
 The European Union has been the single-most important institutional source of peace and stability in Europe since the end of the Second World War . Sweden is a proud member of the European Union .
 The EU partnership with its neighbours in support of democracy, prosperity and human rights has never been a zero-sum game to the detriment of relations with other countries .
Deepened cooperation with external partners is encouraged. On the contrary, deepened cooperation is encouraged, according to the report .
 The Security Council has gradually handed over to the EU its responsibilities for peacebuilding and security in countries that were once subject to large U.N. operations .
 Sweden believes that the more inclusive the EU is, the more stable and prosperous our continent becomes . The more inclusive EU is the more prosperous the continent becomes.
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe offers a unique platform for dialogue on European peace and security . It is based on commonly agreed-on principles and commitments .
Only when OSCE principles are fully respected can we achieve lasting security and stability . OSCE's principles are the foundation of the European security order, according to the European Union .
 The OSCE is a vital contributor to sustaining peace in line with U.N. efforts to that end . confidence-building measures and arms control should now be enhanced again, the OSCE says .
 Respect for democracy, the rule of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms remains a precondition for our common security, says David Cameron .
 The OSCE’s human dimension and autonomous institutions should be allowed to play their full role . The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the Representative on Freedom of the Media and the High Commissioner on National Minorities should also play their role .
 They are key assets across the conflict cycle and today are needed more than ever as we try to prevent armed conflict . They are important assets in the fight against armed conflict, says the UN .
 The mandates and budgets of those institutions must he preserved and strong candidates selected to lead them . The mandates, budgets of the institutions must be preserved .
 Security depends on rule-based international order under which sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, large and small, are respected everywhere .
 Our long-standing commitment to multilateral cooperation and our staunch defence of international law are rooted in that realization . We are proud of our commitment tomultilateral cooperation .
 Europe is currently facing the most serious challenges to its security since the end of the Cold War . It is therefore with great concern that we note that Europe is facing a great concern . Europe's security has been in the spotlight since the Cold war ended .
 The ongoing conflict in Ukraine has already cost some 10,000 lives . As we speak, the ongoing conflict is causing inhuman suffering for innocent civilians .
 When one State decides to use military force to invade and annex a part of another State and threaten its sovereignty, that is a threat to us .
 The EU, the OSCE and others need to secure Europe’s future as a continent of peace and prosperity and to accord with Chapter VIII of the Charter .
 We must ensure that an end is brought to the Russian aggression against Ukraine, says the U.S. President . The Minsk process, with deliberations in the Normandy format, and through a decrease in violence, must be implemented .
 We must act in a manner that is conducive to longterm stability in the Balkans, says the EU . We must uphold and strengthen the EU enlargement policy.
 We must commit to efforts to move the promising peace process forward, says Cyprus. We must also commit to the peace process, says the government .
 We must resolve the so-called protracted conflicts in Georgia, Moldova and Nagorno Karabakh, without delay and in accordance with international law . We need to resolve the conflicts without delay, according to international law.
 The Security Council is committed to defending the rules and principles of the Charter of the United Nations . By supporting these goals, we will not only buttress peace and stability in Europe, hut also show .
 The Kazakh delegation has been briefed on the prevention of conflicts . Guterres says it is more effective than crisis management .
 My country stands united with the international community in efforts to strengthen the work of the U.N. and the Security Council .
 We support Member States in our common efforts to constructively transform conflict into peace, advance security and development, protect human rights and promote the rule of law .
 The European security environment has changed dramatically in recent years . Europe's security environment is changing dramatically, according to experts .
 Stability on the continent has been impacted by contemporary security challenges, including unconventional terrorism, irregular migration and organized crime, such as drug trafficking .
 All of those affect negatively both the social and political structure of European societies, as well as international peace and security, and challenge our common fundamental values and principles .
 Kazakhstan has consistently advanced an international agenda that seeks to help resolve conflicts before they arise . If that is no longer possible, it would be possible to mediate between conflicting parties .
Several international meetings in Astana and Almaty on Syria and Iran’s nuclear programme are a case in point . The meetings have a direct hearing on security in Europe .
 The most recent meeting of the Astana process on Syria ended with a decision on the modalities of the joint operational group to monitor the ceasefire . I would like to take this opportunity to inform the Security Council that the most recently meeting of Astana was over .
 We are prepared to continue offering the Astana platform in search of lasting solutions to this conflict . We will continue to offer Astana platforms in search for lasting solutions, we say .
 Kazakhstan has always been and will continue to be a strong advocate for peace and security, both globally and in our own region .
 President Nazarbayev's personal engagement helped stabilize the situation in Kyrgyzstan in 2010 .
 Our approach, based on seeking mutual understanding and restoring trust among nations, was perhaps most notable during our chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in 2010 .
 Kazakhstan remains strongly committed to strengthening the OSCE further in order to help the organization better meet the swiftly changing challenges of our times . That commitment is as critical and relevant now as it was then, and Kazakhstan is strongly committed.
 The position of my country regarding conflicts in Europe that, unfortunately, continue to take place without durable solutions, is well known . "The position of his country regarding conflict in Europe is wellknown," he says .
 Kazakhstan maintains friendly relations with all the countries involved in those conflicts . Kazakhstan maintains friendship with all those involved .
 We have both bilateral and multilateral formats of mutually beneficial cooperation within integration initiatives and regional organizations . With respect to virtually all of them, we have both diplomatic and non-profit organizations .
 The Astana platform can serve as a much-needed additional venue for restoring confidence and reconfirming commitment to the basic principles of international law and respect for the national interests of the parties involved .
 The Security Council and other partners redouble their efforts to forge political agreements . It is also important that the Security Council redouble its efforts to forging political agreements.
 Bringing an end to the conflict in eastern Ukraine should be our utmost common priority, says the Ukrainian government .
 We have repeatedly called for strict compliance with resolution 2202 on those agreements . We consider the only viable existing mechanism for the resolution of the conflict in a peaceful way .
 The results of the Trilateral Contact Group’s meeting in Minsk on 15 February . The most recent announcement on 18 February of an agreement to implement a ceasefire .
 Ukraine remains sovereign, stable and independent, with diverse multi-ethnic and multi-confessional society in which all human rights are upheld . It is of special importance for our multi- ethnic country, Ukraine, to remain sovereign .
 We believe that the full-fledged normalization of the situation in that country can only be achieved only with economic recovery . We believe it can be achieved by economic recovery in the country .
 We therefore call for the establishment of confidence-building measures in the economic dimension . We also call for confidence- Building Measures .
 OSCE calls on OSCE to redouble its efforts to achieve progress in Georgia and Nagorno Karabakh issue .
 Kazakhstan further welcomes the ongoing dialogue on Cyprus, which sends a strong message . The parties hope to come to a possible agreement to reunite the country .
 We believe that the role of the Secretary-General and the unity shown by the Security Council at this delicate stage of peace negotiations are of crucial importance to reaching the eventual solution of Cyprus issue .
 The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina also needs the continued attention of the Security Council . The situation is in need of continued attention from the Council .
 The Council should promote further dialogue process between the parties to the conflict, under European Union auspices, so as to maintain peace and security .
 Kazakhstan's President stressed Kazakhstan's determination to work with fellow members to promote consensus to strengthen peace and security .
 Kazakhstan's vision for effective global security and safety is at the heart of Kazakhstan’s vision, he said .
 This is an official document of the Security Council . It sets out a step-by-step plan for ending conflicts and violence .
 It attaches strong importance to the strengthening of the United Nations through enhanced cooperation among collective regional security organizations in Europe, the Americas, Asia and Africa . The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals are a focus on achieving the U.N. Sustainable Goals .
 I hope that our discussions today will provide positive food for thought for all of us taking part in the global community to end conflicts .
 I should like to begin by warmly thanking the SecretariesGeneral of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European External Action Service of the European Union for their very enlightening briefings .
 The theme of conflicts in Europe has a special resonance for my country, which has twice been at the heart of world conflicts . The outbreak of which occurred on the European continent.
 France is all the more attached to the preservation of peace and security in Europe, as well as to the instruments we have collectively put in place to defend them . France has a painful legacy.
 I am thinking in particular of the Charter of the United Nations and its principles concerning the peaceful resolution of conflicts and respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States . I am also thinking of the Helsinki agreements and the recognition by all the OECD countries of the inviolability of
 The annexation of the Crimea and the conflict in the Donhas unfortunately illustrate the fact that the violation of the territorial integrity of a European State is still possible . The annexation and conflict in Donhas illustrate that the annexation of Crimea is still Possible .
 The persistence of so-called frozen conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Transnistria and Georgia poses an ongoing threat to the security of the countries concerned and their regions .
 The lack of a settlement of the issue of Cyrpus remains a source of great dissatisfaction . CyrpUS is a country within the European Union .
Today we have the tools necessary to ensure peace and security on the European continent . Yet today we have a number of tools to ensure security on Europe .
 The Council has primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace and international security . In Europe as in the rest of the world, the Council has main responsibility for peace .
 It is important for everyone to assume their responsibilities on European issues, which has not always been the case in recent months . It's important to assume its responsibilities so that it can fully exercise its prerogatives .
 The Secretary-General is fully justified in reminding the Security Council of its obligations and responsibilities when he deems it necessary . We believe, we believe, that the Secretary- General is.
 The OSCE is an active and effective organization that has, inter alia, demonstrated its ability to rise to the challenge by playing a central role in managing Ukraine .
 The European Union is today an essential player in the multipolar world and a pillar of multilateralism . The EU's community of values and interests shared with the United Nations is comprehensive .
 Its leading role in stabilizing its direct neighbourhood must be fully recognized and supported . The role of stabilizing the area must be recognized.
Strengthened by these powerful and adapted tools, we must maintain our mobilization to make the whole of Europe a stable, peaceful and conflict-free continent . Europe must maintain its mobilization.
 In Ukraine, we are tirelessly pursuing, alongside our German partners, our mediation efforts in the Normandy format in support of the full implementation of the Minsk accords . We all agree to be the sole avenue to a peaceful resolution of the conflict .
 The renewed tensions around Avdiivka are a cause of great concern to us, says the author . The renewed tension is a result of the resurgence of civilian and military casualties and the deterioration of the humanitarian situation, he says .
 Russian authorities recognize official documents issued by de facto authorities of certain zones in Donetsk and Lugansk regions . It runs counter to the spirit of the Minsk accords .
 ministerial meeting in Normandy format held on Saturday in Munich made it possible to agree on specific commitments . The aim is to promote a rapid improvement of the situation on the ground .
 OSCE commitments include the effective implementation of the ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weapons . OSCE observers will have access to the OSCE for the first time .
 The French, German, Ukrainian and Russian Ministers also supported the rapid exchange of prisoners and the guarantee of access to places of detention by the International Committee of the Red Cross .
 The Council has unanimously supported unanimous support of the Council to that end . It is essential that these measures be implemented in a comprehensive and timely manner .
 Normandy format to quickly adopt a road map, as foreseen by Heads of State and Government . Discussions are continuing within the Normandy format .
 The only way forward is to advance concomitantly on the security and political aspects of the Minsk accords, says the authors . Germany and Russia have shared a shared conviction with Germany, they say .
 We remain more determined than ever to pursue our common efforts within the Normandy format, because each result obtained on the ground counts . We have no alternative solution to support the implementation of the agreements.
 European sanctions put in place at the beginning of the crisis are linked to the full implementation of the latter . The European sanctions were put in effect at the start of the Crisis .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin reiterates his commitment to defending the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country .
 France strongly condemns and does not recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol . I recall that France strongly condemned and did not recognize Crimea's annexation .
 Georgia and Moldova support the search for solutions to frozen conflicts . The two countries also support the territorial integrity of those States .
 The OSCE has prevented any escalation on the ground. We are convinced of the central role of the OSCE in preventing any escalation . We hope for a lasting settlement through negotiations in the framework of the Geneva international discussions for Georgia .
 France is fully committed to mediation of the OSCE Minsk Group . France is also committed to the mediation of OSCE.
 The European Union plays a lead role in promoting the normalization of relations among neighbouring countries and reducing internal tensions among communities .
 The prospect of rapprochement with the European Union and the Union-facilitated dialogue today constitutes the main vector for the normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina . The benefits that accompany this process for the daily life of the people.
 The effective implementation of the agreements concluded and the effective mobilization of the Serb and Kosovar leaders to that end are essential to ensuring that the important results of recent years are not jeopardized by the recent episodes of tensions .
 In Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is also the prospect of rapprochement with the European Union . The Reform Agenda is today the main factor for cohesion among communities .
France favours the European perspective for the Balkans, as we recalled at the Paris summit on 4 July . It is for all these reasons that France favours Europe's European perspective .
 That perspective is, in our view, the main stabilizing force in the region, says the U.S. State Department .
 In Cyprus, despite recent bottlenecks, significant progress has been made in recent months in the conduct of negotiations .
 Much remains to be done in order to arrive at a lasting solution, but the outlines of which must be in line with Security Council resolutions, the Charter and the community acquis .
 The urgent need now is to relaunch the negotiations by maintaining the momentum generated in recent months . Security questions, including security questions, are among the most important issues .
 Europe now has all the tools necessary to ensure peace and security on its continent. It is only through the common mobilization of the various actors that we will be able to perpetuate the European dream born in 1945, in the aftermath of the war .
 Ukraine's delegation of Ukraine convenes a meeting in Kiev . Ukraine's Prime Minister has been in charge of the debate . The meeting will be held in Kiev, Ukraine's capital city .
 I also thank Secretary-General Guterres for his detailed briefing, as well as Ms. Ms. Guterre .
 Uruguay is committed to multilateralism, the peaceful solution of disputes and the validity of international law . Uruguay is a country that is firmly committed tomultilateralism .
 Colombia serves as a true example to the international community by engaging in a domestic peace process . The parties involved have demonstrated that it is possible to achieve peace if you have the courage to invest your political capital therein .
 conflicts in Europe pose an ongoing risk given the possibility of their worsening or transnationalization . Cybercrime and violent extremism, among other factors, are among the factors, says the authors .
 The Secretary-General said just a few minutes ago, the idea of frozen conflicts is completely erroneous . As the Secretary- General said just minutes ago.
 The Security Council and the Secretary-General have been involved in a number of conflicts that the Organization often faces . However, these conflicts offer an opportunity to reach negotiated solutions, says the UN .
 The interaction between the United Nations and the various regional monitoring bodies and mechanisms should be strengthened . International mediation, as well as international mediation, should also be strengthened.
 It is important to mention the 1995 Dayton Agreement, the Geneva dialogue on the question of Georgia, the 2015 Minsk agreements and the work of the Normandy Quartet and the Trilateral Contact Group .
 Cypriot leaders have been holding talks with the island nation's leaders over the past few weeks . The talks have been held under the auspices of the Special Adviser, Mr Espen Eide .
 The preventive approach has proved crucial in order to avoid the high cost of war . It is imperative to prevent bureaucratic obstacles from arising and achieve greater system-wide cooperation from a human rights perspective .
 The human rights system is the world's most important human rights body . It has been criticized for the lack of coordination among the various mechanisms of human rights .
 Uruguay's approach attaches priority to the human rights of populations in conflict . Uruguay’s approach attachespriority to human rights in conflict.
 The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights has a view to monitoring, reporting on and addressing the concerns of the populations affected . We underscore that it is crucial to eliminate any limitation on free and unrestricted access by the staff of the office .
 Uruguay takes note of reports on cases of human rights violations . Reports stress accusations of killings, arbitrary detention, torture and ill-treatment .
In all cases the human rights track should move in parallel and independently of political negotiations, she says . "All stakeholders must impartially and consistently uphold human rights law," she writes .
 We deem it crucial for the positive development of conflicts in Europe that all parties refrain from carrying out any acts that could jeopardize ongoing negotiations . All parties should not carry out any act that could endanger ongoing negotiations.
 The primary responsibility for conflict prevention and the protection of local populations lies with States themselves . The Security Council, the United Nations and the international community also have a role to play that should continue to evolve, says the author .
 The challenge must be met by every country and all those who make up the Organization . The challenge is met by all of the world's leaders .
Ukrainian presidency convene open debate on conflicts in Europe . We wish to thank the Ukrainian presidency for convene this open debate .
 The 2017 Munich Security Conference ended just a few days ago . This is obviously a very relevant topic, as is clear from the various high-level debates on the issue .
 I should like also to thank the Secretary-General, Mr Antonio Guterres and Mr Lamberto Zannier, Secretary General of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
Helga Schmid, Secretary General of the European External Action Service, for outstanding briefings . Schmid was the European Union’s Secretary General. Schmid is the head of the EU's European Externalaction Service .
 The European continent continues to be rocked by various disputes, both intraand inter-State, which threaten international peace and security . In spite of 70 years of relative stability and economic prosperity, the European continent is rocked by disputes .
 The Secretary-General has reiterated that frozen conflicts in Europe could erupt at any time . This is because they continue to lack a definitive solution, he says . The secretary-general has reiterated, as he says, so-called frozen conflicts could erupt.
 To unresolved conflicts in Cyprus, Bosnia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosnia. We must add emerging threats such as terrorism, violent extremism, transnational crime and cybercrime, as well as increasing xenophobia and religious intolerance .
 Former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon rightly emphasized in August 2015 that the United Nations increasingly shared with regional organizations responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security .
 Regional organizations play a part in the resolution of conflicts on the European continent . The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and European Union play a leading role .
 President's suggestion to create working group on prevention of conflicts is deserving of consideration .
 The Plurinational State of Bolivia thanks the Ukrainian presidency for its initiative to address the issue of international peace and security in Europe .
We would like to thank the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres and Mr Zannier for their statements .
 For Bolivia, conflicts between or within States must be handled in strict compliance with the principles enshrined in the Charter of the U.N. All States Members of the United Nations have agreed to comply with faithfully, in particular the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes .
 Bolivia stresses the importance of all States to observe, respect, implement and comply with the purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter .
 It is necessary to encourage and support States and regional and subregional organizations to reach peaceful solutions to conflicts through dialogue, consultation, good offices and mediation .
 It is also important to respect the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, as well as the non-threat and non-use of force in resolving conflicts .
 Bolivia wishes to recall that those principles serve as the indispensable conditions for the fulfilment of the purposes and principles of the Charter . Bolivia wants to recall those principles as indispensable conditions.
 In Bolivia’s view, legitimate regional and subregional organizations are crucial to the stability and security of the regions . In Bolivia's view, legitimacy and security is crucial to stability and stability of the region .
 Those organizations become natural mediators for possible conflicts owing to their proximity and familiarity with the surrounding environment . Those organizations share culture and history and sometimes even the language of the parties .
 The U.S. says it has the ability to address conflicts and create conditions conducive to the achievement of lasting solutions to regional problems . The United States and the United States have the benefit of the mutual benefit of States .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe commend the work carried out by the OSC in Europe .
 We believe it to he is an inclusive and important platform for building mutual trust in the region . We believe that it is contributing to the exchange of knowledge, offering assistance for the creation of new institutions and acting as an important channel .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has played a role in generating conflicts in Europe and in the world . It has also played a key role in creating conflicts in the region .
 The Security Council has sought to play a role in safeguarding international peace and security, a role that is not appropriate to it . It has received no such mandate from the international community, as it has not received such a mandate .
 Many of the underlying conflicts in Europe have been the result of the continued expansion of NATO . NATO's expansion is an expansion that endangers regional and global peace .
 U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, the Secretary General of the United Nations, and the European External Action Service of the European Union, among others .
 The Security Council has a very ambitious mission, namely, to evaluate the entirety of the threats to European security and propose solutions thereto .
 Each situation has its own particularities, including historical ones . It is a difficult mission, because each situation is different, says the author .
 First and foremost among them would be the failure of efforts to implement plans to create a single Europe .
 There have been clear attempts by the West to intervene from the outside, which has led to the exacerbation of crises . In many of those conflicts, the West has tried to intervene in those conflicts .
Thirdly, there is the concept that the solution for conflicts in Europe cannot be military in nature . Thirdly, it is the idea that there is a solution for conflict in Europe that can't be military .
 At the end of the Cold War, there was a real possibility that the European security space could be unified . The European Security Space could be united .
 European representatives in this Chamber have heard many times about the need to ensure indivisible security from Lisbon to Vladivostok . The security of one State cannot be ensured at the expense of the security of others .
 Russia actively attempted to assist in the implementation of the single Europe concept . For its part, Russia actively tried to help in the project .
 The Council of the Russian-German initiative of 2010 sought to create a European Union-Russia committee on matters of foreign policy and security .
 The European Union decided not to follow through on that promising idea .
 Many conflicts on the continent could have been avoided, including in Ukraine . We are pretty confident that had that initiative been developed further, many conflicts could be avoided .
 NATO expansion creates a superficial feeling of security while leading, instead, to an unprecedented level of tension in Europe in the past 30 years . Russia continues to oppose such an approach, because NATO expansion leads to a superficial sense of security .
 The intention to create equal security for all was the basis for the Russian proposal for a comprehensive agreement on European security . The Russian proposal was part of the Russian plan to create a comprehensive deal on security .
 The proposal was presented during the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly . The proposal did not get positive reactions from our partners .
 We are convinced that the reckless refutation of that comprehensive security policy became the root cause for the current situation in which old conflicts have remained frozen and new conflicts have emerged in Europe .
 The situation in Ukraine continues to be difficult and unpredictable, as can be seen from the clashes that took place at the end of January and the beginning of February in Avdiivka .
 At that time, the Council unanimously called upon the sides to restore the ceasefire and to implement the Package of Measures for the Implementation of the Minsk Agreements . The Package of measures is the recognized necessary basis for a peaceful solution .
 The Agreements must be implemented, including at the level of the Normandy leaders format . Agreements should be implemented during the talks .
 Ukrainian delegation and Security Council use of Security Council for furthering political propaganda, says U.S. ambassador .
 It is unfortunate that this is happening on the day of the third anniversary of the signing of an agreement by the former President of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, and the opposition .
 If the implementation of that document had not been rejected the very next day and had it not been condoned by the Governments of Germany, Poland and France, it could have saved the country and its people.
 There have been attempts to resolve the situation through military misadventures . They are afraid of losing power because they are afraid to lose power . There are also attempts to solve the problem through militaryMisadventures.
 The words of President Poroshenko were particularly cynical, we think . We think that the words of the President were especially cynical .
 Ukraine has long held that we must restore those territories to Ukraine via political and diplomatic means alone . On 16 February, he restated the position that he and his team have long held .
Kyiv must begin to implement those agreements, which are required for a political solution . Kyiv must start to implement the agreements, but must also implement the political solution.
 The failure to implement the agreements hinders the settlement process . The failure of the agreement hinders a settlement process.
 The statement of the Ukrainian delegation did not contain even one reference to the Minsk agreements .
 The Russian decision to recognize certain documents from Donetsk and Lugansk regions allegedly runs counter to the Minsk agreements .
 The Government of Ukraine is attempting to achieve the opposite, it seems . They were adopted in the interest of people to ensure that they enjoy their rights and freedoms .
 The recent report of the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe reports conflict-related difficulties encountered by civilians in eastern Ukraine during the period from May to September 2016 .
 Kyiv’s special regime for the territories not controlled by the Government are linked to the difficult procedures for crossing the contact line, as well as to the use of State services and the suspension of the payment of pensions and benefits .
 The U.S. and France allow citizens of Taiwan, who they do not officially recognize, into their countries . The United States and France, like other members of the Security Council, allow Taiwan to enter their countries.
 Belgrade and Pristina have a high-level dialogue between the two countries . European Union mediation is a mechanism for normalizing relations between the sides, says the EU .
 Implementing the agreement is of key importance, first and foremost, for the creation of the Community of Serb-mahority Municipalities in Kosovo .
 The right to represent Kosovo in the international arena belongs exclusively to the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo . Kosovo is against becoming a member of international organizations .
 Bosnia and Herzegovina need full compliance with the Dayton Peace Agreement, says U.S. State Department . U.N. Secretary of State John Kerry says Bosnia needs full compliance .
 We are in favour of internal Bosnian dialogue without outside interference, says the High Representative . The High Representative says it is curtailing the presence of a protectorate .
 We believe that it would be destructive to exacerbate the situation with respect to the Republika Srpska in relation to the celebration of Republic Day on 9 January .
We think that U.S. restrictive measures against BosnianSerhian leaders are unjustified and baseless . We think that United States restrictive measures are unfair and unjustified .
We would like to see an equitable, comprehensive and viable settlement on the island . We would like an equitable and comprehensive settlement on island .
Cypriot-led solutions and the inclusion of Security Council members in the discussion of political solutions on the matter of security guarantees . In the interests of all of its people, we would support Cypriot.
 We think guarantees from the Security Council would be best, rather than from separate countries . We think that guarantees from Security Council will be best .
 The first meeting in eight years between the President of Moldova and the leader of Transnistria . The 5+2 format, as well as bilateral contacts at various levels, will be resumed .
 Moldova and its borders stood on 1 January 1990, with the guaranteed status for Transnistria . Our approach to Moldova has not changed since then .
 The conflict in the Caucasus was addressed in August 2008, in particular with respect to the misadventures of Mr Saakashvili and the emergence of the two independent States of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Georgia and the two young Republics. What matters now is not the settlement of the conflict but rather a normalization of relations between Georgia and Georgia .
 The conflict in the Nagorno Karabakh is the most difficult and has the most destructive impact on the Commonwealth of Independent States . The conflict is most difficult to deal with and has a most destructive effect on the country .
 The military phase concluded in 1994 with the signing of the ceasefire agreement by the two sides . The two sides signed a ceasefire agreement in 1994 .
 The OSCE Minsk Group is co-chaired by Russia, the U.S. and France . Since then, there have been talks mediated by the OSCE Group .
 We call on colleagues to set aside confrontational approaches to ensuring their own security . Once again, we call on our colleagues toSet aside confrontations to ensure security .
 Instead, we should seek mutually acceptable solutions to the crises in Europe, says David Cameron .
 Russian policy is based on establishing a shared security and stability space . The basis of our relations with Europe, our good neighbourliness and reciprocal benefits .
 We have written history together and achieve success when we work together for the prosperity of our peoples . We have been together for more than 20 years . We are committed to the future of our people .
 Russia's analogy with occupied Donbas or Northern Cyprus and Taiwan is very telling. I believe that the analogy given by Russia with regard to occupied donbas and Northern Cyprus. But we will respond to that a bit later, he says .
 China commends Ukraine for taking the initiative to convene today’s ministerial-level open debate on resolving conflicts in Europe .
 Foreign Minister Klimkin is presiding over today's meeting . He is also presiding over the meeting .
 China listened attentively to statements made by Mr Zannier, Secretary General of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
 In recent years, the situation in Europe has generally been calm and positive progress has been made on hotspot issues .
Terrorist attacks in some countries, the ongoing refugee crisis and the rise in traditional and non-traditional security challenges remain . However, complex and uncertain factors remain pronounced .
 All countries are required to respond to such challenges, says the U.S. ambassador .
After the people of Europe suffered the devastation of the two world wars, cherishing peace is the common aspiration of all countries .
 European integration is a regional cooperation process that was the fastest to develop and the most remarkable in progress after the Second World War . European integration was the first of its kind to he launched .
 As most European countries have national interests that are deeply intertwined, they can better the importance of building a community with a shared destiny . European countries can better build a community.
 We hope the countries of Europe will discard the zero-sum-game notion . We hope Europe will build a new kind of international relations characterized by win-win cooperation at its core .
 All countries should adhere to resolving disputes peacefully, according to the U.S. President Obama .
 They should continue to observe the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations . They should stay committed to settling their differences through dialogue and consultation .
 The international community and regional countries should play an active role in facilitating peace talks . The parties concerned to scale up their dialogue, meet each other halfway and seize positive momentum .
 The diversity of and differences among the nations, religions and cultures in European countries represent an important source for progress in the region .
 All countries should continue to engage in all-embracing and harmonious exchanges among civilizations, while acknowledging the differences, says U.S. ambassador .
 Fourthly, cooperation between the Security Council and regional organizations in Europe should be strengthened, says the European Union .
 The Security Council is the core mechanism responsible for maintaining international peace and security . The EU and OSCE have accumulated rich experience in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding .
Relevant efforts should be guided by the principles of objectivity, impartiality and respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned . Relevant efforts must be guided.
 The parties should be made to heed the views of the parties concerned, while refraining from double standards and the imposition of one’s will upon others .
 China has always attached great importance to the strategic position and role of Europe . Sino-European relations have consistently been a priority in Chinese diplomacy . China has been a key part of its relationship with Europe .
 China stands ready, through the One Belt, One Road initiative and other platforms, to deepen the comprehensive Sino-European strategic partnership . China is based on mutual benefits, win-win cooperation and mutual benefits .
 We also stand ready to work with the EU to achieve fresh progress in four partnership areas . We also want to make a greater contribution to achieving lasting peace in Europe and common prosperity .
 We thank the Ukrainian presidency for its wisdom in organizing this debate . We thank them for their wisdom in organising this debate, we say .
We should also like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Antonio Guterres and the observer of the European Union for briefings .
 The Security Council has been seized with a number of European issues under this agenda item . This is perhaps the first time that the Council is broadly discussing conflicts in Europe as threats to international peace and security .
 One gets the sense that we are undergoing a transition at the global level. One gets a sense of a transition in the world.
 It is impossible to say where we are heading, because it is difficult to talk even about the general contours of what we are transitioning into. But it is impossible.
 Secretary-General Guterres has defined the current global situation as chaotic .
 At no time has multilateral diplomacy been as vitally needed as it is now, it's now. At least one of the world's most important diplomatic efforts has been in place .
 Ukrainian presidency should be commended for organizing this debate. It is also for that reason that the Ukrainian presidency is also commended .
 Europe is not merely vital for the success of multilateral diplomacy — it is indispensable . Europe's success is not only vital for its success, but it is essential for its own success .
 A peaceful and harmonious Europe can serve as an important pillar for global peace at a time when, at the global level, there is more confusion than clarity . A peaceful Europe is a key part of the world's peace process .
 The global situation is potentially more dangerous than perhaps at any time since the advent of the post-ColdWar period . That is making the global situation more dangerous.
 People with common sense should put their ears to the ground, experts say . The current period and times prior to the First World War are similar .
 The peace and security of Europe has always had a major impact on the world's security . As far as we are concerned, we do not claim to be experts on European issues, but we do recognize from history that the peace and safety of Europe is a major issue .
 Conflicts in Europe have, in the past, resulted in two devastating world wars and, during the post-Second World War period, in an international order that has ensured durable peace and unprecedented prosperity .
 Europe means a lot to us in Africa for our development and for our peace and security. Europe also means a much to us for our progress and security, says CNN.
 Europe is perhaps one of the most generous and effective partners of the African Union . The AU is critical for the future of Africa. Europe is a key partner of the AU .
 It is against that backdrop that we look with a great deal of concern at some of the unresolved conflicts in Europe that are still on the agenda of the Council .
 Dialogue and negotiation remain the only way to find a durable political and diplomatic solution to some of the difficult and extremely delicate issues of peace and security in Europe .
 The political will and commitment of the parties to the protracted and new conflicts in Europe is crucial, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says it is crucial to ensure that agreements are fully respected and implemented .
 No doubt, building the necessary trust and confidence between and among parties is the key to making progress . Building the necessary Trust and confidence among and among Parties is key to building trust, says CNN.
 The U.N. should continue to work closely with the European Union and the OSCE in the pursuit of those objectives . The United Nations should work with the EU and OSCE.
 Europe is indeed passing through a very difficult period. We realize that Europe is actually passing through an difficult period . Europe is passing through the difficult period, we say .
 Europe is confronting serious challenges involving an economic slowdown, migration and refugee crisis . Europe has been an example to the rest of the world, says David Cameron .
 There is no substitute in this regard in Europe or elsewhere for ensuring peace, security and stability through scrupulous observance of principles of international law governing inter-State relations .
 European Union High Representative Federica Mogherini says multilateral approach is a sensible and logical thing to do . "That is why reaffirming the multilateral Approach and investing in a stronger United Nations and enhancing cooperation and partnership"
 Secretary-General takes himself as a bridge-builder seriously. Let us not forget that we have a Secretary-general who takes himself seriously .
 This is a time when we need a moral arbiter, but one who is not too ostentatious about his or her role . This is the time when it is time for a moral Arbiter, says David Frum .
 Europe is not only a neighbouring continent, but also an important partner in addressing the many peace and security, as well as development, challenges we face . Europe is a key partner in Africa's peace, security, development, and development challenges .
 Europe has forged a strategic partnership with Africa in tackling issues of mutual concern, as well as in ensuring collective peace, security and prosperity . We hope Europe will remain true to the spirit of the strategic partnership that has been forged.
 I would like to thank the Ukrainian presidency for convening such an important debate . I would also like to thanks the Ukrainian president for convened such animportant debate .
 More than ever we are called upon to find collective and peaceful solutions, including in Europe . Europe is facing multiple challenges and new threats, today more than ever .
 Europe’s founding fathers signed the Treaty of Rome 60 years ago . It is the first crucial step towards the establishment of the European Union .
 Re-emerging from the horrific ashes of the Second World War, against all odds they initiated an era of unprecedented and unsurpassed peace and prosperity .
 The people’s innate longing for solidarity and peaceful coexistence can, if given a chance, prevail over the sterile push towards ultranationalism, isolation and exclusion .
 Europe is a model of peaceful coexistence, common values, democracy, solidarity and openness . Europe is the dawning of Europe, says David Cameron .
 It is an approach that we believe will best serve the future of our own children . We believe it will best serving our children, we say .
On 25 March, in cooperation with the Maltese presidency of the Council of the European Union, we will host in Rome a summit of the Heads of State and Government of the EU members .
 It is a way to honour a symbolic moment, but also an important occasion to reinvigorate the spirit of the European project . The European Union’s potential as a force of peace and for peace .
In Europe and beyond, it is imperative in our view to foster a multilateral approach vis-a-vis protracted crises on our continent, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: "We need to leverage all the tools at our disposal to prevent conflicts"
 Italy has pledged to ensure that any international dispute in Europe is resolved through legal and peaceful means . Italy has also pledged to uphold the inviolability of frontiers and principles embodied in Helsinki Final Act .
 Italy views with great concern the tensions on the eastern flank of the continent, starting with Ukraine, in the Caucasus and in the Balkans . Italy views the tensions in the region as a source of concern .
 We believe that the only acceptable and possible outcome of the crisis in Ukraine lies in a lasting political solution . Ukraine's territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty are at risk, we say .
 That can be attained only through a constructive dialogue involving all concerned parties and actors. That can only be achieved through constructive dialogue .
 Italy firmly supports the pivotal role of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . The Normandy group convened in Munich on Saturday to facilitate progress towards the swift and full implementation of the Minsk agreements .
 We also support the efforts of the OSCE for a peaceful and comprehensive resolution of the Transnistrian conflict, based on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Moldova .
In this framework, we welcome the resumption of talks in the 5+2 format last June . In this framework we welcome a resumption in this framework .
 I also would like to reassert Italy’s support to a peaceful solution of the situation in Nagorno Karabakh . I would also welcome the efforts of the three co-Chairs of the Minsk Group for a compromise grounded on the Helsinki Final Act and the 1997 Madrid
 The persisting difficult political situation in the Western Balkans is a dire warning of the risk of relapse into conflict in the region . The region is at the very heart of Europe and essential to its security .
 We call on all local leaders to tone down their rhetoric and to embrace the European Union’s steadfast support to dialogue and peace in the region .
 countries of the Western Balkans will be able to ensure a better future for their own people . Only by following the path of mutual collaboration and regional cooperation, countries of Western Balkans can ensure a good future .
 We continue to work in this direction also as Chair in 2017 of the Berlin Process, in view of the summit on the Western Balkans, which we will host in July in Trieste .
 We strongly support the continuation of the talks, the two communities’ ownership of the negotiations and the mediation role played by the U.N. and the European Union . The two communities are owned by the United Nations and the EU .
People of Cyprus deserve a workable agreement and to prosper in a common endeavour . No prosperity or achievement is borne out of division, and the people of Cyprus need workable agreements .
 Europe turned last century’s scars into a formidable set of tools to prevent and resolve further conflicts . Europe's scars are now used to prevent further conflicts and prevent further conflict .
 Italy welcomes the renewed dedication of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to political solutions to crises . Italy will work with all the members of the United Nations and of the Security Council to sustain peace in Europe and beyond .
 The U.N. has invested in regional organizations to promote conflict resolution across the continent . The OSCE and the European Union have also been involved in the Ukrainian crisis .
 The European Union is the strongest driver for peace and resilience in Europe, says the European Union . The EU is an irresistible stabilizing force for the whole world and for our collective security, writes the EU .
 Since the 1990s, the world has witnessed many geostrategic transformations that have fuelled conflicts throughout Europe . The world has seen many changes in the past 20 years .
 Despite the enormous efforts undertaken, the desired progress has not been achieved in reaching lasting solutions to the conflicts with regard to Nagorno Karabakh, Azkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria, as well as the situations in Ukraine, the Balkans and Cyprus .
 It is important to note that the current situation and the relative calm engulfing several of those conflicts do not indicate in any way that the regional parties concerned have reached sustainable solutions .
 OSCE and other mechanisms to bring stability to a number of hotspots in Europe through preventive diplomacy, mediation, good offices and peacebuilding measures .
 Egypt calls for the redoubling of efforts and urges all parties to shoulder their responsibilities and demonstrate the necessary political will to settle those conflicts peacefully .
 OSCE needs full complementarity between the roles of the OSCE and the United Nations . We also see the need for full complementity between the two countries .
 The Organization in consolidating international efforts to reach a political solution in Ukraine . The Minsk agreements are seen as the ideal framework to achieve a durable and sustainable settlement .
 We call for the full implementation of resolution 2202, which calls upon all parties to fully implement the Minsk agreements . We also call for constitutional reforms and organizing local elections the Donbas region .
 The agreements also call for addressing the humanitarian repercussions of the conflict in coordination with all parties concerned, without exception .
 Minsk Group calls for peaceful settlement, dialogue and avoiding interference in the internal affairs of the country . In the same vein, we call for the implementation of the arrangements to settle the Nagorno Karabakh conflict .
 Cyprus is in line with the United Nations Charter and the relevant Security Council resolutions . We call for a durable solution to that situation .
 It is vital that we move beyond the current security arrangements, which are obsolete and fail to reflect the current political reality. It's vital that the security arrangements are obsolete, says David Cameron .
 Egypt nutures friendly and cooperative relations with all European States, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Egypt is a great place for Egypt to meet with its neighbors .
 The Egyptian people tie the Egyptian people to the peoples of the region . The Egyptian government says it needs to develop the approach adopted to address conflicts in Europe .
 Egypt calls for more concerted regional and international efforts . Egypt also calls for a more concerted international and regional efforts .
 We are confident that the broad spectrum of cooperation and complementarity among the European countries will enable them to overcome those conflicts through reliance on logic and sense of urgency .
 The United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union are all playing a crucial role to preserve peace and security in Europe . "We are grateful for all of the work that they do," the U.N. says .
 Everything that we do in the Security Council has come about as a direct result of conflicts in Europe, says the U.S.
 More than seven decades since the Second World War, we should be proud that Europeans now enjoy a level of stability and prosperity that would have been unthinkable to our grandparents' generation .
 instability and insecurity persist in Europe. As we heard so clearly in the meeting on Ukraine earlier this month, instability and instability persists in Europe .
 The borders of Europe are threatened today in a way not seen since the Cold War . Europe's borders have been threatened in the past.
 The territorial integrity of your country, Mr President, has been flagrantly violated, leaving up to 10,000 dead and millions displaced .
 The Russia Federation thinks Moscow's interest can and should prevail over the sovereign and democratic choices of independent countries . At the heart of that disregard for sovereignty lies the Russia Federation .
 It is a world view illustrated by Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and continued support for separatists in eastern Ukraine . The world view is illustrated by Russian's illegal annexation.
 Only a few days ago, Russia recognized passports from the so-called People's Republics in Donbas under the guise of humanitarian assistance for a conflict that Russia itself instigated .
 Russia should withdraw its troops and equipment from Ukraine and use its influence over separatists to implement the ceasefire and heavy-weapons withdrawal agreement . A more appropriate response would be for Russia to honour its commitments under the Minsk agreements, including withdrawing its troops.
 Russia will remain under sanctions from the European Union and Group of Seven States . Until all such commitments are met in full, Russia will be under sanctions .
 The Council has a responsibility to sustain the peace won in Europe seven decades ago . It has responsibility to ensure that the rules-based international order is respected .
 We have a responsibility to ensure that wars waged across battlefields are ended through dialogue pursued across tables . We have to ensure we have a responsible role in ensuring that wars are ended by dialogue .
 The three organizations from which we have heard today are playing a vital role in those efforts . We have heard that some of the three organizations are playing key roles in the effort to improve the environment .
 The OSCE is monitoring the line of contact in Ukraine . The United Nations is bringing vital aid and much-needed relief to those suffering . The EU is bringing pressure on Russia to meet its commitments under the Minsk agreements .
 All sides must step up and make a ceasefire a reality, implementing the Minsk agreements in full . All sides need to step up.
 The need for a peaceful political settlement extends far beyond the borders of Ukraine. Sadly, the need for peaceful settlement extends beyond the border of Ukraine .
 In the interest of time, I will not mention every single conflict in Europe . In the interests of time.
 The flashing light, after all, is meant to be a sign to stop and not one of encouragement to keep going .
 In Georgia, the conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia remain unresolved . Russian pressure showing no signs of dissipating .
 In Moldova, it is long past time for a comprehensive peaceful settlement of the Transnistrian conflict . It is based on sovereignty and territorial integrity of Moldova with a special status for the region .
 The United Kingdom will continue to be a force for peace in Europe through its membership in NATO, the OSCE and the Council .
 NATO target of spending 2 per cent of our economy on defence is 2% of the economy on defense . NATO target is to spend 2% on defence .
 NATO has responded in a coherent, comprehensive and measured fashion to Russia’s destabilization and provocation and provocation . NATO's response to Russia's destabilization is a coherent and comprehensive fashion .
 Russia has modernized its deterrence and defence posture as a balanced response to instability and insecurity . Russia has also been open to dialogue with Russia .
 Three years since Maidan protests, we speak clearly in this Chamber today to reaffirm our total support for principles of territorial integrity and sovereignty . The United Nations Charter and the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe is known as the Helsinki Final Act .
 We speak clearly to say that we do and will not recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea . We speak clear to say we do, we will notrecognize Crimea's annexation .
 Europe embarked on an ambitious effort to promote a rules-based international order . After two world wars, Europe fully rejected coercion .
 It has upheld principles that prohibit the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State . It also oblige the peaceful resolution of international disputes .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe has become the world’s largest regional security institution . With 57 member States today, the OSC is the largest security institution in the world .
 For over 70 years, Japan has joined its European and American partners in upholding the fundamental values of freedom, democracy, rule of law, a market economy and human rights .
 The United Nations has strongly supported the United Nations system that embodies those values . It has strongly backed the U.N. system.
 NATO has similarly been a trusted and natural partner for Japan . In sharing the same liberal values and proactively contributing to peace, NATO has also been trusted andnatural partner forJapan .
 Japan is concerned by the continuation of hot and frozen conflicts in Europe .
 flagrant acts contravene the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Accords .
 Japan is deeply concerned at the recent deterioration of the situation in eastern Ukraine . Japan is also concerned at recent deterioration in the region .
 The ongoing conflict in Ukraine is a significant threat to the peace and security of Europe . Almost 10,000 people are estimated to have been killed in the conflict .
 The full implementation of the Minsk agreements is essential, says the Council . The Council endorsed in resolution 2202 by all parties concerned is essential .
 OSCE and Germany meet in Normandy under Normandy format . French Foreign Ministers met last week to convening last week .
 On Crimea, we are opposed to any attempt to modify Ukraine’s borders through the threat or use of force or other unlawful means . We are also opposed to a threat to use force, force or unlawful means.
 The referendum held in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol in March 2014 does not constitute the basis for any alteration of the status of Crimea .
 We call upon all States to fully respect Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Threats to the territorial integrity of one country cannot be ignored, says U.S. attorney general . Threats would undermine the fundamental principles upon which the entire international legal order is based .
Major countries of the region need to step up their efforts to resolve Europe's conflicts . Europe’s conflicts need to be resolved in order to resolve them .
 Regional and subregional organizations play a significant role in conflict resolution . The cooperation between the United Nations and those organizations is becoming increasingly important .
 The Council should pay closer attention to protracted conflicts in Europe so that they do not turn into serious threats to the peace and security of the region .
 Europe faces emerging issues, such as violent extremism and humanitarian crises involving refugees and immigrants . Today, Europe faces new issues, including violent extremism, and refugee crisis .
 The international community must strengthen its response to those crises . The International Community must strengthen their response to these crises .
 The Japanese Government has decided to provide an additional $750 million in assistance to address humanitarian and refugee issues, as well as terrorism . The U.N. and other international organizations will also provide additional assistance .
 Europe must play a crucial role in upholding the international order based on the rule of law . Europe must also play a key role in upholding the order, says the European Union .
 The International Court of Justice, the International Criminal Court, the Permanent Court of Arbitration and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. It is well positioned to host the major international courts and tribunals .
 Japan’s faith in the ideal of regional integration in Europe has contributed to improved quality of life, vanishing borders and the resolution of ethnic tensions, remains unchanged .
 We stand shoulder to shoulder with Europe in supporting ethnic and religious tolerance and in upholding the values of freedom, democracy and the rule of law .
 I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements, if possible, to no more than four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously and effectively . The Council should not be allowed to speak for four minutes.
 Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber .
 Council will carry on open debate right through the lunch hour, as we have a large number of speakers on the list . I also wish to inform the Council that we will also carry on this open debate through lunch hour .
 I now give the floor to Mr Peter Szijjarto, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary . Mr SzijJarto is the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
 Russia's Permanent Representative of Russia to the United Nations has died . Russia's ambassador to the U.N. has been killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Europe is facing the most numerous simultaneous and serious security challenges and armed conflicts since the conclusion of the Cold War . It is very timely, since Europe is experiencing a period when we are facing the greatest security challenges since the end of Cold War.
 The EU once was the most successful political and economic integration in the world . The European Union has never had to face so many challenges and threats .
 All of the conflicts we have been experiencing in Europe have global components, global factors, sometimes global reasons, and all are part of global political developments . All of Europe's conflicts have been experienced in Europe.
We are looking for solutions, but we have to admit that it is not really only us Europeans who can resolve them . We are looking to find a solution to the problem . We have to accept that it's not really just us Europeans, it's us .
 Whether these conflicts will be resolved or not is not only up to us Europeans, it is up to them .
 In our understanding, these conflicts will have a realistic chance to be overcome and resolved if in the future there is a change in the United States-Russia relationship toward pragmatism .
 The new Administration and the Administration of Russia will be able to build a better relationship, he says . That is why we are crossing our fingers that the new administration and the administration of Russia can make a deal .
 Without closer cooperation between the U.S. and Russia, we see no realistic hope for sustainable solutions to our threats and challenges . The United States and Russia need closer cooperation.
 Russia and the United States had not sat on the same side of the negotiating table . No one doubts that there would be no nuclear deal with Iran if Russia and U.S. did not sit on thesame side of negotiating table.
 The United States-Russia relationship is improving, says U.S. ambassador to Russia . "We are very happy with all initiatives that bring us closer to a better relationship," he says .
 We consider absolutely harmful all initiatives and decisions that bring us farther from better cooperation . We consider very harmful all measures and decisions to be taken against us .
 We Hungarians hope that the U.S. and Russia will put a lot of emphasis on engaging in dialogue based on mutual trust and respect for international law . We do hope that they will put more emphasis on dialogue.
 enhanced cooperation will offer a better chance to destroy the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and to finally vanquish terror. That enhanced cooperation would offer a greater chance to defeat the Islamic state in Iraq, the Sham .
Without that, tackling the root causes of the mass illegal migratory flows, which have very seriously impacted the European Union in the past, will be impossible . Without that, the EU has been hit by a series of serious problems .
 The U.S. and Russia are working together to solve Europe's security problems . It is impossible to accomplish it without active cooperation between the United States and Russia .
 Hungary has some major disturbances and tensions arising from time to time around us, says the author . He says he would very briefly like to emphasize two issues . "Since I come from Hungary, we have some major disturbance and tensions"
 The first is that we see full implementation of the Minsk agreement as the only way to end the conflict in Ukraine . The second is that the agreement will be implemented in the coming days .
 We hope to see it implemented faster and in full, just as we hope for long-lasting stability and predictability in the western Balkans . We support the path of European integration for that historic region and hope that will also be realized as soon as possible .
 The Security Council will continue to be a forum for dialogue that can help overcome the enormous challenges that Europe and the European Union have been facing recently .
 I would first like to convey my condolences to the family of Mr Vitaly Churkin, whom 1 knew personally for many years . I would also like to give his condolences to Mr Churkins, whom I knew personally .
 President Obama congratulates President Obama on his country's successful presidency of the Security Council for the month of February .
 The theme for today’s discussion will enable us to evaluate current threats posed to international peace and security by the conflicts in Europe .
 The end of the Cold War, the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the termination of the ideological stand-off that divided Europe for almost five decades created expectations for a new era in European security . The end.
Today’s Europe is neither free from confrontation nor at peace. However, today's Europe is not free from confronting or at peace .
 The frozen conflicts in Moldova’s Transnistria and in the Nagorno Karabakh region, a military intervention in Georgia, increasing influence in the Western Balkans and an aggression against Ukraine, along with the illegal annexation of Crimea, are not isolated cases .
 Russia continues to hamper the integration of the Western Balkans into Euro-Atlantic structures . Russia is trying to preserve the status quo through distrust and animosity that still continues between those nations .
 In Transnistria, Russia defends and sometimes defines the aspirations of the separatist regime . Russia also threatens neighbouring countries through the presence of its own troops .
 Russia is fuelling an arms race between Azerbaijan and Armenia that could once again lead to their considering military options . Russia is also fuelling a arms race that could also lead to a military option .
 Russia is once again violating the bedrock principles of the international order . The annexation of Georgian Abkhazia and South Ossetia and through its so-called referendums, elections and even name changes of those occupied regions is a violation of the order .
 Ukraine will soon enter its fourth year, with almost 10,000 people killed and more than 23,000 injured . Russia’s unprovoked Russian aggression, sheltering behind the rebels it supports, will soon entering the fourth year . It is clear that we should use all the
 The recent indiscriminate shelling of Avdiivka showed that the military confrontation is spreading, endangering many thousands more .
 I visited Avdiivka recently myself, met with people who live in houses that have been destroyed and witnessed clear violations of the Minsk agreements in person . I met with those who lived in homes that had been destroyed .
 Russia withdraws its troops from Ukrainian territory and Ukraine re-establishes full control over its State border . Once again, we need to give serious impetus to the stalled implementation of the agreements .
 In order to make progress in dealing with the enormous challenges in Europe, we need collective action at various levels, says David Cameron .
 First, we see the United Nations as a key actor in effective multilateralism and a basis for our international system . We see the U.N. as an important role in the development of the world's largest economies .
 We need a robust U.N. capable of addressing complex global challenges, says U.S. envoy .
 The Council’s frequent inaction, owing to the practice of the veto, should pay closer attention to the protracted conflicts in Europe . They are liable to escalate and therefore threaten the region's overall stability.
 Regional and subregional organizations such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union are playing a leading role in the conflict and post-conflict environments in Europe .
 OSCE's engagement in frozen conflicts, from Transnistria to the Caucasus, and in the ongoing conflict in Ukraine, particularly through its Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine . We greatly value the OSCE’s engagement.
 We call for unrestricted access for the Special Monitoring Mission throughout the territory of Ukraine . We also want unrestricted access to the Special monitoring Mission throughout Ukraine .
 We must rethink the role and engagement of the OSCE in Ukraine, including through the possible creation of an OSCE security mission for the local elections . The OSCE must also consider the possibility of a security mission.
 The EU is playing a significant role in promoting normalized relations between Serbia and Kosovo and the reconciliation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as among individual countries in the Western Balkans .
 The EU Monitoring Mission in Georgia has ensured a long-term international monitoring presence in the country . The mission is a key factor for Georgia's stability .
 The EU Advisory Mission Ukraine deals with civilian security-sector reform and has a regional presence in Lviv and Kharkiv . It is an important tool that should he further strengthened and expanded, says EU advisory mission .
 The EU has progressively imposed restrictive measures on Russia, including a sanctions regime, that will he in place as long as the Minsk agreements are not fully implemented . Lastly, the EU has also imposed restrictions on Russia .
 We strongly advocate for a comprehensive partnership between the European Union and the United Nations that would increase their ability to act and deliver . We also advocate for the EU and the U.N. to be able to work together .
 Two years ago, the United Nations commemorated the seventieth anniversary of the U.N. The United Nations marked its seventieth birthday .
 If we are to succeed, we must share the same aspirations and recommit to the principles on which European security is built . If we succeed, they must share those same aspirations .
Ukrainian presidency convenes today's important and timely debate . Ukrainian president will discuss ways of responding to the security challenges and continuing instability on the continent .
 I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Secretary General of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . Ms. Zanner is the head of the OSCG and the European Union .
Helga Schmid, Secretary General of European External Action Service of the European Union . and those who have participated in and contributed to the debate .
 The United Nations was created to put an end to war and serve as an international instrument for preventing conflicts and maintaining peace and security . The U.N. was created by the U.S. to help prevent conflicts and maintain peace.
 Today, one can hardly point to any region that is free from security threats and confrontations . Today, however, one cannot point to a region that's free from any security threats .
 The multiple conflicts in Europe share similarities and common patterns, including infringement of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring States .
Georgia and Ukraine have all seen aggression, first in Georgia and then in Ukraine, and it may happen elsewhere . No action is taken today if no action is made today .
 Security Council member's duty is to stand guard over international principles . It is particularly alarming when security architecture is deliberately undermined by a permanent member .
 Over the past decade, an inability to solve protracted conflicts and prevent the emergence of new ones has revealed the fundamental deficiencies of the current international security architecture .
 The U.N. Observer Mission in Georgia and the OSCE mission to Georgia were unilaterally blocked by Russia in 2009 . Following the August war, we even lost the minimal existing safeguards.
 All protracted or dormant conflicts contain a threat of escalation at any time, says the Security Council . It is a vivid example that all protracted and dormant conflicts have been monitored by the Council .
 It would be important to launch periodic reporting by the Secretary-General to the Security Council on protracted conflicts .
 The United Nations, the OSCE and the EU have been engaged in international talks between Georgia and Russia for eight years . More needs to be done to deliver tangible results, according to the U.N.
 That requires, first and foremost, political will and commitment from all . That requires political will. That requires a political will from all, and political will .
 It requires more stewardship on behalf of the co-chairs and the Secretary-General in guiding and assessing the process, based on the principles and norms of international law .
 We should all support the Secretary-General in assuming a stronger leadership role. We should support him in taking a stronger role, he says .
 My country has long been committed to the constructive and peaceful policy of reconciliation and confidence-building. My country is committed to a constructive and peace-building policy .
 Let me stress that Georgia is committed to strive for peace in the region. Let me Stress that Georgia has been committed to peace in Georgia .
 Georgia undertook unilateral non-use of force commitment, which was never reciprocated . It was in that spirit that Georgia undertook the unilateral non, non-used force commitment . Georgia did not reciprocate.
 The Government of Georgia has sought the de-escalation of relations with the Russian Federation by taking constructive and practical steps . Since 2012, the government has sought to de- escalate relations with Russia .
For that purpose, we have established dialogue on issues related to trade, transport and people-to-people relations . For that purpose we have been able to find some positive outcomes, which have been positive .
 The Geneva International Discussions are open to constructive negotiations . They worked constructively in the format of the Geneva Internationaldiscussions .
 Last year marked by restoration of Gali Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism . Last year was marked by the restoration of the Gali incident prevention and response mechanism .
 We stand ready to offer all the progress we will achieve along our development path . We are ready to give all theprogress we will offer along our path, says the company .
 The Russian Federation continues policies aimed at the so-called factual annexation of Georgian regions of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia .
 The decision by the occupation regime to conduct the so-called referendum in the Tskhinvali region is another attestation of that policy . The decision to rename it “Republic of South Ossetia-the State of Alania’s’
 In parallel, the occupation regime in Abkhazia region took the decision to close the so-called checkpoints on the occupation line, further impairing the free movement of the local population .
 We call on the international community to condemn and counter those acts . We call for the international world to condemn those acts.
 The Russian Federation has been evicted from its homes by thousands of IDPs and refugees . We call upon the Russian Federation to reverse its illegal policy, comply with international obligations .
 Georgia stands ready to settle the conflict with the Russian Federation by exclusively peaceful means . Georgia has full respect for the fundamental principles of international law .
 The withdrawal of Russia’s occupation forces from Georgia would be the most important stage towards a comprehensive settlement of the Russia-Georgia conflict .
 Georgia's President reaffirm Georgia's strong support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of your country .
 It is vital that we all spare no efforts in finding effective solutions to conflicts that impact the lives of millions of people. It's vital that all are working to find effective solutions.
 His Excellency Vitaly Churkin was the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations . He died in his home country of Croatia .
 Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the representative of the European Union . The statement was made by Croatia's representative for the EU .
 Europe came a long way in overcoming the horrible legacy of two world wars that originated on European soil . Europe came from behind to overcome the terrible legacy of the two wars .
 Former battlefields have been turned into areas of close cooperation, peace and prosperity . Today, former battlefields are now areas of cooperation,Peace and prosperity.
 Some parts of the European continent are still not immune to conflict and strife, and that leads to human suffering and instability . Some areas of the continent are not immune.
 Europe is facing new challenges such as mass migration and climate change, says the European Union .
 The Council Croatia's views and experience in that regard. Answers may be many, but allow me to share with Council Croatia’s views .
 During the 1990s, Southeast Europe was the unfortunate stage of armed conflicts not seen on the continent since the end of the Second World War .
 At the same time, Europe was also the place of the largest peacekeeping operations in the history of the United Nations .
Several key lessons learned from that period can be summarized as follows . Several key lessons can be summed up as follows.
 First, a clear and precise mandate is the prerequisite for the success of any operation . First, the mandate is a clear, precise mandate .
Strict observation of international law is crucial, in particular with regard to the inviolability of internationally recognized borders . Second, the strict observation of International law is important, in the case of international borders .
 The former Yugoslavia failed in the case of the former Yugoslavia utterly failed, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: An engaged preventive diplomacy and a timely response to early warnings are pivotal .
 Fourth and finally, a tailor-made approach to complex sanctions regimes and their principled implementation can go hand in hand with the above-mentioned elements of the equation .
 The United Nations has been haunted by its failures in Rwanda, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina . U.N. peacekeeping forces failed to prevent atrocities and the genocide of civilian populations .
 The United Nations could no longer follow the traditional concept of protection . It became clear that the U.N. troops needed to actively defend civilians from armed attacks .
 The U.N. Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium mission in Croatia led to the peaceful reintegration of the occupied Croatian region of eastern Slavonia into Croatia .
 To this day, it remains one of the most successful operations in the history of the United Nations . U.N. has been a successful operation for more than 20 years .
 Croatia stands ready to share its experiences concerning all aspects of that fruitful endeavour, together with its know-how in confidence-building, post-conflict stabilization, reconstruction and reconciliation . Croatia is ready to shared its experiences with all aspects. Croatia standsready to share their experiences
European post-conflict experiences demonstrate importance of institution-building and the strengthening of the rule of law and the administrative framework of the State . European post- conflict experiences show importance of institutions-building .
 This is essential for fostering peace and creating conditions for economic prosperity and job creation . This is needed to foster peace and create conditions for job creation and economic prosperity .
 Only then can old animosities he fully replaced with cross-border cooperation and true reconciliation . Only then could old animoities be replaced with cooperation and reconciliation .
 Croatia became a member of the European Union in 2013 . Croatia is a member State of which Croatia became in 2013. Croatia is one of Croatia's most important states in Europe .
 In post-conflict peacebuilding, regional organizations can play an important stabilizing role . South-East Europe clearly demonstrates how costly the failure not to act on time and in a decisive manner can he, at the same time .
 Croatia bears a special responsibility for stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina . Croatia is a signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement . Croatia bears special responsibility in Bosnia.
 The genuine institutional equality of all three constituent peoples is crucial to the long-term stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will contributie to security of South-East Europe .
 Croatia will continue to strongly support the European and EuroAtlantic perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina and South-East Europe in general . Croatia will also continue to support the EU and Euro Atlantic perspective of Bosnian and HerzEGovina .
 The Security Council and the international community as a whole should spare no effort to bring an end to current active conflicts in Europe, says the U.S.
We ought to push for resolution of all other existing or protracted conflicts in Europe that continue to endanger international peace and security in the foreseeable future. Simultaneously, we should push for the resolution of any other existing conflicts that threaten international peace .
 The tools for this are available and known and the expertise is vast, so we must not allow history to repeat itself . No one was listening the first time around.
 Ambassador Churkin passed away suddenly yesterday . He was the first person to join previous delegations in expressing condolences .
Ukrainian presidency to convene open debate dedicated to conflicts in Europe . Ukrainian president to hold open debate today .
 This initiative is not only timely but highly necessary, says U.S. ambassador . The initiative is "not only timely and highly necessary," he says .
 The unresolved conflicts that erupted at the end of the twentieth century have reached a tipping point . The conflicts that emerged in Europe in the twenty-first have been a serious challenge to European security .
 These conflicts, some of them unresolved for more than 25 years, continue to impact negatively the political, social and economic development of the U.S. concerned .
I am speaking on behalf of a country directly affected by a protracted, unresolved frozen conflict . I am speaking for a country affected by the frozen conflict.
 The territorial integrity of some U.N. Member States in Europe are Azerbaijan . Azerbaijan is Azerbaijan .
 Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine — has been compromised and their sovereignty repeatedly violated . Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine and Moldova — have been compromised, according to CNN.
 A strong reaffirmation by the General Assembly is needed for European and global peace and security at this critical juncture . The Security Council of imperative U.N. norms and principles of international law is needed .
 I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize the need to arrive at a common understanding in regard to the secessionist entities outside national and international law . I would also like to highlight the need for common understanding.
 Some secessionist entities are not just so-called parties to a conflict, but also the byproducts of broader geopolitical games . It should be stressed that some of those secessionist groups are not so- called parties to the conflict .
 confidence-building measures will not be sufficient in relation to some protracted conflicts, says the author . The economic and financial incentives associated with and meant to underpin them, he says .
 The Transnistrian conflict would be the easiest to resolve after almost 25 years of political. Despite the quasi-unanimous perception that the conflict, compared to other conflicts in our geographical area, would be easier to resolve, says the author .
 The capacity of the Council to uphold international law rather than geopolitical interests is crucial to the smaller States that make up the majority of the United Nations . The capacity to uphold global law is crucial for the smaller U.N.
 The Security Council will increase with each unresolved matter, we believe . We believe that the presumed need to reform the Security Council would increase .
 I want to express our hope that today’s debate will contribute to advancing conflict resolution in Europe, despite the challenges ahead of us, as well as the advancement of the United Nations . I therefore want toexpress our hope. I therefore wants to express my hope that this will contribute
 I should like to thank the Ukrainian presidency for organizing today’s debate on conflicts in Europe . I should also thank the president for organizing the debate.
 The United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union External Action Service thank the Secretaries General for their remarks .
 Europe is characterized by peace, stability and prosperity . In many respects, Europe is defined by peace and stability .
 Since the beginning of the century, we have witnessed serious breaches of the rules of international security . The rules of the world have been breached since the early 1900s .
 The ongoing conflict in the eastern part of Ukraine is the most recent threat to the security of Europe . The conflict in eastern Ukraine has been the biggest threat to Europe's security .
 The protracted conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Transnistria, Abkhazia and South Ossetia remind us that this is no time for international complacency .
 Universal respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty is enshrined in the purposes of the United Nations Charter . It must be adhered to by all .
 All U.N. members have committed to renouncing the illegal threat or use of force . All have agreed to settle disputes by peaceful means .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine are a blatant violation of international law and a serious challenge to the principles of the U.N. Charter . But Russia's actions are a clear violation of the United Nations Charter .
 The international community has witnessed similar acts of aggression committed by Russia and Georgia as recently as in 2008 . The International community has seen similar incidents of aggression in recent years .
 There is no universal solution when it comes to the resolution of active and protracted conflicts, but clear consequences for the aggressor can be helpful .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union as regional organizations have a natural role in resolving conflicts in Europe . The United Nations, together with the U.N, is expected to actively engage in conflict resolution .
 All parties must remain committed to the international instruments for peaceful conflict resolution . That includes support for and the facilitation of the unhindered deployment of United Nations, Organization for Security and Cooperation .
 It is unacceptable for territories of conflict to be inaccessible to international monitoring mechanisms . It is not acceptable for territories to be accessible to international Monitoring mechanisms .
 The Security Council should pay closer attention to existing conflicts in Europe, it says .
 The veto-wielding Security Council members have not only the privilege but also the responsibility to work in the interest of common peace .
National interests must not hamper constructive efforts to fulfil their role as permanent members . Their national interests must be considered as national interests .
 U.N. Secretary General's appeal for peace and for the settlement of all conflicts. We appreciate the United Nations SecretaryGeneral's participation today .
 We call on him to use all the tools at his disposal to preserve the rules-hased international order and to restore it .
 A peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine that respects Ukraine’s independence and territorial integrity must remain high on the international agenda . The conflict is currently being fought in Ukraine's east .
 Latvia will remain vocal as concerns remain over Crimea's illegal annexation . Latvia will be vocal about its non-recognition policy of Crimea .
 There has been no progress towards the resolution of the conflict . The conflict has not been resolved .
 The latest escalation of violence by Russia-supported separatists in eastern Ukraine . Russia's decision to recognize the socalled passports issued by separatists in the Luhansk and Donetsk regions undermines Minsk agreements .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission must continue observing and assisting the progress made in implementation . The OSCE special monitoring mission must continue to observe and assist the progress in implementation.
 The monitoring officers must be granted full, safe and unrestricted access to all conflict-affected areas, including the disengagement zones, heavy-armaments storage sites and the RussianUkrainian border . The monitoring officer must be given full and safe access.
 The Normandy format must continue its efforts to bring the devastation in eastern Ukraine to an end . We also believe that the Normandy format should continue its effort to end the devastation .
 The settlement of protracted conflicts in wider Europe remains of the utmost importance. Let me say by way of conclusion that the settlement of wider conflicts remains of utmost importance, says the author .
 More efforts and political will are needed to achieve a peaceful resolution of the conflict in Georgia, the Transnistrian conflict and the Nagorno Karabakh conflict .
 I am honoured to speak on behalf of the Organization for Democracy and Economic Development-GUAM . It is a regional initiative of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine .
 GUAM's activities have been aimed at fostering stability and regional cooperation in the Black Sea and Caspian region .
 The joint initiatives to counter terrorism and transnational organized crime will ultimately contribute to the United Nations' purposes and principles, says the UN .
 The Council is open to active, multifaceted cooperation based on shared principles and values. Let me assure the Council that we remain open to action, says Council member .
 The achievements and successes registered in the fields of the major activities of the Organization have been significantly overshadowed by the unresolved conflicts in the GUAM area .
 GUAM member States can testify to the threats and challenges that accompany conflicts . The GUAM Chamber has 60 million inhabitants .
 The Republic of Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine have been involved in conflicts . The conflicts undermine their sovereignty and territorial integrity and have adverse implications for peace and security .
 Millions of people in GUAM countries are in need of protection, assistance and support . Many are forcibly displaced, unable to return to their places of residence .
 The GUAM member States are convinced that the peaceful resolution of those conflicts will contribute immensely to comprehensive and lasting security in Europe . The GUam member States believe that the peace resolution will contribute enormously to European security .
 The role of international mediation mechanisms in conflict prevention and peaceful resolution becomes more critical . The role is more critical than the role of the mediation mechanisms .
 The GUAM member States strongly believe that the resolution of the conflicts on their territories within, as appropriate, the Geneva international discussions, the Trilateral Contact Group, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group and the 5+2 talks.
 The international community should be vocal and united in restoring the territorial integrity of GUAM member States, says the International community .
 The U.N. remains an indispensable forum for addressing the ever-complex challenges we are facing . The United Nations is an indispensable Forum for addressing ever- complex challenges .
Guterres: We fully support the appeal for peace by the Secretary-General, Mr Antonio Guterres . We believe that through cooperation, joint efforts and political will, we can overcome the multitude of current challenges and pave the way for sustainable peace and development .
 Ambassador Churkin of the Russian Federation has given his most sincere condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of the ambassador . The German ambassador has been in Russia for more than a decade .
Ukrainian presidency convenes today's debate. We are grateful to the Ukrainian presidency for convening today’s debate .
 To politicians of my generation, the term “conflicts in Europe’s” is historically charged . The term ‘conflicts’ in Europe is traditionally charged .
 The United Nations was founded as a reaction to the Second World War . Germany’s aggression against its neighbours in Europe started with World War II . The U.N. was founded in response to Germany's aggression against Europe .
 The hopes the United Nations stood for were initially not fulfilled in Europe . The hopes of the U.N. stood for in Europe were not fulfilled.
 During the Cold War, Europe was divided and the Security Council was paralysed more often than not, when numerous conflicts persisted all over the world .
At the very moment the Cold War ended, conflict returned to Europe, with wars breaking out over the disintegration of Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union . But paradoxically, at the very time, conflict was back in Europe .
 We had to relearn how to cope with refugee crises, humanitarian challenges, war crimes, ethnic hatred and shifting lines of conflict . We also had to learn how to deal with humanitarian challenges.
 In the Western Balkans, we eventually began to achieve success, thanks to the coordinated efforts of the international community . The European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and the United Nations, all worked together .
 The U.N. and regional organizations now have a much better toolbox for dealing with crises of the kind . The United Nations and regional groups now have more tools to deal with crises.
 The United Nations and the OSCE must be at the forefront of conflict resolution. Ukraine, Georgia, Moldova and NagornO Karabakh are three countries in conflict .
 Germany took on the chairmanship of the OSCE in 2016, with a special focus on conflict resolution . The OSCE is the world's largest body of the European Union .
 We sought to strengthen existing conflict-resolution formats, to contribute to confidence-building and to improve the lives of populations affected by conflict . We also sought to improve lives of people affected by conflicts .
 As a current member of the OSCE Troika, we will continue to give our full support to the Austrian OSCE chairmanship . The Troika is currently a current members of the European Union and European Union .
 The OSCE is particularly well suited to support conflict resolution in Europe, says U.N. Secretary of State .
 OSCE has been granted international legal status and enabled it to fulfil its potential . OSCE's experience is also that we need to continue to develop the OSCE’s capacities throughout the conflict cycle .
 We also need to continue to deepen cooperation between the OSCE and the U.N. We need to also deepen cooperation with the United Nations .
 The year 2014 accorded the term “conflicts in Europe’s a new quality, calling into question the founding principles of the United Nations . The prohibition of the use of force against the territorial integrity of States Members of the U.N.
 The territorial integrity of Ukraine is being violated, most strikingly by the illegal annexation of Crimea . Ukraine's territorial integrity was being violated by the annexation of the Crimea .
In eastern Ukraine, numerous ceasefire violations continue to take place on a daily basis . In eastern Ukraine.
 The Special Monitoring Mission of the OSCE is on the ground, but it faces many obstacles . The OSCE has a special mission to monitor the situation in the region .
 The Mission enjoys full freedom of movement throughout its mandated area of operation . It is essential that the Mission enjoy fullfreedom of movement during its mission .
French, Russian and Ukrainian friends and colleagues met again in the Normandy format to discuss how to advance the Minsk agenda .
 The Minsk agreements provide the only road map for a peaceful resolution of the conflict . Despite all difficulties, the Minsk agreement provides the only map for peace .
 The ultimate aim is to reinstate Ukraine’s territorial integrity and return control of its external borders to it . Ukraine's territorial integrity will be restored with full respect for the rights of minorities .
 All sides need to adhere to the agreements, and all sides have to commit to military de-escalation . All sides must adhere to agreements, all sides must commit to the agreement .
 Other conflicts in Europe also need to be solved on the basis of international law and OSCE commitments . Georgia, in Moldova and Nagorno Karabakh, need to also be solved .
 Georgia and Nagorno Karabakh conflicts are not frozen but continue to destroy lives, threaten our security and deny the benefits of peaceful development . The conflict is not frozen, but continues to destroy life, threaten security, and deny peace .
 Georgia fully respect and support the undivided sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia . Georgia is within its internationally recognized borders .
 Geneva International Discussions is a genuine effort at team-playing by the OSCE, the EU and the U.N. We also encourage all stakeholders to make concessions .
 Close cooperation of all actors, among them the United Nations and regional organizations, is of the essence. First, when it comes to the hard and grinding work of conflict prevention, stabilization and post-conflict reconstruction, is the essence .
 The OSCE, with its expertise and credibility, is currently at the forefront of efforts to resolve conflicts in Europe . OSCE has been in charge of the OSCE since the start of the 1990s .
 The Security Council needs to work in the spirit of cooperation and unity that is a prerequisite for its effective action . That alone justifies the trust the U.N. Charter places in it .
 Thirdly, we need to return to the founding principles of the United Nations, says U.N. leader .
In Europe and worldwide, we need to preserve and strengthen the multilateral, rules-based international order that the United Nations epitomizes. Now more than ever, in Europe and globally, we needs to preserve, strengthen the rules- based international order .
 Ambassador Churkin died yesterday at the age of 48 . He was the Russian ambassador to the Russian Federation .
 The ongoing or protracted conflicts in Europe prevent the creation of a common space of security, stability and prosperity throughout the continent . Europe's economic stability and stability is at risk to the continent's future .
 The United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe are working together to address unresolved conflicts and their consequences . The U.N. and OSC are working to address the unresolved conflicts .
 The illegal annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation and the conflict in eastern Ukraine have caused a major crisis in Europe .
 The conflict in eastern part of the country has already left nearly 10,000 people dead . Many civilians, including many civilians, have been killed .
 Switzerland notes with concern a lack of respect by the parties so far for their obligations under international humanitarian law . Switzerland notes that the parties have failed to respect their obligations .
 The way hostilities are being conducted has led to a rising death toll among civilians and the destruction of things needed for their survival .
 The humanitarian and human rights situations in the conflict area are precarious . The conflict area is in the middle of a conflict in the region .
For Switzerland, greater political will is indispensable for implementing the agreements reached in the OSCE Trilateral Contact Group and in the Normandy format, says Switzerland .
 Switzerland calls all sides to respect international humanitarian law and allow humanitarian access . Switzerland calls on all sides.
 All sides must adhere to the ceasefire and the other commitments made in the Minsk agreements . All sides need to adhere to ceasefire and other commitments.
Georgia, the United Nations, the European Union and the OSCE continue to co-facilitate the Geneva International Discussions . Georgia, the U.N. and the EU are good examples of effective cooperation among these three organizations .
 Gali Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism allowed for resumption after four years of interruption . The discussions have in fact recently allowed for the resumption of the Gali incident prevention and response Mechanism .
 The Nagorno Karabakh region saw an upsurge in violence in April last year . The region saw a rise in violence last year.
 The co-Chairs of the Minsk Group continue to do their utmost to prevent a worsening of the situation . The Minsk group is working to prevent the situation from worsening .
 The German presidency of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe managed to restart the official 5+2 negotiations after a two-year break .
 The parties have reaffirmed their willingness to hold regular meetings, and we commend their commitment . The parties are committed to holding regular meetings .
Several recent incidents have affected relations between Belgrade and Pristina . The sispatch of a train from Belgrade to northern Kosovo has affected relations .
 Switzerland welcomes the commitment shown by authorities in Belgrade and Pristina . The European Union is facilitating talks in Brussels to normalize relations with Switzerland .
 The intensification of the dialogue among the parties on the question of Cyprus is encouraging . For Switzerland, the intensification is encouraging, says Switzerland .
 We thank the United Nations for its commitment to help find a solution to that issue . The United Nations is working to find a way to solve the issue .
 Switzerland has hosted several rounds of negotiations in Mont Pelerin and Geneva . Switzerland has held talks with Switzerland over the past two years . The Swiss government is in support of the process .
 Let me underscore four ways in which the United Nations could respond to conflicts in Europe . The United Nations has been involved in several conflicts in the past.
 First, the notion of sustaining peace offers a comprehensive new approach to addressing conflicts . First, it offers a new way to address conflicts in Europe, also applicable to Europe .
 The traditional notion of peacebuilding is linked, above all, to postconflict situations . But lasting peace encompasses the entire cycle of conflicts .
 U.N. is best placed to provide global experiences related to sustaining peace that could be beneficial to Europe . The United Nations is best place to provide a global experience related to peace .
 In 2015, the SecretaryGeneral published a report to promote the partnership between the United Nations and regional organizations to build mediation capacity .
 In Europe, the OSCE has established its own Mediation Support Unit, with significant support from Switzerland . The OSCE's own Mediated Support Unit is based in Switzerland .
 The United Nations has enormous experience in assisting people affected by conflict . The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees continues to play a key role .
 We must do all in our power to reduce the suffering of people affected by conflict, says President Obama . "We must do everything we can to stop the suffering," he says .
 The United Nations has been working with regional players, including the OSCE and the European Union . Fourthly, for many years the U.N. has worked with Regional players, such as the EU .
 Its experience would be useful in the areas of early warning and the deployment of special political missions .
 Switzerland believes that preventive diplomacy must be strengthened . The OSCE must benefit from the experience of the United Nations .
Brazilian Ambassador Vitaly Churkin has died at the age of 46 . He was a member of the Brazilian Government . The Brazilian government has expressed its sadness over the death .
 The Russian Federation's Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the U.N. extends its condolences to his family and to the Government . Russian Federation staff members also extend their condolences .
We will all deeply miss Ambassador Churkin, who was a distinguished diplomat and a good friend . We will all mourn him.
 President Obama and Secretary-General Zannier organized the open debate .
 Recent and protracted conflicts in Europe constitute a matter of concern for the entire international community, says the UN .
 Two devastating wars began in apparently minor clashes on the European continent . They soon became systemic disruptions .
 The Organization and this Council were created precisely to avoid another tragedy of such proportions . This Organization and the Council were. created precisely. to avoid a tragedy of this proportions .
 stability in the Balkans remains a challenging and important goal. As history shows us, stability is still a challenge for the Balkans .
 Brazil is firmly committed to preserving stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina . Brazil has supported all efforts to strengthen the State at the national level .
 Recent tensions involving the Republika Srpska must be tackled in the context of the full implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in the country . The international community has full support of the international community, including with regard to socioeconomic development .
 Brazil reaffirms its belief that resolution 1244 offers the appropriate framework for a negotiated settlement that can address tensions in Kosovo . Brazil also reaffirms their belief that Resolution 1244 offer the appropriateframework for a settlement .
 Brazil has stated its utmost concern about the gravity of the situation in Ukraine since the very early stages of the crisis . Brazil is concerned about the situation since the early stages.
 We are particularly troubled by the intensification of hostilities since January, considering its humanitarian impact and potential consequences . We are also concerned about the impact of the intensified hostilities .
 Brazil renews its support for the peaceful solution represented by the Minsk agreements . Brazil urges all parties to fully implement them, as well as keep engaged in constructive talks .
 Brazil expects that the crisis in Georgia can be resolved peaceably in the shortest time possible . Brazil expects the crisis to be resolved in the short time possible.
 We believe that confidence-building measures and initiatives to foster cooperation should be pursued by all parties, particularly in the framework of the Geneva process .
 OSCE's Minsk Group urges all parties to strengthen their dialogue to reach a settlement .
 Brazil welcomes renewed efforts to intensify diplomatic negotiations in Cyprus . Brazil welcomes the renewed efforts by both parties to intensify negotiations in pursuit of lasting solution .
 Geneva Conference held in January . Secretary-General, Mr Nicos Anastasiades and Mr Mustafa Akinci among those attending .
 It is our hope that constructive spirit will pave the way to sustained peace after decades of impasse . It is the hope that that constructivespirit will pave a way for sustained peace.
 At this advanced and promising stage of the political dialogue, both sides should display flexibility and refrain from actions that could become hurdles in the overall process . Both sides should show flexibility.
 The Charter of the United Nations was conceived precisely to provide the instruments to avoid the recurrence of war .
 Brazil has consistently upheld that the Charter should be respected, including its principles of the peaceful settlement of disputes and respect for the territorial integrity of the States .
 We should honour all those who perished in the appalling conflicts prior to the creation of the United Nations, in Europe and elsewhere .
 This Council has a pivotal role to play in helping all Member States not to forget the lessons history taught us not so long ago . The Council has to play a key role to help all members of the world learn lessons from history .
 He was a leading Russian diplomat and a key figure in the Security Council . He represented his country in a mature manner for more than a decade .
 Security Council members expressed condolences on what is a loss to us all . We are grateful to the members of the Security Council for the words of condolences .
 The President of the Security Council did not use this opportunity to pay tribute to the doyen of the Council . At the same time, it must he recognized that the President did not used this opportunity.
 Today, one would have thought that the topic of conflicts in Europe would long ago have become an outdated absurdity . Today, it would have been a joke .
 We seem to have forgotten the horrific lessons of the two world wars that broke out precisely on the European continent . The two wars broke out on the continent.
 We sincerely hope that there are no members of the U.N. that seek war, and that we are all interested in strengthening international dialogue and improving understanding among nations .
Seven decades after the last world war, we have apparently lost the acute sense of the possibility of yet another global military disaster . In our opinion, the reason for that is that today, seven decades after that, is that we have lost the sense of a world war .
 This time it would be the final one in the history of mankind. And this time, it would indeed be the last one.
 We have far too recklessly placed faith in the reliability of mechanisms intended to prevent a man-made apocalypse, says the author . We have put faith in common sense and the instinct of self-preservation, he says .
History teaches us that those mechanisms do not work under conditions characterized by mutual alienation and the lack of even minimal trust or willingness to compromise, he says .
Major world Powers and their leaders are powerless unless they find the civil and moral courage to start a direct conversation with one another about their shared responsibility .
 If we do not accept responsibility to abolish the right arrogated by the stronger parties in world politics, we have the responsibility to adjust that right in line with considerations of humanity, solidarity, empathy and compassion .
 Today, the world needs fresh, broad discussions on the principles of the future coexistence of countries and peoples . U.N. representatives in the United Nations need to discuss the future of the world .
 discussions should touch upon the conflicts in Europe, military and security confidence-building measures . Such discussions should also touch on the conflicts.
 The Helsinki Process was what was needed to defuse tension and reduce the degree of hostility, once again similar, is now required to overcome global alienation . As was the case 40 years ago, when the Helsinki process was what is needed todefuse tension .
Candid global conversations on a new detente are now necessary, says the U.N. and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
 We don't need secret, propaganda-style sallies into the media, exchanges of resolutions or ceremonial summits every five years . We do not need secret and propaganda- style sallie into the press, we need to be honest .
 We need regular, personal meetings of the most courageous and responsible world leaders in order to define the new rules of a multipolar world .
 We also need to find ways to ensure mutual respect for one another’s interests . We need to recognize diversity and variety of ways in which the progressive development of human civilization can be achieved .
 Belarus has a credible record of unbiased participation in such processes . Belarus has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Belarusians are ready and willing to continue to fulfil that role actively and in good faith . The country is a welcoming place for international communication, Belarusians say .
Russian ambassador Vitaly Churkin was killed by an explosion in Moscow . Russian President Vladimir Putin extended his condolences to the delegation of the Russian Federation .
Ukrainian presidency is holding a discussion on a very important topic today . I would like to start by thanking the Ukrainian presidency for organizing this timely discussion .
 In too many parts of the world we find emerging, raging or frozen conflicts . It is the harsh reality that in too many areas we find. It is a harsh reality, says the author .
 The ongoing and protracted conflicts in Europe pose a risk to stability and security at the regional and global levels . The ongoing conflicts in the region pose a threat to stability.
 They obstruct the socioeconomic development of our countries and regions, and impede the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, says the author . The author says they obstruct the development of the country and regions .
 Sometimes conflicts are referred to as “frozen’s, which is clearly a misnomer . Sometimes those conflicts are called ‘frozen,’ which is obviously amisnomer.
As we have unfortunately seen time and again, such conflicts can easily flare up . As we have seen times and again. Such conflicts can quickly flare up, we have been warned .
 conflict-settlement processes that tend to he frozen. However, it is not the conflicts, but the conflict- Settlement processes .
 The prohibition on the use of force and respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member States lies at the heart of the Charter of the United Nations .
 Other regional organizations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, also have a crucial role to play in supporting the rule-based international order in Europe .
 The existing system works, provided that all participating States adhere to the principles and commitments that it rests on . All States do so not only in principle but also in practice .
 The Minsk agreements must be carried out, and a sustainable settlement must be found within the framework of the existing negotiation formats . A sustainable settlement is needed to be found in the Minsk agreement .
For the first time since the Second World War, borders in Europe have been changed through the use of force .
 Russia must withdraw its forces from Ukraine, allow Ukraine to restore control over its border and territory, and end the illegal annexation of Crimea . Russia must also withdraw its troops from Ukraine.
 We also remain concerned about the de facto annexation of the Tskhinvali and Abkhazia regions of Georgia .
 The Minsk Group is seeking to find a peaceful resolution to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict . The 5+2 talks on the Transnistrian settlement process.
Political will and good faith is needed from all sides. That is why genuine political will is needed. That's why genuine politics is needed for all sides .
 Not all of the conflicts in Europe could have been prevented, but the effect of many of those conflicts could be mitigated, had we acted sooner .
 The Security Council has as its primary responsibility, under the Charter of the United Nations, the maintenance of international peace and security .
 The Council bears the important responsibility for preventing conflicts and for having the capacity and readiness to adequately respond to them .
 Some members of the Council have used or threatened to use the veto, and by doing so, have left the Council paralysed and unable to act in situations where action is urgently needed .
 That has led to the loss of life and the displacement of millions of people, and to unprecedented human suffering . That has lead to the significant loss of lives and displacement of thousands .
 In 2005, the U.N. members committed to the principle of the responsibility to protect . The U.S. members of the United Nations are now responsible for protecting the world .
 When a Government fails to live up to its commitments or when it violates the fundamental norms of international law, the international community must act .
 Estonia has expressed before and continues to highlight its position, namely that the permanent members of the Security Council should voluntarily and collectively commit not to use their veto to block Council action .
 I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations . The United Nations is the world's most important observer of the world .
 I would like to express the deepest sympathies of my delegation to the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation at the passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin . The Russian Federation is the largest country in the world .
 Holy See wishes to reiterate its closeness to and solidarity with all peoples afflicted by conflicts and aggression of any kind .
 At the same time, it is the obligation of States to refrain from actions that destabilize neighbouring countries and work together to create conditions for peace and reconciliation .
 The Holy See has been and remains deeply concerned that, after the tragedies of two world wars, Europe continues to be a theatre of conflicts causing great distress to entire populations .
 The Holy See underscores once again that all necessary steps should be taken to enforce the ceasefire . The conflict in Ukraine continues to cause grave concern .
 Ukraine's territory and borders should be respected by all parties involved, says Ukraine's foreign minister . Ukraine's borders are Ukraine's border and territory, he says .
 The Holy See stresses the need to protect civilians and the urgency of making every possible effort to avoid the continuation of this unresolved conflict .
 The Holy See continues to welcome every effort of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other relevant organizations .
 Russia's Permanent Representative, Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, has died . He was Russia's permanent representative for Russia in Russia .
 President Barack Obama has organized a debate with a focus on conflicts in Europe . President Obama has been criticized for his handling of the debate .
 Poland fully agrees with the position of the European Union presented at the beginning of our meeting by Ms. Poland . Poland is the first member of the EU to hold a meeting with the EU .
 The Ukrainian concept note prepared ahead of this meeting. We fully share the analyses presented in the Ukraine concept note .
 New challenges and threats have emerged in Europe in recent years. New challenges have certainly emerged in European countries .
European security architecture undermined by new type of threats and conflicts that pose serious risks to rules-based order . European security architecture has been undermined by a new kind of threats, says Peter Bergen .
 First, with regard to principles, we believe in a world that is based on the rule of law and not the law of the mighty . First, we think in the world that's based on rules, not the laws of the great .
 We must categorically reject aggression and any use of force between States, we must reject aggression . We must also reject aggression. We must not use force between states.
 Europe is no exception, but rather it should serve as an example of a peaceful settlement of disputes . Europe's tragic legacy of two world wars should be seen as a model for peaceful settlement .
 State sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and the inviolability of borders are the cornerstones of both the Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act .
 Regrettably, we have not seen these basic principles observed in the cases of illegal referendum, annexation and the occupation of Ukrainian Crimea . The eastern parts of Ukraine faced aggression and war imposed from the outside by Russia .
 10,000 people killed, refugees, internally displaced persons and civilian populations affected by the military operations .
 3 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance, as assessed by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs . Today, still, 3. million people need humanitarian assistance .
 The territorial integrity and full sovereignty of Ukraine are key to European security . We definitely need to stand by it, says the EU .
 The use of military pressure cannot be accepted at the negotiating table, says the British government .
 The Minsk agreements have to be fully implemented and Russia bears a special responsibility in this regard . Russia bears special responsibility for the Minsk agreement .
 We call on Russia to use its influence on separatists to ensure the full implementation of their obligations . We also call on the Russian government to use their influence on separatist groups to ensure their obligations.
 Georgia’s regions of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia remain illegally occupied by neighbouring Russia .
 Any attempts to change internationally recognized borders through so-called referendums or illegal treaties must never be recognized by the international community .
 There is yet another principle that we find important from the European perspective . We would like to highlight today, namely, the protection of members of ethnic and religious minorities .
 Europe has both a rich tradition of cooperation and a tragic history of conflicts and tensions on ethnic and religious grounds . Europe has a rich history of cooperation. Europe has also a history of conflict and tensions.
 The peaceful coexistence of different nations and religions is especially vital for stability in the Balkan region . The peace of all religions is important for stability, especially in the region .
 The European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe are among the most prominent examples of the European Union .
 They have at their disposal different tools for the peaceful settlement of disputes . They include consultations, dialogue, mediation and confidence-building measures to observer missions .
 Once a situation or conflict arises, members should make every effort to effectively use these mechanisms . Members should use these methods to prevent conflict .
 The Security Council should further strengthen its relationship with these organizations, especially on issues that are discussed both by the Council and regional organizations .
 OSCE is the only international organization present in the conflict zone in Ukraine . OSCE's Special Monitoring Mission is in the Ukraine conflict zone .
 More international presence in Ukrainian Donbas might help to calm the situation . It is clear that more international presence might help calm situation .
 OSCE observers must have full and unhindered access to he can implement the Mission’s mandate, including to the demilitarized areas and Ukrainian border .
 The OSCE also plays a significant role in the resolution of other protracted conflicts in Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh .
 Last but not least, I would like to say a few words about the Security Council . The Security Council.
 Poland believes conflicts can and should be prevented or mitigated by early, well-suited political and diplomatic engagement . Poland believes that conflicts can be prevented and mitigated.
 Where the Security Council demonstrates political will and acts unanimously, good results will follow, says the U.S. National Security Council .
 conflicts remain unresolved and last for years. But when its work is hampered by the use or threat of use of the veto, conflicts are unresolved .
 The veto must not lead to the Council’s deadlock in the most pressing security issues . The veto is not needed to lead to a vote on security issues.
 Ukrainian presidency has organized an open debate on the topic of conflicts in Europe . Mr Churkin, who passed away, passed away on Monday .
 I would like to take this opportunity to express my country’s full support for his appeal of 1 January for peace and our determination to genuinely contribute to joint efforts towards making this year, 2017, a year for peace .
 Strict compliance with the general accepted norms and principles of international law guiding inter-State relations are imperatives to that end . The fulfilment in good faith of obligations assumed by States are imperative to the end .
 norms and principles are misinterpreted, conditioned or implemented with reservations, if not altogether neglected . Some of them are referred to in order to cover up aggressions, atrocities and ethnic cleansing .
 At the end of 1991 and the beginning of 1992, both Armenia and Azerbaijan obtained their independence and were accorded international recognition . The two countries were granted international recognition in 1992 .
 The groundless Armenian territorial claim against my country escalated into a full-fledged inter-State war . The Armenian territory claim against the Armenian state has become an inter-state war .
 The Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan is a region of the Republic of Azerbaijan . It is not of the South Caucasus, not of Transcaucasus or of anywhere else .
Serous violations of international humanitarian law amounting to war crimes, crimes against humanity and acts of genocide were committed in the course of the aggression . Serous violations were committed by the regime of the West .
 More than 1 million Azerbaijanis were expelled from their homes and properties . Thousands of people went missing in connection with the conflict . The war claimed the lives of tens of thousands of people .
 This month marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the atrocious crime committed by the Armenian forces against the civilians and defenders of the town of Khojaly . The town is situated in the Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan .
 Khojaly was razed to the ground by a massive artillery bombardment . Hundreds of Azerbaijanis, including women, children and the elderly, were killed and wounded .
 The Council reconfirmed that the Nagorno Karabakh region is an integral part of Azerbaijan . It demanded the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces from all the occupied territories .
 A series of Security Council presidential statements adopted between 1992 and 1995 and documents of other authoritative international organizations are framed along the same lines . The Security Council's presidential statements were adopted from 1992 to 1995 .
 The Security Council also tasked the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to ensure its mediation efforts towards the settlement of the conflict . The Organization was tasked with ensuring the implementation of those resolutions .
 It is also pertinent to recall the positions expressed at that time by the three permanent members of the Security Council . They are currently co-Chairs of the Minsk Group .
 The seizure of Agdam could not be justified by any claim of self-defence, the representative of the United States of America said . Agdam seizure had disrupted the peace process, the U.S. representative said .
 The Secretary-General made it crystal clear in 1994 that the position of the U.N. is based on four principles .
 The Security CounciFs key demands have still not been implemented . mediation efforts conducted for more than 20 years within the framework of the OSCE have yet to yield results .
 Armenia's continued military occupation of the territories of Azerbaijan could not be possible without the sense of impunity that it enjoys despite persistent contempt for international law .
 Armenia has consistently obstructed the conflict-settlement process . Armenia refuses to start result-oriented negotiations, while it regularly resorts to various provocations to escalate the situation on the front line .
 Armenia’s further provocative attempt to hold a so-called constitutional referendum in the occupied Nagorno Karabakh region of Azerbaijan and change the geographic name of a part of my country's internationally recognized territory in violation of international law .
 The international community once again united with Azerbaijan in rejecting this action and its outcomes as null and void . Azerbaijan's actions were rejected by the international community .
 The presence of the armed forces of Armenia in the occupied territories of my country is the main cause of tensions and incidents on the front line . The conflict is the major impediment to the political settlement of the conflict.
 The escalation provoked by Armenia in April 2016 demonstrated that the status quo is unsustainable . The escalation showed that Armenia's status quo was unsustainable .
Since the very first day of the conflict, combat operations have been conducted exclusively inside the territory of my country .
 39 towns and villages in Azerbaijan along the front line were shelled last April . casualties among civilians and servicemen were among the casualties .
 Azerbaijani villages along the line of contact had been coping with the regular ceasefire violations for the past 20 years . Since the beginning of April 2016, the situation had changed fundamentally due to the use of new and heavier types of military hardware, inflicting worse damage on Azerbai
 The leadership of Armenia must realize that the military occupation of a territory of another State Member of the U.N. does not represent a solution . Armenia's reliance on the status quo is a grave miscalculation, the leader says .
 The policy does not serve and is detrimental to the real interests, aspirations and well-being of the Armenian people. Evidently, this policy doesn't serve .
 Azerbaijan will never compromise its territorial integrity or the rights and freedoms of its citizens that are grossly violated as a result of the aggression . Azerbaijan will not compromise its territory or freedoms of citizens, it says .
 The achievement of peace, security and stability will be possible, first and foremost, only if the consequences of Armenia's occupation are removed . Armenia's armed forces are immediately, unconditionally and completely withdrawn from the territories of Azerbaijan, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country are restored .
International law and Security Council demand that the Security Council not be used as a bargaining chip in conflict-settlement process . That is what international law and security Council demand .
 Azerbaijan is a country suffering from the occupation of its territories and the forcible displacement of hundreds of thousands of its citizens . Azerbaijan is the party most interested in the earliest political settlement of the conflict .
 I also thank the Secretaries-General for demonstrating, through their participation, a strong commitment to the issue at hand . I also thanks the Secretary-General.
 It is no secret that this is not the world and state of affairs we were hoping to face 25 years after the end of the Cold War . It is not a secret that the world was not a state of Affairs .
 Conflicts in and around Europe threaten international peace and stability. Conflicts around Europe are threatening international peace, stability .
 Security Council is primary organ tasked with maintenance of international peace and security . This should be properly addressed by the Security Council as the primary organ .
 We support any discussion of the challenges to doing that, including under this format . We also support any talk of challenges to do that, even under this form .
 "I wish to put on record briefly our position on these conflicts," he says . But first, as delegations speaking before us have done, he wants to put the record on the conflicts .
 Turkey aligns itself with the statement of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation that will be delivered by the representative of Uzbekistan on the Nagorno Karabakh conflict . Turkey will also provide a statement to Uzbekistan's representative on the conflict .
 The conflict continues to be the most important impediment to peace, stability and cooperation in the South Caucasus . The conflict is the most significant impediment.
 Turkey will continue to support all efforts to find a just and viable solution to the conflict through peaceful means . Turkey is a member of the Organization for Security and Cooperation Minsk Group .
 We support all efforts aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the situation in Ukraine, including Crimea . Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and international law are key issues in Ukraine .
 The full adherence of all parties to the Minsk agreements is still the only way forward . The full agreement is still a way forward, according to theinsk agreement .
 Turkey does not and will not recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea . The Crimea was annexed by Ukraine in the early 1990s .
 We pay special attention to the security and development of the Crimean Tatars .
 The international community should remain vigilant about the potential challenges that threaten both the political stability and security in the Balkans . The European Union and the United States should be vigilant about potential challenges in the region .
 We will contribute to any effort that will resolve the conflict peacefully, we will contribute . We will help resolve any effort to resolve the Conflict peacefully .
 Any step that would hamper Georgia’s territorial integrity and sovereignty will not be welcomed . On the other hand, any step will hamper the state's territorial integrity .
 Each conflict has its unique characteristic, which is why opinions and analogies among them are often misleading .
 There have been ample words of encouragement and support by delegations to the settlement process of the Cyprus issue . Nevertheless, there have been plenty of words of support and encouragement .
 Turkey is committed to a bicameral and bicommunal federation, based on the political equality of two sides . Turkey is fully committed to efforts for a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement to the Cyprus issue .
 The Cyprus issue will come to a conclusion without further delay. We hope that the latest chance for the establishment of a new partnership State on the island will be seized .
 A Cyprus settlement would also contribute to peace, stability and cooperation in the eastern Mediterranean and the wider region . We believe that a Cyprus settlement will also contribute.
 In most cases, chronic conflicts are sustained due to a lack of will on the part of at least one side to the conflict .
 The problem of a lack of political will is not restricted to the parties of the conflict . It extends to the very members of the Security Council .
 The Council possesses the necessary mandate and most of the tools to prevent and manage conflicts . The Council has a mandate to prevent conflicts .
In most cases, the failure to take action arises from the threat or use of veto by a member . However, in many cases, it is not the first time a member has taken action .
 Turkey supports a model that foresees an expansion of the number of elected members only . Turkey is a member of the Uniting for Consensus group .
 The threat or use of the veto is a pressing issue even beyond the discussion of reform . But the threat of a veto is not just a matter of reform, says the author .
 It is closely related to the working methods of the Council in its current format . The Council's current format is similar to the current format of the council .
 We support initiatives aimed at limiting the use of the veto or a negative veto, such as in cases of mass atrocities .
 United Nations cooperation with other organizations, including NATO, the OSCE and the European Union, contributes to peace and security .
 Other measures that can help the Council better respond to conflicts could be, inter alia, keeping the right balance between thematic debates and conflict-specific situations, such as visiting missions .
 The Security Council has the primary role in maintaining international peace and security . It has the main role in keeping international peace.
 Tackling obstacles that hinder the Council’s ability to perform its most crucial duty is an urgent necessity . Tackled the obstacles that hinders the Council's ability to do its most important duty is a necessity .
 We believe that today’s discussion has been fruitful in helping us to understand the nature of these obstacles . We also believe that this is a good way to deal with these obstacles.
 Ambassador Churkin passed away at the age of 48 . He was the Russian ambassador to the Russian Federation .
 Russian Ambassador Vitaly Churkin has died at the Russian Mission in Moscow . His family and colleagues have expressed their condolences .
 Ambassador Churkin was a highly respected colleague . He sought to find solutions through compromise and great diplomatic skill .
 NATO and the Council of Europe have ensured peace in most of Europe since the close of the Second World War . A robust, comprehensive and inclusive security architecture with the European Union .
 The United Nations must cooperate closely with all those partners in order to address ongoing conflicts and prevent future ones . The U.N. must cooperate with all of its partners to prevent future conflicts .
 Europe is now facing serious challenges and attempts to undermine that rule-based order . However, Europe is still facing challenges and challenges .
 Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, as demonstrated in its ongoing violations of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity, constitutes a clear violation of international law . Russia's annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol is illegal, according to the Russian government .
 We call on the Security Council, the Secretary-General and the whole United Nations to assess what more can be done to restore security and respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty, unity and independence .
 Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity have been severely compromised, in breach of the Charter of the United Nations . Georgia's sovereignty, territorial integrity and sovereignty have been compromised, the U.N. says .
 We call for access for international human rights mechanisms to Georgia’s breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . We also ask for access to Georgia's breakaway region of Ab Khazia.
 In many conflicts, multilateral organizations are hindered from fulfilling their role . In some conflicts, the role of international organizations is hindered by conflicts .
 In Abkhazia, the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia was terminated . Other institutions have not been allowed meaningful access to the mission .
 The Geneva international discussions must continue, and the Security Council resolutions on Nagorno Karabakh must be implemented . The Geneva talks must continue .
 The United Nations has been directly engaged in Cyprus from the start of the conflict . The U.N. has been involved in the conflict since the beginning of the war .
 The SecretaryGeneral’s good offices and patient support have produced real prospects for genuine progress .
 The Security Council can play an important role in conflict prevention and in upholding a rule-based international order . We remain convinced that when allowed to fulfil its mandate, the Security Council will play a key role .
 The resumption of the 5+2 negotiations on Transnistria has demonstrated the value of an OSCE-led smallsteps approach .
 The OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities issued an early warning to Macedonia . The international community intervened successfully to assist national authorities .
 In Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the active presence of the United Nations, the EU, the OSCE, NATO and others has provided security and facilitated reconciliation between peoples .
 The Nordic countries will continue to promote the effective participation of women and the agenda on women and peace and security wherever there are discussions of peace andSecurity .
 We urge the Council to work to ensure that gender equality and women’s rights are an integral part of its work . The Council is working to increase legitimacy and the possibilities for lasting peace .
 I would like to begin by expressing Liechtenstein’s deep sympathies to the Russian delegation on the passing of Ambassador Churkin . I would also like to express Liech tenstein's deep sympathie to Russian delegation .
 His wife and family are with his wife, family and friends at the Russian Mission . His colleagues and colleagues are also with him at the Mission .
 Liechtenstein welcomes today’s open debate on conflicts in Europe . Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin was there earlier today .
 European Union continues to be an important element of stability and an actor for peace . The EU is an important part of stability, says the European Union .
Since the 1990s we have also witnessed a proliferation of conflicts in Europe . Today we are facing an overall security situation that is deteriorating, says the author .
 Armed conflict has re-emerged in Europe with the crisis in and around Ukraine . situations in Georgia, Moldova and Nagorno Karabakh have been simmering for years without a solution .
 The inability to achieve reconciliation in parts of the Balkans constitutes yet another risk to sustainable peace in our region . The inability of reconciliation in part of the Balkan region constitutes yet more risk to peace in the region .
 The rule of law, human rights and democratic standards are under strain. At the same time, important safeguards for peace and security, such as the rule oflaw, are under pressure .
 Geopolitical uncertainty is on the rise and has already contributed to a new arms race, the hardening of national security postures and escalating nationalist and populist rhetoric .
 Liechtenstein is deeply concerned about the escalating violence in eastern Ukraine . The violence is putting the local population through yet more unacceptable hardships .
 The levels of violence we have recently witnessed are in stark contravention of the obligations by the signatories to the Minsk agreements . The violence we've witnessed is "in stark contraventions" of the agreements, says the author .
 Ensuring full adherence to the agreements must therefore be a priority for the international community . The OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine will monitor the situation .
 OSCE stands out for its objective reporting and resistance to politicization . OSCE also stands out against politicization.
 OSCE's work on the ground makes an important contribution to promoting peace and security in the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the U.N. The Security Council will acknowledge that role by expressing strong political support for the OSCE .
 I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate Liechtenstein's full support for Austria’s chairship of the OSCE in 2017 .
 The recent security crises in Europe have been accompanied by serious violations of international law, the U.N. Charter and Helsinki Final Act . Ukraine and Georgia have been accused of violations of the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
 Europe's commitment to stability and cooperation in Europe has lost its consensual basis. Those violations are warning signs that the commitment to Stability and Cooperation in Europe is losing it .
 Europe's security vision remains out of reach, according to security experts . They point to the need for taking incremental steps to rebuild security and confidence, above all in the military field .
 Europe should look back at the lessons of its own conflict-ridden past, writes David Frum . Europe's most fundamental of which remains the primacy of the rule of law, democracy and economic integration over authoritarianism, demagogy and isolationism .
 The United Nations, with its Charter and the body of international law, is itself a product of that hard-learned lesson . The U.N. has a hard-learning lesson.
 The primacy of the law is intimately linked to the importance of accountability, in particular for the most serious crimes . In particular, the primacy is linked to accountability .
 Europe has experienced the value of justice for reconciliation and sustainable peace . Europe has itself experienced thevalue of justice. Europe has also experienced the benefit of reconciliation .
 Later this year, we are looking at an important step forward in international criminal justice . The upcoming activation of the crime of aggression within the framework of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court .
 European States have ratified the Kampala amendments on the crime of aggression in significant numbers . Europe should be at the helm of the international community in outlawing aggression, says CNN .
 Conflicts in Europe, while prone to geopolitical exploitation, often have an important internal dimension . Conflicts are often related to the insufficient protection of minorities or grievances of communities under highly centralized governance structures .
 Liechtenstein has consistently advanced the right of peoples to selfdetermination as a means to preventing and resolving internal conflicts . The right of selfdetermination can be applied in conformity with international law and without undermining the principle of territorial integrity .
 The right to self-determination can result in appropriate levels of self-administration for entities within existing borders . It can be based on consultation and negotiation processes, with third-party assistance where necessary .
 Under the Liechtenstein model, the appropriate level of selfgovernance will always be the result of an agreement between the concerned parties . The Liech tenstein model is based on an agreement.
 The provisions of the Minsk agreements on decentralization and constitutional reform are compatible with those basic tenets of the Liechtenstein model . The discussions are a case in point of the relevance of these discussions .
 Liechtenstein will continue to engage on that issue with all who are interested in the appropriate academic and diplomatic forums . Liech tenstein will still engage on the issue with the appropriate academics and diplomats .
 I now give the floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela . The representative is a member of the Venezuelan government .
 Ambassador Vitaly Churkin's death was announced today by the Security Council . He said he would like to begin his statement by echoing the many heartfelt condolences expressed .
 Ambassador Churkin's sudden departure is an irreparable loss for his family, says the Russian Federation . The United Nations lost an exceptional figure committed to inclusive multilateralism, the U.N. says .
 Ambassador Ilichev has left on us all as a remarkable diplomat, teacher and human being . We convey our affection and admiration to Ambassador Churkin .
 The Council has not been able to issue a declaration in memory of Ambassador Churkin . We regret that the Council hasn't issued a declaration .
 The diplomat's distinguished career as a diplomat is a matter of humanity, all the more so .
 Ukraine's Foreign Affairs Minister Pavlo Klimkin has convened an open debate on conflicts in Europe . The first of its kind.
 The U.N. Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe have been joined . The European External Action Service has also been joined by the U.S. Security Council .
 For the past 70 years, Europe has enjoyed a period of relative peace and stability . Europe has achieved significant levels of economic development and promote the integration, establishment and consolidation of regional multilateral institutions .
 The European continent has endured conflict in the former territories of Yugoslavia, for example . Despite that progress, Europe has endured conflicts in the past .
 Europe faces risks and challenges, such as the threat of terrorism and violent extremism . Europe faces challenges, including armed conflicts still unresolved, and social discrimation and exclusion .
 Some NATO countries have similar interventionist policies. Those are the same consequences of some NATO countries .
 Europe is convinced of the importance of the peaceful settlement of disputes, according to the Charter of the U.N.
 Regional and subregional organizations like the OSCE play an essential role in peacebuilding . OSCE promotes consensus and the recovery, reconstruction and development of societies emerging from conflict .
 Regional forums must enhance synergies with the Security Council, says the U.N. Security Council .
 The Security Council, pursuant to its specific mandate, must implement a responsible, transparent and inclusive conflict-resolution policy, without double standards or geopolitical manipulation, says the UN .
After a broad review of the current conflicts in Europe, we wish to share some observations on specific crises in Europe .
 Venezuela recognizes the diplomatic efforts embodied in the OSCE’s various peace initiatives aimed at resolving that difficult situation . The situation in Ukraine has resulted in the unfortunate deaths of civilians .
 The Minsk agreements are signed by the Heads of State of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany . They are the only way to reach a peaceful settlement to the conflict .
 We once again call on the parties to honour the ceasefire, not escalate the conflict . The ceasefire should be duly implemented, thus transcending extraregional interests, we say .
 The process requires that the key players facilitating that process abstain from applying unilateral coercive measures that would compromise the negotiations and be counterproductive to the shared objectives of peace .
 Kosovo will continue to play a prominent role in the agenda for peace in Europe for as long as the persistence of distrust between the parties and the exclusion of communities continues to hamper the potential for dialogue and stability .
 The U.N. Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the European Union mission in Kosovo are working on a peaceful resolution . The EU mission is based in Kosovo .
 Serbia reaffirm its full commitment to respecting sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of Serbia . We also reaffirm our full commitment.
 Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriote communities to maintain the spirit of political will in order to put an end to that dispute through a mutually beneficially agreement . That is why we encourage representatives of the Greek Cyriot andTurkish Cypriots to maintain a spirit ofpolitical will
 The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries is facing new, complex and emergent threats to international peace and security . It is facing genocide and ethnic cleansing, war and protracted conflicts .
 Armenia and Azerbaijan have not yet been settled, despite the various relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council . The conflict between the two countries has been a long-running issue .
 At the seventeenth NAM summit on Margarita Island, Venezuela, held in September 2016, the Heads of State and Government of the Movement encouraged the parties to continue to seek a negotiated solution to the conflict . The heads of state and government of the movement are encouraging
 The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries reaffirms its commitment to promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes .
 Ambassador Vitaly Churkin was a great man, a great friend and a great professional . We express our sincere condolences to Vitaly's family, his wife, Irina, and his children .
 Vitaly was a man of wisdom; his wit and his professionalism will be greatly missed . This is a great loss for us all, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 I thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their contribution to this debate . I thank them for their contributions to the debate .
Despite the high expectations that Europe would become a strategically stable continent following the end of the Cold War, new challenges and threats have emerged on the continent in the 1990s .
 The causes of these challenges stem from the blatant and violent denial of peoples’ right to pursue their aspirations to freedom and self-determination . But, apart from the broader geopolitical processes and religious, ethnic, ethnic and territorial disputes, the causes of the challenges stem also from
 Nagorno Karabakh is a struggle against the historical injustice of the 1920s and persistent discrimination throughout the 70 years of Azerbaijani rule over them .
 It is a struggle that witnessed barbaric pogroms at the end of the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s against Armenians in Baku, Sumgait, Kirovabad and other parts of Azerbaijan . The struggle is a reaction to the legitimate aspirations of the
 Nagorno Karabakh is a struggle for self-defence and the physical survival of the people of NagornoKarabakh . It is a result of the outright aggression, war and ethnic cleansing unleashed against them by the newly independent Azerbaijan .
 The Nagorno Karabakh conflict is about the struggle of the people of NagornoKarabakh against the claim of sovereignty over them by a despotic regime in Azerbaijan . The conflict has a shocking human rights record that suppresses and suffocates any dissent .
 Ramil Safarov killed a sleeping Armenian officer with an axe during a military training course . Safarov was a ruthless murderer who in 2004 killed an officer with a axe .
 Armenians are being persecuted by Azerbaijan's authorities. It is a struggle against a claim of jurisdiction by an authority in Azerbaijan that persistsently cultivates and inspires Armenophobia, hatred and intolerance .
 The renewed attempt at aggression by Azerbaijan against Nagorno Karabakh has been a stark reminder of the urgency of supporting the peace process under the internationally agreed format of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group co-chairmanship .
 The international community should forcefully reject the use of force and any pursuit of a military solution to this conflict, says U.S. State Department .
 The 1994-1995 ceasefire agreements signed by Nagorno Karabakh, Azerbaijan and Armenia constitute the foundation of the cessation of hostilities .
 Armenia urges Azerbaijan to take immediate and genuine steps towards the implementation of the agreements reached at the summits in Vienna and St. St. St. John's in Vienna .
 Petersburg in May and June 2016, respectively, in order to create conditions conducive to the advancement of the peace process . The peace process is expected to take place in both cities .
 Azerbaijan should bring to an end without delay its persistent warmongering and cultivation of hatred and intolerance against Armenians . Azerbaijan should instead invest genuine efforts in promoting a culture of peace as well as respect for human rights. Azerbaijan should end its warmongers and cultivate hatred of
 Armenia urges Azerbaijan to demonstrate genuine political will and efforts in advancing peace process . France, Russia and the United States, the co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group have reiterated their statements at all levels .
 Armenia expresses its deep appreciation to the international community, to the Council and to the Secretary-General of the United Nations . The OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs are the only internationally agreed format for negotiations for the peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict .
 I should like at the outset to express our deepest condolences to the Russian delegation in connection with the premature and sudden passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin .
 Romania commends Ukraine for convening this timely and important open debate of the Security Council . Romania commended Ukraine for having convened this timely, important debate .
 This meeting follows the Munich Security Conference, at which issues critical to global peace and security were discussed extensively .
 Europe has long been a beacon of stability and prosperity, and we are certain that it will remain so . Europe has been the beacon of Stability and prosperity for decades .
 A few years ago we could not have foreseen that we would be discussing conflicts in Europe, and certainly not in the Security Council . However, a few years later, we would not have Foreseen that they would be discussed .
 I wish to use the opportunity to mention some issues about protracted conflicts in the close vicinity of Romania that continue to pose challenges to regional security and stability, also affecting the European continent as a whole .
 decades of negotiation have not produced the expected solutions. Sadly, decades of negotiations haven't produced a solution .
 Countries are affected, trade is distorted and people have little chance of sharing the prosperity and stability of neighbouring regions .
 The risk of another protracted conflict around the Donbas region of Ukraine remains high . Alongside Transnistria in the Republic of Moldova, South Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia, or Nagorno Karabakh, the risk of seeing another protracted war .
 Romania is convinced that the full implementation of the Minsk agreements is the only available and workable tool able to deliver a negotiated political solution and achieve enduring peace . Romania believes that despite the setbacks and delays, the full Implementation of Minsk agreement is the best tool .
 We remain committed to supporting the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . We are committed to support the sovereignty and sovereignty of Ukraine.
Only through negotiations and mutual respect can a peaceful settlement be envisaged . Only through negotiations can a peace settlement be agreed .
 The conflict in the Transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova remains a matter of high priority for us . The resolution of the conflict remains a highpriority for us.
 Romania expresses hope that during the Austrian chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, all parties involved will continue to support this negotiation format and work towards a solution . Romania expresses the hope that all parties in the OSCO will support the format and continue to
 Romania has been active in regional organizations, and assisted the European Union and NATO in increasing the cooperation with our partners and friends . Romania is aiming to extend the space of stability and security in the region .
 All actors to make the utmost efforts and to demonstrate political will to contribute to lasting political solutions, according to U.N. Charter .
 Russian delegation sends condolences to Russian delegation on the passing of Ambassador Churkin . Russian ambassador died at the age of 48 .
 We welcome the opportunity to address the Security Council on issues related to regional and international peace and security .
 Most of the conflicts in Europe might not be very high on or at the top of the Security Council’s agenda . But that does not mean they are any less important or even irrelevant .
 Many of them have the dangerous potential of escalating into threats to peace and stability in a wider region . Many have the danger of escalating to threats to stability in the region .
 It is very important that we recognize the negative effects that some of these conflicts have, especially with regard to the principle of respect for territorial integrity and the sovereignty of States .
 It needs to he continuously make clear that the disregard of the international order built through the decades is unacceptable . He needs to make it clear that he continuously made clear that it is unacceptable.
 It may be imperative to address ongoing conflicts, but it is even more important to prevent them . It is also important to stop them.
Preventing disputes from escalating into conflicts must be accompanied by other endeavours to create an environment characterized by cooperative relationship . Preventing disputes must be followed by others to create a cooperative environment .
 It is crucial that the resolution of conflicts be done through dialogue, using diplomatic and political tools and instruments . It's crucial that it is crucial to use diplomatic tools and tools to resolve conflicts .
 The Security Council and the States Members of the United Nations should make better use of Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter .
 Prevention and the timely peaceful resolution of potential conflicts are by far the most costand resources-efficient approaches . Prevention and peaceful resolution are the most effective approaches .
 The European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe should be utilized for preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping, peacemaking and postconflict peace-building .
 Slovenia is a staunch supporter of the principle of the peaceful resolution of conflicts through dialogue, cooperation and mediation . Slovenia has always been a staunch supporters of the idea of peaceful conflict through dialogue and cooperation .
 The most important precondition for the resolution of the conflicts is respect for international law and implementation of international agreements in good faith .
 The peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine is a non plus ultra. The conflict is not a "non plus ultra"
 Talks within the Normandy format and the efforts of the OSCE must continue, says Germany and France . "We appreciate the constructive roles of Germany and French in resolving the crisis through an open dialogue"
 It needs to be made clear that freezing the search for a solution is not an option . It is not a solution to the problem, it is an option to find a solution for the problem .
 It would only protract the conflict and the suffering of the local population . It would be only protracted by the conflict .
 Slovenia supports the Union’s common position on the necessity of a peaceful resolution of the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict over Nagorno Karabakh . Slovenia is a member of the European Union .
 Armenia and Azerbaijan have held direct talks between the two countries . Azerbaijan and Armenia have been in conflict for more than a decade .
 Slovenia attaches great importance to the format established within the framework of the Geneva talks . South Ossetia and Abkhazia conflicts in Slovenia are the focus of the talks .
 Their continuation is essential for ensuring the security and stability of the region . The region's stability is important for ensuring security, stability and security .
 Georgia should continue to cooperate with civil society in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, says Georgia . We believe that Georgia should continuing to cooperate.
 It is good that there is continuity in the efforts of the parties involved and in the effort of the international community. It's good that the efforts have been made to improve the situation in the past .
 Constructive commitment and dialogue are always the best paths to follow, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 He faced numerous everchanging challenges to international peace and security. We continue to face many challenges to the world's security .
 The international community has agreed on many instruments and tools to address challenges and prevent their escalation . In the last 70 years, many instruments have been used to address issues such as terrorism and terrorism .
 Ambassador Churkin's passing was a sad and untimely passing . His colleagues and friends have offered their condolences .
 Ambassador Churkin was an accomplished diplomat and representative . As many have noted, he was a accomplished diplomat .
 We will greatly miss his presence at the U.N. and particularly in the Security Council, where he played such a strong and formative role over many years .
 The Security Council spends much of its time on situations in Africa . Today’s debate reminds us that no region is immune from conflict .
 International peace and security is something that we must work towards collectively . We must also work towards each other to achieve peace .
 The United Nations was created over 70 years ago for this purpose, following the world wars that started in Europe .
 It has shown that negotiation is more effective than conflict, that cooperation yields more than nationalism . Even implacable opponents can talk, negotiate, cooperate and unite if political will is strong enough .
 The international community cannot take for granted the stability and prosperity Europe has enjoyed for decades . Europe's prosperity has been enjoyed by the international community for decades, says the EU .
 We now face a period of instability, where core principles of international law are under threat . The primacy of State sovereignty and territorial integrity is under threat.
 Australia remains deeply concerned that aggression against Ukraine has resulted in the annexation of Crimea and conflict in eastern Ukraine . Nearly 10,000 people, including over 2,000 civilians, have been killed in the Ukraine conflict .
 Over 2 million people have fled the region since April 2014, and over 1 million continue living in dire conditions near the front line . Over 1 million people continue to live in dire condition near thefront line .
 Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 was downed in July 2014 . Australia felt first hand, along with several other countries . This conflict created the conditions that led to the downing of MH17 .
 The international community cannot forget this tragedy, and we must ensure that those responsible are held to account . We must ensure those responsible for the tragedy are held accountable .
 Australia continues to work closely with the Joint Investigation Task Force countries to achieve this end . Australia has been working closely to achieve the end of the joint investigation .
 Security Council should take action to respond to acts of aggression, violations of territorial integrity and failure to settle disputes peacefully, says the UN .
 The permanent members of the Council have a particular obligation to lead by example when upholding the United Nations Charter’s fundamental principles .
 A threat to international peace and security in any part of the world is a threat to the entire international community, says the U.S. ambassador .
 The new Secretary-General's commitment to utilizing his powers under Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations .
 The Security Council and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe welcome continued cooperation . We also welcome continued Cooperation between the Council and other regional organizations .
 The OSCE has provided critical support in Ukraine and elsewhere, including helping to negotiate ceasefires and facilitating investigator access to the MH17 crash site . The OSce has also helped negotiate ceasefire and facilitate investigator access.
 Australia calls on the parties to Europe’s conflicts to reflect again on the founding principles of the U.N. Australia calls for parties to reflect on the United Nations' founding principles .
 At its core lies a rules-based international order, says the British Foreign Minister .
 Ambassador Churkin's wife, Irina, his family, the entire Russian mission and the Russian people for their great loss . He says he would like to begin by expressing his most sincere condolences .
 Vitaly Churkin left many good memories during his time as ambassador to Canada between 1998 and 2003 . He was ambassador to the United Nations from 1998 to 2003 .
 A few weeks ago I was having a discussion with Prime Minister Chretien who was the Prime Minister during that period . The former PM was the PM during that time .
 Prime Minister Chretien told me that he fond memories of his relationship with Ambassador Churkin . He said he fondly remembered the ambassador's role in the country .
 The simple fact is that security and stability in Europe are in the interest of us all. Security in Europe is in the interests of all, says the European Union .
 Canada’s history as a nation has been defined by the struggle for peace, security and democracy in Europe . Canada's history has also been defined as a country.
We have participated in U.N. peacekeeping missions on the continent . We have also participated in a NATO multinational battalion in Latvia . We will lead the NATO multinational Battalion in Latvia, as well as our bilateral military capacity-building mission in Ukraine .
 First, we all have a stake in a stable, peaceful and prosperous Europe . First, it's a stable and peaceful Europe .
 Canada’s commitment to European security remains steadfast, as demonstrated by its participation in key institutions, such as NATO and the Organization for Security and Cooperation .
 Canada's Minister of Foreign Affairs affirmed at last week’s annual Munich Security Conference . The international security environment is more complex and challenging than ever .
 In that context, alliances and the rules-based international order matter more than ever, says the author .
 European security is buttressed by trade and prosperity, Prime Minister Trudeau said .
 The Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement was concluded . The agreement was signed by the European Union in June 2013 .
 The U.N. and regional organizations must work together to best leverage their comparative expertise, knowledge and capabilities in the pursuit of peace in the region . The United Nations and regional groups must also work together.
 The U.N. has learned many lessons on prevention, mediation and sustaining lasting peace . The United Nations has also learned lessons on mediation and peace .
 The United Nations can be a powerful voice for peace and stability . Under the leadership of its Secretary-General, the U.N. can be the powerful voice.
 The European Union has successfully contributed to stability in the region by fostering institutions, structures and norms that embrace diversity and advance the rule of law .
 OSCE deserves our recognition and support for its role in preventing and managing conflict in Europe .
 Canada especially values the OSCE’s current efforts in Ukraine, where the Special Monitoring Mission has served as a critical confidence-building measure . The OSCE's current efforts are in Ukraine .
 Canada looks to work with the U.N. and European Union to help resolve this festering conflict . Canada is looking to work to facilitate the Mission’s access to the OSCE .
 European security need not be a zero-sum game, but the sovereign rights of countries to determine their future must be respected .
 Canada does not and will not recognize Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea .
 That breach of international law has heightened tensions across and beyond Europe . That breach has raised tensions across the world .
 Russia’s material and political support to illegal armed groups in eastern Ukraine only fuels instability in the region . Russia's material andpolitical support toillegal armed groups only fuel instability in Ukraine .
 Our sanctions are tied to the full implementation of the Minsk agreements and respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . Our sanctions, like those of our partners, are tied with the full Implementation of the agreements .
 Canada supports sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia, including South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Georgia has been under Russian occupation since 2008 .
 peace and security in the region can be achieved only when sovereignty and territorial integrity are respected, preserved and restored .
 Having identified the challenges, I would be remiss if I did not highlight recent successes, says the author . "I would have been remiss" if I didn't highlight successes, he says .
 The work of the United Nations, NATO and the OSCE in the Balkans has achieved considerable results . The U.N., NATO and OSCE have achieved significant results .
 Much more remains to be done, of course, but it is important to remember how far we have come . We need to remember that we are still in the process of getting better .
 Recent efforts towards reunified Cyprus offer another important example of the reunified country .
 Canada welcomes Secretary-General Guterres’ personal involvement in the process . Canada welcomes U.N. work on the ground .
 Our support for the U.N. and regional political and security institutions remains unwavering . We are committed to the United Nations and the region's security institutions, we say .
 The Security Council can count on Canada to work tirelessly to foster our collective security, both within Europe and worldwide . Canada is a member of the Security Council .
 Ambassador Vitaly Churkin was a prominent and highly experienced diplomat . He skilfully represented Russia at the U.N. for more than a decade . He contributed to the promotion of the United Nations agenda .
 It is an honour to participate in today’s discussion focusing on conflicts in Europe and their impact on peace and stability .
 Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council is convening today’s important meeting .
 Cyprus aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European Union . Cyprus would like to add the following remarks in its national capacity .
 Cyprus has relied heavily on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations in maintaining its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity . Cyprus fully abides by the U.N. and international law .
 Cyprus shares the concerns already expressed as regards the multiple challenges putting international peace and stability at risk .
 Cyprus fully subscribes to the statement made on behalf of the European Union . The statement also includes the importance of further strengthening cooperation between regional and international organizations .
 Closer cooperation and strategic coordination at the regional and international level can lead to a more targeted and effective response from the international community to existing threats and dangerous developments .
 The United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus is an example of an efficient, cost-effective peacekeeping mission . The U.N. peacekeeping force in Cyprus has been a pioneer for gender parity in peace operations .
 The political track of the mission also constitutes an example of positive collaboration with the European Union . The EU is catalytic in the efforts for a solution that will be fully compatible with Cyprus rights and obligations as an EU member State .
 Cyprus reiterates its profound appreciation to the Security Council and the Secretary-General for their continuous efforts towards the peaceful and lasting solution of the Cyprus question .
 The convening of a conference on Cyprus, under the auspices of the Secretary-General, to address the international aspects of the problem . Security comprises the most fundamental elements of an eventual settlement .
 We sincerely hope that all parties involved will demonstrate the requisite degree of commitment and political will so that the effort will yield results .
 Secretary-General's personal involvement and for the Security Council’s strong signal of unity and support for the effort . We are most grateful for the Secretary- General’'s personal intervention .
 The Security Council has an inherently particular role to exercise in that regard . The body has primary responsibility for the preservation of international peace and security .
 The successful outcome of the ongoing negotiation process in Cyprus has the potential to establish Cyprus as an international paradigm of peaceful co-existence and prosperous collaboration between its citizens .
 Cyprus will become a model country of stability and predictability for the region . It will also bear out the catalytic role of the SecurityCouncil in promoting international peace and stability .
 Ambassador Vitaly Churkin has died at the age of 48 . He was ambassador to the United States from Russia .
 Ambassador Churkin served his country with distinction and was deeply respected by all who worked with him .
 Regional organizations can play a significant role in reducing tensions and promoting peace and security, says the European Union . In Europe we have seen the significant role that regional organizations can help reduce tensions .
 Monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe are working in eastern Ukraine . They are working to assist efforts to consolidate a ceasefire .
 The European Union is facilitating dialogue in Kosovo between Belgrade and Pristina . It is leading a multinational stabilisation force in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
 EU support for the settlement negotiations in Cyprus under the auspices of the United Nations is also very welcome . EU support in Cyprus is also welcome, according to the EU .
 The role of regional organizations in Europe continues to be strengthened in support of peace, says the Council . "We welcome their enhanced engagement with the Council"
 Some old animosities have been reasserting themselves in parts of Europe . There is much to feel encouraged about, we are concerned at the fact .
 Tensions are a further demonstration of the need for the U.N. system and the Council to increase their conflictprevention capability .
 New Zealand was committed to working with others to improve the ability of the Council to prevent conflict . New Zealand is committed to taking practical steps to improve its ability to prevent conflicts .
 Council members will continue to make good use of the tools at their disposal, such as regular situational awareness briefings .
Unclogging the heavy agenda of the Council would help it focus on problem-solving and prevention, rather than just managing conflict .
 U.N. Secretary-General should use his good offices and other preventative-diplomacy tools to avert conflict, U.S. says .
 New Zealand is all too aware of how sensitive it can be in a practical sense within the Council, particularly when specific country situations are discussed .
 Council should continue to assess how it can take practical steps to do better, says the Council . But the Council should still assess how the Council can do better. The Council should also consider how to make changes to the council's policies .
 Doing so will save lives and ensure a more cost-effective use of resources . Do so will help save lives, ensure a better use of the resources .
 There are a number of current threats to peace and security in Europe that New Zealand continues to be concerned about, as detailed by other speakers today .
 In Ukraine, we urge all sides to ensure that the OSCE is able to effectively carry out the responsibilities entrusted to it by the parties .
 All parties must deliver on their obligations under the Minsk agreements . All parties will have to comply with the agreement .
 We reiterate our support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity, and also the territorial integrity of Georgia . Georgia also supports Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 In Georgia, we call for unimpeded humanitarian access to internally displaced people to return to their homes . We also call for access to the homes of displaced people in Georgia .
 We also hope to see commitment from all parties to resolve tensions in Nagorno-Karabakh .
 It is in the interests of all of us, and small States, to ensure that the principles of the Charter and the international rules-based system are adhered to . It is also in the interest of all the small States in particular, says the author .
 New Zealand will continue to speak up in support of those principles, just as we did during our term on the Council . New Zealand has been in the same position during their term as Council .
 Ambassador Churkin was also well-known in Belgium where he had also been stationed and where tribute was paid to him .
 I thank the Ukrainian presidency for organizing this open debate on the important subject of peace and security in Europe . I thank Ukraine's president for organizing the debate .
 Belgium supports the statement made by the observer of the European Union and wishes to add the following remarks . Belgium supports a statement made in the statement by the EU .
 Let us first highlight the reasons to be concerned in the face of the increasing number of armed conflicts around the world .
 Today, war seems to have become once again an acceptable option for some . For some, it seems to be the continuation of aggressive diplomacy .
 That is a step backwards and an unacceptable insult to the ideals of the Charter of the United Nations. That's a step back, says U.N. Secretary-General .
 The use of war and violence does not provide lasting solutions, says the author . "On the contrary, it exacerbates crises and creates new threats," he says .
 The European Union offers a reason to hope, as well as a source of inspiration, for all modern-day conflicts . The use of weapons is falsely portrayed as the only viable solution .
 Most European countries have experienced an unprecedented period of peace in their recent history . This is also the result of the establishment of unique and efficient multilateral institutions . The European Union is one of the world's most successful countries .
 The Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Atlantic Alliance have contributed to the stability of our continent .
European institutions must continue to play a central role in the peaceful management and prevention of conflicts in Europe . Now more than ever, those institutions must play a key role in preventing conflicts in the continent .
 The United Nations is working to promote the peace and stability of the European continent . They are all actors that can, working in close cooperation, take effective action .
 Belgium's then Minister for Foreign Affairs, Pierre Harmel, proposed an innovative vision for emerging from the division of the world resulting from Cold War logic .
 The Flarmel Doctrine advocated dialogue while maintaining a firm stance on the need to defend our values in a divided Europe . That vision, known as the Flarmels Doctrine, advocated dialogue .
International context has evolved considerably since then, but that doctrine is still relevant today . The doctrine is in our view, but it remains relevant today, we say .
 Dialogue should serve to clarify our defence policies and postures, says John Sutter .
Rebuilding confidence begins with respect for the agreed communication mechanisms of multilateral institutions in Europe . Rebuilding confidence is a step towards building confidence in Europe, says the European Union .
 Belgium supports Belgium for the Secretary-General in his goal to increase the effectiveness of the United Nations in the area of conflict prevention .
 Belgium is ready to play its role in that field and has made contributions . Belgium has made a number of contributions to the Belgian football team .
Last week we organized an international conference in Brussels on mediation . We propose to share the lessons from that conference later on, here at the United Nations .
 Malaysia's ambassador Vitaly Churkin has died in his sudden passing . Malaysia's government has extended condolences to the Government and the Russian Federation .
 Malaysia's membership in the Council was a close friendship with Malaysia’s president . Malaysia's ambassador to Malaysia will miss his presence and friendship tremendously .
 Ukraine's delegation is grateful to Ukraine for organizing this timely open debate and to the distinguished briefers for their insights .
 European security is very much intertwined with the peace and security of the rest of the world . Over the past century, we have witnessed how European security has been intertwined with world security .
 The two world wars had, in fact, started in Europe, and the very existence of the United Nations was a direct consequence of the Second World War . The United Nations is a direct result of World War II .
More than seven decades later, we have not seen conflicts in Europe to the scale and level as in the previous world wars . More than seven years later, fortunately, we haven't seen conflicts to the size and level of the previous wars .
 The recent emergence of crises in the region are no less worrying, especially when major Powers are involved . However, the prolonged frozen conflicts and recent emerging of crises are no more worrying .
 The conflicts in eastern Ukraine and Crimea constitute a direct challenge to the U.N. Charter of the United Nations' principles . The conflicts are a challenge to Charter's purposes and principles .
 It is difficult to imagine that one could blatantly disregard the fundamental principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and the independence of States and gain territory by the illegal use of force with little consequence .
 Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 was downed in July 2014, a tragic consequence of the Ukrainian crisis . What started off as a conflict in Europe later escalated and affected far-flung countries .
 The so-called frozen conflicts in the southern Caucasus and the Transnistrian conflict continue to be a source of instability in the region . The region may spark bigger crises that could threaten international peace and security .
 Malaysia believes that there is no lack of mechanisms to address the conflicts in Europe . Malaysia believes there is a lack of mechanism to address conflicts in the region .
What is lacking is political will by the conflicting parties to adhere to the Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and various United Nations resolutions. Instead, what is lacking are political will.
 This predicament will remain unless the Council takes responsibility to engage in reform, instead of narrow self-interest . The Council will have to take responsibility for global security and the common good .
 Malaysia believes the international community has an important role to play to make it costly for the conflicting parties in Europe to use military means to achieve their political ends . Malaysia believes that the internationalcommunity has a key role to help make it cheaper for the two parties to use the
 We also need to support the parties to engage in dialogue and de-escalation of conflict . We need to help the parties engage in Dialogue and confidence-building measures .
 Malaysia welcomes the call by Secretary-General Guterres to intensify cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations to work closely together in preventing, managing and resolving crises .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union in bringing peace and stability to the region . We commend the great stabilizing role played by the OSC .
 The U.S. calls on the parties to fully implement the Minsk agreements in order to facilitate a final, political solution to the Ukraine conflict .
We urge all parties to fully cooperate with the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to enable it to carry out its mandate . We also urge all Parties to fully cooperate with the mission .
In the western Balkans, we fully support the crucial role played by the EU and the OSCE in further strengthening democratic institutions, especially in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo .
 Malaysia believes Europe has a lot to offer to the post-conflict countries in the Western Balkans . Malaysia believes that Europe needs to acknowledge atrocities committed in the past and to ensure accountability .
 Malaysia also views the increasing isolationism, xenophobia and revisionism in Europe with great concern . Malaysia also sees the increase in isolationism and xenophobia in Europe as a concern .
 The international community has good reason to be alarmed when European countries turn inward . Based on past experiences, the international community should be alarmed .
 We sincerely hope that the countries in the region will remain united in their common values based on respect for human dignity and human rights, freedom, democracy, equality and the rule of law .
 I would like to take this opportunity to pay my respects to one of our own. Before I proceed to make my statement, I would want to make this statement, he said . I would also like to pay his respects to another person, I said .
 Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, passed away in his office . He was hard at work representing his country and promoting the great causes of the U.N.
 A stalwart of our Organization and a friend, he will he missed by all of us and we all owe him our utmost respect and gratitude . He will be remembered for his kindness and respect .
 Our condolences also go to his family and colleagues from the Russian Mission .
 The Government of the Republic of Serbia continues to render a maximum contribution to the efforts invested by the international community in maintaining peace and security .
 The Government proceeds from the conviction that multilateralism is the best response to all the risks that aggravate international relations .
 The purposes and principles of the United Nations, as defined in the Charter, continue to be just as important as they have ever been .
 Serbia supports the joint efforts of the United Nations and its Member States . Serbia supports joint efforts to reach acceptable and sustainable solutions to the conflicts and crises .
The national priority of the Republic of Serbia remains the quest for a political solution to the question of Kosovo and Metohija . The national priority is the national priority for Serbia .
 The U.N. Security Council is the supreme authority of the Security Council . The United Nations and the Charter of the United Nations are key to safeguarding international peace and security .
 Kosovo is a serious threat to the international legal order and the key principles of the Charter of the United Nations . Kosovo's declaration of independence of Kosovo is an international threat to international law, the UN says .
 UNMIK will continue to carry out its mandate under the resolution, especially in areas that are essential for the survival and normal and dignified life of the Serbs .
 Belgrade is committed to the political dialogue conducted between Belgrade and Pristina with the facilitation of the European Union and the implementation of its agreements .
 The Serbian government is trying to protect the interests of Serbia and its citizens, as well as peace and stability .
 The establishment of the association/community of Serb-majority municipalities continues to be the priority issue .
 The signing of the Brussels Agreement was motivated, first and foremost, by the aspiration to find proper modalities for systematic, institutional protection of the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija . There is a lack of adequate institutional mechanisms in that area .
 The support of the international community is of paramount importance for the success of this dialogue . Support of the International community is a paramount importance, says the U.S.
 The change of position with respect to the non-recognition of the unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo would have a negative effect on the continuation of a constructive approach by the parties to the dialogue .
 My Government will continue to strengthen regional cooperation and remain a constructive, committed and active partner in the promotion of relations, inter alia .
 The region's future of the region is second to none, says the government . "We have invested many efforts and endeavours in stabilizing the situation in the region," says government .
 Working on stability and cooperation is an investment in a better life for all of us. Working on its stability is a good investment in the future for all, says the author .
 Serbia’s readiness to overcome the negative legacy of the past and to commit to our common future is unquestionable . Serbia's readiness for a common future, based on principles of mutual respect, is unbelievable .
 The region is an integral part of Europe. We are partners and we shall continue to he partners to all our neighbours and other countries of the region and beyond .
 Bosnia and Herzegovina is Bosnia's first neighbour . Bosnia is the country's first country . Bosnia and its first neighbour is Bosnia and Bosnia . Bosnia has a history of stability and prosperity .
 More than 20 years have elapsed since the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement . It made it possible to end the suffering and establish peace after the tragic conflict in that country .
 The Agreement is on the cusp of its third decade, and it has made an important contribution to reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire region .
 It has provided a basis for rebuilding confidence among that country’s three constituent peoples and two Entities . It continues to be of crucial importance for the country .
 Serbia supports each and every agreement adopted by the two Entities and three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina . Serbia is a signatory party to the Dayton Peace Agreement .
 My country also supports good-neighbourly cooperation based on close relations with the central authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
 It will continue to promote and intensify cooperation with the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina . It will deepen and enrich its special relations with the Republic of Srpska .
 The European perspective of the countries of the Western Balkans serves the common denominator for regional cooperation and a contribution to the resolution of many outstanding issues in the region through dialogue .
 My country believes that the European Union is the best framework within which all of the countries of the region can realize their individual interests .
 The reforms that we have carried out over the past several years have demonstrated that we perceive our future to be in the European Union. The reforms have shown that we see our future in the EU as a European Union .
 The process of European integration will not be complete until the entire region joins the Union . The entire region will have to join the Union.
 It is a historic undertaking and calls for exceptional efforts, sacrifices, maturity and reason on the part of all actors involved in the film .
 My country has demonstrated, on many occasions, that it has the courage to act dynamically and responsibly, says President Obama . "My country has shown that it is a country that has courage," he says .
 His Excellency Mr Vitaly Churkin, Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, was killed by his colleague . He was a member of Russia's Russian Federation.
 Montenegro is pleased to contribute to this important debate and commends Ukraine for organizing it . Montenegro also commends the Ukrainian government for organizing.
We live in an increasingly divided world, fractured by violence, conflicts and political breakdowns . We live in a world that is increasingly divided by violence and conflicts . We are worried about the future of entire generations, says author .
 The European security landscape is also marked by instability, and our ideals are and will be repeatedly challenged . The EU security landscape has been marked by stability and instability .
 The international community, including the United Nations, constantly finds itself in crisis-management mode . The U.N. is in crisis management mode .
 By devoting all our energy to just one crisis or just reacting to crises, we will never get things done . We will never be able to do anything else .
 We should recognize the clear need for decisive action in reversing such trends, says David Cameron . We need to avoid backsliding away from peace, security, basic respect for human rights and sustainable development .
 prevention can work and does work and that our Organization can do better. We all know that prevention can be used to help our Organization .
 The price of overlooking prevention, on the other hand, is high and very easy to see . It's easy to overlook prevention, and it's hard to do so .
 U.N. would like to underline significance of United Nations earlydetection and early-warning mechanisms. That is why we want to highlight the significance of early detection .
 The Security Council must consider making better use of the wide range of tools at its disposal to prevent conflicts .
 We should foster them in every country and at every opportunity, and we should keep in mind lessons learned in our continent . We should Foster them in all countries, at every chance, and in every opportunity .
 The only sustainable way to solve differences is to use the tools of diplomacy and dialogue, says Montenegro . "We know from experience that the best and truly, truly, the only sustainable solution is to solve tensions and conflict situations"
 The United Nations and the Security Council often become overstretched and overburdened with crises . The U.N. and Security Council should he strengthened, he says .
 Those organizations should play a more active role in assisting, if need be, in leading efforts to bring about peace and stability . Those organizations need to be more active in assisting and, if needed, in bringing about peace.
 Regional and subregional organizations have deep knowledge and strong local networks . They are in a position to offer tailor-made approaches to local organizations .
 The African nation is directly affected by crises, as we have seen in many instances in Africa . It is important to ensure that the countries directly affected are involved, as well as those directly affected .
 The European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in international security is indispensable . The role of the EU and the OSC is indispensable, the EU says .
 European Union-facilitated dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo on the normalization of relations . One of the latest examples of proactive engagement of regional organizations from our region .
 Montenegro welcomes that EU initiative, which is very much in line with our firm belief that there is no alternative to dialogue as we search for durable solutions . Montenegro says it is a firm belief there is 'no alternative' to dialogue .
 We know that putting dialogue into practice is not always easy and that any success will be possible only if there is strong and sustained political support by all States .
 The maintenance of international peace and security is not the task of the U.N. and other international organizations alone .
 It is a process of individual, collective and institutional transformation and one of inclusive development . It is an inclusive development. It is the process of individuals, collective, and institutional change .
 Without inclusive State institutions, we are unlikely to have either sustained peace or a basis for long-term development, says author .
 We also believe that it is crucial to involve women and youth in the peacebuilding process as stakeholders and decision-makers . All Member States and regions should be responsible for peacebuilding.
International actors need to strengthen their understanding of how international actors can support the process . But we need to stronger our understanding of what international actors are doing .
 A stronger and more effective United Nations is needed for confronting the challenges of today’s world . A collective global response and a stronger, more effective U.N. response is needed .
 We should use the wide range of potential tools at our disposal with focus and dedication, so as to achieve results . We should also use the range of possible tools at the disposal of us .
 Montenegro is committed to playing its part in a world that will bring about peace, security and development .
 Ambassador Churkin's wife and children are among those to offer their condolences to him .
 He was an important interlocutor for the Kingdom of the Netherlands during his mandate on the Security Council . He will be sorely missed by the Netherlands .
 The President of the United States has convened a debate on the maintenance of peace and security in Europe . The debate has a special focus on conflicts in Europe, with a focus on Europe .
 The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union . The two countries’ split term in the Security Council for this and the coming year .
 I will read out a shortened version of my statement, and the full text will be made available on Twitter . The full text is available on my Twitter account .
 We see three issues that are essential to any discussion on peace, security, stability, conflict prevention, peacekeeping and the peaceful settlement of disputes .
 We will add to our discussion today our views on how those issues relate to the European experience . We will also discuss how those topics relate to European experience.
 multilateral cooperation lies at the heart of peace and security in Europe, says the European Union .
 Over the past 60 years, the European Union has shown its ability to bring peace where there was once conflict . The EU has shown that it has brought peace where it was once a conflict .
 Not once since the inception of the European Union has violent conflict erupted between any of its member States . The European Union is the largest body in the world. The EU has not had a violent conflict between its member states since its inception .
 NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe continue to play an important role in maintaining peace and security in Europe . Other regional organizations such as NATO and OSC continue to address various aspects of conflict prevention .
 The United Nations is one of the largest multilateral organizations in the world . The U.N. is the first and foremost of the world's largest international organizations .
 Secretary-General Guterres reminded us in January that prevention is best served by strong, sovereign States acting for the good of their people .
 peacekeeping has been necessary when the basic tenets of international law have been violated. But also in Europe, peacekeeping is necessary when it is violated .
 peacekeeping missions can be critical to stabilizing conflict situations, but they cannot resolve them . Peacekeeping missions are critical to stabilize conflict situations .
 Ultimately, Europe’s conflicts can be resolved only politically, not militarily, according to the EU .
 The current negotiations in Cyprus, on which we have just heard our colleague speak, underscore that point . The current talks in Cyprus are currently being held in Cyprus .
 United Nations-mandated missions have played constructive role in Cyprus and Kosovo, for instance .
 The United Nations does not need to carry the burden of resolving each and every conflict alone . The U.N. doesn't need to be responsible for resolving all conflicts alone .
 Regional organizations like the EU, NATO, the OSCE and the Council of Europe all play essential roles in stabilizing conflicts zones in Europe and brokering political solutions .
 The United Nations should seek to reinforce cooperation with regional organizations wherever it can, the U.N. says . We strongly believe that under the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the United States should try to help the region .
 United Nations support for the work of the OSCE in monitoring the implementation of the Minsk agreements, for example, sends a clear signal to the conflicting parties .
 This brings me to my third point, the peaceful settlement of conflicts . This brings him to his third point. This is a peaceful settlement, he says .
 Over the years, European States sadly have seen their sovereignty challenged, their territorial integrity compromised .
 The European security order is firmly based on the principles of sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, the inviolability of borders, the peaceful settlement of disputes .
 Balkan wars in the nineties have demonstrated that simmering conflicts can easily reignite . But as the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s have demonstrated, simmering conflict can be easily reignited .
 It is better to settle disputes peacefully, through the international court system, than by military means . It's better to settled disputes peacefully through the International Court system, rather than through military means.
 The International Court of Justice in The Hague and the Permanent Court of Arbitration in that regard. Let me underline the importance of the International Court.
 We are convinced that, ultimately, there can be no lasting peace without justice . We are also convinced that there can't be a lasting peace in the world .
 The European experiences teach us that when States focus on mutual benefits and respect for international law, conflicts need not occur . The European experience teach us.
 The United Nations is not there only to oversee the cessation of hostilities in conflict zones . We should focus much more on prevention, as the Secretary-General has indicated .
 U.N. should pursue political resolutions vigorously and create an environment in which reconciliation can occur, the U.S. says . The United Nations should pursue a political resolution vigorously.
 To that end, the United Nations should seek to cooperate with regional organizations and strengthen them . U.N. should seek the cooperation of regional organizations, U.S. says .
 This holds as true in Europe as anywhere else in the world, so all nations may reap the benefits of peace and stability fully . This is true in European countries, as well as any other world countries, according to CNN .
 The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to be a partner for peace, justice and development in that endeavour . The Netherlands will be a partners for peace and justice in the Netherlands .
Russian ambassador Vitaly Churkin has died at the age of 48 . He was ambassador to the Mission and Government of the Russian Federation . His family and family have also been given condolences .
 I thank the delegation of Ukraine for choosing such an interesting and important topic for the second open debate of their presidency . I thank them for choosing the topic of the second debate.
 I will focus my intervention on issues of stability and security in my region, SouthEast Europe . I will also focus on security in South East Europe .
 Albania has continuously striven to facilitate peace, reconciliation and cooperation in our part of the world . Albania has also been trying to facilitate reconciliation and reconciliation in its part of a world .
 South-East Europe experienced one of the most tragic conflicts after the Second World War . Only two decades ago, South- East Europe experienced a tragic conflict .
 NATO and the European Union have contributed to NATO and European Union . The region is more peaceful and secure than it has ever been in its long and troubled history .
 All the Western Balkan countries are now involved, albeit in different stages, in the process of European and Euro-Atlantic integration . All the West Balkan nations are involved, but not all of them are in the same process .
 The progress achieved is immense, but it remains fragile and can be put at risk . Some irresponsible and provocative actions have demonstrated that the unfinished business in the Western Balkans is not properly addressed, says the author .
 The EU-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia needs to accelerate and lead to the normalization of relations between the two countries . The two countries need to normalize their relations.
 It needs to be concluded with mutual recognition and full membership of Kosovo in the U.N. It must also be completed with full membership in Kosovo .
 European integration is the most effective driving force for peace and cooperation in the region . European integration has been described as the most successful driving force in the world .
 The European Union has a major, irreplaceable role to play as a mediator and a peacebuilder . The EU has a key stabilizing factor in the region, the European Union says .
 Failure to achieve EU integration risks fuelling nationalist politics and ethnic or religious divisions . Failure to achieved EU integration risk fuelling ethnic and religious divisions, according to EU leaders .
 regional peace and stability are closely interconnected with Europe’s security architecture . Let us not forget that our regional stability is closely linked to Europe's security architecture, says the author .
 The Balkans need Europe today as much as Europe needs the Balkans, says the European Union .
There are still many challenges in our region, and we must all work together to stay the Euro-Atlantic course . There are stillmany challenges in the region, but we must work together, and all must be united .
 Threats, provocations and inflammatory rhetoric lead nowhere and draw us back in time to a dark chapter in Europe's history .
 Albania has always contributed to strengthening regional cooperation, based on the principles of good-neighbourliness and all-inclusiveness . Albania has also contributed to strengthen regional cooperation .
 The Berlin project is based on the so-called Berlin process . It aims to connect the city with the rest of the world by connecting it with other countries .
 The U.N. should shore up the role of the EU in our region and deepen the strategic dialogue with regional organizations, notably NATO and the OSCE . The United Nations should also forge common approaches and provide collective responses to protracted conflicts.
 A stronger global-regional partnership is needed to ensure that the Security Council can rely upon a more resilient and diversified network of actors in order to prevent and resolve conflicts .
 What Europe and the world need today is to build bridges of cooperation and mutual respect, says David Frum .
 Human security can be achieved by instilling hope for a better common future . Human security is a key part of the world's future .
 Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin was the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation . He was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 The memory of this wonderful and bright person will always remain with us . The memory will always be with us, says author .
 The United Nations and regional and other organizations enhance their cooperation to address them comprehensively and effectively . International peace and security are faced nowadays with many threats and challenges .
 The Charter of the OIC reaffirms the commitment of its Member States to the United Nations . The OIC stresses their determination to contribute to international peace and security, understanding and dialogue .
 The OIC is an important partner of the United Nations in promoting peace, security and postconflict reconstruction . It is fostering a culture of peace and enhancing cooperation in the humanitarian, human rights, social, economic and cultural fields .
 The Security Council recognized and further encouraged the active contribution of the OIC to the work of the U.N. In its presidential statement of 28 October 2013, the Security Council recognizes and further encourages the active contributions to the United Nations .
 The OIC has consistently expressed its principled position on the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan . The U.S. has been involved in the conflict for years .
 Most recently, that position was reiterated at the thirteenth Islamic Summit of the Heads of State and Government of the OIC Member States, held in Istanbul .
 The OIC looks forward to working closely with the United Nations, the OSCE and other partners in fostering the earliest possible resolution of the conflict, based on the aforementioned position, and to bringing peace and stability to the region .
 The OIC is a strong and active partner of the U.N. in promoting global peace, security and development . In conclusion, I would like to express once again the commitment of the OIC to remaining a strong, active partner .
 Ukraine is holding a debate on a topic of particular importance to its country . Ukraine is the first country to hold such a debate in recent years .
 The end of the Cold War unleashed a profound geopolitical transformation in Eastern Europe . It doubled the number of States on the map .
 The continent also witnessed a level of violence unseen since the end of the Second World War . Most of the border changes came about peacefully, but the continent also saw violence unseen .
 The United Nations and the relevant international organizations in Europe have been engaged in finding peaceful and sustainable solutions to the conflicts . The U.N. and relevant international groups in Europe are involved in finding peace and sustainable solution to conflicts .
 In some instances, we have celebrated success, but in others, painful lessons had to be learned . In some cases, we've celebrated success; in others we've learned painful lessons .
 Many countries that went through difficult times have been able to turn the page and to prosper . Many of the countries that have been through tough times have turned the page .
 The post-Cold War transition is not yet over, but there are still a number of protracted and unresolved conflicts in Europe .
In the current global instability, it is essential that no efforts be spared to resolve the conflicts in Europe . In the currentglobal instability, no efforts should be spared.
 If any conflict is to be resolved, it is vital that all parties he guided by and respect the relevant international law and the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations . The principle of preserving and respecting the territorial integrity of countries is a core principle.
 In recent years, the international consensus on the principle of territorial integrity has begun to erode . Georgia and Ukraine, among others, have been affected by the erosion of the principle .
 This poses a great danger to stability and security in Europe, says the author . The principle of territorial integrity is challenged by violent confrontations and bloodshed, he says .
 Regional organizations have demonstrated that they can play a constructive role in conflict resolution . Regional groups have demonstrated they can be constructive in conflict resolutions .
In today’s world of global challenges, international organizations have to find a smart balance between the principles of subsidiarity and complementarity .
 Bulgaria is eager to see a peaceful way out of the crisis in Ukraine, with full respect for the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the country within its internationally recognized borders . Bulgaria is keen to see an end to the Ukraine crisis with a peaceful solution .
 Most important is to guarantee the full implementation of the agreed package of measures . To complete the withdrawal of heavy weapons, and to grant unhindered access to all sites .
 Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group of the OSCE would accelerate implementation of Minsk agreements . That would allow the Normandy format to accelerate the implementation of the Minsk agreement .
 Bulgaria reaffirms its support for the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Georgia within its internationally recognized borders . Bulgaria reaffirm its strong support.
 We support the Geneva international discussions and the meetings in the framework of the Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism in Gali and Ergneti . The meetings are essential to stabilizing the situation on the ground.
 We fully back the Minsk Group co-Chairs and support the negotiations on a comprehensive settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict without precondition .
 The best prospect for a peace settlement is to continue the mediation efforts of the Minsk Group . The Security Council has endorsed the internationally established format endorsed by the Council .
 We stress the importance of re-engaging in meaningful negotiations and of moving beyond the status quo . We believe that thestatus quo is not a solution, as we believe that it is not the solution .
 We appeal to all sides in the afoermentioned conflicts to be engaged in reaching concrete results on outstanding issues, such as commitment to non-use of force .
 The Security Council's unity and support of regional organizations represent a potent force, says the authors . They say there is no one-size-fits-all solution to addressing conflicts in Europe .
 The Security Council is united behind renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus . The European Union is giving constructive support to efforts to reach a solution based on the relevant Council resolutions .
 Ukraine, Georgia and other countries in Eastern Europe can be conflict-free, says the European continent can he conflict- free .
 Mr Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin was the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation . He died at the age of 46 .
Presidential meeting to discuss ways of emerging from crises in the European region .
 The Security Council would hear ideas about how the Security Council could help them to achieve that, says the group .
 We also hoped that our joint efforts would enable us to persuade Kyiv as to the necessity of fulfilling the Minsk agreements . Many delegations have spoken about that today .
 The Ukrainian authorities must understand that the package of measures is not a dead end but rather a means of salvation for Ukraine . Ukraine must preserve its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
 Regrettably, we are not quite certain that we were able to move forward in that direction today . We're not quite quite certain, we're still not quite sure that we're moving forward .
 Armenia's representative of Armenia has made a further statement . I now give the floor to the representative of the country to make a further statements .
 The people of Nagorno Karabakh chose their path to the future and democracy a quarter of a century ago . The people chose the path to a future of democracy and democracy .
 Finalizing and formalizing that process is the only way to bring stability and security to the region . For that there are two requirements — compromise and realism .
 A couple of delegations have made accusations about my country, and I would strongly encourage them to read the meeting record of my Ambassador’s statement when it becomes available .
 One claim was made by the representative of Azerbaijan with regard to a new referendum conducted yesterday in Nagorno Karabakh .
 Nagorno Karabakh has a poor human rights record . It is ironic that a country with a poor record can challenge or question a referendum .
No one can deprive the people of Nagorno Karabakh of their right to organize a referendum. Clearly no one, especially Azerbaijan, can deprive them of a referendum .
 I do not want to go into detail over this, but it is about a difference in perceptions of democracy . I don't want to give details over this. It is about difference in perception of democracy, I say .
 I will confine myself to bringing to the Council’s attention to two major pieces of news yesterday and today in the region .
 A referendum was conducted in Nagorno Karabakh, giving the population an opportunity to express their will regarding their future lives, development and constitutional reforms .
 The top news item in Azerbaijan at the same time was about a decree signed by the President of Azerbaijan appointing the country's First Lady to be the country’s First Vice-President .
 CounciFs are divided in their perceptions of democracy and democracy, says CounciF chief .
 Azerbaijan's representative has made a further statement. I now give the floor to the representative of Azerbaijan to make a further statements .
 The comments of the representatives of Armenia at today's meeting exemplify that Member State’s attempts to deny the facts behind its policies of aggression, hostility, hatred and falsifications .
 The Armenian side’s claims and misinterpretations sound particularly astonishing within the Security Council . The Security Council in 1993 adopted a series of four resolutions condemning Armenia's use of force against Azerbaijan .
 Armenia bears the primary responsibility for unleashing war and perpetrating aggression against Azerbaijan . It is curious that Armenia's representatives are attempting to criticize and lecture others .
 The story of the world's most powerful man and woman in the world is told in a new book . The author's book, The World's Most Powerful Man, is published in the UK . The book is based on the book, "The World of the World"
 Armenia has established a notorious pattern of disrespect for the generally accepted norms and principles of international law . In reality, the successive Governments of Armenia have established a pattern of complete disrespect .
Committing war crimes and crimes against humanity, sponsoring international terrorism, adhering to a dubious ethno-religious ideology and making territorial claims against its neighbours have become a sort of norm in that Member State .
 Armenia's current President Serzh Sargsyan refers to his words in a famous interview that he gave in 2000 to a British journalist, Thomas de Waal .
Before Khojaly, Azerbaijanis thought Armenians were people who could not raise their hand against the civilian population .
 The stance of Armenia is an open challenge to the conflict settlement process and a serious threat to international and regional peace and security . The stance is a serious challenge to international peace, security and security, says the UN .
 The earlier the officials of that country realize the lack of any prospect of the unconstructive and dangerous political agenda, the author says . "The sooner our peoples will be able to benefit from peace, stability and cooperation," he says .
 The Russian representative claims that failure to implement the agreement signed by the opposition, former President Yanukovych and European observers brought about all the problems my country faces today .
 The Russian representative at those negotiations was the only one who did not sign the document . He failed to mention that the Russian representative had not signed the document.
 Moscow representative failed to mention that as early as 20 February 2014, while he was sitting at the negotiating table in Kyiv, Russian troops had started a military operation in Crimea .
 Since the early 1990s, Russia has created a belt of instability at its borders . instability keeps spreading to Europe and beyond . Russia's instability has spread to Europe.
 Putin's assertion that Russia has no borders as not merely a joke is a joke . Russia says it wants a united Europe from Lisbon to Vladivostock .
 The reference in the statement of the Russian representative earlier today was not just a slip of the tongue . In the context to a united Russia, the reference is not just the slip of a tongue .
 Russia sees nothing wrong in recognizing documents issued by authorities in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions . Russia is not under the control of the Ukrainian Government .
 resolution 2166 on the downing of MH17 is a clear reference to the fact that those areas are controlled by armed groups . The resolution also refers to the situation in those areas .
 The Russian Federation recognizes documents issued by leaders of those armed groups . Now, the Russian Federation is recognizing those documents .
 In resolution 2202, the Security Council reaffirmed its full respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Russian-backed militants continue to shell territories under the control of the Ukranian Government . Minsk agreements are fully supported by the Russian Federation at the Normandy format meeting .
 The matter of who is undermining the implementation of the Minsk agreements is quite obvious . The issue of who's undermining the agreement is very obvious, says the author .