 The industrial area of the Donbas includes much of the Ukrainian oblasti of Donetsk and Luhansk . The Donbas is the largest industrial area in the Ukraine .
 The Donbas coalfield lies primarily in southeastern Ukraine, but a small portion of it extends into Rostov oblast in southwestern Russia .
 The principal exploited area of the field covers nearly 9,000 square miles south of the Donets River . Coal deposits also extend westward to the Dnieper River in the greater Donets Basin .
 In different areas of Earth, one might find sweltering deserts, dense tropical rainforests, or bone-chilling tundras .
 Each biome and habitat comes with its own selection of flora and fauna, and it may include physical features such as canyons, volcanoes, rivers, or caves .
 Human beings have built homes in many different environments, settling the area and organizing it into units such as cities, states, regions, and countries, each with its own points of interest .
 History has shown that it's not so easy to form societies or communities that fulfill these requirements for all members .
 The fight for human and civil rights has persisted for hundreds of years and remains alive today, both within the borders of nations and on an international scale .
 A literary work can transport us into a fictional, fantastic new world, or describe a fleeting feeling, or simply give us a picture of the past through novels .
 The earliest Greek philosophers focused their attention upon the origin and nature of the physical world . Later philosophers theorized about the nature of knowledge, truth, good and evil, love, friendship, and much more .
 Philosophy involves a methodical assessment of any and all aspects of human existence and experience . Philosophy involves an assessment of the human experience.
 The realms of philosophy and religion have sometimes intersected in conducting such inquiries as these .
Study of religion underscores how humankind has long speculated about its origins . The study of religion is a form of philosophy .
 The possibility of a higher being to which livings things owe their existence has long captived human thought .
 Governments can be classified by mode of succession . ascension to governmental leadership may follow the rules of hereditary succession .
 Human beings have long been curious about the world in which we live, striving to identify connections among the phenomenons we witness and understand how it all works .
 The field of science has developed over many centuries as a way of studying and understanding the world . It began with the primitive stage of noting important regularities in nature and continuing through modern science .
 In both team and solo sports, the human body has been pushed to its limits in the name of improving athletic performance . In order to break record upon record, athletes have been pushing to their limits to improve performance .
 The ancient Olympic Games are an early example of the contests in which humans have engaged to showcase physical prowess . The ancient Games are the first to be held in ancient times .
 The arts were born thanks to the development of technology, like sculpture, printmaking, photography, and installation art . They include the most ancient forms, such as painting and drawing, and the arts that were born due to technology .
In these videos, Britannica explains a variety of topics and answers frequently asked questions .
In Demystified, Britannica has all the answers to your burning questions . Britannica.
 This Time in History videos show what happened this month in history . In these videos, find out what happened in this month's history .
 Student PortalBritannica is the ultimate student resource for key school subjects like history, government, literature, and more .
While this global health crisis continues to evolve, it can be useful to look to past pandemics to better understand how to respond today .
 Britannica BeyondWe've created a new place where questions are at the center of learning .
Britannica Presents Earth’s To-Do List for the 21st Century .
 Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions . Use the style manual to help with your questions .
 Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article . The article will be revised and updated .
 The principal exploited area of the field covers nearly 9,000 square miles south of the Donets River . Coal deposits also extend westward to the Dnieper River in the greater Donets Basin .
 Development in the last two decades of the 19th century was rapid . By 1913 the Donbas was producing 87 percent of the coal and 74 percent of pig iron .
Despite setbacks in World War I, absolute coal production continued to increase until the 1970s . Despite erosion of its relative position by the development of new coalfields, the production of coal continued to rise until 1970s.
Andrew Butko The Donbas still has large coal reserves, much of it of high quality . The mine is located in the Donets Basin, Ukraine .
 Of the proved reserves, about one-fourth are anthracite, concentrated chiefly at the eastern end of the field . Of the proven reserves, around one- fourth are Anthracite .
 A difficulty of the field is that seams are thin, averaging just under 3 feet . Only 40 are thick enough to be worked economically, according to experts .
 mining is now deep down to 2,000 feet for lignite and 5,900 feet for higher-quality bituminous and anthracite coals . Most thicker seams and those nearer the surface have been worked out .
 The area remains the largest single producing area of iron and steel in Ukraine . It is one of the world’s major metallurgical and heavy-industrial complexes .
Iron ore is obtained from Kryvyy Rih to the west, and manganese is mined at Nikopol and Marhanets on the Dnieper . Iron ore is obtain from Kryvy Rih.
 The chief ironand steel-producing towns of the basin, together with Luhansk, Kramatorsk, and other centres, have a range of heavy-engineering industries .
 The chemical industry is well developed, based on coking by-products and rock salt mined in the Donets Basin . The main chemical towns are Artemivsk and Slov’yansk; the main chemical town is Artemvsk .
 Mercury is also mined in the Donets Basin, and cement making is important . Cement making is also important .
 A wide range of light and consumer-goods industries have been introduced to diversify the economy and supply the needs of the large urban populations .
 The Scythians had established a presence in the lands of the Donbas by the 7th century bce . Many nomadic peoples of the Western Steppe passed through the area over subsequent centuries .
 By the 16th century the settled population began to grow, and control of the area was divided between the Zaporozhian Cossacks and the khanate of Crimea in the south .
 The kings of Poland and the princes of Muscovy attempted to exert their influence in the region . They enlisted the Cossacks to check the advances of the Tatars.
 The Crimean War cut off Russia’s access to imported coal from England . Large-scale commercial exploitation of the region began only after the coming of the railways in the 1870s .
 An ironworks was set up in 1872 by Welsh engineer John Hughes at the site of present-day Donetsk . Several attempts to establish a metallurgical industry in the Donbas were unsuccessful .
 The Donbas began to expand dramatically after the completion of a railway to the iron ore mines of Kryvyy Rih . By the beginning of World War I, the Donbas had developed into the principal ironand steel-producing region of the Russian Empire .
Joseph Stalin's Five-Year Plans greatly accelerated industrial development in the Donbas during the interwar years . Soviet leader Joseph Stalin’s Five-year plans greatly accelerated industry development .
 Many of the workers attracted to the growing industrial cities in the Donbas came from Russia .
Urban centres of the Donbas became highly Russified islands in what had been a Ukrainian rural sea . As a result, the urban centres became highlyRussified islands .
 Many industrial assets were destroyed by the Soviets ahead of the German advance as part of their scorched-earth retreat . Local population suffered brutal treatment under Nazi occupation .
 The great devastation of World War II accelerated the reequipment of factories and mines with modern machinery . concentration into larger units during reconstruction made economies of scale possible .
 The Donbas became a major industrial engine of the economy of independent Ukraine . With the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Donbas was a major economic engine of Ukraine .
 The region also served as the political base of Viktor Yanukovych, a pro-Russian politician who would play a significant role in early 21st-century Ukraine .
 Leonid Kuchma presented Yanukovych as his successor, but Yanukovych faced a strong challenge from opposition leader Viktor Yushchenko .
 Yanukovych and Yushchenko faced each other in the second round of the 2004 presidential election . exit polls gave Yushhenko the clear lead .
 Russian Pres. Yanokovych was declared victorious, but a result that was quickly recognized by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Yushchenko was generally regarded as the winner of the Orange Revolution . His supporters maintained that the results were fabricated, and a mass protest movement began .
 Moscow-supported politicians recognized Yanukovych as president and considered a referendum on whether the Ukrainian oblasti of Donetsk and Luhansk should become autonomous and ultimately secede from Ukraine and join Russia . In Syeverodonetsk, in the Donbas, a meeting of
 In December 2004 the presidential election results were annulled by the Supreme Court . A second runoff was held, in which Yushchenko was declared the winner .
Viktor Yanukovych was forced into a power-sharing agreement with Yanukovych as his prime minister .
 Yanukovych was elected president in 2010 . He immediately pivoted away from the pro-European course that Yushchenko had set in favour of a strongly pro-Russian foreign and domestic policy .
 In 2012, Yanukovych signed a law that granted local authorities the power to confer official status upon minority languages . In cities throughout the Donbas, this meant the recognition of Russian as an official language .
 Yanukovych signaled his willingness to conclude an association agreement with the European Union in late 2013 . In spite of Yanukovych’s obvious affinity for Russia, he signaled his desire for an association with the EU .
 Yanukovych opted not to sign the agreement after a visit with Putin in Moscow . Protesters took to the streets within hours of the about-face .
 In February 2014, Yanukovych attempted to quash the demonstration with a bloody crackdown that killed dozens of protesters and destroyed his political base .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia. Impeached by an overwhelming parliamentary majority that included members of his own party .
 Within days Putin, deprived of his lever in Kyiv, invaded the Ukrainian autonomous republic of Crimea .
 Putin spent the next month consolidating his grip on Crimea . In April 2014 Russian-backed militants and Russian troops seized control of the Donbas .
 Pro-Russian separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk proclaimed their independence on August 13, 2014 .
 During the summer of 2014, the Ukrainian military pushed back Russian and separatist forces throughout the Donbas, recapturing the cities of Mariupol, Slov’yansk, and Kramatorsk .
 Tens of thousands of people were internally displaced by the fighting . Damage to infrastructure within the conflict zone disrupted access to water and electrical power .
 Several attempts were made to negotiate a cease-fire, and in February 2015 talks in Minsk, Belarus, led to an agreement . Most heavy weapons were withdrawn from the line of contact that ran through the Donbas .
 By 2022 the war in the Donbas had claimed more than 14,000 lives . This did not mean an end to the fighting, however, and by 2022 the fighting had killed more than 15,000 people .
 Putin had denied involvement of Russian personnel in the Donbas war . In late 2021 it appeared that Russia was preparing for overt military action against Ukraine .
 Moscow stated that the massing of troops and matériel along the Ukrainian border was nothing more than an exercise . But Western analysts characterized the buildup as clear evidence of a planned invasion .
 Putin recognized independence of self-proclaimed people's republics of Donetsk and Luhansk in February 2022 . Putin's intentions were made clear when he recognized the independence of the republics .
 Russian troops poured into Ukraine from Crimea, Belarus, and southwestern Russia . Three days later, Ukraine's defense was soon checked by a tenacious Ukrainian defense .
 As the Russian drive on Kyiv faltered, the focus shifted to the Donbas . Many of Ukraine’s most seasoned units were holding the line .
 Putin sought to salvage his “special military operation’s “ special military operation.” by “liberating” the Donbas . Putin was frustrated by a poor performance by the Russian military .
 Putin claimed Ukrainian forces were carrying out a genocide against Russian speakers in the Donbas . As his casus belli, Putin had claimed, falsely, that Ukrainian forces had killed Russian speakers .
 The Russian invasion caused significantly more death and hardship than the previous eight years of conflict . Cities like Mariupol were essentially razed by indiscriminate Russian artillery strikes .