 As the Commander of the Air Force Commissioned Officer Training and Reserve COT programs, she was responsible for initial officership and leadership training for approximately 1,600 newly commissioned chaplains, health professionals, and judge advocates annually .
 As a strategist, she contributed to the Combat Air Forces strategic plan and programming guidance . She also contributed to Combat Air Force strategic plan, programming guidance.
 She was tasked in 2010 to ensure policy and strategy linkage within a 51-country Area of Responsibility . She is a strategy specialist to the Office of Defense Cooperation Division .
 Russia’s long, volatile history has been shaped in part by violent struggles using the proverbial sword to maintain its survival and territorial integrity .
 NATO can use diplomatic and informational actions to blunt Putin’s sword. Despite the proven effectiveness of Putin's hybrid approach as seen in Ukraine in 2014, there are diplomatic, informational actions that NATO can employ .
 In Putin’s hybrid approach, information is being used as an ambiguous weapon with effective results, unlike the more clear-cut conventional approach .
 A comprehensive communication campaign to counter Putin’s misinformation is imperative, says CNN .
 At the heart of this strategic campaign should be substantial counter-information operations and information defense intended to expose Putin’s misinformation .
 NATO should revise the Article V verbiage to include the use of hybrid tools and explicitly articulate what will trigger an Article V response . To reinforce this effort, NATO should use hybrid tools, NATO says .
 NATO could find itself ill-prepared to deal with Putin's next ambiguous engagement that may very well be within NATO’s borders .
 The result could be, at best, a weakened Alliance, shaken by uncertainty of the collective defense of its members . The Alliance could be at best.
 In the worst case scenario, Putin succeeds at permanently shattering North Atlantic security establishment .
 Russia’s sword today displays a distracting ornamental exterior, while still retaining the piercing qualities from the days of old .
 Putin utilizes these tools by propagating pro-Russian misinformation in areas with larger ethnic Russian populations . Russian hackers attack former Soviet republics’ electronic infrastructure, while hackers attack ex-Soviet republics.
 Ukraine is not currently in NATO, but it is of deep historical significance to Moscow . The Russian elites view keeping Ukraine in Russia's orbit a vital national interest .
 Putin's misinformation operations and unmarked special purpose forces set the stage for an illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula in 2014 . The world largely stood by and watched as Putin’s misinformation operations.
 NATO can use diplomatic and informational actions to blunt Putin’s cloaked sword in Ukraine . Despite the proven effectiveness of Putin's hybrid approach in Ukraine, there are diplomatic, informational actions that NATO can employ .
 Russia emerged as a great European power and an influential player on the world stage . Russia's Struggle for Survival and Territorial Integrity follows Napoleon's defeat .
Britain nibbled at the extremities of the Russian territory in the 1853-1854 Crimean war, leaving ethnic Russians under British control .
 Throughout the nineteenth century, Russia utilized both military might and diplomacy to maintain its survival and sphere of influence in the region .
 In 1917, while Russia internally struggled for its very survival as a nation during the revolution, externally, Russia's sovereign borders were being drawn by the remaining great powers .
 After World War II, Russia regained control of Baltic states and Ukraine and maintained it until the collapse of the empire in 1991 .
 The former Soviet republics quickly sought independence from the Soviet Union . In many cases, they were granted independence .
 The once-great Russian empire crumbled, leaving behind many ethnic Russians on the opposite side of new borders .
 NATO subsequently welcomed new members from among former Warsaw Pact satellites of the Soviet Union as well as the three Baltic republics . NATO also welcomed members from the threeBaltic republics.
 Russia has maintained a deliberate interest in strategically relevant former Soviet republics . Russia favors a wide range of strategies to maintain footholds in them .
 Irregular Warfare A violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population. Irregular warfare a violent struggle for legitimacy.
 Russia is trying to exploit ambiguity and assure Russia’s survival and territorial integrity while evading a NATO reaction . They are designed to exploit ambiguity and assure Russian's survival .
 Russia's hybrid tools weave the fabric of its overall military doctrine . Russia’s hybrid tools are used to create the Russian military doctrine.
 General Valery Gerasimov, Russia’s Chief of the General Staff, claimed in February 2013 . In February 2013, he claimed that he was in charge of the Russian army .
 The broad use of political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary measures is supplemented by military means of a concealed character . Military means include carrying out actions of informational conflict and actions of special operations forces .
 Moscow applied several concepts to slice away the Crimean peninsula and assault eastern Ukraine right under the international community’s nose .
 Putin’s recent use of hybrid tools throughout his neighborhood underseores the trepidation .
 Russia's Recent Use of the Hybrid Approach is espeeially relevant in an age of almost immediate access to information to mueh of the world’s population . The Kremlin has long eontrolled the media and employed propaganda shamelessly .
Messages of nationalist sentiment are intended to keep proRussian attitudes in the forefront . For example, “Moscow’s large TV, radio and internet presence is part of a hybrid battle for the Baltic hearts and minds.
 Putin's "information army" pose as journalists who appear on RT as “experts. The goal is to obseure the truth by spreading alternative versions of reality . This is designed to shed a positive light on Russia, distract audiences and diseredit Western sources .
 The Kremlin's latest propaganda effort has opened at least 29 new media offices in Central and Western Europe . The Kremlin is even setting up shop in Latin 4 America .
 Putin’s “online trolls work out of an office called the ‘Internet Research Center’ in St. Petersburg, Russia . Also, Putin's ‘online trolls’ work from an office.
 Estonian citizens rely heavily on e-commerce and online transactions . The country's leaders also use online briefings as a primary means of informing the public .
 denial-of-service attacks were particularly effective in Estonia . Estonia is heavily reliant on the Internet for information and services .
 “The war in eastern Ukraine is a Kremlin-manufactured conflict,’ says a Russian Hybrid Approach in Ukraine . A Case Study The Russian Hybrid approach in Ukraine.
 The war’s toll-6,200 dead, tens of thousands wounded and maimed, and over 1. million displaced persons-is the direct result of Russian President Vladimir Putin's efforts to establish control over Ukraine .
 A closer look of Russia’s 2014 actions in Ukraine highlights Russia's use of hybrid tools to accomplish its strategic objectives . U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
 Russia has developed a strong Anti-Access/Area Denial capability in the Black Sea, says General Philip Breedlove .
 Many Ukrainians desired closer integration with Europe and a corruption-free government chosen through a democratic election . Many Ukrainians wanted closer integration and closer integration.
 Ukrainian government's turn away from an Association Agreement with the European Union turned violent following brutal beatings of student protesters and implementation of antidemocratic legislation .
 Putin regarded this revolution as another instance of Western influence in his backyard . He took advantage of a fractured society to wield his influence .
 His fear of a democratic stronghold in 'Little Russia' prompted him to use all means available towards his objective of reorienting Ukraine eastward .
 Russia’s state-dominated media also controlled the flow and content of information across much of eastern Ukraine .
 Russian equipment and special purpose forces in unmarked uniforms funneled in under the guise of normal resupply activity through the Sevastopol base under lease to Russia until 2044 .
 Putin proclaimed to the world that ethnic Russians were in danger in Ukraine . Moscow denied involvement and labeled these self-defense militias .
 A pro-Russian mayor was put in place in Sevastopol that declared he would not accept orders from the “fascist, illegal’ regime in Kyiv .
 Putin signed a bill two days later annexing the peninsula to Russia . Using a falsified referendum that was not internationally recognized, Putin signed the bill .
 Road-Testing Rapid Reaction Capabilities, November/December 2014, 48.3, is a new book .
 Putin answered charges of aggression that these were Russian soldiers on their holiday or recently discharged servicemen, all there of their own accord .
 Three Ukrainian power firms confirmed the existence of BlackEnergy malware on their servers in December 2015 . The malware caused power outages across the country .
 The same malware was reported in January 2016, from Ukraine’s largest airport, Boryspil . It was reported from Ukraine's largest airport.
 The airport is responsible for over half of Ukraine's air traffic . This attack is particularly menacing since the airport isresponsible for overhalf of Ukraine’s traffic .
 The attacks are being attributed to Russian hackers . Information technology security experts are scrambling to secure the country’s infrastructure from future attacks .
 In May, “rebels from the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts declared the establishment of New Russia’s New Russia . 9 crossed the Ukxainian/Russian border .
 Maintaining popular support throughout the Russian population is essential to Putin’s political power base . Putin's power base is key to his political power.
 Putin intends to continue to spin the story to his liking and avoid NATO's involvement in what he considers his domestic affairs .
Russia's large ethnic Russian population and unstable central government gave Putin an opportunity to test the West with his hybrid tools . Russia's new reformist administration in Kyiv.
 Putin and the Russian elites expressed concern that this “demoeraey promotion’ would spread to Russia . In some cases, regimes were challenged, and in some cases toppled, throughout the Arab Spring .
 The U.S. is the only member of NATO in Europe . The United States is the second largest member of the European Union .
 Article V states. They do not clearly present themselves as “an armed attack’s” as Article V state . They don’t clearly state themselves as an armed attack, they say .
 The European Union is trying to prepare the "battlespace" of the European community . It is intended to undermine the unity of the community, rather than prepare the ‘battlepace’ Instead, they are intended to indirectly prepare “batt
 Putin could very well be on his way to securing his objectives without mobilizing conventional forces or pulling the Article V trigger .
After the fall of the Soviet Union and the disbanding of the Warsaw Pact, many questioned the relevance of NATO .
 Russia clings to outdated notions of international relations, believing it is entitled to an exclusive sphere of influence . Russia believes it's entitled to a sphere of power, but it is not .
Only now, Moscow wields an ornamental, but still razor-sharp, sword to maintain its territory . Only now, the Russian capital has a razor- sharp sword.
 The immediate concern for NATO’s leadership is who Putin might target next or worse yet, who is already under assault by Russian hybrid methods .
 Two possible areas of concern are the Baltic states and the Black Sea region . The Baltic states are the most populous countries in the world .
 Baltic states of Estonia and Latvia make a potential target . Formerly under direct Soviet rule, with large ethnic Russian populations and small defense forces .
 Romania, Bulgaria, Moldova, and Georgia also present targets of opportunity in the Black Sea region . Georgia and Romania also present opportunities in the region .
 These countries have vulnerabilities that Russia can use (or use) for its own purposes . Russia can also use its own vulnerabilities to protect its own interests .
 Moscow can exploit these issues as a foot in the door. Whether it is pro-Russian enclaves (Transnistria in Moldova or Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia) or economic dependence Moscow can exploited these issues .
 Moscow has often charged large ethnic Russian populations with mistreatment . EU and NATO members with large ethnic Russians are often charged with mistreating .
 Russia recognized and set up military bases in two breakaway regions in 2008 . Percentage of the population that is ethnic Russian in former Soviet Republics is less than 2% .
 Georgia and most of the rest of the world hasn't recognized the territories . Georgia and the other countries in the U.S. haven't recognized them .
 Ethnic Russians in breakaway Transnistria region have asked Moscow for protection .
 Russian troops could, in two days, be in Kiev, Vilnius, Tallinn, Warsaw, and Bucharest .
 A comprehensive co mm unication campaign to counter Putin’s misinformation is imperative . The campaign is imperative to counter the Putin's misinformation .
 Reassurance measures include bolstering the ongoing air policing mission and increased infantry exercises in the Baltics . Additional ship transits through the Black Sea, and additional exercises of NATO air assets.
 This guidance requires an update and sharpened focus on a collective way forward . This guidance needs an update. This guidance must be sharpened on the way forward.
 The importance of seizing the strategic narrative and assuring the accuracy of the information is being communicated to NATO and U.S. domestic audiences alike can't be overstated .
 The U.S. media is clearly not controlled by the government, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the media should be more clear and concise .
 The message needs to reflect NATO’s way forward and be proliferated across the media spectrum, says the U.S.
Broadcasters funded by the U.S. government are instrumental in providing the truth to eountless citizens under Putin’s umbrella of misinformation .
 2016 research effort comes on the heels of an updated strategic communication directive . 15 chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee is a tremendous advocate for exposing Putin’s misinformation .
 We do not need to engage in an information war, rather we need to empower civil society, journalists and citizens to distinguish between fact and fiction . We need to be able to make sure we don't engage in a information war .
 Estonia was nearly crippled by the cyber attack on its infrastructure in 2007 . To reinforce this effort, NATO should “clearly articulate what counts as an attack under Article”
 The Alliance concluded that determination on whether a cyber attack on one of its members invokes Article V action would be made on a case-by-case basis . Russia’s ‘little green men’ were successful in preparing Crimea for a Russian annexation long before the confirmed appearance
 Russia choosing not to cooperate with international cybersecurity initiatives and already skilled in the use of unmarked special purpose forces . revised Article V verbiage to address use of hybrid tools is imperative .
 A resolute strategic communication program will uncover Putin’s misinformation and hamper his attempts to delegitimize Western institutions . The program includes counter-information techniques and information defense .
 Putin is still exploiting these methodologies within NATO countries today . This will better prepare member countries and partners for Russia’s hybrid approach as implemented in Ukraine .
 Czuperski, Maksymilian, John Herbst, Eliot Higgins, Alina Polyakova, and Damon Wilson are among those who have been named .
 A Primer on Modem Russian Unconventional Warfare, Ukraine 20132014,’s ‘Russian Un Conventional Warfare’ , 38.
 Ed Royce, “Countering Putin’s Information Weapons of War,” Wall Street Journal, April 14, 2015 .
 Mark Conversino, Northeast Europe Regional Culture Studies lecture #1, 5 January 2016 . The lecture will be held in New York City .
 Three Aspects of Russia’s Current Information Campaign in Ukraine,’ Journal of Slavic Military Studies, Volume 28, 2015, 301 .
 The Russian People. McIntosh, “Kyiv, International Institutions, and the Russian People’s Russian People,” 299 people were killed .
 A Pre-Emptive Strategy for Dealing with the New Disinfomation Wars,” Beyond Propaganda, London, England.
 Getting NATO Ready for a New Cold War,’s Survival, Volume 57, Number 1, February-March 2015, 60 .
 James Clapper, “Worldwide Threat Assessment of the United States Intelligence Community,’s ‘Worldwide threat assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community’, released February 2015 .