 The award-winning military officer is a graduate of the U.S. Army's Advanced Operational Arts Studies Fellowship . He is a member of the Advanced Military Studies Program . He has been awarded a three-year fellowship in the past .
 ABSTRACT International actors engage in cyber warfare to include the People's Republic of China, the Democratic People’s Republic of North Korea, the Islamic Republic of Iran, and non-state actors .
 Cyber warfare evolved into synchronized activities to achieve strategic objectives . Cyber warfare has evolved into synchronised activities.
 The characteristics of cyberspace amplify the aspects of cross-domain warfare within the framework of operational art . This research asserts that the characteristics of cyberberspace amplifies aspects ofCross- domain warfare . The research is based on the findings of a new study by the
 The case study evaluated the Russian Federation cyber operations in time and space to support a theory that cyber and land force actions can transform mutual operational reach .
 The study employed modeling of observed interactions which indicate synchronous land and cyber power change the construct of the operational art .
 The study provides a conceptual framework to aid in answering the following questions . The study is based on a series of questions.
 Cyberwarfare, cyber-joint operations, Russo-Ukrainian conflict, and cyberwarfare .
vi Acronyms.vii Illustrations.ix.ix Introduction . The author of the book is known for his work .
 Williams family has given its all and sacrificed to support the U.S. Army and myself for twelve years .
 My wife, Kimberley and Aaron, my son, gave up their last few years for the service and the research .
 We hope our contribution significantly provided toward the understanding and answered the illusive questions hidden in this body of study . We hope we will be able to answer these questions.
 Bruce Stanley, Lt Col Todd Puntney, Colonel Peter Im have supported his wild spirit of discovery . Bruce Stanley's personal development.
 "You all set me along the path toward the School of Advanced Military Studies, thank you gentlemen," he says .
 Majors Joe DiDomenico, Chad Corbin, Tennille Scott, Ryan Hand, and Brian Walker have provided incredible input and peer development to this study and my professional development .
Tony and Josh, do your best, serve your country, always care for your family . Tony and Josh. Do your best and serve your family, serve the country .
An important feature of a learning machine is that its teacher will often be very largely ignorant of what is going on inside . Jeffrey Carr, a cyber intelligence expert, observes that the complexity and secrecy of cyberspace have confounded the thinking of senior national security leadership .
 Turing along with others at Bletchley Park, United Kingdom built the cyber-mind to decrypt the communications within “Enigma,” “Fish,’ and “Magic’ that connected the Axis Powers’ through a global electromagnetic communications network .
 UK concentrates on decrypting, on cryptanalysis against German and Italian . Obvious solution UK concentrate on decrypts, on encrypting .
 Sir Harry Hinsley: "The Influence of ULTRA in the Second World War" (lecture) "The influence of U LTRA in World War II"
 ARPANET’s design became the framework of modem cyberspace that has been embedded to control human space . The design was designed to allow people to control their space .
 ARPANET’S survivable structure provided the means for cyber war to go beyond signals and technical intelligence within the framework that became the Internet .
 By the 1980s, cyberattacks against infrastructure, economies, and intellectual property had begun to appear . The first documented cases of cyberattacks were against infrastructure and economies .
 The Russian Federation enhanced attacks through cyberspace against Georgia in 2008 and later synthesized cyber and land power during the invasion of Ukraine in 2014 . By the twenty-first century, the Russian Federation had enhanced offensive attacks against Georgia .
 The significance of this research provides an initial contribution to the theory and understanding of cyberspace and the general theory of warfare . The significance is the first contribution to this research .
 Computer Network research documented in the January 1 to June 30, 1972, marked the beginning of the Internet . The Internet is universally recognized as the start of the internet .
ARPANET began the standard of global networks that became the internet and all classical network protocol structures . The technical specifications and control structure developed through ARPANet .
 Richard Clarke served as the National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection, and Counterterrorism . He says Cyber Operations reflects the Joint definition of Cyber Operations .
 General Dempsey recognized that the resonance between domains of warfare depends on their interaction of behaviors and capabilities within the context of operational outcomes . Dempsey recognized the resonance of the conflict depends on the interaction of behavior and capabilities .
 planners may employ these interactions to exploit systemic domain advantages . Theoretically, planners may use this to exploit system advantages .
 The associated interactions between cyberspace and cross-domain warfare must be understood to form optimal options for commanders . The associated interaction between cyber warfare and cyberspaces must be considered .
An understanding of this resonance in warfare leads to choices and opportunities . An understanding of the resonance in war leads to opportunities and choices .
Land power must be synchronized with cyber operations for operational reach . First, if land operations alter the state of cyberspace, then land power must also be synchronized .
Cyberspace may alter the available time, space and purpose of land warfare . Second, if cyber operations impact landpower, then cyberspace could alter the availability of land power .
 Two focused questions were used to gather the empirical evidence to test the hypotheses . The results were published on Monday .
 The research potentially provides a cognitive framework of operational art that conjoins cyber operations with the other domains in the joint context . The research could provide a framework of cyber operations.
 The research material focused on only unclassified publicly known actions attributable to the Russian Federation between March 2013 and January 2015 within the territory of Ukraine .
 The primary purpose of analysis centered on the interaction of cyberpower and landpower . The primary goal of analysis is to understand how cyberpower affects land power .
 The paper attempted to frame a complex system to conceptualize the interaction of cyberspace and provide greater clarity for understanding cross-domain warfare . The paper was published in the UK.
 Army Design Methodology AY 2011-12 (Fort Leavenworth: School of Advanced Military Studies, 2011): 16-7 .
First, hacker culture imposes a degree of internal social context concerning the conduct of cyberspace activities . First, hackerculture imposes a level of social context about cyberspaces .
 The Russian Federation campaign evolved its operational approach from a theory of “deep battle” during multiple decades before 2013 . Second, regardless of multiple puiposes for synchronization of cyber operations with land formations.
 The reduction to land, space and cyber does not obfuscate the overall interactions of other natural domains. Finally, the reduction to space and space does not obscenate the interactions of others .
 The literature review builds a theoretical and conceptual context of operational art and cyberspace . It connects to the contextual model of cyberspaces relative to other domains of warfare for further analysis .
 The methodology provides a framework of the structured focused approach to assess cyberspace's characteristics and apply operational art for an established process . Next, the methodology provides the framework of a structured focus approach to assessing cyberspaces .
 The findings section synthesizes the evidence of the case study within the theoretical hypothesizes .
 The conclusion draws from the findings to recommend an application of cyberpower within joint operations . The conclusion is based on the findings.
 RFCs provide the collaborative framework in which all internet terms, references, design, and implementation are based . RFCs are based on a collaborative framework for the internet .
 An RFC is the doctrinal and capability implementation of cyberspace . In military terms, an RFC is a military term for the implementation of the technology .
 The assumptions are that hacker culture imposed a humanist character to the physics of the cyber environment . The assumptions were made by hacker culture .
 Operational art is framed within the context of Russian deep battle theory and academic models of joint cyber-land operations .
 A theoretical model of operational art provides a cognitive framework to seize success in modern warfare . Theoretic model provides a theoretical model for operational art .
 SAMS founder, Brigadier General Huba Wass De Czege, described operational art as the genius to apply tactical actions toward strategic ends in time, space, and purpose .
 Russian operational art adapted deep battle to solve the obstacles of early post-World War I breakout . The art was used to solve obstacles of post-WWI breakout .
 Naveh described the Russian theorist Tukhachevsky’s ideas had substituted destruction ‘Verichtung’ of armies with the concept of operational shock ‘ udar’ that leads to the annihilation of the enemies’ war systems by the race of
 Both 20th century German and Russian operational theories link the Prussian theories of Clausewitz and Moltke the Elder to the problem environment observed by Georgii Samoilovich Isserson .
 The Army Doctrine and Training Bulletin 4, no. , 50-1. The Intellectual Culture of the Interwar German Army, 50-2 .
 Tukachevsky as interpreted by ‘annihilation’ which he implored as the military end state and Naveh post-edited as a strategic end, annihilation .
 He proposed composing sequences of actions in time and into the depths of enemy spaces . He proposed compose sequences of action in time, into enemy spaces.
 The Russians balanced combinations of operational capabilities of each combined arms unit within each strike force based off of the predicted operational circumstances . The Russians then balanced combination of operations based on the expected operational circumstances of each unit .
 On War, edited and translated by Michael Howard and Peter Paret, 209; Naveh, In Pursuit of Military Excellence, 33 . On War. On War is written by Howard and Paret .
 Richard W Harrison, Architect of Soviet Victory in World War II, 114. The architect of Soviet victory in WWII was the architect of the Soviet Union .
 The United States military adopted operational art as a transformative concept after 1978 . The U.S. military adopted the concept of operational art in 1978 .
 The U.S. military codified operational art as a cognitive function to operationalize national means and achieve political ends to counter Soviet deep battle doctrine .
 American operational art became a cognitive approach to alter opposed systems by attacking decisive points through a synchronization across the temporal depth of the battle area . Similar to the Russian theory, American Operational Art became a Cognitive approach .
 Global cyber warfare potentially provides an extradimensional means that complements deep battle and amplifies immediate land warfare . The threat of cyber warfare could be extradimensional, according to experts .
 Alan Turing hypothesized that the engineers of the military global intelligence apparatus would not be able to understand the logic to which it operated . He said the engineers would be unable to understand what they operated .
 The makers of the U.S.’ ARPANET could not foresee the global implications of control or cognitive spaces their system would create . For instance, the makers could not anticipate the global impact of the system .
 The architects of the new synthetic human domain had no means of understanding the consequence of the complex open system that they had designed .
 The open system evolved from hackers in elite clubs at engineering universities to plan digitized assaults between nation-states . The system was developed from hackers at elite clubs to plan assaults between nations .
Military practitioners adopted the hacker mentality and methods that weaponized human innovation . Military practitioners adopted a hacker mentality.
 Cybernetic manipulations mirrored military operational art to exploit enemy weaknesses and gain temporal dominance . The effects of cybernetic manipulation mirrored military operations to exploit weaknesses .
 The ‘Imitation Game’ logically extends to consider the creation of the electromechanical mind . A complex adaptive system that exceeds the cognitive understanding of those who brought the new intelligence into existence .
 The reports detail the progression of specifications for ARPANET and the integration of space telecommunication systems . The reports also detail the progress of the development of the system .
 Reports in 1973 begin to describe the process of system security as an endless task . However, in 1973, the reports in 1973 began to describe it as a lengthy task .
 Dolman connects the conservation of time to the tactical engagements that achieve control of tempo and the prediction of these acts by strategy . Dolman also connects the Conservation of time and the predictability of these actions by strategy. Dolman: "The conservation ofTime is key to the success of
 Operational art seeks to adapt to 10 became systems synchronized by autonomous parts . The world's first autonomous systems became synchronized by 10 systems .
 Twentieth century commanders struggled to maintain control and prevent their opponents from attacking their systems .
 The U.S. defense theorists developed the doctrine of Network-Centric Warfare to employ the advantages of defensive cyber power .
 Between 1990 to 2005, early information age theorists framed cyber power as sharing knowledge across all networked nodes rapidly to outpace adversary decision cycles and seize an asymmetric advantage .
 The NCW theory ignored the counter threat of cyberpower which could attack its functions . NCW's theory ignored a counter threat to cyberpower that could attack it .
 The net-centric and net-war conceptualization of cyber power employed the idea of rapid-complete situational awareness and action . The idea was the concept of rapid, complete situational awareness, action .
 John Arquilla’s description of the employment of cyber capabilities by various non-state actors proposed a concept for net-war which complements Libicki's, the lead theorist of NCW .
NCW’s asymmetric advantages predicated on asymmetric benefits while exposing cohesive systems to cyber-attack . However, these theories evangelize flawed asymmetric advantage, according to the authors .
 Cyber reliance expands the cyber-surface area that opponents could assault into cognitive and physical space provided from advanced microprocessor enhanced systems interconnectivity .
 Cyberspace operates from a standardized network system architecture which provides simple approaches to overcome complex problem sets . The network is designed to provide simple solutions to complex problems .
 The Transmission Control Protocol/Internet emerging situations continually . The transmission control protocol is used to control the Internet .
 Dolman links his ideas to Boyd's OODA loop as an attempt to achieve this goal . Dolman says his ideas are similar to the idea of a loop in the world .
 TCP/IP system provides optimal routing services for legitimate use . The open source, globally understood, is globally understood .
 The same norms of "good practice" generate attack surfaces for hackers . However, the same norms are used by hackers to generate attacks .
Cyberspace's transmutable interactions imposed by collective engineering agreements created operational gaps through simplicity . Cyberspace’s transmutable interaction with collective engineering agreement created operational gap .
 Hackers could alter the rules of logical cyberspace and manipulate the relative characteristics of time and space across domains .
 The malleability of the TCP/IP architecture, computer code, and even hardware "states" allow the operating laws to be transformed for divergent purposes .
Cyberspace after 1991 provided an immense environment for hackers to exploit the engineered laws of cyberspace . Cyberspace was created after 1991 .
 Practitioners and executives discounted the legal perils of manipulation in the 1990s as security issues to litigate hackers in Western states .
 The art of hacking became a criminal sub-culture within the U.S. Instead, the art of hackers became a crime sub- culture .
 Cyber security firm Symantec implicated the Stuxnet creators as a nation-state that employed over 13 hacker tactics, techniques, and procedures which destroyed the strategic Iranian nuclear reactors at Natanz .
 cyberspace provided a global means to control populations, industry, media, and ultimately institutions of reality . Meanwhile cyberspaces provided a worldwide means for control of populations and industry .
Cyberspace exploded as a world of blind users, rebellious hackers, and professionalized cyber-authoritarians .
 cyberspace requires the Electro Magnetic Spectrum to propagate efficiently . First, cyberspaces requires the electro magnetic Spectrum to propagate efficiently .
Second, cyberspace needs man-made physical objects to generate nodes within its topography . Second, cyber space needs men-made objects to create nodes within topography.
 Fourth, cyberspace's barriers to entry decrease rapidly relative to Moore’s Law . The law is based on Moore's Law .
 Fifth, offense rather than defense is the dominant form of warfare in cyberspace, says the author .
 Cyber warfare is not information warfare but warfare within a domain that can significantly impact all the physical domains and control environments including that of information . Cyber warfare can impact the physical domain and control environment of information.
 Cyber operations require a set of domain characteristics to establish a basis for analysis . Cyber operations need to establish the basis for an analysis .
David S. Alberts and Richard E Hayes, Power to the Edge, 90-3, are the top three defense secretaries .
Moore's law states that each year the number of transistors in a fabricated dye will double . Moore's law says each year each year, the amount of transistor in a fabrication dye willdouble .
 The information technology sector has observed the same relative exponential growth in processor rates for the last three decades .
 The human information space and the physical connections of cyberspace did not collocate in the natural world but delimited through the logical layer of cyber space . The human info space and physical connections were not collocated in the real world .
 cyberspace has been made to transmit as a medium the human modality of information but is not controlled by the information constructs . 13 other domain theorists, Mahan, Corbett, Mitchell, and Klein, propose the fundamental characteristics of cyberwarfare .
 Mahan's stress on the defense and communications from remote ports provides the strength to the fleet . Mahan: The stress on defense is the strength of the fleet. Mahan says it is a strength for the fleet to stay on the ground .
 He theoretically linked sea and land operations as essential for strategic success . He said they should have been linked to strategic success.
Cyberspace relies on the physical nodes that conceptually interconnect from the physical infrastructure . Cyberspace is based on the concept of interconnecting physical nodes .
 Giulio Douhet philosophized that instead of the mass slaughter seen during the Great War, absolute war rapidly imposes on the opposing force through air power would prove decisive .
 cyber power leverages Douhet’s concepts of strategic bombing, immediate air supremacy with those of Billy Mitchell .
 Cyber power, like air power, must gain temporal dominance in the cyber domain . Cyber power must gain time dominance in cyber domain, says cyber expert .
Space power does not have an operational theory or artist connected to it . The domain does have principles that can contribute to the understanding of cyberspace .
 Space power like air and sea power requires the use of choke points or hubs of activity . Space power is like air, sea power.
 Space relies on satellites in discreet orbits controlled by air, sea, or land infrastructure to maintain advantageous positions .
 The orbits of space power like the sea lines of communication provide equal utility to all nations and highly sought after connections in cyber power .
 Space Control measures taken to prevent an adversary's hostile use of US/third-party space capabilities or offensive operations .
 Cyber operations require control of advantageous position in cyberinfrastructure and logical space . Like space operations, cyber operations need control of an advantageous position, like space operations .
 Air Force General Benard predicted precision guided munitions by space age fighters could defeat Warsaw Pact ‘follow-on forces’ and thus support AirLand Doctrine .
 The Men, Machines, and Ideas That Revolutionized War. From 15 Central Command Commander, General Schwarzkopf, the ability to cut off supplies, isolate the Iraqi regime from ground forces .
 Cyber forces can be employed to achieve similar functions through the use of their unique attributes . Potentially, cyber forces can also be used to achieve the same functions through their attributes .
 Either space or cyber domains enable precision guided munitions essential for a minimalist operational approach .
 Antoine Bousquet questions the conclusions of Cebrwoski and the NCW concept as opposed to Boyd's cybernetic theory . He says observe, orient, decide, and act loop, and observe, Orient, decide and act loops .
 Bousquet concludes that Boyd sought to get inside an opponent's OODA cycle as an approach to achieve initiative, surprise, and deception beyond simply speed . Boyd seeks to get into an opponents' cycle as a way to achieve initiatives, surprise and deception .
 cyber warfare is an indirect means to overwhelm an opponent's offsets within a respective domain . Leonhard's concept of perception and tempo to Bousquet's critique of netcentric warfare enables a framework to see cyber warfare on the battlefield .
 This paper relies on five characteristics of cyberspace as the basis of analysis for the further study . The paper is published in the UK.
First, cyberspace requires man-made physical nodes within its topography . First, cybernations require man- made physical nodes .
 control of advantageous positions in cyber infrastructure and logical space enables warfare . Second, control of an advantageous position in the cyber infrastructure enables warfare. Third, control a position in a cyber infrastructure or logical space allows warfare .
 Third, cyberpower cannot succeed by opposing cyber forces but through the manipulation of cyber topography. Third, Cyberpower can only succeed through manipulation of topography .
 Fourth, cyber dominance enables the operational reach of cyber power through advantageous position and tempo . Cyber dominance enables cyber dominance through advantageous positions, tempo and position .
 Fifth, defense of safe cyber-ports ensure the stability of cyber topography and the lines of communication to other domains .
 Cyberspace is a complex adaptive system, second only to the natural world, in which manipulations of the system cause chaotic cascading effects .
 Achieving a position of advantage in cyberspace can theoretically be attained through maneuver in other domains . Achieved a position in cyber space can be attained by maneuver in another domain .
 The act of the sequencing of actions in time creates a frequency that cyberspace can amplify through harmonization . The acts of sequencing of action in time create a frequency of harmonization.
Three topics appeared that have contributed to the development of theory to provide for a structured focused case study . However, three topics appeared to have contributed.
 Osinga summarizes Boyd's Observe, Orient, Decide, Access loop as a cybernetic system in which each node affects the state of the next . The system is based on each node's ability to control the next system .
Cyberspace acts like a variable causing a closed system to open and transform rapidly in response . Cyberspace has been used as an example of how it can be used to help people in the world .
 Research provided a basis to support research for cyber-land interactions . Bradley Converse and Scott Applegate's research provided the basis for research .
 The study applies cyber power as a theoretical warfare framework . It combines the utility of cyberspace and operational art in warfare .
 Methodology used the structured focused approach of a single case study to construct findings that indicate the interaction that cyber operations enhance cross-domain warfare .
 The Russo-Ukrainian conflict provided evidence to support the research questions using the device of cyberspace characteristics .
 The five characteristics of cyberspace regarding the research questions frame the effectiveness of operational art in the scope of cross-domain warfare . The research questions whether the use of cyber warfare is effective in cross- domains .
 The structured focused methodology provided a way to assess the evidence that cross-domain warfare occurred in the Ukrainian theater . The structuredfocused methodology provided the evidence .
Land and cyber operations mutually impacted strategic outcomes regarding the operational reach and tempo of cyber operations . How land and cyber ops mutually impact strategic outcomes is a complex interaction.
 Cyber power appears to alter the time and purpose of land power regarding operational reach and tempo .
 Russian Federation applied joint operations with cyberpower and exploited the characteristics of cyberspace to enable operational reach and tempo .
 The observed interactions between land and cyber in the case study provide evidence that land-and- cyber maneuvers achieve operational synergy and a potential harmony .
 If the Russian Federation appreciated the interaction of land and cyber, then they would operationalize and synchronize each within a symbiotic setting .
 The Russian Federation cyber-actions to provide evidence that cyber and land force synchronization transformed mutual operational reach . Secondary sources supported observations that the Russian Federation Cyber-actions were to be investigated .
 Observed synchronous land and cyber applications construct a picture of operational tempo that transfigured the time, space, and puipose of events .
 The case study filtered events using validated observations in both domains of warfare . The study was based on validated observations of both warfare domains .
 The assessments identified and supported predictions that land and cyber maneuvers enhanced crossdomain actions . The assessments were based on the data from the U.S. National Security Council .
 Non-governmental sources, the open press, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization publications provided the bulk of information about the conflict .
 The study assumed that the Russian Federation manipulated the eastern European press .
 Ukrainian ministry investigations provided counter-perspective to Russian sources . Russian sources also provided evidence from Ukrainian investigations .
Russian land and cyber-forensic evaluations tied the actions of Russian land, cyber forces to 68 Alexander L George and Andrew Bennett, Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences . 20 clarify a picture of events .
 The critical events between cyber and land domains indicated a new impact of cross-domain activities . The critical event indicated a change in the way cyber-land domains are used .
 The structured focused approach methodology applied to the Russo-Ukrainian conflict facilitated the objectives of this monograph . The structuredfocused approach methodology applies to the Russian conflict .
 The balance of sources against possible cyber and attributional events determined the scope and tempo of operations in the Ukraine .
 Cyber warfare exposed a new approach in operational art through synchronous cross-domain implications . The justified hypothesizes that cyber warfare exposed the new approach .
 Blue forces redirected in cyberspace after Red Force destroys or manipulates the physical/logical nodes . Blue forces redirect or manipulate the physical or logical nodes.
 The combined operations between the Russian land and cyber forces leveraged several advantages against the Ukraine between 2013 and 2015 . The Russo-Ukrainian Conflict 2013 to 2015 was the biggest year of the conflict .
 Ukrainian cyber architecture and topological environment created a familiar set of considerations for Russian troops . Russian troops continually addressed through modification of their operations .
 The Russian land forces synchronized cyber and ground troops that diverged from the classical operational art of ‘deep battle’ within the context of cross-domain warfare .
 The Russian Federation maneuvered on land to affect cyber and vice versus. The Russian government is trying to stop the flow of information to Russia .
 The case study provides evidence of the mutual impact of land and cyber power . The study is based on a case study by the University of Cambridge .
 The case study presents evidence that the characteristics of cyberspace alter the application of operational art regarding cross-domain warfare . The study is based on a case study of the case study .
 Modern Russian Theory of Warfare Multiple American analysts assess "reflexive control" as the employment of all twentyfirst-century capabilities of national power into the frameworks of "deep battle" operations that manipulate an enemy .
 Lefebve first introduced the concept of reflexive control in the 1960s . The concept was first introduced in the 1970s .
 '22 employed cyberpower as another part of the framework of reflexive control equal to other military domains to create a positive environment for military action. The primary missions of special reconnaissance are acquiring intelligence on major economic and military installations and either destroying them or putting them out of action .
 The Russian's employ conventional forces as a phase of escalation to finalize an opponent nation into accepting the desired state . The Russian government uses conventional forces to finalise an opponent's request for a state .
 Russian Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov says that the open use of force comes from a stage following the manipulations of information and actions used by special forces .
Gerasimov declared that extensive use of force should be employed as the final step to conflict success . Above all Gerasimov said use of Force should be used as a final step.
 Maria Snegovaya, an expert in Russian political science from Columbia and the Wilson Center, says reflexive control is not only the Kremlin’s information warfare but an innovation of thought from Soviet doctrine .
 The Ukrainian experience of reflexive control should not be seen as something new but an adaption of deep battle . The Ukraine experience of Reflexive control is not a new thing .
 Russia's Snegovaya captures three key elements of Russia’s reflexive control techniques . Snegovay captures three of Russia's key elements.
 First, denial and deception operations concealed or obfuscated the presence of the Russian forces in Ukraine . First, deny and deception Operations concealed or obscured the presence, first, deception operations .
 The Russian Federation disguised goals and objectives that generated an acceptable conclusion within the Kremlin’s aims . Second, the Russian Federation disguises its objectives and objectives .
 The Russian Federation justified its action through superficially plausible international legality . Third, the Russians justified their actions through superfICially plausible legality . Fourth, the Russian Federation's actions were justified by superficulously plausible international law .
 Russian strategic theory today remains relatively unimaginative and highly dependent on the body of Soviet work with which Russia's leaders are familiar .
 23 cyber campaigns in Georgia and the Ukraine with applied “continuous, mounting pressure on the Georgian government and population... to provoke the Governments] into the desired decisions and actions,’ 73 that satisfied the strategy of reflexive control .
 The three reflexive control elements combined to limit NATO military power along with the threat of the Russian military nuclear potential .
 The infrastructure of the opponent remains key to the employment of cyber and information capabilities by the Russian Federation .
 New information warfare campaigns would attempt to destroy pieces of the enemy’s critical infrastructure . Bedritsky pointed out that rather than improving the efficiency of traditional military operations, the new campaigns would try to destroy parts of theenemy’'s critical infrastructure.
 cybermeans such as cyber-attacks can cause a failure of power supply facilities, transportation infrastructure, government institutions, etc.
 Cyber warfare can induce the target country’s political and economic collapse . In this way, cyber warfare can cause a country to collapse, say experts .
 Russia’s new military doctrine for propaganda and information war theories have not changed from the old Soviet Union .
 Report: 35. Examining Non-Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine from a Strategic Communications Perspective .
 The technosphere theory, “a concept of an entirely new type of warfare—warfare in an artificial environment” mirrors the western concept of cyber warfare, says the theory .
 The structure and maturity of Ukrainian cyberinfrastructure provide a relevant sample of cyber-land warfare . The structure, maturity of the cyber-infrastructure provides a relevant samples of cyber warfare .
 Ukraine entered the Information Era immediately after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 . The Soviet Union was dissolved in 1991.
 The Russian Federation developed and financed the Ukraine’s communication systems and telecommunication companies. Keith Giles from the Conflict Studies Research Centre noted that the Russian Federation develops and financed Ukraine's communication systems .
 Ukraine uniquely bore a single physical fiber-optic line to mainland Crimea in 2013 . The Ukraine also bore a one-to-one fiber- Optic line in 2013.
 The symmetry between Ukrainian rail and cyberinfrastructure resonated with the conceptual patterns of deep battle and reflexive control theories . The symmetry of the two sides resonates with the concepts of the battle and control theories.
 The characteristics of cyberspace with operational art escalated political events, says the author . "Cyberspace" is a form of "operational art," says author .
 NATO tensions began to grow as early as March 29, 2008 when the Russians began to express opposition to NATO membership for Georgia and Ukraine .
 There is no reason why Russia should try, especially given the integrated nature of Ukrainian and Russian information space . But also, there's no reason for Russia to try, even given the integration of Ukraine and Russia .
 Russia already enjoyed domination of Ukrainian cyberspace, including telecommunications companies, infrastructure, and overlapping networks . There was little incentive to disrupt it.
 The Cyber War in Perspective: Russian Aggression against Ukraine, edited by Kenneth Geers .
 The Russian Federation gained military strategic control of the warm water port at Sevastopol . Further, the Russian Federation gain military control of a warm-water port in the Russian city .
 The Soviet Union generated a condition of honor for President Putin's thinking materialized in the form of the Collective Security Treaty Organization . The historical regional hegemony of the Russian people since the Crimean War, World War II, and the Soviet Union created a condition for Putin.
 NATO expansion and Ukrainian departure from the Russian sphere of influence threatened petrol-economic interests, fear of NATO military expansion, and honor of Russian hegemonic memories .
 Cyber security firm iSight traced the earliest Russian Military Intelligence Directorate cyber operations in the Ukraine and NATO to the Sandworm Operation in 2009 .
 The Sandworm espionage operation had started as early as 2009 . 26 tensions remained the risk to the Russian petrol-energy economics including Gazprom and the debt of approximately $1. billion .
 The Russians could not secure their interests with the ouster of Victor Yushchenko by Victor Yanukovych . The Russian president is expected to step down from the post .
 Yanukovych immediately withdrew NATO application, he also aligned with outside petrol-interests . While Yanukovych immediately withdraws NATO application.
 Yanukovych under domestic pressure signed a 50-year production sharing agreement on January 24, 2013 . Shell Oil to exploit the Yukivska shale oil field as the first step for Ukrainian independence from Russian gas .
 The Russian leadership quickly expanded cyber espionage with Operation Sandworm . Operation Armageddon emplaced cyber warfare access points for future operations . The Russian leader quickly expanded the cyber espionage program .
 LookingGlass cyber threat firm says 'Operation Armageddon' initially provided military advantages over the target Ukrainian government, law enforcement, and military officials .
 The Ukraine began to finalize discussions to accept the Association Agreements with the European Union . Events in the Summer of 2013 generated further concern for the Russian interests .
 On June 26, 2013, Russian cyber forces began manipulation of Ukrainian information . They targeted EU and NATO telecommunications infrastructure through 2014 .
 Sandworm's malware had intensified and focused Ukrainian government networks in September 2014 . The malware coincided with the NATO summit in Wales .
 Cyber Espionage as a Strategic Component of Russian Modern Warfare, says LookingGlass Cyber Threat Intelligence Group . The group is based in Baltimore .
 Cyber threat experts believe these attacks sought to determine the political decisions by all parties . The attacks are aimed at political parties.
 The Russian Federation's decision to seize the Crimea and then extend to eastern Ukraine became known as Euromaidan . The political point that drove the Russian Federation decision was the critical political point .
 Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovych suddenly pulled out of European Association Agreements sparking widespread protests and riots throughout western Ukraine .
 Domestic unrest by the ethnic-Ukrainian population countered the Russian interests and threatened local investments . The Russian interests are threatened by the Ukrainian population .
 Russian Federal Security Service with the integration of still friendly Secret Service of Ukraine systematically shut down mobile operators with armed police suppression .
 The malware only uses the attacker-controlled DNS server to resolve specific domains of interest to the attackers . The malware was privately registered via the REGRU-RU registrar for use in future attacks .
 Perceived Russian interests of regional hegemony, petrol-economy, and the naval base in Ukraine could no longer be secured through subtle and informational manipulation alone .
 The Russian cyber operations sought to isolate the information flow of the Ukrainian government from institutions and military forces across the Ukraine .
 The Russian land forces altered the physical infrastructure within Crimea, enabling cyber operations through canalizing Ukrainian cyberspace .
 Cyber-land operations employed the same tactics as the conflict spread to eastern Ukraine . Similarly, cyber-land operation employed same tactics.
 Cyber operations expanded to enable precision fires and defined operational timelines for land forces . Cyber operations also expanded to allow precision fires, defined operational timeline for land Forces .
 The correlation of terrestrial and cyber maneuvers suggest that land and cyber operations mutually enhanced operational reach . The correlation is similar to terrestrial and Cyber maneuvers .
 The 45 th opSpN (Independent Special Purpose Regiment of Spetsnaz detached to the 45 th Russian Airborne Troops ) disembarked by air transport at the naval base in Sevastopol .
 KSO forces seized the Crimean parliament building, the Simferopol airport, and key military facilities .
 similar unmarked soldiers took over a Ukrtelecom building in Sevastopol . Similar unmarked soldiers were also taken over a building in the city .
 Soldiers manipulated remaining active fiber optic cables with data intercept devices . Soldiers also manipulated the remaining active fibre optic cables .
Land forces used physical control of to generate cyber power throughout the Crimea . Effectively, the land forces usedphysical control of the Crimea to generate online cyber power .
 The Russian land forces completed the isolation of the Crimean peninsula from Ukrainian cyber forces .
 Russian cyber forces enabled the KSO control of Ukrainian telecommunications facility . KSO also enabled the Russian cyber force to control Ukrainian telecommunications facilities .
 The logic behind these comes from the Ukraine’s telecommunications geography .
 Ukraine's Internet Service Providers were decentralized and held terrestrial and satellite path diversity to the rest of the world . Ukraine’s Internet service Providers are decentralized and hold terrestrial and Satellite path diversity .
 Crimea was one of the vulnerable areas in Ukraine since it only held one Internet Exchange Point that connected the peninsula to the rest of the country . Crimea is one of Ukraine's most vulnerable areas .
Pro-Russian hackers disrupted the mobile phones of members of the Ukrainian parliament . Also, actions by coordinated pro-Russian hacker groups disrupted the phones of Ukrainian lawmakers .
 Continuous cyber attacks on mainland Ukraine maintained external isolation of Crimea hours before the invasion .
 The combined attacks on Ukrainian and Crimean telecommunications significantly lowered the response potential of the Ukrainian government . Russia's invasion and post-invasion cyber-attacks significantly lowered Ukrainian government's response potential .
 Operations Armageddon and Sandworm altered the cognitive space through integrated cyber and land force maneuvers . Operation Armageddon andSandworm changed the cognitiveSpace through cyber and Land Force maneuvers .
 Isserson’s composite theory of “multi-level battle waged on several tiers within the operational depths’ took a new form in the Donbass Campaign .
 The threat of the Russian invasion further escalated by March 12, 2014 . NATO and the Ukrainian government identified the Russian Federation forces massing along Ukraine's eastern border .
 The Russian forces began the process of integrating an operational approach between cyber and land forces .
 Russian forces deceived Ukrainian defenses and prepared the next Russo-Ukrainian campaign . Cyber capabilities escalated by June 15 as the Russian forces deceive Ukrainian defenses .
 The cyber operation began and used the same malware and TTPs from the Crimea . The operation was carried out by a group of Russian hackers .
 LookingGlass hypothesizes that the Russian cyber forces reused old TTPs to determine how Ukrainian forces would respond to the Ukrainian attack .
 Ukraine's new President Poroshenko announced a ceasefire two weeks before initiating a military ground operation against pro-Russian rebels in the Donbass oblast . Less than a week later on June 20, Ukraine’s new president announced the ceasefire .
 Security firms and digitalattackmap.com confirm Russian military activity and cyber-attacks paused for two weeks . Security firms, digitalattack map.com confirmed Russian military activities and cyber attacks paused for those two weeks.
 The Russian GRU and FSB detected the intent to invade by Ukrainian forces through multiple intelligence sources, including cyber reconnaissance .
 New cyber TTPs and support by pro-Russian rebels amplified the land and cyber capabilities during the 2014 Donbass Campaign . The 2014 Don Bass Campaign was the first in the UK to launch the campaign .
 Russian military invaded Ukrainian territory from July 17, 2014 to August 28, 2014 . Large groups of Ukrainian forces became cornered and almost entirely destroyed .
 The Ukrainian and Russian Presidents Poroshenko and Putin met shortly after the meeting .
 Only two days after their meeting on August 26, 2014, the cyber-attacks ceased .
 The destruction of communications architecture like in the Crimea isolated the Donbass, Crimea .
 The seizure and alteration of the cyberinfrastructure along with a new employment of cyber TTPs extended the operational reach of precision artillery fires . The seizure of cyberinf infrastructure along with the new employment. of cyberTTPs was the result of the seizure .
Russian cyber capabilities culled data from GSM and Wi-Fi networks to adjust fire for artillery battalions . Pakharenko in a NATO Cyber Center document observed that the Russian cyber capabilities were culled .
 Ukrainian forces came under artillery fires while Russia retained control of the oblast and massed artillery across the border . The expected ceasefire was to take effect .
 The vast isolated cyber topography in the Donbass Oblast enabled almost omnipresent effects that extended from Donetsk to Luhansk . The vast isolation of cyber topographies in the region enabled almost ubiquitous effects that extend from Donetsk.
 Russia could maintain legitimate targeting in the eyes of enough of world powers to continue projecting the operational reach through cyber power .
 The Crimean and Donbass campaigns of the Russo-Ukrainian conflict provide discreet examples of cross-domain maneuvers and the symbiotic nature of operational reach .
 A First-Hand Account,’s first-hand account, is a first- hand account . Arbor Networks, “Digital Attack Map,” is a digital map of the world .
 Artillery fire can be adjusted based on location data gleaned from mobile phones and Wi-Fi networks . The fire can also be adjusted by using location data from mobile phone and wi-Fi .
 The Crimean theater reveals that cyber power depends on the manipulation of topography to gain dominance . The theater also reveals that topography is used to gain power .
 Donbass campaign demonstrates the ability of cyberpower to project control of infrastructure providing asymmetric effects . Donbass is the latest in a series of cyber-related incidents in the UK .
Asymmetric targeting such as cyber-enhanced physical ISR and adjusted virtual observation for accurate and timely fires . Asymmetric targets such as Cyber-enhancing physicalISR and virtual observation.
 The Russian Federation operational art mutually suggests both land and cyber operational reach within the Ukraine . Both land and Cyber operational reach in the Ukraine.
 Cyber Enhancement of Operational Tempo Robert Leonhard proposed that the frequency of conflict impacts the consequence of employed tempo in warfare . Leonhard's proposal was approved by the U.S. National Security Council .
 Conceptually, impact of perceived and imperceptible tempos on the field of battle amplify the strategic employment of military force toward achievable ends .
 Study explores the Russo-Ukrainian conflict as pulses of events tied between cyber and land-cyber that achieved outcomes by the Russian Federation .
 The Russians harmonized pulses in both cyber and land domains within their strategic framework of reflexive control . The Russian government was in control of both the cyber andLand domains .
 The initial tempo of tactical pulses occurred during the Euromaidan protests after the Russian's manipulated events and pressured political powers toward fulfilling their interests .
 The political unrest of Euromaidan allowed the Russians to prepare for the control of the Crimea and influence petrol-economic interests . The unrest in the Ukraine allowed the Russian government to prepare.
Leonhard describes tempo as the sequencing of event frequency and duration which provide opportunities for commanders . Leonhard says tempo is a sequencing of events that provide opportunities to commanders .
 The frequency of tactical events and aggregate pulses increased as the Russians transitioned to land invasion and overt cyberattacks . The Russian military is now the focus of the Russian military in the region .
 The Russian intervention in Ukraine operationalized the construct of ‘Reflexive Control’ to generate obstacles and circumstances that should have determined the logical course of Ukrainian and NATO politics, says the author .
 The events of the conflict indicate that the duration and frequency of cyber and land pulses are complimentary . The events indicate the duration of the war is complimentary .
 The Russian cyber events initially supported the sharp divergence of Ukrainian interests perceived by NATO and EU counter to Russian hegemonic sphere . The events were initially supported by the Ukrainian government .
 The first pulse, the Russian Federation generated nationalism narrative under "Reflexive Control" to alter the discourse of international thinking .
 The Crimean excuse provided the Russian Federation with rapid means of control to gain the peninsula’s telecommunications infrastructure . The second pulse, the Crimean excuse, provided the Russians with rapid Means of control .
 Ukrainian media companies lost their physical assets in Crimea, and local television programming shifted from Ukrainian to Russian networks .
 The Russian Federation dominated local cyberspace to extend the effect of special forces involved in the operation . It points to a new interface between cyber and information environments .
 The Russian cyber operations generated from physical seizure of fiber lines and imposed on Western planners in eastern Ukraine . The cyber operations were conducted by Russian cyber operators .
 The Russian Federation gained advantages which overcame local circumstances and quickened both land and cyber operations . The first round of conflict indicates that the Russian Federation gain advantages .
 The third pulse, cyber operations extended to cyber personas of commanders . Seizing opposition leaders identities, financial account takeovers, and espionage can be remarkably effective .
 Ukrainian government and population balanced the Russian activities with NATO promises, the Russian Federation consolidated immediate gains .
 distributed denial of service attacks provided the most cost effective attack to fix targets through cyberspace . Martin-Vegue also noted that distributed Denial of Service attacks provide the most effective attack on targets .
 Crimean Parliament seized by armed men in February 2014 . The fourth pulse culminated on, February 27, 2014 .
 Time escaped the Ukraine and NATO which indicates that the frequency of had oscillated from an imperceptible to unacceptable levels . Time escaped.
 The Russian initial pulses in the Donbass indicate a suppression of decision to act by closing cognitive and temporal spaces .
 Political outcomes became tied between Ukrainian survival and American interests on March 2, 2014 . Initial sanctions imposed on the Russian Federation were imposed on March 1, 2014.
 Leonhard's rates support the ideas of John Boyd and achieving cognitive dominance inside an opponent's OODA loop . Leonhard: "Cognitive dominance is the key to winning the battle"
 Ukrainian officials were unable to share information or execute command and control processes among themselves . Second, Ukrainian officials could not share information with themselves .
 Ukrainian officials were unable to communicate with foreign allies, placate pro-Russian Ukrainians, or make efforts to undermine Moscow . Unwala and Ghori, “Brandishing the Cybered Bear,” 6-7. 37 and FSB attacked to achieve changes in Donbass
 Pro-Russian’s cyber attacked with prolonged DDoS attacks against Ukrainian and NATO media outlets .
 Operational tempo still favored the Russian strategic objectives, says the Russian intelligence agency .
 Just 72 hours before the Ukrainian election the pro-Russian surge in Donbass occurred in May 2014 .
 The pro-Russian insurgency opposed the mandate to the Ukrainian population for a legitimate pro-Western government . The insurgency opposes the mandate for the Ukrainian government .
 The situation provided ethnic Russians with a clear choice to fight for Russian intervention. Alternately, the situation providedethnic Russians with an option to fight Russian intervention .
 The election headquarters were hacked by the pro-Moscow group known as CyberBerkut .
 CyberBerkut, allegedly an independent Ukrainian organization, aligned rapidly and technologically with pro-Russian interests . The group is said to have been aligned rapidly with Russian interests .
 Ukraine’s two-decade old information systems predominately utilized Russian technology . Russian technology connected to servers located in Russia .
 The hacker tools employed against Ukraine were sophisticated, further indicating nation-state sponsorship . The hacker tool used against Ukraine was more sophisticated than the other .
 The Russian objectives sought to control the Ukrainian governmental systems that would fall into the Russian Federation sphere of control . The Russian objective was to control Ukraine's government systems .
Temporal dominance by cyber pulses in Crimea appear to have invigorated the Russian Federation application of indirect cyber warfare. Temporal dominance in Crimea appears to haveinvigorated Russia's use of cyber warfare .
 The czarist-era term refers to the period when the Russian Empire controlled much of Ukraine . It refers to a period when Russia controlled most of the country .
 The temporal conflict extended rapidly past the Crimea to the Donbass within the narrative of the Russian Federation doctrine . The conflict extended quickly past Crimea and the Crimea .
 Malware altered the Ukrainian electoral networks and achieved two divergent objectives . Malware also altered the Ukraine's electoral networks .
 Hackers bolstered in-depth reconnaissance of their targets before any serious attack . Hackers boosted in- depth reconnaissance of targets before a serious attack.
 Second, the hackers attacked to control technical credentials and prove the legitimacy of CyberBerkut . The hackers attacked the hackers to control the credentials of Cyberberkut.
 Russian Aggression against Ukraine, edited by Kenneth Geers (Tallinn, Estonia: NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence, 2015)
 New vulnerabilities came from zero-day exploits, which typically sell on the darkweb for only nation state values .
 Crimea and Donbass regions land maneuvers isolated cyberspace by controlling main fiber lines from the remainder of the Ukraine . Crimea, Donbass and Crimea are land maneuvers by controlling fiber lines. Crimea andDonbass region land maneuvers.
 The sixth pulse, the Donbass invasion, began on July 2014, as the conflict shifted to the Don River region . The Donbass conflict began in July 2014 .
Cyberspace played an increasingly important role in military operations . Cyberspace is a key part of the U.S. military's operations .
 Multidomain operations altered the logical terrain of cyberspace to the advantage of Russian interests .
 Russian SIGINT, including cyber espionage, allowed for effective combat operations planning against the Ukrainian army with multi-domain sensors and cross-domain remote fire observation .
 Rerouted Ukrainian mobile traffic provided advanced forces protection and the operational reach to project defensive counter-attacks .
 Russian forces provided support, assistance, and facilitation to Russian insurgents in the Donbass . Simultaneously, Russian forces also provided support and assistance to insurgents .
 pro-Russian forces enveloped through technological advantages of Russian cyber, land, and air assets to isolate Ukrainian forces responding to the Donbass insurgency .
 The Ukrainian and Russian Presidents Poroshenko and Putin met . However, the Ukrainian President and Putin did not meet .
 Only two days after the meeting on August 26, 2014, cyberattacks ceased .
 The eight pulse occurred on July 24, 2014, Ukraine accused Russia of arming pro-Russian separatists with tanks . The eight pulses occurred in Ukraine.
 The United States confirmed that multiple tanks crossed into Ukraine from Russia . The U.S. confirmed that several tanks crossed in from Russia.
 Russian troops reinforced the Ukrainian border, and deployed additional heavy artillery enhanced by cyber capabilities . Russian troops reinforce the border with Ukraine and deploy more heavy artillery .
International reaction quickly undercut the legitimacy of the Russian interests which soured by July 28, 2014 . The United States Department of State released photographic evidence that Russia integration included heavy artillery to pro-Russian forces .
 The nineth pulse led to intermediate strategic outcomes for the Russian Federation . negotiations resulted in the signing of the Minsk II protocols .
 Cyber and land forces retracted from strategic objectives within their domains in Donbass . Cyber and Land Forces retracted from their strategic objectives in the region .
 The Russian Federation had obtained its primary and secondary strategic objectives . The Russians had obtained their primary andsecondary strategic objectives.
 NATO and EU limited expansion left the Russian Federation as the uncontested regional hegemon and Ukrainian resistance became internationally framed .
 The Russian Federation demonstrated a burst cyber-attack for strategic interests . However, another isolated tenth pulse came as the Russian Federation showed a burst attack .
 Minsk II provided an understanding between NATO and Russia to provide an intermediate Ukrainian solution . The Ukrainian solution was a Ukrainian solution to the conflict .
 On December 23, 2014, after Ukrainian peace talks ended at Minsk II, a new cyber-attack expanded a paradigm shift for nation-states .
 The December cyber-attack derived from the same genetics of the November 2014 sample which the Ukrainian FSB had defeated . The December attack was based on the same genetic sample that the FSB defeated in November 2014 .
 The Minsk II protocols did not force the Russian Federation from unplugging national assets . The Russian Federation could still promote their strategic outcomes in 2015 .
 Pulses between domains and international events experienced by the Ukraine between 2013 to 2015 . Ukraine has seen a rise in international events between 2013 and 2015 .
 Hundreds of thousands left in the freezing dark on Christmas eve . All hospitals, water treatment, and economic systems to a standstill .
 Ukrainian Kyivoblenergo, a regional electricity distribution company, reported outages to customers .
 The country’s energy minister blamed Russia for the attack on the power grid .
 Security firm ESET agreed the malware known as BlackEnergy caused the outage . It was a trojan malware attributional to the Russia Federation in previous attacks in the Donbass .
 The outages were due to a third party's illegal entry into the company’s computers and SC ADA systems . The company's computers and ADA systems were affected .
 This event provides a sample of kinetic strategic cyber-attack outside the confines of synergistic cross-domain warfare . More important this event provides an example of kinetic cyber-attacks outside of the confines.
 Russo-Ukrainian conflict between 2013 to 2015 provides four important key events orchestrated by the Russian Federation . The Russo- Ukrainian Conflict between 2013-2015 provides four key events for Russian Federation.
 January to September 2013 experienced an escalation of cyber-attack supporting analysis of events for political outcomes without land forces . January to Sept. 2013 experienced a rise in cyber-attacks supporting analysis.
 PostEuromaidan cyber forces shifted to amplifying the success of Crimean occupation by the Russian Federation ground forces .
 Escalation followed the cyber and land forces mutually supporting ethnic Russian separatists in Donbass region .
 The Russian Federation maintained cyber freedom of maneuver to achieve strategic outcomes demonstrated by the December 23 kinetic cyber-attack . Culmination occurred after cease fire accords because of political outcomes from MH-17 .
 Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center: 7-8, March 18, 2016 .
 The interactions of cyber and land warfare required two hypotheses to be validated by the research questions . The interactions needed two hypotheses. The questions were asked by the researchers .
 This study did not seek to precisely model the complex interactions between land and cyber domains . This study was published in the Journal of the International Journal of Science .
 The study only tried to support the theory that the characteristics of cyberspace amplify the physical dynamics of cross-domain warfare regarding operational art .
 The findings of this study determined that the two hypotheses support the theory . The findings were based on a study conducted by the University of Cambridge .
Research questions indicate that land operations alter the state of cyberspace, and land power must be synchronized with cyber operations for operational reach .
 Cyber operations impact landpower and alter the available time, space and purpose of land warfare. Second, research questions support the hypothesis that cyber operations affect landpower . Second, the research questions whether cyber operations impact the availability of space and space .
Human decision makers must refine specified heuristics to determine how best cross-domain cyber-land actions may best achieve strategic objectives . Ultimately, like any complex adaptive system, human decision makers need to refine specified.
 Russo-Ukrainian Conflict between 2013 and 2015 indicates that each of the research questions are valid . The Russo- Ukrainian conflict between 2013-2015 indicates that the research question is valid .
 The characteristics of cyberspace extended operational reach within the crossdomain context . The characteristics of cyberspaces extended operational reach in the cross domain context .
 The infrastructure, nodes and logical ports of cyberspace were observed as transmutable by land forces . The infrastructure and nodes were observed to be transmutable.
 The logical structure and control from cyberspace impacted the operational reach of the Russian land forces . The logical structures and control of cyberspaces impacted the operations of Russian land force .
 The case study also demonstrated that the synchronization of anticipated characteristics of cyberspace impact joint tempo through frequency, duration, and sequencing that create options in cross-domain warfare .
 Cyber power in isolation often can only maintain temporal dominance for short durations until the opponent adapts .
 The cyber domain also can preserve and amplify the tempo of other domains as observed in both the Crimea and the Donbass .
 The evidence from the case suggests that the first hypothesis is supported . The first hypothesis of the case is supported, according to the evidence .
 Observations of cyber warfare from the key events in the Russo-Ukrainian conflict demonstrate how cyber power manipulates the available time, space and puipose of land warfare .
 Command and control isolation contributed to the lethargic response by the Ukraine leadership of the Ukraine, says the U.S. State Department . The Ukraine's leadership led to further cyber exploitation, it says .
 Indication in the case study provides two events that demonstrate the cyber alteration from land activities . The cyber alteration is part of a case study of cyber-alterations .
 First, Crimea operations placed logical cyberspace into the rear area of the Russian cyber domain . The peninsula was seized by Russian forces which seized the peninsula .
In the Donbass region, cyber enabled maneuver, targeting, and mass of land fires through land manipulations . In the Don Bass region, Cyber enabled maneuver and targeting, targeting and targeting land fires .
 Russo-Ukrainian study demonstrates the harmony of cyber and land operations juxtaposed against pre-Maidan and post-Minsk environments .
 The dependence of commanders on the space to make decisions and employ forces in time can be operationally shocked by the cyber domain .
Land forces can isolate, penetrate, and exploit events on the ground . The resulting paralysis throughout the entire depth of the opponent’s battle area enables land forces to isolate and penetrate .
 The study demonstrated how land maneuvers could perform the same effects to enable cyber activities . The study also showed how land maneuvers could perform same effects as cyber activities.
Land forces secured key points of cyber-topography and extended duration of control in cyberspace to dominate the operational environment . Land forces secured the key points.
 The second hypothesis states that if cyber operations impact landpower, then cyberspace can alter the available time, space and purpose of land warfare . The second theory states that cyber operations affect landpower .
 The nature of complex adaptive systems leaves the progenitor of the system able to predict the desired function within the confines of the root design . But the system is incapable of understanding the shifting system due to catalysts external to the system .
The duration of catalytic events and the shift in frequencies indicate an interdependence between domains . The duration of catalyst events and shift in frequency indicate aninterdependence.
 The Russian Cyber, Land, Cross-Domain actions with Ukrainian and International Actions in Time between 2013 to 2015 . The Russian cyber-related actions took place between 2013 and 2015 .
 The interrelated cross-domain tempo as experienced by the Ukraine between 2013 to 2015. The inter related cross- domain tempo between 2013 and 2015 was the highest in the Ukraine .
 The relationship between domains depends on the context of the cyber architecture and mechanism employed in the theater of war . The relationship is based on the nature of cyber architecture.
 The Russian Federation designed and contributed to the Ukrainian information architecture and military capabilities before 2013 . The Ukrainian government is the largest in the world .
 The evidence indicates cyberspace provided an operational maneuver corridor into the Ukrainian OODA loop . The evidence is consistent with the use of cyberpace .
 Land actions separate from cyber means spiked periods of culmination and action. Land actions are different from cyber actions .
Cyber amplification of land forces occurred as the land forces altered the topography of cyberspace .
 The electrical grid attack on December 24, 2015, indicates the rapid culmination of cyber without the support of the land domain . The marked contrast between events observed between November 2014 and February 2015 indicates that the attack was a rapid culmination.
 Evidence suggests a strong connection between cyber domain and actions made in other domains .
 The Ukrainian case study provides clear evidence that land operations synchronized with cyber during the Crimean campaign dissected Ukrainian sovereignty interests .
 Donbass campaign demonstrates a constant struggle to align cross-domain objectives by land forces to dominate cyber infrastructures .
 Donbass 47 indicates the mutual amplification of effects preventing culmination in either cyber or land domains . Also, Don Bass 47 indicates that the effects of cyber and land domains are similar to each other .
 The absence of land power during December 24, 2014, indicted a risk for cyber warfare as a strategic arm of political objective sans cross-domain warfare .
 Study sought to determine the potential interaction of cyber to the application of operational art in Joint Warfare . Conclusions: This study sought to find out how cyber could be used in the future of Joint Warfare.
Cyberspace has the ability to alter the employment of operational art as a result of cross domain warfare . The identified characteristics of cyberspace have been identified as the physical dynamics of cross Domain warfare .
 cyberspace can alter the available time, space and purpose of land warfare . First, if cyber operations impact land power, then cyber operations can alter land power. First, cyber operations affect land power .
Land power must be synchronized with cyber operations for operational reach . Second, if land operations modify the state of cyberspace, then land power must also be synchronized. Third, if cyber operations are synchronized with land power, land power will be synchronized .
 This case study utilized a structured focused approach to evaluating a theory that application of cyberspaces’ characteristics and operational art establish processes of critical intersections of a cyber-land domain activity .
 The characteristics of cyberspace provide greater options to operational artists because of cross-domain linkages in warfare .
 The case study evaluated Russian Federation cyber operations in time and space to support a theory that cyber and land force actions can transform mutual operational reach . The study evaluated the Russian Federation's cyber operations.
 Cyber forces disrupt land forces from Kiev to the Crimea and the Donbass . Cyber forces disrupted land forces.
 The Russian land forces support pro-Russian rebels in Luhansk and Donetsk . The land forces are isolating the Donbass cyberspace, irregular forces, air-defense, and field artillery .
 Cyber-attacks to neutralize the western Ukraine electrical grid extend operational outcomes. Finally, cyber-attacks on Ukraine's electrical grid extended operational outcomes . The attacks are the latest in a long line of cyber attacks on Ukrainian electrical grid .
 The Joint application of symbiotic relationships between cyber and cyber requires synchronization across all domains . The joint application of cyber to cyber requires synchronisation across all domain domains .
 The Ukrainian case study supports the hypothesis that land operations synchronized with cyber achieved a synergy that altered the operational reach of cyber attacks .
 The design of activities could align cross-domain objectives by ground forces to dominate . The study observations indicated that the design of Activities could alignCross- domain objectives by Ground Forces to dominate.
 Donbass events showed mutual amplification of effects preventing culmination in either cyber or land domains . Also, Don Bass events showed the mutual amplified of effect preventing culmination of either cyber and land domains.
 The kinetic cyberattack observed on December 24, 2015, indicates the rapid culmination of cyber without cross-domain interaction . The kinetic attack was observed in December 2015 .
 The observed changes in operational reach and tempo provide evidence to the body of military theory that cross-domain synthesis answers the standard questions and supports the hypotheses .
 Military leaders employing cross-domain warfare must consider employment that synchronizes the characteristics of cyberspace with other domains . Military leaders must consider that cross- domain warfare is similar to other domains, such as the Internet .
 Cross-domain warfare requires 49 more than simultaneity of multi-domain war . Cross- domain warfare requires49 more than simultaneous war, more than a single war .
 The study indicates a complex interaction between cyber and land that theoretically can extend between all other domains of warfare .
 The study supports military theory seeking solutions to domain offsets and asymmetric approaches . The study was published in the journal of the International Defense Council .
 The characteristics and observations in the case study provide a new framework for aggressive strategies employing cyber with cross-domain operations to meet strategic outcomes .
 The study presents a critical analysis for warfighters, strategists, and political leaders . The study is based on a study of warfighters and strategists .
 Military warfighters must develop a concept of the operational environment, including cyber, and the potential cross-domain effects . Military war fighters must also develop the concept of cyber, including cross- domain effects .
The strategist must understand the environmental potential, enemy capabilities, and friendly force potential . The strategist must also understand the potential of cross-domain actions .
 Political leadership must accept the range, speed, and transformation potential of cyberspace, study finds .
 Future studies should evaluate cross-domain integration between all domains simultaneously . Future studies will also evaluate the integration of all domains .
 Research would enhance understanding toward planning Time Phased Force Deployment and other synchronous mobilizations . Research validates the strategic impact of cyber warfare employed to isolate strategic assets in time .
 The new machine created by and after Turing and others has changed the operational and strategic actions which assume methods of controlling physical systems . Any research should come from exploring how the new machine was created.
After all the new system, according to Turing, cannot be understood by the same system .
 The Men, Machines, and Ideas That Revolutionized War, From Kitty Hawk to Iraq, are all about the war . The Men and Machines are a collection of ideas that revolutionized war .
 The Future of Terror, Crime, and Militancy, edited by John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt .
 Turing, Alan M “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,’s Mind New Series 59, no.6.6 . Turing is the author of a new book, "Mind New series 59," about computing technology .
 The Russian-Ukrainian conflict is the subject of a new book, "Military Cyber Affairs 1, art 7.2, and "Russia-Ukraine Conflict,’s Cyber Affairs"
 Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference, 2010 . The conference was held in New York .
 Report to the Ranking Minority Member, Committee on Commerce, House of Representatives . Report: "The Minority Member of the House is a member of the Senate's Minority Party"
 I loBbie Bonpocbi bohhm,” Voenno-Istoicheskii Zhurnal, no. 73-5 quoted by Naveh, Shimon . 73- 5 quoted by Shimon.
 Dempsey, GEN Martin E “Forward,’s Joint Operational Access Concept v 1.0.0, is the latest in a long line of concepts .
 SAMS, CGSC and Other Studen ts for MMAS and Other Degree Program/Requiremen ts. ts.