 The Ukraine crisis exposed the weaknesses of this strategy, says KEYWORDS . Russia must fall back on Russia; Eurasian Economic coercive means to keep Kiev from moving closer to the West .
 Fears of such an outcome overestimate Russia’s ability to use coercion and underestimate post-Soviet states capacity to resist . Fears that such a result would overestimate the country's ability.
 Rather than emerging as a regional bully, Russia is trying to push Eurasian integration forward by becoming a regional security provider .
 Regional leaders can use the provision of security to promote economic integration, says the article . The article relates to the larger literature on regional integration and security hierarchies .
 Despite initial signs of success, we believe that the new strategy will ultimately fail . The new strategy has been dubbed 'the new strategy'
 Eurasian integration will continue to stagnate as long as Russia's economic and soft power remain weak . Russia will be unable to address the economic and social problems that are at the root of the region’s security problems .
 Russia has tried to establish a “soft hegemony in the post-Soviet region, using economic incentives and Soviet legacies of shared history and culture to entice post- Soviet states to join regional integration efforts .
 Moscow has been willing to take responsibility for the provision of regional collective goods such as security, free trade, energy resources, and financial stability . To further this goal, Moscow has also taken responsibility for providing security and free trade .
 Russia's efforts to entice Ukraine into its economic and political orbit have backfired . Moscow now finds itself using military and covert means in order to destabilize the situation in that country and prevent it from moving closer to West .
 Moscow's hope is that once the country's turn to the West fails, Ukraine will have no choice but to participate in Russian-led Eurasian integration . Moscow’s hope is the country will be able to join Russia's Eurasian bloc .
 Russia's approach to regional integration has changed in the wake of the Ukraine crisis . This article will examine the ways in which Russia’s approach to region integration has been changed .
 This does not necessarily mean that Russia is now bent on using hard or coercive means to achieve its goals . However, this does not mean that this means that Russia has now used hard or coercion to achieve goals .
 It is unlikely that Moscow will adopt the same tactics it has used in Crimea and eastern Ukraine in other parts of the post-Soviet space .
 Russia's behavior in Ukraine has raised concerns and fears in other post-Soviet states . The leadership realizes that the costs of doing so are prohibitively high, as its behavior has already raised concerns .
 Russia is trying to use the advantage it still holds in military and other hard-power resources to position itself as the region’s security hegemon . Russia is helping the region's weak authoritarian regimes to deal with internal and external security threats .
 Russia is pursuing a strategy very much in line with Lake and Morgan and Lake’s concept of regional security hierarchy . In doing so, Russia is Pursing a strategy that is similar to that of Lake and Lake .
 Moscow hopes to gain the loyalty of the region’s other states and their participation in its project of regional economic integration .
 Russia is trying to use its hard power to achieve what are primarily economic or geoeconomic goals, we argue . We argue that Russia is thus trying to using its hardpower to achieve its hardPower to achieve the goals .
 Russia's elites see regional integration as a key to maintaining the country's status as a great power in world politics . It reflects the dearth of soft and economic power resources available to Russia .
 If Russia emerges as a revisionist challenger to the Western-led liberal order, the West will also have to share some of the blame .
Western leaders took advantage of Russia’s perceived economic and soft-power weaknesses, not recognizing that this would provoke a hard-power response . In doing so, Western leaders took advantages of Russia's perceived economic, soft- power weaknesses .
 Russia has become further estranged from the Western-led order and sees the use of coercive and hard power as the only tools available to defend and promote its interests . Russia sees coercive power as only tools to defend its interests, according to Russia .
 Russia has invested heavily in the process of regional integration of the postSoviet space . Russia’s Drive for Post-Soviet Regional Integration Russia has spent heavily on regional integration .
 Russian leaders believe that Eurasian integration is of key importance for reversing their country’s economic and geopolitical decline .
This new push for integration began in the late 2000s, and it is a significant ­departure from earlier policies . This new push is a major ­departsure from previous policies .
 Commonwealth of Independent States 1 was initially designated as the main vehicle for regional integration in the 1990s . The Commonwealth of independent States 1 has been named as the country's first regional integration vehicle .
 Regional disintegration and the dissolution of economic and political bonds that had been created in the Soviet and Tsarist periods continued .
 Russia was not really willing to make the sacrifices and efforts needed to make regional integration work. Despite its pro-integration rhetoric, Russia was never willing to made the sacrifices .
 Russia withdrew support for maintaining the CIS as a ruble zone in 1992 . This was apparent early on when Russia withdrew its support for the CIS in 1992.
 Russia had neither the will nor the resources to counter the upsurge of nationalism throughout the former Soviet Union . Russia had not the will or resources to combat the rise of nationalism in Russia .
 The policy served to reassure the Kremlin that since Russia subsidized these countries, it still maintained influence in the post-Soviet space . This policy was a sign that Russia still maintains influence in post- Soviet space .
 Russia has resisted attempts to tie them into Russian-led regional institutions . At the same time, they steadfastly defended their sovereignty .
 Ukraine failed to ratify the CIS treaty and instead only accepted associate member status in the organization . Ukraine is the only country to have accepted associate members status .
 It turned down the invitation to join the Russian-led Customs Union . It only accepted observer status in Eurasian Economic Community in 2000 .
 Central Asian states were also interested in integrating with the richer Russian economy . Other Central Asian countries were also keen to integrate with Russia's richer economy .
 Russia found it much easier to establish itself as a regional peacekeeper and conflict manager . Given its residual military capabilities, Russia found its military capabilities much easier .
 Russia carried out peacekeeping operations in Moldova's Trans-Dniester region and Georgia’s Abkhazia region in 1992 .
 Initially, the primary goal of these operations was to stop violence and prevent anti-Russian political forces from taking power .
 Russia began to show a renewed commitment toward regional integration after the financial crisis of 2008 . Russia's economic growth in the region has been slowing since 2008 .
 Russia has intensified its efforts to promote regional integration . Since then, Russia has been trying to promote the region's integration .
Relationships exclude states such as Georgia and Azerbaijan, which are more interested in integration with powers in the Western bloc . Instead focus on building relations with states like Belarus, Kazakhstan, Armenia, and Armenia .
 The CU was established by Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan in 2009 . The primary institutional vehicle for achieving Russia’s goals is the CU .
 The CU was transformed into the EEU January 2015, as additional measures were implemented to harmonize legislation among the three markets . The EEU was also set up an arbitration mechanism to settle disputes .
 Russia’s financial backing the EEU has also established a $10 billion crisis fund . With Russia's financial backing, the E EU has also set up a crisis fund. The EEU is also set to set up $10billion crisis fund with Russia .
 Belarus drew $3 billion from the fund in 2012, helping it to meet its international debt obligations and avoid going to the International Monetary Fund for assistance .
 Armenia and Kyrgyzstan joined the EEU in 2015 . Tajikistan has been officially invited to join and is undergoing the ascension process for membership .
 Access to Russia’s growing domestic markets and Russian finance, as well as discounted energy prices, all used to entice the post-Soviet countries to join .
 On the elite level this includes shared political and economic networks rooted in Moscow . Many of the region’s elite continue to go to for business and education .
 Russian pop music, movies, and television series are popular in the region . There is also a popular component, exemplified by the ubiquitous presence of pop music and movies .
 The project is designed to promote the development of a common cultural and linguistic space that will unite the post-Soviet countries based on the shared legacy of Russian language, history and culture .
 Russia has tried to position itself as a benevolent regional hegemon that can provide regional collective goods . In effect, Russia has been seen as a lender of last resort in times of crisis .
 Russia made sustained efforts to use its economic and soft power to bring Ukraine into its Eurasian integration project . A Failure of Russian Economic and Soft Power in the prelude to the 2013 Ukraine crisis was a failure of Russia's economic andsoft power .
 Ukraine has signed a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement and an ‘association agreement’ The agreement would begin the country’s political and economic transformation .
 Moscow offers Kiev preferential access to its market through the Customs Union . For its part, Moscow offered Kiev preferential market access through the Union .
 Moscow was willing to provide Kiev with much-needed financial aid . Moscow was also willing to help Kiev with financial aid.
 Ukraine’s financial position was dire, with the country owing nearly USD 60 billion in loans due by July 2015 . The country owes nearly $60 billion in debt to Ukraine .
 Russia's decision to buy USD15 billion in Ukrainian bonds was thus a real lifeline to Ukraine's struggling economy . Russia’s decision to purchase the bonds was so a real Lifeline to the struggling economy, according to analysts .
 More than half of Ukraine’s gas comes from Russia . Ukraine's energy dependence on Russia is another economic lever .
 Russia tried to take advantage of its still-considerable soft power in Ukraine . The two countries have strong historical and cultural ties .
 Russian popular culture had a wide following in Ukraine . Russian media often disseminated the Kremlin's views on current events .
 Moscow invested heavily in pro-Russian media and cultural organizations and financed NGOs and civil society groups in Ukraine . Russia also invests heavily in Ukraine, particularly in Crimea and the eastern portion of the country .
 Ukraine’s political and business elites were tied to the post-Soviet ‘old boy’ power networks centered in Moscow . Ukraine's political, business elites are tied to Russia's post- Soviet power networks .
 Moscow gave Moscow considerable leverage in terms of the elite’s material interests, which were often closely allied with Moscow's . This gave Moscow significant leverage, which was often allied with the elite .
 Ukraine’s elites also shared a common worldview and political and business culture with their counterparts in Moscow .
 Yanukovych wanted to bring state institutions under his centralized control . He saw Russia’s semi-authoritarian system as a model to be emulated .
 Ukrainians saw Yanukovych’s decision as selling out the larger national interest to Russia . Months of massive pro-EU demonstrations followed.
 Ukrainians continued to support close ties with Russia and reject NATO membership . A sizable number of Ukrainians continue to support the move .
 Russian foreign policy is clear in terms of Russia's foreign policy. Nevertheless, the results are clear, according to the Russian government .
 Russia's efforts to use economic incentive and soft power to entice Ukraine to join the Eurasian integration project failed . In the end, all of Russia’s efforts to using economic incentive, soft power and economic incentive failed .
 Moscow found itself facing its nightmare scenario – the coming to power of a pro-Western government that was determined to turn Ukraine toward the path of Western integration and possibly even NATO membership .
 Russia’s lack of soft power as well as its limited ability to use economic inducement to achieve its foreign policy goals – even in its own immediate neighborhood . This turn of events exposed Russia's lack ofsoft power and limited ability of use of inducement .
 Russia has turned to other, more coercive, hard-power means to achieve its goals . This failure forced Russia to turn to other hard- power means, such as more coercive .
 Moscow looked to protect its core strategic and military interest in the country by orchestrating annexation of Crimea .
 The Kremlin is determined to isolate the new government in Kiev and bring it to heel by stirring up ethnic conflict in the east . The Kremlin was also determined to isolate the new Kiev government in Ukraine .
 Toward this goals, it helped to incite domestic malcontents in the Donbas and in Crimea, which were bolstered by radical elements from Russia itself . Toward the goals, this goal, was aimed at inciting domestic malContents in Crimea and Donbas .
 Ukrainian forces were given generous military aid and support to save them from probable defeat in August 2014 . Russian troops were deployed to Ukraine to protect them from possible defeat .
 Russia's instruments of economic and soft power are beginning to decline even further in the wake of the Ukraine crisis . Russia’s Declining Ability to Use Instruments of Soft Power is beginning to fall further in wake of Ukraine crisis.
 Russia’s economy has been battered by Western sanctions and the steep decline in the price of oil . Russia's economy has also been hit by sanctions and a steep decline.
 Russian GDP growth was beginning to stagnate even before the crisis . In 2014, GDP grew by less than 1% and the ruble lost 60% of its value against the United States dollar .
 This economic downturn has reduced Russia’s ability to use economic incentives and inducements to promote its Eurasian project . The economic downturn is reducing Russia's ability to used economic incentives.
 As a result, Russia has become less attractive as a market for other post-Soviet states . Russia is now less attractive to other countries .
 Russian businesses are also less willing to invest in neighboring countries as they face a credit crunch at home . Russian businesses also less inclined to invest.
 Russia has become a major destination for migrant labor throughout the post-Soviet space . Over the late few decades, Russia has been a major destinations for migrant workers .
 Russia has the second largest number of immigrants in the world, after the United States . Russia is the country with the second biggest number of immigrant population .
 Russia has tremendous political and economic leverage. Dependence on this source of income has given Russia tremendous political leverage .
 The government of Tajikistan agreed to extend Russia’s right to base troops on its territory to 2042 in exchange for Russia raising the quota for guest workers .
With the economic downturn in Russia and the steep decline in the value of the Russian ruble, many migrants are now going home . Many migrants are going home.
 Migrant laborers are sending back less money to their home countries . Migrant workers are also sending back more money to home countries.
 Russia may be losing a valuable source of soft-power leverage over these states . Russia is becoming less attractive as a destination for migrant labor, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Russia is losing its soft- power leverage over those states .
 The crisis in Ukraine has exposed the limited appeal of Russia’s soft power – even within the post-Soviet space . The crisis has also exposed thelimited appeal of Russian soft power .
 Russia's approach to soft power has relied heavily on common cultural legacies . Russia’s approach tosoft power has reliance heavily on culture and culture .
 A country must also have an attractive economic and political model that others admire and seek to emulate . A country should also have a attractive political and economic model that other admire .
 Russia's authoritarian political regime and corrupt oligarchic capitalism have little popular appeal beyond its borders . Some domestic interest groups in post-Soviet states may have close connections to the Russian political and economic establishment .
 Most post-Soviet states have authoritarian political regimes, and this has not significantly hindered Russia’s ability to project its influence . This has not hindered Russia's ability toproject its influence.
 The EU was unable to offer much in the way of material incentives, the European model of political and economic governance . Ukraine would be obliged to accept if it signed the agreements.
Russian-led Eurasian Union promised to maintain the status quo or increase authoritarians and open the country to economic predation by Russian oligarchs . Maidan square protest the Yanukovych government's decision to back away from the EU .
 Russian Ethnic Nationalism Rears its Ugly Head . Russia may shift to using hard-power resources – military force and political pressure – in order to push integration forward .
Hard-power tools were on full display during Moscow’s sophisticated operation to annex Crimea and support of separatists .
 Moscow justified the annexation of Crimea by appealing to Russia’s right to defend its ethnic Russian kin throughout the post-Soviet space .
 Putin made this the central theme of his 18 March 2014 Crimea speech . He announced Crimea’s “return” to Russia and justified his policies in Ukraine .
 The speech can be read as a call to irredentism and a repudiation of the legitimacy of the post-Soviet division of borders . The speech is also a repudiated of the legitimate legitimacy of post- Soviet borders .
 The speech argues that in annexing Ukraine, Russia is correcting a historical wrong . It suggests that the Crimean precedent can be repeated in other post-Soviet countries such as Kazakhstan and Moldova .
Kazakhstan and Belarus have found subtle ways to voice their displeasure . Even states whose close economic and political ties with Russia have forced them to tacitly accept Moscow’s policies .
 Belarusian population closely identifies with Russia and has been largely sympathetic to Russia’s policies in Ukraine . The Belarusians have been sympathetic to Ukraine's policies .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine have heightened anxieties about Belarusian national sovereignty . Russia has eroded support for union with Russia .
 Threat of Russian irredentism has already begun to affect the bargaining calculus between Russia and Kazakhstan . There is also subtle evidence that the threat is already affecting the negotiating calculus .
 Russia has been unhappy with the Kazakh government in that it has not offered it the expected level of support on Ukraine . Russia is unhappy with Kazakhstan's government for its lack of support for Ukraine .
 Astana has refrained from directly criticizing Crimea's annexation and Russia's support for separatists in the east . Astana stressed the complex historical context under which the crisis has occurred .
 Russia put in place in response to EU sanctions on agricultural products . The move has weakened the cohesiveness of the EEU's trade and customs policies . Its support has stopped short of formal recognition, and it failed to support the retaliatory sanctions .
 The use of these kinds of coercive tactics comes at a steep price . Kazakhstan's statement can be interpreted as an indirect threat to Kazakh sovereignty .
 If Moscow continues to go down this path it will erode the legitimacy of the Eurasian project, it will foster resistance on the part of subordinate states . If Moscow goes down the path it would erode its legitimacy and foster resistance .
Both countries have asserted their independence during the Ukraine crisis . Both countries have also assert their independence in Ukraine .
Both sides have hedged against Russian domination by opening up channels of communication and cooperation with Kiev . Both sides have not unequivocally backed Russia in its fight against the Ukrainian government .
 EEU members and candidate countries have taken advantage of the Ukraine crisis to extract costly concessions from Russia in exchange for continued support for integration .
 EEU member state Kyrgyzstan is asking for a payment of USD 1 billion to compensate for the losses that higher EEU import tariffs will incur to its re-export of Chinese goods to Russia and other EEU members .
Use of force and coercion in Ukraine has made it more costly for Russia to continue its regional integration project at a time when its economic resources are diminished . In the end, the use of force, coercion and coercion has made Russia more costly.
 Such a conclusion fails to capture the true nature of the shift in Russia’s regional leadership strategy .
 The leadership in Moscow has backed away from coercive strategies even in Ukraine . The leadership has backed out of coercive strategies in Ukraine.
 The initial euphoria over Crimea has given way to a more sober assessment of the costs of a more coercive approach . It is likely to meet from the smaller states in the post-Soviet space as well as isolation from the West .
Post-Soviet states have actually been able to use Russia’s post-Ukraine international isolation to extract economic concession from Moscow in return for their continued support for integration .
 Russia's ability to continue to use economic incentives to ensure these states’ loyalty is now limited by Moscow’s own economic woes . At the same time, there is a growing appreciation in Moscow that Russia”s ability to keep economic incentives is limited .
 Russia has begun to shift its policy of regional integration away from economic issues and toward security and hard-power issues . Russia continues to enjoy a distinct advantage.
 Russia is not simply trying to use its hard and coercive power to reestablish empire, it is not just trying to re establish empire . Russia is using its hard-and- coercive power.
 Russia’s approach is to establish its influence in these states by taking the lead on regional security issues . Russia is positioning itself as the main guarantor of the security of the region's regimes .
 The Arab Spring and the rise of ISIS are of grave concern to the leadership in Central Asia and the Caucusus . Both indirectly as a result of demonstration effects that may destabilize their own regimes, as well as directly.
 The United States winds down its presence in Afghanistan, opening up the prospect of further instability and the Taliban’s return to power . These problems take on increased importance as the U.S. winds down.
 Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan face the prospects of leadership successions due to the advanced age of their authoritarian presidents . These threats are of growing importance as two of the most significant Central Asian nations face the prospect of successions .
 The region's leaders have been able to keep the lid on public discontent . Thus far, the region’s leaders have kept the lid.
 Recent events in Tajikistan are a reminder of just how fragile many of these regimes are. But recent events in the country are a sign of how fragile they are .
 In recent months, Russia has stepped up its security commitments throughout the region . Russia has also stepped up security commitments in recent months .
 The topic of instability in the Middle East and the threat from ISIS were at the forefront of the CSTO’s September 2015 meeting in Dushanbe, Tajikistan .
 At Russia’s initiative member states agreed to a number of reforms designed to address the ISIS threat .
 The CSTO failed to send forces to Kyrgyzstan in May–June 2010 when riots broke out in the southern part of that country . The legal framework for such an intervention was not in place, the CSTO says .
Russia has also used the CSTO to police cyber space throughout the region . Russia has also been using it to help police in cyber space .
 The recruitment of our citizens to participate in the armed conflict on the side of ISIS is particularly troubling . Many have returned to continue their terrorist activities and recruit others to their cause in the region .
 Moscow is demonstrating its commitment to its Central Asian allies . By supporting the Assad regime, Moscow is showing its support to its allies .
Most of them head secular authoritarian regimes that have narrow bases of social support based on clan or tribal affiliations . Most of them face the prospect of active Islamist insurgencies .
 Many regimes do not fully trust the U.S. and fear that any support they may get from Washington will require concessions on their part on democracy and human rights .
 Kyrgyzstan finally joined the EEU in August 2015 . The country's long-running foot-dragging has led to the move to the European Union .
 The two countries are wary that Moscow is using the conflict to promote its regional hegemony . But they are also heavily dependent on Russia .
 Armenia is a member of the CSTO and counts on Russia as a final guarantor if its security is at risk . Armenia is also a member.
 Russia has been able to play on regional security concerns to push forward security proposals that reflect its more narrow security concerns . Russia has also pushed forward security plans that reflect more narrowSecurity concerns .
 Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan have jealously guarded their sovereignty and independence . Up until now, they have stayed out of Russian-led integration efforts .
 Russia has now invited China to participate in its projects of Eurasian economic integration . Realizing the limits of its economic resources, Russia is now seeking China's participation .
 Putin and Xi Jinping have signed a memorandum of cooperation between the Eurasian Economic Union and China's Silk Road initiative . The two powers would work together to promote the region’s economic development . Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping signed the memorandum .
 Moscow's acceptance of China's growing economic presence in Central Asia represents a dramatic reversal in policy . Moscow’s acceptance of Chinese economic presence has been a dramatic change in policy.
 Russia has gone from a strategy of trying to use economic incentives and soft power to push forward regional integration . Russia is looking to use its hard-power resources to achieve the same goals by positioning itself as the main security provider for the region’s states .
 This shift in strategy reflects a realization of the limits of its economic and soft-power resources as well as a newfound confidence in its hard-power capabilities . This shift is in response to a growing confidence in the country's hard- power capabilities .
 The study makes several contributions to our broader understanding of regionalism, the authors say . The focus has been on contemporary Russia, the study says .
 Regional powers can use hard power to pursue what are predominantly economic goals . This study illustrates the way in which regional powers can pursue what is predominantly economic Goals .
 The study shows that even when a regional power's ultimate goal is economic integration, it does not necessarily have to only rely on its economic or soft-power to push forward the integration agenda .
 Hard-power tools or the provision of security can also be used as a tool for regional powers that lack economic or soft-power resources .
 Russia's new strategy for regional integration is in line with Lake and Morgan's work on regional security hierarchies . Russia’s new strategy will be in line to the work of the two countries .
 dominant states provide order and security, and in turn, make demands on subordinate states . The leadership of the dominant state is legitimate and necessary for the maintenance of order .
 Dominant states form a kind of ‘contractual relationship’ with subordinates in which protection is exchanged for loyalty . Dominant States form a sort of “contractual’s’ relationship with subordinates .
 Russia is attempting to assert its authority by establishing hierarchical relations with the region’s smaller states . Russia is trying to provide for their internal security in exchange for their participation in Russian-led regional integration projects .
 Lake and Morgan and Lake focus on the security dimensions of the emerging hierarchical relationship . Lake andMorgan and Lake are the two largest cities in the world .
 Russia’s goals are shaped as much by economic interests as they are by security . However, Russia's goals are not as much as economic interests.
 Russia is trying to leverage its security leadership to achieve its broader regional economic goals and advance regional economic integration . Russia's security leadership is being used to achieve broader regional goals, say Russia .
 The analyses of Lake and Morgan and Lake focus on external security threats that subordinate states face from other states . The dominant state keeps subordinate regional states from fighting one another .
 This article also examines the leadership role that powerful regional states can play in protecting states from internal security threats, such as Islamic radicalism . It also examines leadership role in protecting countries that have transnational or global dimension .
 Regional powers are trying to exercise their authority over developing states . This is a heretofore ignored dimension of security leadership that may be of particular significance to regional powers .
Post-Soviet countries are weak and their political regimes are poorly institutionalized and highly authoritarian . It is these kinds of internal threats, rather than threats from other states, that constitute the most acute threat to many of the post-Soviet nations .
 Russia has a comparative advantage over other possible security sponsors in that it is much more tolerant of these regime’s violations of human rights and anti-democratic practices .
 The crisis in Ukraine exposed Russia’s limited ability to use material incentives and soft power to integrate post-Soviet space under its leadership .
 Russian leaders have chosen to rely on the country’s still considerable hard power and military capabilities to push integration forward .
 The alternative would mean giving up the pursuit of regional dominance and the Eurasian integration project . It is not considered to be a viable option .
It would be easy to place the blame squarely on Russia for this turn of events . It would be easier to blame Russia for the incident than any other country .
 The West also made a critical mistake in pushing for Ukraine's Western integration without taking Russia’s interests into account .
 Western leaders took advantage of Russia’s soft-power weaknesses, not appreciating that this would provoke a hard-power response .
 A more farsighted strategy would have also given Russia some stake in Ukraine’s future, instead of letting the question of Ukraine's future devolve into a zero-sum contest between East and West .
 Russia may have been willing to accept Ukraine’s European integration if it had also promised some tangible benefits for Russia .
 If such an agreement had been offered from the very beginning, we may have been able to avoid the current crisis entirely . If such a deal had been made, we could have avoided the crisis entirely.
 A Ukrainian strategy that included Russia would also have allowed Russia to develop its economic and soft power so that it would not have to rely on its hard and coercive power to push regional integration forward .
 Russia has become estranged from the Western-led world order, writes Peter Bergen . He says it sees the use of coercive and hard power as the only tools available to defend and promote its interests .
 Russia relies on its hard power to push forward its foreign policy goals . In the absence of economic and soft power it may be logical for Russia to move to a strategy where it relies on hard power .
 Russia may be overestimating the usefulness of its hard-power resources in achieving goals, such as Eurasian integration . It will also require it to effectively exercise economic and soft power if they are to truly be successful .
 Reliance on hard power can detract from its ability to develop its soft power and economic resources . Reliance to hard power is a problem for the country's economy .
 investment in the military and the embracing of military commitments on its periphery and beyond places a burden on the Russian economy and creates resentment and fear of Russia among many of the smaller states in the region . Investment in theMilitary and the embrace of militarycommitments on the periphery places
 Hard power is the only effective tool we have we see it as the solution to all problems . Hard power can be used to solve problems such as power problems, says the company .
 Moscow’s preoccupation with the use of hard power may give rise to a skewed world view . Russia and the rest of the world certainly face many new and pressing security challenges .
 Ukraine and Turkmenistan are only associate members, as they never officially ratified the CIS founding treaty . The two countries never officially signed the treaty .
 Georgia withdrew from the organization in 2009 in the aftermath of the 2008 RussoGeorgian war . Georgia withdrew in 2009 after the war .
 In 2014, the Ukrainian government announced that it will cut all its ties with the organization . The Ukrainian government submitted a bill to the Ukrainian parliament to begin the process .
 The U.S. criticizes the kind of gross human rights violations that often occur when authoritarian governments repress internal opposition .
 The U.S. was very vocal in its criticism of Uzbekistan’s government after it massacred protester in Andijan in 2005 .
 Uzbekistan has increased security cooperation with Russia and China . This prompted Uzbekistan to back away from the security ties it was developing with the United States .
 Disclosure statement no potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors . The authors said there were no potential conflicts of interest .
 Ivanter, Viktor Valery, Vladimir Yasinskiy Geets, Alexander Shirov, and Andrey Anisimov are all named . Ivanter is a former member of the Russian National Guard . He is the son of Russian President Vladimir Putin .