 The Kowalsky Program also sponsors an annual summer archaeological expedition in Baturyn, Ukraine .
 Essays on the Humanities, History, and PoliKeo tics in Contemporary Ukraine, Poland, and Russia by Tomasz Stryjek .
 The ‘Slovo’ Writers’ House in Kharkiv and the Unknown Destiny of its Inhabitants (The Tragic Fate of the Ukrainian Writer Mykhailo Bykovets during the Great Purge)’
 The Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies at the Univ. of Alberta is alive and well . From the Director “The letter kills, but the spirit gives life’s life, says Director .
 The period of its administrative reorganization appears to have completed its initial and most challenging phase . The period was the most difficult phase of the organization's reorganization .
An innovative development strategy proposed several years ago is beginning to yield its first academic results . Iam sure that, given good will, patience, and dedication to the principles of academic autonomy, an appropriate formula will be found .
 The Contemporary Ukraine Studies Programme established two years ago . It already has a solid record of conferences, seminars, round tables, and publications .
 The Institute is the first holders of the Stasiuk Postdoc Fellowships . This year, they are the first to hold the postdoc fellowships .
Three issues of the new electronic journal East/West have been published in the course of two years . Three issues have been released in two years.
 Volodymyr Kravchenko, CIUS director their ""Vision"" for the development of their centre to community stakeholders .
Major changes will affect the Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine project . The main emphasis will transfer to the history and current state of Ukrainian Studies in the Western world .
 The commemoration of this “less than round’s anniversary of CIUS is an occasion not so much for celebration as for a sober assessment of what has been accomplished and what still lies ahead .
 Ukrainian studies, the Ukrainian community in Canada, and the Ukrainian state. We must respond to new challenges facing academic Ukrainian studies .
 The book contains research essays in Jewish studies by young historians from Lviv, Kharkiv, Kyiv, Dnipropetrovsk and Luhansk .
Villages of Bohdanivka, Stepanivka-Druha (Pryoziv district, Zaporizhia region) Urban village of Verkhnii Rohachyk City of Polohy Publications 1 .
 The CanadaUkraine archaeological expedition carried out its annual excavations in Baturyn, Ukraine .
 Journal of Ukrainian Studies, an online academic journal sponsored by the CIUS, published its inaugural issue in August 2014 .
 The journal's editor-in-chief, Professor Oleh S Ilnytzkyj, is currently working on future issues . One of the issues will be about the city of Kharkiv .
 Tania Plawuszczak-Stech joined the EWIJUS staff as book review editor in June 2015 .
 The editor-in-chief expressed his sincere gratitude to the outgoing book review editor, Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter said he was grateful for the outgoing editor's service .
 Journal of Ukrainian Studies is a peerreviewed scholarly venue for the dissemination of new interdisciplinary research .
 EWJUS is already living up to its mission by attracting contributors from Canada, the USA, Australia, and Europe . EWJus has already attracted contributors from the U.S. and Canada .
 During its very short existence, it has earned an active following among readers . More importantly, during its short existence.
 EWJUS is able to track not only the number of registered readers on its site, but also the popularity of articles as evidenced by downloads .
 EWJUS is freely available to anyone who simply registers on our site . The former JUS was based on subscriptions, which is now based on subscription .
 Visitors from 68 different countries have come to the EWJUS site to read abstracts and download articles . Visitors have also been able to download articles from the site .
 The most active visitors and readers hail from Canada and the USA . Ukraine, Germany, and Russia are the most active countries in the world .
 The popularity of our content can be gauged by the number of article downloads and page views of abstracts . The number of articles and views of an abstracts can be measured by how many people have downloaded them .
 The Study of the Holodomor and Ukrainian Historiography’s. (Downloads: 34; Abstract views: 89) The study was published in 2013 .
 Two Memory Cultures at the Western Ukrainian Borderland’s Museum of Memory .
 The number of visitors is doubtless greater than that enjoyed by any other English-language Ukraine-oriented research journal in North America .
 The challenge before us is to increase our editorial staff and financial resources, which will allow us to expand and cope with a larger number of submissions and technical issues . We need to increase staff and resources.
Since this is an open-access journal, it must fund its activity from non-subscription sources . Since this is a open- access journal, the journal must pay for its activity through non- Subscription sources.
 The Holodomor, the Famine of 1932-33 in Ukraine, is a rich subject for study . It is the first time a study has taken place in Ukraine .
 The Holodomor Research and Education Consortium was established as a CIUS project in 2013 . It was established to promote research and awareness of the HolodOMor and its inclusion in school curricula .
 HREC is funding projects that broaden access to eyewitness accounts . HREC supports research on the Holodomor .
 The writer Volodymyr Maniak and his wife, Lidiia Kovalenko, wrote a collection of letters . They were amassed by the writer and wife.
 The letters often begin with expressions of gratitude for the opportunity to speak on the Holodomor . Written in the late 1980s and early 1990s .
 HREC is working with Mr Bojczuk to transcribe the letters . They contain some of the first expressions from the general public in Ukraine concerning the Famine .
 HREC seeks out opportunities to engage scholars from various disciplines in examining the implications of the Holodomor . HREC wants scholars from different disciplines to examine the implications.
 The “Communism and Hunger’ conference attracted specialists on Soviet, Chinese, and Kazakh history .
 HREC encouraged the participation of early-career scholars through conference attendance stipends . HREC also encouraged theparticipation of early career scholars .
 In 2016, the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies celebrates 40 years since its founding . The Institute of Ukraine Studies celebrates its 40th anniversary .
 CIUS will be Organizing a series of events and activities focusing on Ukrainian Studies in North America . CIUS to mark this special occasion .
 HREC holds grant competitions to support research and preservation of materials . HREC plans to hold grant competitions in support of research and preserve materials .
 HREC has made 21 awards, including a grant to support research on the Torgsin store system . To date, H REC has made 20 awards .
 Professor Timothy Snyder of Yale Univ. presented this year's lecture on November 4 .
 The HREC mandate includes development of educational programs in secondary schools . HREC mandates that schools must develop educational programs .
 HREC prepares teaching materials, conducts training for educators, and is a partner in the Holodomor National Awareness Tour . HREC is part of the CanadaUkraine Foundation's Multiculturalism Inter-Action Program .
 The Holodomor tour will highlight the values of freedom, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law .
 The Holodomor Mobile Classroom is a customized RV that will visit schools across Canada . It features state-of-theart audio-visual and multimedia capabilities .
 Bohdan Klid oversees research activities, supported by Andrij Makuch . Director of Education Valentina Kuryliw oversees the education program .
 HREC was established with generous support from the Temerty Family Foundation . HREC is based in the UK and was established in 2007 .
 The mandate of CUSP (formerly Centre for Political and Regional Studies) is to develop new directions for CIUS . CIUS focuses on research in the social sciences focused on Ukraine since independence .
 In March 2015, CUSP held a three-day symposium to mark the anniversary of Ukraine's Euromaidan Revolution . The 49th annual Shevchenko Lecture was held in conjunction with the three- day event .
 The symposium included papers by Marta Dyczok, Volodymyr Kulyk, Vladyslav Hrynevych, Bohdan Kordan and Taras Kuzio .
David Marples, Robert Murray, Larissa Blavatska, Lubomyr Markevych, and Michael Bociurkiw. A round-table discussion comparing the revolutions of 2004 and 2014 featured David Marples.
 CIUS conference was extremely successful, unprecedentedly so in terms of attendance, engagement with the community, financing through outside fund-raising, and raising the profile of CIUS locally, nationally, and internationally .
CUSP also coordinated CIUS participation in International Week on campus on 27 January 2015 . CUSP was also part of CIUS Participation in International week on campus .
 The IEU is the most widely influential of all CIUS projects . Today, the IEU web site is giving Internet users worldwide access to more than 6,000 articles .
 The IEU has been favourably reCIUS Newsletter 2015 ceived not only by the academic community but also by the general public and Internet viewers .
 In 2014-15, the IEU site has been visited by up to 1,500 persons per day . The IEU staff has received feedback and numerous queries from scholars, students, and other Internet users .
 It thus reaches much wider audiences than our scholarly programs and publications . It also reaches much broader audiences than its scholarly programs .
 Stech, with Andrij Makuch as senior editor, added new information to the site on a variety of topics and a focus time to exchange views . Stech has been in charge of the site since 2007 .
 Preferred topics of research proposals include identities, nationalism, regions, borders, social values, and historical politics .
 Bohdan Harasymiw is serving as the lead investigator of a three-year project on democratic reform of governance in Ukraine . He is funded by a grant of $100,000 from the Kule Institute for Advanced Study .
 PSSST ESS on particular subjects, such as the history, cities, and population of the wartorn Donets Basin region and southeastern Ukraine .
 The IEU project is developing new areas of particular focus . Fa EAS Mg LNA SESE RISES ATR OE Peter Jacyk Centre for Historical Research .
 Petro Jacyk Program for the Study of Modern Ukrainian History and Society Dr. Dr. JacyK is a Ukrainian historian .
 The 2014-15 academic year was one of intensive work on the Hrushevsky Translation Project . The project is one of the most important projects in the world .
 Volume 10, which concludes Hrushevsky’s History of Ukraine-Rus’, was published in November 2014 . Volume 10 is published in October 2014 .
 The volume deals with the Treaty of Hadiach and the years immediately after Khmelnytsky’s death .
 It features an introduction by Yaroslav Fedoruk documenting the last years of Hrushevsky’s life .
 The occasion was also a tribute to the late Honourable John Yaremko, a former minister of the government of Ontario and sponsor of the volume . The occasion also was a tribute.
 The event was attended by over 70 members of the Toronto academic and general community .
 Uliana Pasicznyk serves as managing editor and Robert Romanchuk and Yaroslav Fedoruk as consulting editors . The two men also serve as managing editors .
 volume 4 deals with political affairs in Ukraine under Lithuanian and Polish rule . Nearly complete is the editing of volume 4, which deals with Ukrainian political affairs .
 Yurkevich serves as managing editor and Robert Frost as consulting editor . CIUS Newsletter 2015 Projects and Programs.
 The goal of publishing all the volumes of the History is approaching realization . With work proceeding apace on volumes 5 and 2, the goal is to publish the History .
 The Centre has secured $20,000 from the Ukrainian Studies Fund, Inc. to support the study of modern Ukrainian history . Pavlo Khrystiuk, “Chronicle of the Ukrainian Revolution”
 Khrystiuk was a member of the Ukrainian Central Rada and a negotiator of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk . He secured international recognition for the Ukrainian state .
 The translator is Alan Rutkowski, a former Slavic librarian at the Univ. of Alberta . He is a former Russian librarian .
 Professor Mark von Hagen of Arizona State Univ. will serve as the scholarly editor of the volume . The volume will be a major Centre and CIUS contribution to the centenary commemoration of the Ukrainian Revolution of 1917-21 .
 Marko R Stech, Uliana Pasicznyk, Tania Plawuszczak-Stech, and Frank E Sysyn are among the four members of the team .
 Professor Yaroslav Hrytsak was elected program director . Professor Martin Schulze Wessel of Ludwig-Maximilpea iansUniversitat Miinchen was co-director .
 The German Foreign Ministry has guaranteed multi-year funding for this important initiative . The initiative will bring together German and Ukrainian historians .
 Since July 2014, ULEC has engaged with the community on collaborative educational endeavours . ULEc has pursued a number of exciting research projects, given conference presentations, submitted academic publications and offered innovative workshops .
 Olenka Bilash showcased ULEC’s collaborative work with the community at the Engagement Scholarship Consortium International Conference . The conference was held in New York City .
 Alla Nedashkivska at the International Engagement Scholarship Consortium conference, Edmonton, October 2014 . She is a member of the Internationalengagement Scholarship consortium .
 ULEC was also pleased to host two professional development sessions for educators from the Edmonton area . The Edmonton area has also hosted two professionaldevelopment sessions for teachers .
 One was devoted to the implementation of digital resources in teaching and learning Ukrainian and the use of technological tools to promote the differentiation of students with various levels of language proficiency, interests, and background knowledge .
 ULEC is especially eager to continue and expand its professional development initiatives at the provincial, national, and international levels .
 The Centre is also developing a vision for ULEC 2030 to be shared with the community . The Centre has also developed a vision to share the community with the world .
Ukrainian education company is working to develop and secure success for Ukrainian education . The company is also working on projects that engage the community, students, young leaders, and stakeholders .
 We are proud of our accomplishments and will confidently approach the new challenges ahead of us . We will be proud of their accomplishments, we say. We are confident of our achievements and will be confident about our future .
Halyna Klid, Mykola Soroka, Olena Sivachenko, Oksana Perets, and Cassian Soltykevych are among those who have helped ULEC's research and resource development projects .
 Most of the articles address Ukrainian or Eastern Christian religious formations, but other religious groups, such as Jews, are also discussed . Most of these articles address Ukraine or Eastern Christians .
 In light of the modern-day globalization of Ukrainian religious groups and rise of diasporas, some articles also cover Western Europe and the Americas .
 Olga Andriewsky, Fran¢oise Thom, Norman Naimark and Stanislav Kulchytsky addressed the significance of study of the Holodomor for the examination of one or more broader topics .
 The Emergence of Ukraine: Self-Determination, Occupation, and War in Ukraine, 1917-1922 . This volume is a collection of articles by several prominent historians from Austria, Germany, Ukraine, Poland and Russia .
 The first section deals with military aspects of the conquest, the suppression of uprisings and the retreat . It also discusses the administration of occupied territory, the economic utilization of the country, and the internal Ukrainian perspective on the occupation .
The second section details developments in Ukraine between 1917 and 1922 . The second section includes developments in the country between 1917 to 1922 .
 The third section deals with the Central Powers’ policies toward the East and Ukraine in particular . The fourth and final section is an analysis of the international context of Ukraine's efforts to establish a state .
 Eeponu Ukraine on the Historiographic Map of Interwar Europe . Co-published by CIUS Press and several other leading centres of Ukrainian studies in Europe and North America .
 articles are based on papers delivered at a conference held at the Ukrainian Free Univ. in Munich on 1-3 July 2012 .
 memoirs describe Ukrainian life in Austrian Galicia, interwar Poland, during Soviet and German occupations, and in the emigration .
 The introduction by Oleh Pavlyshyn discusses the role of jurists in Ukrainian civic life .
 Bishop Borys Gudziak deals with the prominent role of the Slyz family in Ukrainian community life .
 Income from the fund is to be used for fellowships and scholarly projects in Ukrainian studies .
 This book is available in a hardcover edition for $24.95 . The book is written by Koryr, Borwannip Meseniies, KOpilt Crruit, Banecaas Cxopoxon .
 The Palaces of lvan Mazepa and Kyrylo Rozumovsky are the fourth richly illustrated booklet presenting the work of Canadian and Ukrainian archaeologists and historians researching Baturyn .
 The publication surveys the history of Baturyn during its golden age under Hetman Ivan Mazepa . The town was destroyed by Russian troops in 1708, and its subsequent rebuilding by Het man Kyrylo Rozumovsky .
 The sack of Baturyn is described on the basis of eighteenthcentury French sources and Cossack chronicles . The sack is described by French sources.
 The authors discuss the results of the 2013-14 CanadaUkraine excavations at the fortress and the hetmans’ estates .
 They describe the remnants of the palatial residences of Mazepa and Rozumovsky . They present computer reconstructions of their architecture and decoration .
 Archaeological findings testify to the development of international trade, crafts, agriculture, and art in Baturyn up to 1708 .
Earlycareer and established scholars who gave original papers on such topics as geopolitics and regional politics .
 Being live-streamed, the conference attracted an unprecedentedly large audience . The conference attracted over 1,000 Internet followers .
Derek Fraser, former Canadian ambassador to Ukraine, spoke on Canadas policy toward Ukraine and Russia . A dinner was held for the presenters .
 The Contemporary Ukraine Studies Program held a symposium on the first anniversary of the Euromaidan Revolution in Ukraine .
 Scholars and experts from Canada and Ukraine spoke about the significance and consequences of this historic event as well as its influence on current international developments . Scholars from Canada, Ukraine spoke of the significance of the historic event .
 The first panel was devoted to the images, symbols, and identity of the Euromaidan Revolution . The panel also focused on the images and symbols of the revolution .
 Marta Dyczok (Univ. of Western Ontario, London, Ontario) spoke about competing narratives in media representations of the Ukraine .
 As a result, international public opinion remains divided over matters dealing with Ukraine .
 Volodymyr Kulyk (Institute of Political and Ethnic Studies) noted a dramatic change in Ukrainian national identity .
 Ukraine has increased self-identification with Ukraine, greater pride in belonging to the Ukrainian nation, greater attachment to national symbols, and greater solidarity with fellow nationals . Ukraine is now a truly European country, according to the author .
 Vladyslav Hrynevych (Institute of Political and Ethnic Studies, Kyiv) looked into the conflict of competing historical memories fostering antagonistic relationships .
 The Russian Federation's memory politics emphasize militarism, imperialism, anti-Westernism, and opposition to democracy and individual rights . The Russians are also opposed to democracy, individual rights, and democracy .
 This runs counter to Ukraine's aspirations, based on European values of the rule of law, social justice, and personal freedom . This runscounter to Ukrainian aspirations, according to the EU, says the author .
 Bohdan Kordan explored the origins, meaning and significance of the Euromaidan . He highlighted the deep-seated changes in political and social consciousness that have occurred in Ukrainian society .
Taras Kuzio, speaking from the UK via Skype, pointed out violence, criminality, and Russian nationalism had been sustaining Yanukovych’s regime .
 neo-Soviet and Russian nationalism remains the biggest threat to Ukraine's democratic system and to European integration .
 Mychailo Wynnyckyj (Kyiv-Mohyla Academy National Univ) characterized the Euromaidan events as a triple revolution . The events were described as national, bourgeois, and postmodern .
 Canada-Ukraine archaeological expedition continues excavating the remnants of Hetman Ivan Mazepa’s main residence in Baturyn .
 The palace was burned by Russian troops during their destruction of the town in 1708 . Prior to 1700, he constructed a richly embellished brick baroque palace .
 Many fragments of fine multicoloured glazed and terracotta floor, stove, and facade revetment tiles were found . Many fragments were found.
 These decorative details of Mazepas villa represent the seventeenth-century Kyivan school of architectural majolica .
 Researchers have prepared computer reconstructions of nine ornamental floor patterns of the palace’s reception halls, living quarters and office premises .
 Of all the known early modern buildings in Ukraine, Mazepa’s principal residence in Baturyn stands out for the largest number of ceramic floor tiles .
 This attests to its comparatively large size, multistoried and multi-chamber architectural design, and exceptional embellishment . This attest to its relatively large size and multistorious design .
 Archaeologists have completed excavating the remnants of the spacious service structure at Mazepa’s court . The site is located in the town of Mazepas, near to the city's capital .
 It probably housed either members of the hetman’s guard or Cossack officers from his retinue .
 Bronze clasp and decorative appliqués from leather belts of Cossack officers discovered in early eighteenth-century service building in 2014 .
Investigators have reconstructed three decorated belts of wealthy Cossack officers . Sytyi. Investigators have reconstructed the belts.
 These were probably brought to early modern Baturyn from the Ottoman Porte . They were likely brought to the city from the early 1900s .
 Finds of imported goods indicate the trade connections of the Cossack capital with 14 CIUS News Northern, Central, and Eastern Europe and the Islamic East .
 Archaeologists hope to locate remnants of Orlyk's residence at the site where this heraldic tile was found .
 In the fortress, ten seventeenthand eighteenth-century graves of burghers were exhumed in 2014 .
 Three of the victims can be identified as victims of the Russian assault on Baturyn. Three of them can be named as victims.
 The excavations of 2014 in Baturyn have yielded important data for research and reconstruction of the architecture and decoration of hetmans’ residences as well as the accoutrement of Cossack officers .
 New archaeological finds testify to the vibrancy of grain agriculture, crafts, and applied arts before the onslaught of 1708 .
 CIUS, the Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies and the Ucrainica Research Institute in Toronto sponsor the Baturyn project .
 Volodymyr Mezentsev and Professor Martin Dimnik participate in this research and the dissemination of its results .
 Nearly 50 students and scholars from universities in Chernihiv, Kyiv, and Hlukhiv took part in the excavations .
14 excavations in the Baturyn fortress. Fragments of costly milk-glass plates painted with multicoloured plant design, seventeenth or eighteenth century .
 Broken ceramic heraldic stove tile found in Baturyn suburb of Ostroh in 2014 .
 The first was awarded to Oksana Udovyk, who received a PhD in environmental governance from Sédertérn Univ., Sweden, in 2014 . The first award was given to Uksana Uvovyk in 2014.
 The second was awarded to Ivan Kozachenko, who received a PhD in sociology from the Univ. of Aberdeen, UK, in 2013 . The second award was given to Kozacenko, who is a graduate in sociology .
 The two post-docs took up their appointments at CIUS in the fall semester of 2015 . They took up appointments atCIUS in 2015 .
 Orest Martynowych awarded for proposal to arrange and catalogue part of Michael Marunchak fonds at Ukrainian Cultural and Educational Centre in Winnipeg .
 John-Paul Himka to support the creation of a digital archive associated with the Sanctuary Project . The Sanctuary Project is based in the San Francisco area .
 The fifth was awarded to Valentyn Kavunnyk to compile a two-volume index to diplomatic documents of the Ukrainian People's Republic . The index is based on diplomatic documents.
 Heather Coleman is the Director of Research Program on Religion and Culture, USA, and Ukraine . She is also a former member of the U.S. Embassy in Ukraine . Coleman is a former diplomat for Ukraine .
 Speakers and presenters from Austria, Canada, Germany, Israel, and the U.S.
 Bohdan Klid is the Chair and Professor of the Department of Political Studies . He is also the Director of the Political Studies at the University of St. Louis .
 The lecture was organized by the Holodomor Research and Education Consortium at CIUS . The Canadian Foundation for Ukrainian Studies and the Centre for Russian and East European Studies, Univ. of Toronto .
 A History, and her most recent book, Iron Curtain: The Crushing of Eastern Europe, 1944-1956, won the Cundill Prize for Historical Literature .
 Applebaum began her lecture by describing how Joseph Stalin's early career shaped his policies in Ukraine . She also described how Stalin's policies in Russia shaped his early career .
 His extra-legal “revolutionary methods’ included inventing a counter-revolutionary conspiracy as a pretext for using violence against opponents . His ‘revolutionary method’ includes inventing an anti-government conspiracy .
 Stalin's representative in Ukraine witnessed two failed Bolshevik invasions and peasant rebellions that came close to succeeding . Applebaum explained how Stalin, as Lenin’s representative, witnessed the two failed invasions .
The prevention of another Ukrainian peasant uprising was a central concern . The prevention of a peasant uprising in Ukraine was a key concern .
 He ordered Kaganovich to turn Ukraine into “a real fortress of the USSR’s USSR, a genuinely exemplary republic” “Without these and similar measures ... we may lose Ukraine,’ he wrote .
 Soldiers confiscated vegetables, fruit, and livestock as well as grain . Soldiers also confiscated livestock and livestock .
 She described Putin’s “managed democracy,’ including the creation of fake political parties . She also described Putin's ‘managed democracy’
 Putin saw “his people threatened by democratic forces as he had as a young KGB officer in East Germany in 1989, when terrified KGB and Stasi colleagues burned their files as crowds filled the streets .
 Putin has worked to ensure that no “colour revolution’s’ could take place in Russia . Since the demonstrations in Moscow in 2011, Putin has been working to ensure no ‘colourrevolution’ can take place .
 Vladimir Putin “knows that the successful westernization of Ukraine, even the creation of a relatively democratic, relatively prosperous, and relatively well-integrated Ukraine, is a dire danger for him’ said Ms. Putin .
 Putin fears revolution in Ukraine as a threat to Russia and his own political survival . Like Stalin, he fears revolution is a threat not only to Russia, but also to his political survival.
 Denysenko is Associate Professor of theological studies and Director of the Huffington Ecumenical Institute at Loyola Marymount Univ. in Los Angeles .
Leaders of Russian and Ukrainian churches have composed narratives defining the features of their ideal civilizations . He suggested that since 2009, leaders of the Russian and Ukraine churches have written narratives .
 The current turbulence afflicting Ukraine has shaped revisions of those narratives and elicited forceful counter-narratives defining what it means to belong to a given church .
 Denysenko opened by summarizing the Russian religious narrative known as the "Russkii mir" or Russian World . The initiative was developed and launched by Patriarch Kirill in 2009 .
 The "Russkii mir" defines the Moscow Patriarchate as an Orthodox civilization cultivating the traditional values of Holy Rus’ . It embraces the core peoples of Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova .
 Denysenko then turned to exploring how this Russian narrative was revised in order to defend the "Russkii mir’ in the wake of the Maidan revolution.
 Patriarch Kirill and Metropolitan Hilarion Alfeev contributed to the revision of the narrative by as Dr. Dr. Kirill .
 Nicholas Denysenko serting that illegitimate church groups both caused the violence in Ukraine and posed a serious threat to the safety and freedom of loyal adherents to the "Russkii mir" in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyivan Patriarchate responded to the Ukrainian crisis externally and internally by equating President Vladimir Putin of Russia with the biblical Cain and Pharaoh . Professor Denysenko argued that the Ukrainian counter-narrative was communicated by the church .
 The VOCKP’s counter-narrative assigns blame to Putin and the Kremlin . It describes the "Russkii mir" as a false promise resulting in slavery .
 The Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church is the source of a second Ukrainian counter-narrative, noted Denysenko . The church is also a source of an anti-Narrative .
 The UGCC is a church of new martyrs who remain faithful to their people to the end . It proclaims the church's absolute solidarity with all Ukrainians regardless of ethnicity, religion, or language .
 The lecture concluded with a reflection on how church leaders might adopt a course of rapprochement to model peace for civil society .
 Kulyk examined the most recent evolution of Ukrainian national identity . He examined the impact of the 2013-14 Euromaidan protest and the Russian aggression against Ukraine .
 Kulyk relied on two nation-wide surveys conducted in 2012 and 2014, supplementing that of focus-group discussions in Kyiv and Kharkiv in February 2015 .
 Dr. John Sutter says national identity has become much more salient than territorial . His nuanced analysis shows that national identity is more salient.
 Volodymyr Kulyk 18 CIUS Newsletter 2015 non-territorial (gender, occupational, religious, ideological, etc. identities)
 Those already possessing a Ukrainian identity have become more radical and alienated from Russia and have embraced Ukrainian nationalism in the past and present .
 citizens' readiness to identify themselves with the Ukrainian state is modified by the degree of their satisfaction with the current situation in Ukraine . citizens’ satisfaction with current situation is modified.
 The Euromaidan Revolution of 2014, also known as the Revolution of Dignity, was centred on Kyiv’s main square, as was the 2004 Orange Revolution .
 To mark the first anniversary of the Euromaidan Revolution, CIUS organized a three-day symposium . Andrey Kurkov delivered the 49th annual Shevchenko Lecture .
 Andrey Kurkov is a world-renowned Ukrainian novelist, movie scriptwriter, and essayist . He is also a film scriptwriter.
 Andrey Kurkov has published 18 novels, 7 books for children, and more than 30 film scripts . He is a member of PEN International, and has published 30 films .
 His works have been translated into 36 languages, including English, Spanish, French, Italian, Dutch, German, Swedish, Turkish, Japanese, Chinese, and Hebrew .
 Kurkov commands the largest international audience and is Ukraine’ bestselling author abroad . Among Russophone writers in the post-Soviet space, he commands the biggest international audience .
 Kurkov began with a personal account of his development as a writer in the context of the unravelling of the Soviet state and economy in the late 1980s .
 Kurkov: Ukraine's lack of state-builders among its political elite has been a constant problem since independence in 1991 . Kurkov says Ukraine has been plagued by a lack of political leaders .
Ukrainian politicians have never regarded their country as national property . No agreement has ever been concluded with Russia to delimit Ukraine's territory .
 This neglect also extended to Ukraine's informational and cultural space . This neglect extended to the country's cultural and informational space .
 In the Donbas and Crimea, media and information outlets were controlled by local elites . They used them to maintain a Soviettype mentality among the local population .
 The Euromaidan Revolution was provoked by the actions of Viktor Yanukovych . Yanukovych wanted to avoid such a scenario, having lost power following the Orange Revolution of 2004 .
 During the first stages of the Euromaidan Revolution, demonstrators had no clear goals . The Maidan became a forum for discussion resembling an open university .
 Russia's war with Russia has produced large-scale politicization, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The readiness of a minority of demonstrators to confront the authorities with force has led to large- scale politicization .
 Ukraine has entered a period of nation-building that is also a time of danger, since the road ahead is difficult . As a result, Ukraine has also entered a periods of country-building, which has been difficult .
 corruption is difficult to root out, especially when the country is at war . Many Ukrainians want to live under the rule of law, but corruption is hard toroot out .
Russias leaders hope that dire economic circumstances will exhaust Ukrainians, leading them to abandon the struggle with Russia .
 Kurkov concluded that if there are no reforms, there may be a third Maidan revolution caused by mounting economic and social problems, which would be disastrous for Ukraine .
 Professor Mihaychuk’s research interests include issues in nineteenth-century Ukrainian and Russian literature, particularly using a discourse approach to narration .
 He is also an active translator, working on plays by Volodymyr Vynnychenko and Mykola Kulish . He is currently working on two plays by Vynychenko and Kulish.
 Maxim Tarnawsky, Prof eorge Mihaychuk, Oksana Pisetska Struk. Struk the problem of developing a serious highbrow Ukrainian literature and culture in the context of the early nineteenth-century Russian Empire .
 Ukraine was an intriguing, somewhat exotic backwater, whose literature was perceived as entertaining light fare with a quaint flavor of the rustic provinces .
 For Ukrainian authors and readers, this provinciality informed a distinct identity that enabled them to preserve the particularities of their culture and ethnos .
 Mihaychuk’s title lies precisely in the difficulty of overcoming this provincial distinctiveness without abandoning a separate Ukrainian identity and culture .
 Ukrainian authors in this period needed to demonstrate the dignity and capacity of the Ukrainian language and culture to embody the aesthetic principles of high culture .
 The Struk Memorial Lecture is an annual lecture in English on topics in Ukrainian literature . The lectures are held in Ukraine.
 Danylo Husar Struk taught at the Department of Slavic Languages and Literatures of the Univ. of Toronto . The lecture is held at the University of Toronto.
 The Struk Program in Ukrainian Literature of the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies is sponsored by Struk's family and friends . The program was founded in 1999 through donations from Struk’s family, friends .
 Round-table discussion held in Kyiv on the history of the Ukrainian Cossack Hetmanate in honour of Professor Zenon Kohut .
 Yaroslav Fedoruk, Oleksandr Mavrin, Svitlana Pankova and Dr. Dr. Hrushevsky Memorial Museum are among the top archaeologists in Ukraine .
 Professor Frank E Sysyn is the author of the introduction of the book . The book was published in 2009 .
 The First Ukrainian Catholic Bishop of Canada, Nykyta Budka, is the first Ukrainian Catholic bishop of Canada . Budka is a former bishop of Ukraine .
 Taras Lupul is recipient of grants from the Govern20 CIUS Newsletter 2015 . Lupul received grants from Alberta’s International Education Awards-Ukraine and CIUS .
 Mykhailo Hrushevsky, History of Ukraine-Rus’s history of Ukraine, 16571659, is published in the Cossack Age of Ukraine .
 This event also honoured the late John Yaremko, a co-sponsor of the volume . This event was also honouring the lateJohn YareMko .
 Students from SLAV 299, “Europe and the Ukrainian (Euromaidan) Revolution,’ taught by Dr. Bohdan Harasymiw, CIUS .
 Women's League of Canada Edmonton Eparchy Museum is at St. John’s Cultural Centre .
 Professor Natalia Kononenko, Kule Chair in Ukrainian Ethnography, is a professor in Ukraine . She is also a professor at the University of Kiev .
 Sofia and Vasyl Shchudlyk, Khrystyna Kyrylych, and Thor Medvid were recipients of the Bohdan and Natalia Golemba Scholarship . Sofia, Vasyl, Khystyna, and Sofia are among the recipients
 CIUS Awards Award administration is one of major activities undertaken by the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies . CIUS has a mandate to develop knowledge and support research in Ukrainian studies .
 The many endowment funds established at the initiative of their founders yield annual income to sponsor education and research in Ukraine .
 Archival Fellowship in Ukrainian Studies and Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for the Study of Modern j and Contemporary Ukraine .
 Ukraine has a high volume of applications this year, many of which were worthy of attention . Because of ever-increasing interest in Ukraine and its greater significance on the world stage, we experienced a high number of applications .
 We would like to thank all participants for submitting their proposals and for their patience and cooperation during the adjudication process . We would also like to thanks all participants.
 The Institute's fund-raising team is working intensively in search of new resources to fund projects . To meet the demand for more sponsorship opportunities, the Institute is looking for new resources .
 CIUS plans to modernize the submissions process to make it more user-friendly and efficient . The administrative team plans to review the process of award administration .
 In the first stage, a selection committee in Ukraine (including leading scholars in a number of subject areas) compiles expert assessments of publications .
 Following discussion Oleksandr Zaitsev tre of the Kyiv Mohyla Academy National Univ. on 2 June 2015.
 The award is intended to identify and recognize publications issued in a given year that are notable for scholarly excellence and impact among colleagues and the general public .
 The authors whose works were selected received cash awards and souvenirs from CIlUS . Inuit inukshuk is symbols of the unity of continents, people, and ideas .
 A two-stage procedure guarantees wy transparency in the selection of and voting, the committee prepares a list of articles and monographs that is submitted to CIUS .
 The CIUS jury votes on publications in two categories, best article and best monograph . The jury selects winners from the list of nominees .
 Myron Kapral Maksym Yaremenko DD CIUS Newsletter 2015 Scholarships, Fellowships, and Grants Awarded Undergraduate Scholarships .
 Graduate Scholarships Stasiuk Master's Research Fellowship is Leland MacLachlan, Political Studies, Univ. of Saskatchewan .
 Helen Darcovich Memorial Doctoral Fellowship luliia Kysla, History and Classics, Univ. of Alberta, is a professor at the University of Alberta .
 Oksana Vynnyk, History and Classics, Univ. of Alberta, is the author of the book .
 Oksana Udovyk, PhD in environmental governance from Sédertérn Univ., Sweden, is a PhD in Environmental governance .
 Archival Fellowship in Ukrainian Studies in Ukraine has been awarded to University of Alberta .
 Stephania Bukachewska-Pastushenko Endowment Fund. The fund was created by the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine .
 We Kysla Orest Martynowych, Ukrainian Cultural and Z Education Centre, Winnipeg, is a centre in Winnipeg . The centre is located in the city of Winnipeg, Canada .
 CIUS Research Grants Andrii Bovhyria, Institute of Ukrainian History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine . CIUS research grants and research grants are based in Ukraine .
 Oksana Udovyk a a a EE LE SA oO ITE ITE ETT EI EEE SO EE SO EE A EI EFFI GR EE SE CIUS Newsletter 2015 73 .
 Yaroslav Faizulin, Institute of Ukrainian History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, is the head of the Institute ofUkrainian History .
 Viktor Filas, Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography and Source Studies, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, is the director of the Institute ofUkrainian Archaeography .
 Iryna Khromova, Institute of Ukrainian History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, is the head of the Institute of Ukraine's History . She is also the director of the Ukrainian National Institute of History .
 Vitalii Skalsky, Institute of Ukrainian History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, is a member of the Academy of Science of Ukraine . He is the director of the Institute of Ukraine's Institute of History .
 Patrycja Trzeszczynska-Demel, Institute of Ethnology and Cultural Anthropology, Jagiellonian Univ., Cracow, is a professor at the University of Cracows . The University is a member of the Institute
 HREC Research Grants Olga Bertelsen, Munk School of Global Affairs, Univ. of Toronto, is a professor at the University of Toronto .
 Lubomyr Luciuk, Department of Politics and Economics, Royal Military College of Canada, is a professor of politics and Economics . He is also a professor at the Royal Military college of Canada .
 Dr. Ie Olga Bertelsen Valentyna Yeremenko New Endowments. A documentary history.’
 Fund will provide grants to scholars in Ukrainian studies or graduate students in that field at any post-secondary institution .
 Preference will be given to research on the economy and economic history of Ukraine . Applicants studying rural economics, economy or economic history .
Special consideration will be given to topics related to the Holodomor of 1932-33 . Special consideration will also be given.
 Recipient will be selected by a CIUS committee, based on demonstrated interest in Ukrainian studies and potential impact of the proposed research .
 The Yurkiwsky Family Memorial Endowment Fund was established at CIUS in 2014 with a principal of $16,800 . The fund was set up at CIU in 2014.
 The fund will support the publication of research through the Research Program on Religion . It will support research on the history of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church .
 CIUS Newsletter 2015 25 Generosity and Philanthropy. We make a living by what we get, we make a life by what they give .
 Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies is a leading research group in Ukraine . The CIUS team is based in Canada and the U.S.
 We thank all our benefactors for their support and confidence in us. Grateful for your understanding of our needs, we thank them .
 Some CIUS philanthropists and benefactors contribute every year to their own named endowments or other funds that support specific programs at the Institute . CIUS is a nonprofit organization that supports the Institute's programs .
 Others donate to support our continuing work, allowing us to use the funds wherever the need is greatest . Others donate.
Despite a drop in provincial funding to the Univ. of Alberta that has affected all departments, including CIUS, the continuous stream of income from these funds, helps us overcome these cutbacks .
 Strategies for Giving to CIUS CIUS works closely with donors and financial advisors to develop gifting strategies that are personally rewarding, inspiring, and tax-effective . CIUSCIUS works with our donors and their financial advisors.
 Both individuals and organizations can establish named funds at CIUS, either restricted or unrestricted . CIUS is a non-profit.
 Restricted funds may have “purpose restrictions’ for particular programs or activities of the donor's choice or “time restrictions” determined by the donor’s time frame .
 Unrestricted funds make it possible to shift the focus of CIUS research or activity to the most critical areas or needs at a particular time . CIUS researchers can use the funds to focus on the most important areas of research .
 A Lasting Legacy The Institute's current endowment funds support various programs and activities . The Institute is currently using the funds to support its various programs.
 The Program will focus on the themes of multiculturalism, regionalism, nationalism, and political elites, as well as the sociocultural foundations of modernization in comparative perspective .
 Endowed funds can be named after the individual benefactor, a family member, or a loved one . The funds require a minimum initial investment of $25,000 .
 Current and future gifts increase both the value of funds and their potential to inspire significant activity . Current andfuture gifts increase the value and potential of funds .
 The principal they contribute in initial and subsequent gifts always remains intact. What donors need to know is that the principal is that they contribute.
 Only the proceeds from the investment of principal are used to support scholarly research, fund publications, produce educational materials, or develop new programs .
 Contributions may be made in cash, gifts of life-insurance policies or marketable securities, or bequests .
 It is important to work with professional advisors to select the strategy most appropriate to your circumstances . It is also important to choose the best strategy for your situation .
 The gift may provide significant tax savings to your estate . You could receive immediate tax savings and enjoy the benefit of seeing your gifts .
 In 1998-2000, the Kowalskys increased the capital of their endowment by $1,650,000 . They redirected it toward the newly established Kowalky Program for the Study of Eastern Ukraine .
 Since 1993, the fund has supported the Institute for Historical Research at the Ivan Franko National Univ. of Lviv . The fund has been in charge since 1993 .
 Andrew's College offers fellowships, support independent research, and facilitates research and publication by scholars in the field of religious studies .
Myroslawa Iwanciw of Elmwood Park, Illinois, in April 2006 in support of CIUS activities . Myroslaw a Iwancw of Illinois, was a member of the Illinois-based CIUS . He was in support for Ukrainian students and scholars conducting
 The fund also supports exchange program students from the Ivan Franko National Univ. of Lviv .
 The Contemporary Ukraine Studies Program. Please direct your donation to D1 The Contemporary Ukrainian Studies Program .
 It will be used for the purpose of alumni engagement and philanthropic activities . It will also be used to help alumni engage and give away money .
 The CIUS Newsletter is a weekly newsletter for CIUS research, publishing and community outreach work . Use this newsletter to help people with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the CIUS newsletter to learn more about CIU research and publishing .
 CIUS will be welcomed into the Quaecumque Vera Honour Society . When you inform CIUS of your intentions to leave a planned gift, you will be welcome into the society .
 By sharing your plans with us during your lifetime, you will help us ensure your legacy is fulfilled . We will also share your plans for the future .
Canadian Civil Liberties Foundation Casino Account $5,000-$9,999 Alberta Foundation for Ukrainian Education Society Casino Account . Alberta Ukrainian Commemorative Society Casino account $5k-$9k .
 Oksana Dexter Mr Roman Kolisnyk. We would like to extend our sincere appreciation to each of you who supported CIUS in 2014-2015 .
 Your generous gifts, regardless of amount or designation, collectively impact CIUS in ways that benefit the whole field of Ukrainian studies in Canada .
 Mr. Jule Nazarevich Mr. Michael Daypuk Mr. Myron and Mrs. Alexandra Hildebrandt . Mr. Hildebrt is a former member of the House of Representatives .
 Ukrainian Women's Association of Canada SUS Foundation $500-$999 Dr. Sonia Peczeniuk St John's Cathedral Branch. Ukrainian Canadian Benevolent Society of Edmonton Casino Account Ukrainian Canadian Professional & Business Association $500-999 .
 Mr. Cornell Stefaniuk and Marc A Chikinda Percy and Mrs. Janet Dmytruk League of Ukrainian Canadians Edmonton Branch Casino Account .
 The Hon Michael J Savaryn The Ivan Franko School of Ukrainian Studies Ukrainian National Federation of Canada Ukrainian Self-Reliance Association Calgary Branch $1-$499 Anonymous Anonymous AnonymousAnonymous Anonymous Anonymous.
 Walter Snihurowych eennnnnnnnnnnnnnee eereee eT SSS LSE SSS CIUS Newsletter 2015 33 CIUS Donors TS EE ER SE TI SR ES ETS SL SS a TI CIUS newsletter 2015.
 Zorianna Kohut Jan Kowalyk Jean Waclawski Miss Donna Holowaychuk is the daughter of a former member of the family .
 Mr. Andrew Srymanowke. Judy Bohay Mr Andrew Symanowk. Mr Andriy Chomyn Mr Arthur Kowalchuk Mr Bob Kochtubajda Mr Bradley Martyniuk Mr. David and Mrs. Andrew Bohay
 Mr George Brandak has been married to Maria Shwed for more than a decade . The couple have been married for over 20 years .
 Mr. Thor Tomkiw Mr. Ihor Z Davydovych Mr. Jerry Zrymiak Mr. Jim and Mrs. Zrymak .
 Mr Mykhailo Wawryshyn Mr Myron Pawlowsky is a former member of the National Council of Representatives . The council is based in New York City, New York .
 Mr Walter Kolanitch Mr. Wasyl Drabik Mr Wasyl Mojsiak Mr. William & Mrs. William and Mrs. Sharon Harras . Mr. Walter K Nolanitch is a former member of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 The Toronto Very Rev. Lois Miller Rose Michalchuk is the founder of the Toronto very Rev. of Toronto VeryRev. Asce Blawatsky Univ. of Canada .
 KopayIbCbKUX IIpu XapKIBCbKOMY yHiBepcnTeTi, 1loOM KepyBaTM Ta KOOPAMHYBaTU Ta KOopAMHYBATU POOOTYy MM 3
 XapKiBCbKUM Bis is a 3amopi3sbkun . J-p Bonoynumup Minpues. The name means "porpama"
 Micma-Kopnopaujii Ha AoHOaci . u-traditsiyniy-kulturi-ukraintsiv. Heeno6ni Kameeopii: Hapucu npo 2yMaHimapucmuKy
 Co iIHHOBAaLiMHOTO PO3BUTKY, 3allponoHOBaHa KiJIbKa POKIB TOMY, IlOUMHa€ IIpMHo — CUTM Mepili akagemiyHi n0
 The Contemporary Ukraine Studies Program is based in Ukraine . The program is based on Ukraine's Contemporary Ukraine studies Program .
 Meroyqnununun WeHTp yKpaiHcbKoi Mosu IpeqCTaBUB 1A OOTOBOpeHHA HOBY KOHIJeHM10 Ta CTpaTerito CBOTO posBuTky 0 2030 po
HayKosoOCBITHIM KOHCOPI1IOM 3 BABYCHHA Tonogomopy ctaB ogy i3 Have@eKTMUBHIMWMX BifginmiB KIYCy. HayKosoocB
 OCHOBHa yBara B HIM Il€pechocMTMTbCA Ha iCTOpitio Ta cydacHMM CTaHMMCTaH yKpaiHCbKNx CTyfin B 3aXiJHbOMy c
 Mu mMycumo pearyBaTn Ha HOBi BUKJIMKU, UO TOCTalOTb llepey, YKpaiHCbKUMM aKaJjleMidHUMU OCMI>KeHHAMM
 BuyjaHHsa MicTUTD OCJHUMbKi CTaTTi 3 EBPeMCbKMX CTYMIM MOMOFUX ICTOPUKIB 31 Jibpopa, XapKoga, Knesa, and Knes
Cena borganiska, CrenaniskaJipyra (IIpva3sopcpKui paion, 3amopisbKa OO7acTb) 2. The other three are in the same category .
Kpauniu aisopy4 — 0-p Boaodumup Kyaixos, akuu ovoawe XapKiBcokull Biddia . Kpaunu a isopy4 – 0-P BoaODumup
 The Journal of Ukrainian Studies is published in Ukraine . The journal is based in Ukraine.
 Tpere uncno NosBUI0CA y BepecHi 2015 poxy; y HbOMy IV ATb CTaTeit Ha TeH . TEMM Ta JIECATb KHVOKKOBUX peueusin .
TonoBHun pefakTop, 1podecop Oner C DipHnubKnn, pale Hall HOBMMM BUILYCKaMU, OJMH 13 AKMX 6yfe IpMicBayeHuM M XapKosy
 YepBHi 2015 poxy Tana is the name of the 2015 Poxy. YepbHi 2015.
 InbuuybKiit BMCTOBIIOE inMpy MOFAKY KOIMHIN peqakTopui KHVDKKOBMX peljeH3il, ]-py CBiTMaHi Kpuc 3a ii 3pa3KO
 J-p Kpuc OTpMMaysia MOcaM Polenta (assistant professor) aHrmiitcbKol MOBU Ta TOMOBU KaTefIpu yKpaiHCbKUx cTyfim YHinep
Oena, fe BOHa BOJHOUAC, FUpekTopa YkpaiHCbKOTO WeHTpy 3aco6is i PO3BUTKy. Max’s ‘Oena’ is the name of the
 Ha qymMKy mpodecopa InmpHmupKoro, EWJUS yxxe peamisye Iporomomeny Micito, ipuBabs10104M aBTopis i3 Kanagu, CILIA, As
 A-p Ceimaana Kpuc AK eleKTpoHHe BUaHHA, EWJUS Ma€ 3MOTY He JIMIMle Bi[CTexKyBaTN KIJIbDKICTb ix 3aBaHTaxeHb
 Ha BifMiny Big, cBoro nonepesHnka, JUS, EWJUS Oe3KOLITOBHO JOCTYNHUM AA KOXKHOLO, XTO IIPOCTO 3apeecTpyeTbc
 HawakTUBHilIMMU € KOpMCTyBaui 3 Kanagu Ta CILIA, a 3a HUM 3 Ykpainn, Himeywuuun Ta Pocii, a 4a HUM.
BuMipATM MOMYIAPHICTb HallioTO 3MICTY MO>KHa 3a KIJIbKICTIO 3aBaHTaKeHb CTaTen 1 MeperiApiB Tana IlAasywax-
 Tako BIBI yBadl MOKYTb YUTATU CTaTTi be3MOCcepeqHbO Ha BeO-caMTi, He ckauyroun ix. He c kauyoun.
BuByeHHA TonogjomMopy Ta yKpaiHcbKa icTopiorpadia (3aBaHTaxKenb: 34; Tepermayis aHotauii: 89)
 Bi KYIbTYPU aM ATM Ha 3aXif (3aBaHTaxKeHb: 29; neperiapis aHoralii: 99) 5. The ATM is an ATM ATM.
 WapTil 3a KaTacTpo@iyHnn i WIMpoKoMaCIUITAAOHMM TOMO B YkpaiHi, MOTBepsPKYIOUN CBi,4eHHA ovesuguis. Wap
 OfHMM 13 TAKMX (pKepe € KO/IeKUiA IMCTIB) AKi 3i6panu IIMCbMeHHUK Bonogumup MaHak i Moro Apy2x (PKepe€ KO
 HOKBI mpautoe 3 1. bowuyKom Hay po3slmMd@pyBaHHAM JIMCTIB, WjO MiCTATB leAKi 3 MepluMx CBI4eHb WIMpOKol Tr
 Li CBiJJ/4YeHHA OMyO7iKOBaHO Ha BeO-cauTi HOKBI — www.holodomor.ca; ix 3IpyNobaHO 3a MICIAMM TOXO/
 HOKBI urykae MOKIMBOCTI 3aNYYMTU HayKOBIIB 13 pis3HUX (MCcWMH JO FOCP2KCHHA HacyKIB [onoyomopy. HOKB)
 Bigrak Bocenn 2015 poxy HOKBI mposis cBoto Tpertr1o KoHdepenyito, AK NOMTMYUM iHCTPyMeHT, WjO6M MpoaHani3syBaTu CIM
 Kondepenia: KOMYHI13M 1 ronop, KUTaMCbKOi Ta Ka3aXCbKOI ICTOPil . KUTAMCb KOI: KUT aMCbkoi TaKa3a
 HOKBI saoxouye fo yuactu MomoyUx HayKOBIIIB, AKi JIMUe MOUMHAIOTb Kap €py, Haflatoun CTMMeHAil Ha yuacTb y koHdep
 Bignosiguy iHPOpMaliio0 MOKHa 3HaVTM Ha BeO-canTi HOKBI — www.ho+ lodomor.ca.com .
 HOKBI tmposogutp KOHKYPC: KeHHA Ta 36epe2KeHHA Tepmop»Kepen . Kepen: Tepopopop is the name of the Tepapopo, the name for the
 Ha cborogHi BIH BIH BUVINB yxKe 21 Haropojly, 30KpeMa IpaHT Ha JJOC/Ii. Ha DKYy, 1 [paht Ha MiKPOICTOPi#0]
 Kpim toro, HOKBI 6epe Ha ce6e Mepekilay, ykpalHOMOBHMX JJOCI2KeCHb aHIIMCbKOIO MOBOW, 30KpeMa IlyOlikawjito
 Jjo MOBHOBaxKeHD HOKBI BXOJJMTb TAKOXK POSBUTOK OCBITHIX IIporpam y cepef{Hix WIKo7IaXxx. Jjo.
 HOKBI rorye HapuasibHi MaTepiann, IIPOBOJUTb HaBUaHHA JIA BYUMTENIB, a TAKOK € lapTHepoOM y IIpoBejfeHHi Hatjio
Weqpin mpTpumui PyHAauii Ponuan TemeptTeis. HOKBI 6ys crBopenui 3aBq AKU Weqpin MPTpuuweqpinmpTpusui Pyhaauii. Ponuan
 Ilani Mapra ba3tok — BUKOHaBYNM mupextop HOKBL. 3a fociigqHMybKy po6oty BigmoBigaroTp 4-p borgaxn Knig i MOTO 3a
 Boedan [i apacumis, KopoouHamop npoepamu Meta IIBCY — possnparu HOB WOCHJHUUbKi HalipamMKu Aa KITYCy, 3 HarO/IOC
 Y 6epesui 2015 poxy IIBCY MIpoBeyla TpUs, IIPMCBAYEHUM PiYHUIl yKpalHCbKOrO EspoMaityany, MOeEqHaBLUM Moro 31 Wy
 The world's most famous and most famous names are known for their work in the Middle East .
O aBAMTOpieH, IO 3aNMMWIMaca VW W1C1A BiBeeHOro Ha JIMCKycito Yacy, abu OOMiHATUCA NOMAgaMu. O a
 CTMciily BepCikO boro 3axOply Oy710 IIpeseHTOBaHO TIK]eCHb TisHiwe, nig vac TroKHa r10b6abHux 3HaHb, B E.MOHT
Temn JOCMIPKeHb, AKMM HajjaBaTUMyTb llepeBary, iJJeHTUYHICTb, HaljioHa113M, PpeliOHU, KOPJOHNM,  COMU
Ali B posMipi $38,000 ana po6orn B KIYCi. JJBO€ CTUMeHAIATIB OTPAMyBaTMTMMyTb pidHi cTMNMeHAli Bposmipi. $38k
 Npoext ExyuKnonegii Ykpainnu B lHTepuHerti 2001 poky, cTaBia4uu 3a MeTy CTBOPUTM WIKOBMTO HOBe Jp.
 AKaJ[eMi4HAa CHIIbHOTA, a WIMpila TpOMa. EY. NuxubHo ciipMMHsyia He JIMIUNe aKaJ [eMi 4HAaCHIIb
CIMWJIbHOTM VU IpeycTaBHMKIB IIMpwol TpOMaficbKOCTM. CIMW JIbhotm VU. IpeYc TaBhMKIB Ipe
 Kpim Toro, 3aBeplleHo pejjaryBaHHA 3-rO TOMY BUjaHHA, B AKOMY Myetbca mpo LanmiybKo-BommHcpKe KHASIBCTBO Ta Ky
 Ilona Pobepm Maroui, Opank E Cucun, Hadia Ayux.-4 P40, 3Aiba HanpaBo, Isana Apemka, Posaai, Ayci ma Amanem .
 BroneteuHb KIYCy 2015 Npoektu Ta neporpamu Ynana IlacigHuk BUKOHYye byHKUii BIJMOBIJaIbHOrO pefakTOpa, a mpod.
 Jjo6irae Kina pefaryBaHHa 4-rO TOMY, B AKOMY MjeTbCA po nomituky B YKpainHi 7oOu naHyBaHHA Jinrsu u Tlompmi. J
 Ilasno Xpuctiok 6yB yneHoM Ykpaincpkoi Leutpasibxibxoi Pag Ta ydaCHUKOM TifroTOBKM Bpecr-JImToBcbKoro WoroB
 Yasua Ilaciunux, Tana Ilaasywak-Cmex i Opank E Cucuu. Jina, 1406 30cepeyuTu yBary _ HayKOBIiB 1 (pOMaf. 1)
 Journal (YkpaincbkuM KaTOAMIbkUM yHiBepcntet) 6ym0 o6paHo IIpOrpaMHMM J\MpeKTOpoM, a mpod .
 Aana Hedawmkiscoka Ha MimHapoonHiu Kongepenujii: "Engagement Scholarship Consortium», EdmoumouMoumOUmou, wosmenb 2014 poy.
 Onenka Binaaw Bueoaowmye Karwu0sy Oonosidn nid 4ac HauioHaAboi KonepeHuii B4UMEAIB YKPAaiHCbKOi MoBu, Ykpaincoka
 OCBITN, AK OT 3MilllaHa MOJe/Ib BABYCHHA Ta BUKafaHHa yKpalHCbKOi MOBM AK iHO3e3eMHOI; a TaKOXK OCP; a
 MLIYM takox pao mposis mBi mBi cecil 71a MpodecitHoro po3BMTKy OcBiTAH EqfMouTony Ta Amb6eptTu .
 Kpim toro, MILYM mpawe Hag ctrpareriero CBOTO po3BUTKy 40 2030 poxy, Mpo AKy BiH NoiHdopmye rpomady. KpIM toro is a toro
Mpopopxye posBuBaTu M 3a6e3neuyBaTM yciix ykKpaiHOMOBHIN OCBITi, OCOOMMBO B IIPOEKTAaX, WO 3a7ly4
 Y cBitii cydacHol rmo6ami3zayii ykpaiHcbKUx pemrinHux rpyl i 3pocTaHHA Jiacnop, J\€AK1 CTATTI IPMCBAYeHO
 The Impact of Thirty Years of Ukrainian Famine Studies YnopsA,HMKU WUboro 36ipHuka HayKOBUX CTaTeu . The Impact. of Thirty years of Ukrainian famine studies YnopA, HMKU.
 Kooxken 13 rojloBHUx qonoBifzjauis — Obra AHpieBcbKa — AHfpea Ipatiosi . Ppaucya3 Tom i CraHiciaB KyapunupKun (l
 O TepuTOPiEto, e€KOHOMIUHE BUKOPMCTaHPAHHA KpaiHM Ta BHYTpiUHbO-yKpalHCbKMM MOray, Ha okynaito, Ha Okyn
 Cnoragu Aqonpda Cruxa, AKUM WpaljroBaB Cy Aero B 3axifHin YkpaiHi MDK JJ[BOMa CBITOBMMM BIMHAaMM, OXOTIJIIOIOTH
 B MicAMOBI Kupa bopnca lya3aka MpeTECA po IIPOBIPHY pOwlb powMHU CrypKiB B XKUTT1 YKpalHCbKOi rpoMajIu
BiroM BoHa 3acHyBaza BiaHunm doug f-pis Mapii Mimep-Cimx. CBoim 3amo0Birom BoHa 2acHybaza 3ac HyBaza 2achyBaza 3
Toxoan 3 POHLAY NiTpMMyioTb cTMMeHAiI Ta HayKOBi IIPOEKTM 3 yKpalHCbKMX cTyMim . Toxoan is a three-year-old. Tox
 BngaHua lpefcTaBise icTopiro BaTypuva BIpOOB*K 3O710TOI epu 3a reTbMaHa IBaHa Masenu, pymHalyiro MiCTa pOCIMC
Ta TeTbMaHCbKUX MaeTKiB y 2013-2014 pokax. ABTOpU OOTOBOPIOWTh pesyiibTaTM CIVIbHUX KaHa .
 Bonu OnmMcyt0Tb 3aIMIIKN TlamayoBux pesupenuin Maseru Ta Po3yMOBCbKOTLO 1 IIpef[CTaBAAOTb eKCTep epy Ta i
 NopiBHAHHA FocBipy Kanan, Esponu ta Ykpaini, B AKIN B3AIM yuacTb MONOMi JOCHIPJHUKU Ta 3HaHi HayKOBIIi, UU
Unenu napnamenty JImuga JJankan i Ilirep longpinr Takox BucTymMa~n Ha KoHdepeuuii. Unenu Napnamenti JImugu JJank an i Iliresi is a long
 Cumnos3irom KIYCy fo piynnuyi peBonrouil E€BpomarvifpaH 9-11 6epe3Ha 2014 IIporpama BUBYCHHA Cy4acHol YKpaiHM pu
 Ilepury cecito 6yno0 mpucBAdeHO o6pa3aM, CMMBOMaM Ta iffeHTMUHOCTI BroneteHb KIYCy 2015 pesomtonii. IlePury 6yn
 J.P. Bonoyumup Kynuxk (Inctutyt MOMITMYHUX) is one of the world's most popular cigars . J.BHUX is the most popularcig in the world .
 Bigq3Haune, Kunis, is a small town in the Kunis city of Kypaca . The city is home to the city of Kunis .
KeHHA CBif4aTb po 3pocTaHHA caMoifjeHTUdikaii 3 YkpalHoro Ta rOpfOcTM Yepes HaslexKHICTb JO YKpalHCbKOI Halil,
 M Kypaca HAH Yxpainnu, Kuis, is the name of the Kuis region in the region .
 B octaHHiit eHb mpod. borgzan Kopan Kopan POSIIAHYB [pKepera, 3HaYeHHA Ta BaK/IMBICTb EBpoMalipfaHy, HarooIyIOUM
 CUcTemMM YKpaiHu Ta il EBpOiHTerpawil. J-p Muxanno BunHuupKun (HayionambHun yH-T) is the name of a J-Pawil, a j-P
 Tlepiimn feHb CUMIIO3i3i1KOMy 3aBepmmmBca LleBueHKiBCbKOI0 WeKWIEIO: CKIJIbKU MaaHiB NOTpi
 HlonoBHeHHA AO po3KonokK y Batypuni 2014 yKpalHCbKO-KaHaj\CBKa apxeovIOridHa eKCHeqUUIA MpOLOBKUNA POSKONK
 Ilepeg 1700 Bin CHOpy4MB TaM Oara to IpuKpallleHun yermanuit 6bapokosuit nanay . Ilepe 1700 BinCHOpy4 MB TaM oara. Ipepe 1700.
 JlocnifHUKU Mi{TOTyBaIM KOMI 10TepHi peKOHCTpyKUii eB ATM ClOCcobiB ATM cloccobib MOKPUTTA MifOT, 3acCTOCOBA
 Cepeyl BigjomMux paHHboMofepHux cnopyy, Ykpainu ronoBHa pesupeHuiA Masennu y BarypuHi Baryuhi. A MasennushaeTbCA Ha
 ApxXeOJIIOrM 3aBepLIMIM PpO3KONKU PeWITOK BeNMKOi cry*KOoBOi cnopyyn nBpopy Masenn. ApxxxXoBO
 Tam “MoBipHo 30Mpalicb reThMaHCCBKi rBappiMi 4M KO3albKi oditjepn 3 Moro noury. Tam ‘MoBIPHo’ is a
 B Ui OyAiBnmi 3HaMuAM cpiOHi Ta MIJJAH1, 6poOH30Bi IYA3NKU; IpsKKy Ta YOTUPU diryphi HakiagKu 3 perbepduumu BI
 Cepell 3aM1kiB cmay>K60BOi CHOpyAM Ta KOIMUIHBOI OaTypMHCbKOl dopteui 6y10 BiqHayeHO UMMazIO 14 BioneteHb KIY
 MDKHapOJHIX KOMePpHIMHMX 1 Ky/IbHa nepegmicti barypuua Jo voro Oyo 3HalfeHo KepaMi4Hy ivy 3PpyMUHYyBaH
 Tpu 3 Hux BoHU apxeOJIOFI4MHUX JOC PKeEHHAX baryi HAYKOBIIB 3 YHIBeEpCUTeTIB BIJJHOCATb JJO 2KEPTB MOCKO
O6oe cTMMeHAIATIB MOUAIM CBOE cTaxkyBaHHa B KIYCi B OcinHboMy cemectTpi 2015 poxy. O6oe CTMMehaIatIB MouaIM CBO
 APpXiBHY CTMMeHil0 3 yKpalHCbKUX CTY, WO CTajla MOKIMBOW 3aBJAKN NipTumMui BiaHoro douay Credanii byxay
 UetBepry cTuneHsito Oynhsito oyn0 HafaHo TamMapi Cxpunyi 41a poboru Haj . WyTiBHMKOM J[O apxiBHux PouAis YKpai
 The TaKOK apXiBHy CTMMeH1I0 3 yKpaiHCbKUX CTYyHiM1 is a TaKokOK ap XiBhy CTMmeH1 I0 3yKpaiH1i0. CTY
 Ilepemoxis. IlePemox is a word of "cractoxis" and "cronomomox"
 Kpim nposeyeHua cBoix WocmifqHux IIPO€EKTIB, CTMMeHMMATM MalOTb TaKOXK JOMOMaraTu u OpaTu yuacTb yuACT
HaffaHo Ipanosi Kosayenky, AKUM OTPUMaB JOKTOPCKMM CTYMIHb #f is covjionorii 8B A6epgincpkomy yuiBepcnterti B 2013 pou
 The first time a person has been named as a member of the U.S. National Security Council . The U.N. Security Council has been in charge of the United States since 2007 . The United States has been involved in a number of incidents .
 CnipopraHisaTopaMu mekyii 6yam HaykoBo-ocsBiTHin KOHCOpUiIOM BUBYeHHA LonOqOMOpy mupu KIYCi, IIporpama joc
 Ilerpa AumKa mpm KIYCi, Kanagcpka pyHfaia yKpaiHcbkux cryin Ta Llentp e€BPOIeMCbKMX, POCIMCbK MX 1 eBpa3
 A History. 3a cBoro KHyDKKy: The Crushing of Eastern Europe, 1944-1956 . The Iron Curtain: Thecrushing of eastern Europe .
 Ilani Anmen6aymM mouara CBOI0 JI€KI{1I0 OIMCOM paHHbOl Kap epu Viocuda Cramina i aK Bona cpopMyBasla Moro MoMiTMKY CTOCOB
 Ilani Anmen6aym noacHuiia, AK Cramin, 6yfyfy4u npeyjcTaBHUKOM Jlenina B YkpaiHi, CTaB CBiJ, CTABCBiJ .
 BifjTak 3alOOirTU JabUIMM MOBCTaHHAM yKpaiHCbKMXx CeyIAH CTaIO Moro TOMOBHOW TypborTow. The 3alooirTak.
BoHa onmcana IlyTiHosy: "KepoBaHy JJ@MOKpartito" BoHa oncana Ily TiHosi: "Bepo BaHy JJ"
Hae, WO ycrillHa BeCTepHi3allid YkKpaiHu, HaBiTb CTBOPeHHA BiJHOCHO JJEMOKpaTU4HOl, BiJJHOCHO YCHiMIHOCHO Ta
 TaddinttoHa Yuisepcutery Jlonona Mepimayxt B micTi Jloc-AHJpKerlec y Kamidopuii . TaddintoHaYuiseputery. Mepinayxt: Jlon
 Bonoyumupa. BonognMupa J|mamucpKoro npn KIYCi y ciiBlipatyi 3 IaCTUTyTOM CBATOTO BonoyUMupa .
 Jiextopom 6ys f-p BonowumMup Kyiuk, 1poBisjHuM HayKOBUM CHiBpOOiTHUK Bifpzity eTHOMOMITONOTIi IHCTUTY
 Ilarpiapx Kipian i MMTpononmut Inapion MOKNAIMCA JO MeperiaAyy boro HapaTM. Ilarpaapx kipian. iMMTPonmut inapion mOKNAimca
 Ha fymky f-pa Jlenucenka, yKpalHCbky KpM3y 1330BHi Ta 3cepeMHM, NopiBHroe Bragimipa Ilytina 3 6i6ni .
IlepK by AK CaKpaJIbHy CIIiIbHOTY, a "PyccKun MUp" by OOiLAHKY, a 'Pycckun M up' by a "PaybIUIM" by
 Ha fyMky J-pa Jjenucenka, Yxpaincpka Ipexo-KatomubKa Llepxsa € p>xepenom inmoro yKpaiHcbKoro KOHTpHapaTuBy .
 Jiexuia 4-pa Jjenucenka 3aBepmmnjlacAd MOTO pO3yMaMK IIpo Te, AK IjepKOBHi MpOBIJHAKU MOKYTb IpunH
 IJM€CHTMUUHOCTI, IfeOOTil and IfeoOTil. Ta HecaTKKiB cTaTen B aHIJIO-, YKpaiHO-, pOCiMCbKOTa (bpaHKOM
BiqMOBIFHO, TOAM OyhyTb OibIle IPMB A3aHMMU JO YKpaiHcbKOi [lepoKaBu, AKUJO BOHa CTaHe MOBHOWIHHOLW JeEM
 LleHtpom pesontouli CBpomanpyaH 2014 poxky, 3HaHOI TaKOx AK PeBoMOU iA TIFHOCTU, Oya TONOBHA MOLWsa Knesa, AK i [
 Aunppea Kypxkosa ipountarn 49-y piany Iesyenkiscpxy mex . The piany is a 49-year-old piany .
 Ile saHeq6aHHA NOWIMpMioca M Ha iHmopMalliftHuM Ta KyIbTypHUM mpoctip Ykpainn. Ilesa sa heq6 a.HHA NowIMp Mioca M
 Ha Jfon6aci Ta B Kpm is a MicljeBi eqiTu. HaceyIeHHAl is a multi-million-year-old.
PupoMaljaHy CIpOBoKYBaJIM BUUHKM BikTopa AHyKoBuya, AKU, 3a IPOHIEO OM, IparHyB YHUKHYTM TaKOro ClleHapito M
 Ajle BOWHOUaC HebesneyHUM, Tepiogy HaljieO6yyBaHHa. BHacifOK boro YkKpaina BCTyIMa y HOBMM, ajle Ykkpain
 Jligqepm Pocil Hafit0TbCcA, WO KaXJIMBi EKOHOMYHI OOCTABUHU BUCHA@KaTb YKpaiHiiB i COHYKaloTb ix
 Ilan Kypkos 3aBepimes CBIM BUCTYI MIpMiyljeHHAM, WO, AKIO He BiOyAyTbca pedopmn, BHaC/IIJJOK 3pOCTaHHA CKOH
 B paMkax cBoro TypHe KaHajoro mlaH Kypkos jjaB inTepB 10 raseTaM. 16-a WOpi4Ha MeMopiaANbHa NeKUIA im.
 Jlo moro oct THU bKUX iHTepeciB HaslexKaTb yKpaiHCbKa Ta pocificbKa jlitepatrypu XIX CTOJI., 30KpeMa BUKOpUCcTaH
 Miraituyk € akTMBHUM TepeKlajjaueM, AKMM 3apa3 pale Hall llepekjlayjaMu 11 ec Bonoyumupa Bunumuenka Ta Mukonm Kyzima .
 Crpyka — WOpi4Ha JIeKUiA AHTIMCbKOIO MOBOIO Ha TEMM YKpaiHCbKOi itepatypu . The city is a popular tourist destination in Japan .
 Apocnas DefopykK, KepiBHMK (IHCTMTYT) and Kepeno3HaBCTBa (Kepeno 3HaBC TBa) are all the same names .
 Ilerpa Auuka npn KIYCi ta mpodecop YkpaincbKoro KaTOJIMUbKOTO yH-y . Irop Iupuy, Typanmi Deprag, JImMutpo Bupcpkui Ta Ox
 Ayam PawxrapfiT, romoBHMM pesakTop, is the most popular pesak in the world .
 B 3ami 3acifjaHb. B 3am 3am . B 3AM 3am 2am . A 3am 4am .
 B-Bo KIYCy, 2014, is the name of the year's best-known author of the book, "The Year of the Year"
 Iloka3 JOKyMeHTAasIbHOrO PisbMy: He6ecHa COTHA: 1 MCKYyciA IIpo peBov10ui10 CBpomawsfany. Iloka 3 JOKYciA:
 Onicaa Biq6ynaca quckycia 3a Y4acTM CTYJeCHTIB 3 Kypcy. Anb6epTcbKoro yH-Ty Ta 110Ka3 JOKYMeHTasIhtasIbH
 Ppaucec Csupina 3 fellapTameutTy icTopii Ta KIACMYHUX CTyAiM AmbOepTcbKOroO yH-Ty; enmckon Jjasuy, Motto (Yxpain
 Kapeu JIemicki (My3eu Otuis Bacunian, Manpep, Amp6epta). 27 moToro (MToro) is the third mo Toro (Otoro) in the world .
 Ppank E Cucun, aupextop Llentpy yKpaincbkux iCTOPMYHUX FOcmpKeHb KITYCy. Ppanks E CUCun, Aupexto Llenty YKpainCBkux
 YaacHuKM Mporpa Mu CTYJ€HTCbKOTO OOMiHY MbDK JIbBiBCbKMM Hal{ioHasIbHUM YH-TOM im. im. Mporma .
 Codia Ta Bacwib Ulyaiuknu, Xpnctuna Kupnam4 Ta Irop Megsinb, AKI oTpumMazn cTMMeH All im. borgzaHa Ta Haranii TomemOis .
 Io6u 3agoBombHuTu HoTpeby B OinbLIMx CIHOHCOPCOPKUX MOXKIMBOCTAX . KoMaHa KIYCy, KoMaha KIyCy, mo mpatiioe
 Moon nonermmmrTu mpowec HajjaHHA Haropog ta FoTauim KIYCy, aqminicrpaTm bya rpyna KIyCy . M MOfepHi3syBaTu powec Nofa
 Llen IIPOeKT CTABMTb 3a METY 3HaXOMTU Ta Bif3HauaTU My Onikawii, WO 3 ABMAMCA BIIPOJOBXK POKy M MatOTb
 Ilicna o6ropopeHHa Ta rOJOCyYBaHHA KOMITe, Aki IpOMOHY10Tb Ha posrmay KIYCy. Ilicnna o 6ropope HHa Ta ROJoc
HaMKpalija CTaTTA i HaltKpallja MOHOrpadia, 1106 obpaTu TlEPEMOKIIB 13 Ipesj. Ha gpyromy ervatii .
 Hapnicn inteeKTyasIbHOi icTopii: Ta Mupona Kanpana: "JltoqM"" kKopnopatii. Kopnopsi: "Ibhoi ic topii"
 CTUNeHAll 4A acnipaHtiB: HOKTOPaHTIB JlocniQuvubkKa MarictepcbKa CTUneHpiA IM. CTUNEH all 4A: Cacka¥eBa
Conomia Ilapana, kadeypa HiMeybKuUx i COB AHCbKUX i COb AHCBKUX CTyqiMt Manito6cpKoro yH-Ty . ConomiaIlapana is
 Ta cy4acHol YkpaiHu IpaH KosayeHko, FOKTOp coionorii FOais Kucaa d Tpesop Epaaxep ae Oxcana YoosuKk A6epyincpxoro yu
OfeplOpHCbKOLO yH-TY B Isenil. Oxcana Yaosnk, FoKTop opraHi3anii JOBKIINA CoOfePlOpHCBKOLo yh-TYB isenil
 ApxiBHa CTMNeHgia 3 yKpalHCbKUX CTypin Ipan-Ilapio Xum«a, ellapTament ictopii Ta KJIACMYHUX CTyAiM AmbOepTC
 Banentrun KaspyHunk, IncrutyT yKpaiHcbKol apxeorpadii Ta #>Kepem03HaBcTBa im. Kepem3haBc TBa im . KaspiHunk.
Opect Maprunosuy, YkpaincbKun KY/IbTYPHUM Ta OCBITHIM OCepefOK, Binuiner . Opect Mapranosuy is a former member of the U.S. State Department
 Cmedanii Byxaueecoxoi-Iacmywenko. @®unun Coxan, YkpaiHcbKO-KaHaj. @ Ykpaihaj: CbKUn WOCIiJ;HO-H
 JocnifHVUubkKi FpaHTu KIYCy Aungpii bosrups, Ixcruryt icropil YkpalHn HaionambHoi AkajeMii HayK YKpalHu,
 Apocaas Jjenxucenko, IncturyT icropii Tlonpcepkoi Akajfemii Hayk, BaputaBa. Apoca as JjenXucenko is a former member of the Russian National Guard .
 Apocnas Mansynin, IactutyT icropii Yxpainn HaiionantbHol AkajjeMil HayK YxPainn, Kuis. Apocna Mansyn in, I actutyt icropi Yx Painn, I
 Bixtop Minac, InctutyT yKpaiT ykpaiHcbKoi apxeorpadii Ta f>Kepeno3HaBcTBa, im. Bixto Minac. IncutyT YKpaiHCBK
 Ipuna Xpomosa, lucrutytT icropii Ykpainn HaionambHoi Akajemii Hayk Yxpainu, Kuis. Ipuni Xpumosa,  Ipuna Xpuna x
 Jlina Kammenko, Kapenbcbkuit 1HCTUTYT Yuipepcntery cxigqHbol Dintanpil . The 1H CTUTYt YuipePCntery is a first-grade school in the United States
 Oxcana Komtymbko, kadeyjpa eKOHOMiGHUX Hayk MazitencpKoro yH-Ty, Cram6yn. Oxcanna Komtymko, KOHOMIGHUX, KHOOMi
 PomaH CxakyH, InctutyT icropii Llepxsu YkpaiHCbKOrO KaTO/IMIbKOTO yH-TY, JIppis. Pomah CxkyH, Ippis,
 JIeeka ma Mapitixu Baoiu. tOpit Bonommu, IlonrapcpKui HaljiOHaJIbHUM MeqaroriuHun yH-T im. TOpitBonommu. JIE
 LT REE Oa Oa ST Ee EE SO SI DT TT IE IRR I TT ES SELLE RT SO NSE BOGE SL BE EEE BroneteHb KIYCy 2015 2. Haropogu KIyCy Jlocn
Bopncenko, HayKosi apxiBHi, Bopcenko and Bophuna bopnenko are among the names of those named in the above article . They are also known as "Bopcenni" and "HCTUTYTY
 JIto6omup JlyutoK, kadeppa nomituKu Ta e€KOHOMIKM KopomiBcbKoro BiMCbKOBOrO KoneyKy Kanan, Kinrcrou. Koney Ky Kanan is a kade
 O-pa Bacuna Ipuxogbka Leu Hopmn doug, i3 WouaTKOBMM BHecKoM $10,632, 3aCcHYBa/IM B rpygHi 2013 Jlapuca Iip
 Mou HaflaBaTuMe is a 3-year-old student at the University of London . The university is based in London, England, and has a 4-year history of student education .
 The $16,800 price tag is $15,000 per person .