 InformNapalm has analyzed Russian military files hacked by hackers from the Ukrainian Cyber Alliance . The hackers are responsible for hacking the email accounts of Putin’s gray cardinal Vladislav Surkov .
 InformNapalm has tracked down members of Russian military brigades who took part in the occupation of Crimea . The data was used to identify members of the military brigade .
 InformNapalm has conducted an open-source investigation of the soldiers mentioned in the lists . At least 60 soldiers from the Chechnya-based 18th separate motorized-rifled brigade took part in the occupation of Crimea in 2014 .
 The Russian occupation of Crimea started back in 2014, four years ago, following the three-month long Euromaidan protests in Ukraine . Nearly one hundred protesters were shot by police special units, after which then-president Viktor Yanukovych fled Ukraine to Russia .
 Many top officials, including ministers, parliament members, and heads of state agencies, followed the pro-Russian president . Many state bodies awaiting decisions and new appointments from the parliament .
 Russia took advantage of the short period of political uncertainty in Ukraine to conduct an armed seizure of the Crimean peninsula . Russia later unleashed a war in the East-Ukrainian region of the Donbas .
 Russian authorities and other participants of the 2014 Crimea invasion haven’t been punished yet . Despite the fact that years have passed, some details of this operation remain uncovered .
 The names of 1097 active Russian servicemen of the unit are mentioned in two food supply lists . The names are also mentioned in the food supply list .
 The second document is also an extract but from another order, #53, of the same military unit . It is dated as 14 March 2014 .
 Both mentioned time intervals perfectly fit into the dates of the Crimea invasion operation . Both mentioned the time intervals .
 It is logical to assume that the people on the lists actually participated in the military aggression against Ukraine. It is not the people who were on lists that participated in military aggression .
 InformNapalm started searching for more evidence as assumptions were not enough to pin the blame . But as assumptions are not enough, Inform Napalm started looking for new evidence .
 38 servicemen were decorated with the medal “For the Return of Crimea;” Photographs of other 22 Russian soldiers participating in the operation were found on social profiles .
 60 soldiers from List-1097 were involved in an active Russian campaign to prevent Russian serviceman from using social media . To identify the 60 soldiers was really hard due to an active Russia campaign .
 The fact that evidence was found not against 1-2 persons but against 60 proves that it can’t be a mere coincidence .
 The collected evidence may prove the validity of UCA’s data on Russian servicemen of unit 27777 with a high degree of certainty .
 Crimean unit in Crimean operation. As well as they prove the participation of the unit in the Crimean operation .
 The full database of the finds about the Russian soldiers on the lists is available in Russian in the original InformNapalm report . The military is warmly clad, most of them wear a cold-weather cap, indicating that the photos weren’t taken during the summer .
 The date tells that the pictures couldn’t be taken later than 12 September 2014 because the lifting tools would have another date on them . The lifting tools will be used again in September 2014 .
 The photographs couldn't be made in summer which lasts in Crimea until mid-fall . As mentioned before, the photographs couldn’t be made.
 Ilyas Midaev is a member of the supply platoon of the special operations battalion . He is the driver of an automobile squad of the Special Operations battalion .
Senior sergeant Vitaly Pribitkov, serving in the unit 63354, is a senior sergeant . He was a member of the unit.
 Some soldiers from the UCA lists exposed on the ferry in the winter-spring of 2014 were later awarded the medal “For the Return of Crimea,’ they were Magomed Khamataev, Sergei Karchevsky, Marat Magomedov, and others .
Russia's Novorossiysk, Russia, is the country's largest port in the country . The port is in the Russian city of Kaliningrad .
 The first half of the video shows the same plane marked RA-78805 on an unknown airfield approaching a crowd of people dressed in winter military uniform .
 Two persons are talking in Chechen, saying Putin has sent the plane to bring them home since they have completed their mission .
 Donetsk, Kharkiv, and Luhansk. Later they mention that just in case they can capture them, they will be captured . Later they say they will try to capture Donetsk and Kharksiv .
 Reportedly, the footage origins from a mobile phone of a Chechen mercenary who fought in Ukraine . The footage is believed to have been taken from a phone used by a mercenary .
 Video gives the ground to assume that it was filmed on one of the airfields captured in Crimea when the invasion operation was complete .
BTR-82A is an in-depth upgrade of the old Soviet IFV BTR-80 and its shipment to Russian military units started in 2011 . The upgrade is in- depth upgrade to the old Russian IFV-80 .
 The Ukrainian Armed Forces have never bought this model from Russia, thus such equipment couldn't be found anywhere in Ukraine prior to the Russian invasion .
 The pieces of BTR-82A on other images have the same three-color camouflage pattern which is not widely used in other Russian military units .
 The side number is stenciled in maroon both on the video and images . Another similarity is the style of the side number – it’s stencils in maroons .
 The BTR model and other vehicles are likely to have been in service with the military unit 27777 at the moment of the invasion .
 The sign “Crimea, land of guerrilla fame’ at the entrance to Crimea from Kherson Oblast in a profile photo by line inspector .
 Photograph taken by deputy commander of intelligence company Ruslan Serikov . Photograph taken from a social profile by Deputy commander of the intelligence company .
 The three-color camouflaged BTR-82A was posted on 18 March 2014 . It is not far from the town of Armyansk.
 InformNapalm investigators have created a map of the route by the soldiers of the Russian brigade who used the ferry to reach Crimea . The animation shows the way from their permanent base in Chechnya to Crimea .
 The deployment of Russian soldiers in Crimea wasn’t a spontaneous decision made in February 2014, as Vladimir Putin states .
 It was well-organized and prepared and could be fulfilled according to plans prepared months or even years before the invasion itself .
 The act of aggression was prepared long before the invasion and all roles were prescribed by its scenario and rehearsed by the perpetrators . The coordination of the actions of the military detachments, promptness of their deployment, and the tricks with which they concealed their affiliation with the Russian army.
 Moscow breached the UN articles to commit military crimes, says InformNapalm report . The Kremlin knew that it was violating international law, the report says .
Only Ukrainian, Russian, Spanish, Belarusian, Czech, Bulgarian, and Swedish versions are available as of now .