 To negotiate with Putin, U.S. President Donald Trump and his advisers recognize that it is important to look well beyond his statements.
 Putin seems to have Russia sitting on Ukraine and moving at a deliberate pace on the Minsk peace process .
 Moving slowly on the peace process has given him an upper hand to a degree, as other parties involved are required to respond to his whims .
 The ideal geopolitical response to the global power crisis is a connection between U.S. and Russia . The ideal response is to the crisis in the world's most powerful countries .
 President Donald Trump evinced a desire not to isolate Russia, or allow engagement with it to fall off .
 He does not want to settle on a long-term stand-off in which peace, particularly in Europe, is placed at risk . He doesn't want to put peace at risk.
 He believes the U.S. and Russia can be good neighbors on the same planet . He says the United States and Russia are good neighbors .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski says sophisticated U.S. leadership is sine qua non of a stable world order . Brzezzinski is a former United States National Security Adviser . He is a renowned foreign policy scholar .
 finding a way to establish an authentic positive relationship with Russia is a struggle U.S. administrations have engaged in for a few decades . Russia has been struggling to establish a positive relationship for decades .
 Trump said he would try to find the solution, and explained that he would give it his best effort . Trump said the solution would be his best attempt .
 Critics depicted Trump as being a naïve neophyte, outmatched by Russian Federation President Vladimir Putin .
 The Russians warned of the dangers of Trump dealing with the sly, experienced Russian leader .
 The Trump administration remained outwardly positive about working with Putin . It was not in fact overly optimistic about that .
 Trump and foreign and national security officials in his administration were always well-aware of the fact that Putin and his government can more often than not be disingenuous .
 Putin is the duly elected president of Russia, and its head of state . Yet, Putin is a duly elected President of Russia .
 Putin is the best leader available to keep Russia’s complex society somewhat stable . For now, for now, he's the best. Putin is best leader.
 He has managed to contain extremist political elements that might seek war with Russia’s neighbors, NATO, or the United States directly without thinking it through . He has suppressed morally void organized criminal elements that may wreak havoc globally .
 Moscow views Ukraine as being part of its sphere of influence, its “near abroad’s ‘near abroad,’ and its hope would be to bring it into Russia's fold .
 The United States and other Western powers support Kiev’s desire to be an independent actor . The U.S. and other West powers support the Kiev government's desire to become independent actor.
Pro-Western circles in Kiev were quite pro-Western and welcomed entrées from the EU to take a westward path. Long before the mass protests in Kiev began in 2014, circles there were quite Pro-Western .
 Another crisis arose in the east of Ukraine, in the region known as Donbass . U.S. and EU responded to the Russian occupation of Crimea .
 Pro-Russian separatists in its Donetsk and Luhansk provinces took over entire towns and declared independence of the territory .
 The Kiev government has sent the Ukrainian Army into those region to reclaim its sovereign territory . The Ukrainian Army has been sent into those regions.
 Western officials insist Russia has actually been controlling both the civil administration of the self-proclaimed countries as well as the fighting . Western officials say Russia is controlling both civil administration and fighting .
 The Minsk Agreement was intended to create a ceasefire, yet thousands of violations were committed by both sides on a daily basis .
 The combatants have maintained fighting positions too close to one another . The combatants are still fighting each other.
 Tanks, mortars, artillery, and multiple launch-rocket systems could be found where they should have been .
 Ukraine, the Russian Federation, France, and Germany agreed to a package of Measures to mitigate and eventually halt the conflict in Eastern Ukraine . Under the Minsk Agreement, Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany on February 11, 2015.
 There was supposed to be a constitutional deal on the future of Donetsk and Luhansk by the end of 2015 . But that went nowhere . There was also a potential constitutional deal for the two cities .
 The direction which the region may turn will be determined by the US, EU and Ukrainian Government . Part of its population is reluctant to live under Kiev’s control or by Russia and pro-Russian separatists .
 Putin can exert his influence in the region. From the additional space in Ukraine he holds, Putin can exerted his influence on the region .
 The direction which Eastern Ukraine may turn will be determined by the US, EU and Ukrainian Government . Part of its population is reluctant to live under Kiev's control or by Russia and pro-Russian separatists .
Russia's Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov summed up Moscow's thinking on Ukraine . Lavrov spoke at a news conference on January 15, 2018 .
 Russia respects the territorial integrity of Ukraine but only within the boundaries that were designed after the referendum in Crimea and its reunification with the Russian Federation . Lavrov explained that on a political level, Russia respects Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 The possibility that Putin would not make himself available for deals that would lead to resolutions of disputes and contentious issues was undoubtedly among the big "what ifs" administration officials considered and planned for .
 Putin has not been surprised by anything Putin has done. Trump and those who could be called the “stone hearts’ among his officials have not been surprise by anything he has done .
 The Trump administration came into office eager to engage Putin in order to improve relations . But it did so with its eyes wide open .
 Trump's vision and pronouncement of his intention to engage was wrongly viewed as a pro-Putin deference . Trump’s vision was wrongly seen as pro- Putin deference.
 Critics predicted disaster if Trump attempted to negotiate on things he did not really understand with the ruthless Russian leader .
 Trump also received words of caution about Putin from Members of Congress from his own Republican party .
 The repeated warnings remind of Act II of William Shakespeare’s The Life and Death of Julius Caesar . Caesar dismissed information concerning the conspiracy against him .
 He rebuffed Calpurnia's pleas that he “not stir out of his house’ on the Ides of March . He rebuffs Calpurnedia's plea that he didn't stir out his house .
 He rejected augurers’ claim that the discovery that an animal sacrificed as an offering had no heart was a warning sign . The discovery was made by augurers' claim that it was an offering with no heart .
 Caesar ignored a letter from Artemidorus outlining the conspiracy and identifying the conspirators . In Act III, he was assassinated .
 The possibility that Putin would not make himself available for deals with Trump that would lead to resolutions of disputes and contentious issues that would satisfy the administration was among the big "what ifs" administration officials considered and planned for .
 The United States would hardly be naïve and sentimental about any U.S. adversary or competitor, let alone Russia .
 The jumping off point for attempting to establish better relations with Russia inevitably became getting clarification and reaching some resolution of the issue of Russia’s meddling in the 2016 United States Presidential Election .
 The Trump administration wanted answers due to its own concerns . It wanted to respond to crushing domestic pressures to find out what happened .
 Putin was approached by Trump about the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election meddling . The possibility of rebuilding US-Russian relations and possibly creating a new era cooperation was discussed .
 If things had gone well, the stage would have been set, for better or worse, to move along the road from forgiveness, to acceptance, to restoration, and then rejoicing in Washington and Moscow . If things were well, they would have gone well.
 Putin would only offer denials about the meddling when rain falls from the sky .
 Trump listened very closely to Putin’s positions and ideas, and developed an understanding of his way of thinking .
 Trump administration clearly understood that provocative actions would have destabilized an already fragile situation .
 Ukraine has been discussed in a fulsome way with Russia's Vladimir Putin . There have been multiple talks between Tillerson and Lavrov .
 Trump has left no doubt that he wanted Russia to leave Ukraine alone . That is the position that the Russians are hearing from him, Tillerson and all other United States officials .
 Trump gave a foreign policy speech in Warsaw that made clear his administration's objectives and principles .
Russian officials had begun to make claims that Trump’s words and actions were the causality for its attitude and behavior toward the new administration . Yet, even before that speech, Russian officials had made claims .
 Putin is clearly a clever tactician, but it is unclear whether he is equally shrewd strategist on the global stage . It is unclear if he is also a shrewd Strategist.
 Putin has resurrected the old systems to control the populace with which he grew up with and is most familiar . He has served as Russia's leader as president and prime minister .
 That has essentially dragged systems in Russia back to a simulacrum of the Soviet-era domestically and Moscow’s sort of neo-Cold War approach geopolitically . That has basically dragged systems back to the Soviet era domestically and the neo- Cold War approach .
 Russia may no longer have the capability to be flexible militarily and may be unable to be a decisive superpower in the world . Still, while armed to the teeth with nuclear weapons, Russia may not be able to be decisive superpower .
Greatcharlie mistakenly assessed that Russia entered the war in Syria determined to shape the war on the ground and the war’s ultimate outcome given the military power it brought to bear on the problem . Putin declared that Russia needed to act.
 Putin emphasized that Russia would attack ISIS, eventually driving it and other Islamic militant groups from Syria . He said Russia would restore Assad's control over the country .
 Russia lacked the capability to do that despite appearing to have the capacity to do it . Over time, it became clear that Russia lacked that .
 Russia also demonstrated a lack of will or desire to do more and to increase its presence in Syria to enable its forces to act decisively .
 Perhaps one could glean much from what has happened in Syria to examine and assess Putin's efforts in Ukraine .
 Despite any shortcomings observed in Russia’s military performance in Syria, there can still be no doubt that it can still effecrively act as a divisive power .
 Putin has tasked the Russian military and other security services with mission of eroding democracies wherever they see them .
 Putin decided to pull independent countries that were once part of the Soviet Union back into Russia’s orbit .
 The process usually begins with contemptuous murmurs against home country’s identity, language, and national symbols . Then it becomes a “rebel yell’ for secession, the author says .
 It was seen in Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan, South Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia, Transnistria in Moldova, Moldova and more recently in Ukraine .
 Each time an ethnic-Russian space was carved out of a country, Putin gained a base from which he can exert his influence in that country .
Political thinking of former Eastern Bloc countries has not turned in agreement with Russia . Still, despite the activities and some successes of pro-Russian political elements, in the larger territories of those former Soviet republics .
Greatcharlie assessed that Russia entered the war in Syria determined to shape the war on the ground and the war’s outcome given the military of power it brought to bear on the conflict and exigence expressed by Putin when he declared Russia's need to act .
 Over time, it became clear that Russia lacked the capability to act decisively, although appearing to have the capacity to do so . Russia has been accused of being incapable of acting decisively .
 One might infer much from this with regard to Putin’s efforts in Ukraine .
 Vera gloria radices agit atque etiam propagatur, ficta omnia celeroter tamquam flosculi decidunt nec simulatum potest quicquam esse diuturnum .
 Many Western military analysts have proffered that Putin’s moves in Ukraine would be followed by many more, to reclaim former Soviet republics and more .
 Putin’s determination to hold on in Eastern Ukraine served to substantiate such concern . Along with the capture of Crimea, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Transnistria, was captured .
 Putin's approach on Ukraine fits into his plans to make Russia better, it is unclear how it fits with his plans .
 Russia's capture of Donetsk and Luhansk would do for Russia in any real respect . It is unclear how Russia’s capture of the two cities would do.
 Russia is the best authentic option available to lead Russia for now, despite his shortcomings, he is still the best option .
 Putin restored order in his country after the internal chaos of the 1990s . Putin has restored order after the chaos of his country.
 It was perhaps his initial career as an officer in the Soviet Union’s Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti . The KGB made reestablishing the power of the state a central part of his efforts .
 Putin has been a figurative mother to Russia, nurturing it in the best way he knows how . Putin has also been a mother to the country .
 Russian citizens feel shortchanged of their civil and human rights, as well as opportunities to fulfill their ambitions, and feel burdened by anxieties . That idea might face some disapproval from Russian citizens who feelShortchanged .
 Putin has kept his ship, Russia, right and steady. Still, whenever, the metaphoric waves have gotten higher, Putin has been steady .
 Putin and a Moscow seem to be still playing the great power game in Europe, and happy to play it alone .
 Analysts and scholars in the West believe Putin sees everything in terms of conspiracy .
 Obama administration's approach to Ukraine and other former Soviet republics irked Putin to the extent he is now swinging after the bell colloquially .
 He may be stirring difficulties due to political expediency, soothing hardliners political elements at home . He may also be stirring problems due to his political expedience .
 Putin seems determined to get into a scrap with the Trump administration . It is not completely clear why rather than seek agreements, rather than seeking agreements .
 If Donetsk and Luhansk were left in the hands of pro-Russian elements, it is questionable whether Russia would become a stabilizing force in the region . Russia would be taking on a new, difficult situation akin to those in its Southern and North Caucasian provinces .
 Any resistance, peaceful or violent, would likely be dealt with withh eavy handedly by Russia and its allies .
 Reconstruction in the Donetsk People's Republic or Luhansk People’s Republic would require a lot from Russia . reconstruction in Donetsk would require Russia .
 Donetsk and Luhansk were net consumers of foreign imports and dependent on Russian gas before the conflict began . Donetsk and Luhansk were net consumers. The conflict began in November 2013 .
 Moscow is considered a rustbelt, needing to be refitted at the cost of billions of dollars . The region sits in a region that is considered to be a rust belt, but needs to be rebuilt .
 The only viable long-term goal in Moscow would be to convert the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic into versions of South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Transnistria .
 It would likely receive recognition of very few countries, Russia’s allies, but not the United States or major powers of Europe .
 The two quasi-countries would in many ways be shut off from the rest of the world . They would never see a postwar economic upturn .
 Moscow might recognize that it cannot support them in a way that would allow for their rebuilding . The effects of few months of rain and wind on the ruins of cities and towns may be surprising .
 An authentic assessment will be left to the economic experts . But there undoubtedly will be a great additional strain on Russia .
 The situation would only worsen if pressure was placed on Russia over Ukraine through future sanctions . The situation is expected to worsen if sanctions are put on Russia .
 Putin very likely has considered what Russia would be like after he accepts, as one might presume he is called to heaven .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is doing much to saddle future generations of Russians with two economically impoverished basket cases .
 In Donetsk and Luhansk, future generations might abandon their homelands for “the other Ukraine’s” or points further West .
 Russian leader might very well try to reverse what Putin is attempting to reverse in Ukraine due to financial strains caused .
 Donetsk and Luhansk might very well be a great miscalculation, says CNN.com . Russia is now a second tier superpower, with Russia in second place .
 Putin wants Russia out of his reach, not by some fault of his own, but rather because it’s problems are so heavy, may run too deep .
 He may have run out of real answers to put Russia on real upward trajectory given the capabilities and possibilities of the country using all tools available .
 In a significant endeavor, there is always the potential to become lost, says the author . "There is always a potential to be lost," he says .
 Putin may simply be procrastinating, postponing an authentic look at the situation . To that extent, consciously or unconsciously, Putin may just beprocrastinating .
 The U.S. found success in rallying the Syrian Democratic Forces against ISIS and other Islamic militant groups . The success across the border with the Iraqi Army, Iraqi Security Forces, and the Kurdish Peshmerga may convince the United States and Western allies to develop plans for a new initiative regarding Ukraine
 The U.S. and European countries no longer appear ambivalent about committing to the requirements of European security . In many respects, security can be costly and risky .
 The U.S. found success in rallying the Syrian Democratic Forces against ISIS and other Islamic militant groups . The success avross the border with the Iraqi Army, Iraqi Security Forces, and the Kurdish Peshmerga aainst ISIS, may convince the United States and Western allies to develop plans
 The U.S. might organize overt and covert training and equipping of Armed Forces of Ukraine, particularly the Ukrainian Ground Forces . That may in turn give those forces the capability to independently regain territory claimed by the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic .
 Kiev may, on its own volition, make use of its new arms and capabilities to do just that with such speed and power that nothing could be done rapidly in reaction .
 The Ukrainian Air Force could be used in ways to support friendly ground movement that has never been seen before . The Ukrainian air force could also be used to support ground movement .
 Kiev has not recognized the rebellious movements in Donetsk and Luhansk . Kiev has never recognized the rebels in Donetsk or Luhans .
 It has not recognized the autonomy or the secession of those provinces . It is not recognized as a province or a province .
 Donetsk and Luhansk provinces are still Ukraine's sovereign territory . As far as Kiev is concerned, the entire territory is still Ukraine’s sovereign territory. Ukraine is concerned.
 Kiev agreed under the Minsk Agreement that the borders between Donbass and Russia must be administered by the Ukrainian government . Kiev's position reflected its position, its belief that border control must be overseen by the Ukraine government .
 The United States has asked Russia to take its forces out of Ukraine and hand Crimea back to Kiev’s full control .
 The reality is that getting the Russians out of Crimea, at least in the near term, may be impossible .
Getting them out of Eastern Ukraine is another thing altogether . However, getting them out is one thing altogether.
 Moscow may be willing to seek some resolution on Ukraine at the negotiation table to halt the total collapse of the forces of the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic forces . The Russian Federation might have mixed in with them, according to reports .
 Putin and his advisers do not appear too far down the road to recurvate on Ukraine . Ukraine is a delicate issue in the Kremlin, but Putin's advisers don't appear to be too far away from it .
 It could be hypothesized that the collapse of pro-Russian forces in Ukraine would not play well politically at home . It could also be hypothesized the collapse would not be politically good at home.
 Moscow could again use the argument that it must defend ethnic-Russian in Ukraine by request . Moscow could also argue that the country must defend its own people by request.
 Putin abstained from more vigorous moves against Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania . Putin has abstained.
 Putin could lash out against the Baltics in response to the collapse of the two pro-Russian states . Putin, taking an asymmetric approach, may lash out at Baltics .
 Russia may not be so certain that it could sufficiently respond militarily, extrapolating from what was observed in Syria . Yet, all this being stated, it may not have been so certain .
 The U.S. could organize overt and covert training and equipping of the Armed Forces of Ukraine . The United States could not cope with deadlocked talks.
Pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine now in the hands of pro-Russian separatist forces . That may in turn give those forces the capability to independently retake most or all of Eastern Ukraine now .