 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko ordered troops on the border with Crimea and the frontline in Eastern Ukraine to be on high alert on Thursday . Russian accusations that Ukrainian intelligence agents plotted terror attacks in Crimea .
 The alert comes amid a period of increased violence, substantial Russian troop movements, and fears that Moscow's accusations could be used as justification to escalate the years-long conflict .
 Poroshenko orders Ukrainian troops on the border with Crimea and the frontline in Donbass to be on high alert . Poroshenko ordered Ukrainian troops to be in high alert.
 The accusations come amid escalating violence between Russian-backed separatists and Ukrainian forces in the eastern part of Ukraine .
 Russia's FSB, the successor agency to the KGB, alleged that officials had thwarted attacks planned by the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense's Main Directorate of Intelligence . "critically-important elements of the peninsula's infrastructure and life support," said the Interpreter .
 Firefights between Russian officials and alleged perpetrators resulted in two Russians being shot dead, the FSB said .
 Russia has already taken steps to bolster security at its border with Ukraine, according to the statement . Russia has taken steps in recent months to bolster its border security with Ukraine .
 Ukrainian officials described the accusations as baseless . Ukrainian officials, including the country's president, said the accusations were baseless .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said that Kiev had turned to the ""practice of terrorism" Putin called the actions "stupid and criminal," according to Russia Today .
 Putin further stated that it was "pointless" to meet with Ukrainian authorities in an effort to resolve the conflict in the wake of the incidents . Putin further said it was "pointless"" to meet with Ukrainian authorities .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov says officials from Russia, Ukraine, France, and Germany could discuss peace process on the sidelines of the G-20 summit in China .
 It is likely that Putin will use the alleged incidents as reason to escalate the conflict in Ukraine, expert says .
 Russia has been involved militarily in Ukraine since spring of 2014 when it annexed the Crimean Peninsula . The country was slapped with international sanctions after the annexation .
 The United States and the European Union have refused to recognize Crimea as Russian territory . The U.S. and the EU have dismissed the referendum that Russia claims legitimized its annexation of the peninsula .
 Despite a second ceasefire agreement brokered in Minsk in February 2015, the conflict in Ukraine has persisted .
 July marks deadliest month of fighting since August of last year . Fighting between Russian-backed separatists and Ukrainian forces has increased in the eastern part of Ukraine .
 Ukraine's military reported last month that seven troops had been killed and 14 wounded over 24 hours of fighting with separatists . The military reported that 7 troops had died and 14 were wounded .
 A Ukrainian service member was killed and five others wounded in a firefight this week in the eastern zone of conflict .
 At least 9,500 individuals have been killed in the conflict since the spring of 2014, the U.N. says . More than one in four civilians have died since that time, the United Nations says .
 Russia's FSB says officials conducted "operational search activities" near the town of Armyansk in Crimea Friday night . They found an arsenal of weapons, including improvised explosive devices and grenades .
 The Ukrainian defense ministry's special forces divisions made two incursion attempts that were blocked by Russian security and defense officials . And on Monday, "diversionary terrorist groups" from the Ukraine defense ministry made two attempts .
 Russia has opened a criminal case into the incidents and detained individuals accused of involvement . Russia said that it has opened the criminal case.
 Russia has also bolstered security at "critical infrastructure and life support" in Crimea . Russia has reinforced the border regimen between Russia and Ukraine .
 A spokesman for Ukraine's defense intelligence called the accusations "fake information" The claim was later echoed by Ukraine's president, Poroshenko .