 Sunday would have been a good choice to re-ignite the slumbering conflict between Russia and Ukraine . If you were to look for a time to reinstate the conflict.
 Russia’s seizure of three Ukrainian ships occurred in a diplomatic vacuum that makes the danger of escalation greater than any time in years . European leaders preoccupied with Brexit and the president of the United States silent .
 Neither side has much to gain from re-igniting the full-on shooting war of 2014 and 2015 . Neither side is likely to gain.
 Both Moscow and Kiev are expected to exploit it for political gain . But we can expect both Russia and Kiev to exploit the situation for political gains .
 Vladimir Putin's government is facing a slide in approval ratings over an unpopular pension reform . A small but successful tangle with a “Ukrainian provocation’ will play well on the domestic front .
 Russia's tightly controlled state television devoted major coverage to the incident on Sunday night . Russia’s tightly-controlled state television focused on the incident .
 Moscow to recount capture of Ukrainian vessels with undisguised triumph . Moscow will recount its capture of Ukraine vessels with unguised victory .
 Ukraine's president Petro Poroshenko will ask parliament for permission to introduce martial law today . MPs who backed the 2014 Maidan revolution have warned that they will want to see “exhaustive’s justification for such a move .
Political opportunists in the Kremlin and Kiev are seeking to exploit an extremely dangerous situation with real military and strategic implications . But the political opportunists are trying to exploit a dangerous situation.
 Russia and Ukraine have been fighting a war for nearly five years . This is the first time Russian forces have openly engaged their Ukrainian foes .
 The Kremlin claimed during annexation of Crimea and tank battles in Donbas four years ago, not to be involved .
 A nautical confrontation has been brewing in the Sea of Azov for months – and is fast becoming a maritime theatre in the slow-burning land war . East Ukraine has devastated East Ukraine since 2014 .
 The First World War-style front line of trenches, minefields, and barbed wire ends on the sandy beach of a small resort village . It is a few miles east of Mariupol – Ukraine’s most important Azov Sea port .
 Russia completed its bridge to Crimea across the Kerch Strait earlier this year . Tensions at sea have escalated since the bridge was completed .
 Both Ukrainian and Russian forces have detained one another's fishing vessels in the sea . Both are in the Ukraine and Russia .
 The two small Ukrainian boats seized on Sunday were recently built gunships meant to redress the naval imbalance . The boats were seized by the Ukrainian government .
Military logic behind Russia's decision to prevent them from entering Sea of Azov is obvious . Russia's military logic behind the decision is obvious.
 The Kremlin has asserted its almost universally unrecognized claim to Crimea . By closing the strait of Kerch, the Kremlin has asserted its almost universal claim.
 Ukraine's small naval presence in the sea of Azov isolated and cut off from reinforcements . But it also leaves Ukraine’s small navy presence in sea ofAzov isolated .
 Europe once again to the brink of something much worse. And it brings this part of Europe onceagain to the verge of a disaster .