 The International Criminal Court issued its preliminary findings on 14 November . It said a crime falling within the jurisdiction of the Court ‘has been or is being committed’ in Ukraine .
 The ICC report was uncompromising in recognising the annexation of Crimea as a military conflict between Russia and Ukraine . It classifies it as an occupation .
 The ICC said it was also trying to determine whether the war in east Ukraine could be international in character . The war between Russian-backed separatists and government forces “could be actuallyInternational in character”
 Russian troops found to have committed crimes on Ukrainian territory in the course of the conflict . Such a finding could open the way for prosecution of Russian troops .
 President Putin signed an executive order withdrawing Russia’s signature from the 2000 Rome Statute . The ICC established the ICC in 2000, citing ‘dissatisfaction’ with the body's “one-sided and inefficient’ work .
 Russia had signed Rome Stature, but it had never formally ratified it . It makes the withdrawal largely symbolic .
 A number of African states are planning withdrawal on the grounds that the ICC has focused disproportionately on wars and conflict in Africa . The ICC has been focusing disproportionately on cases relating to wars and conflicts in Africa.
 The ICC conclusions comprehensively demolish the narrative that Russia continues to peddle to the world . There is no prospect of any prosecutions for many years to come .
 The motion appeared to be given equivalent status to the non-state militants of the Islamic State . The latter justified their actions saying that they could not endorse the report because Russia was not alone in posing such threats .
 Left-wingers denounced ‘neo-McCarthyism’ that risked harming media freedom by treating suspect outlets as agents of Moscow .
 The motion drew an angry reaction from President Putin, who told a press conference in Moscow . Putin told the press conference without any hint of irony that he was now trying to silence dissenting opinions .
 The French Republican party is holding the first round of its open primary . Seven candidates competed for the nomination .
 Current opinion polls show that in some scenarios, she could be a clear winner .
 Parliament's refusal to ratify a Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence is known as Istanbul Convention .
 Parliamentarians were concerned about the parts of the convention that mention gender identification and sexual orientation .
 The text of the convention says victims’ rights should be protected without discrimination on any ground . The text also says that sexual orientation and gender identity must be protected .
 Ukraine's parliament is fully committed to European standards of equality . The ratification bill was voted back to the parliamentary committee . It leaves the position unclear as to the extent to which Ukraine’s parliament is committed to equality .
 The Prosecutor General’s Office Special Investigations Chief Serhiy Horbatyuk said in an interview that the Russian government had confirmed that the questioning would take place on 25 November .
 Yanukovych will be questioned at the end of November via a video link to Rostov-on-Don, where he has been living since he fled the country amid the 2014 EuroMaidan Revolution .
 Yanukovych will be questioned as a witness in the case against five Berkut ex-officers . They are accused of shooting 48 EuroMaidan activists on Kyiv's Instytutska Street in February 2014 .
 Yanukovych faces several charges of mass murder and official misconduct . He is being given protection by the Kremlin, but he is unlikely to answer any time soon .
 Donald Tusk, President of the European Council, will host the 18th EU-Ukraine summit . The summit will be held in Ukraine .
 He will represent the EU together with Jean-Claude Juncker, the President of the European Commission . He will be in charge of the EU.
 The November summit could confirm a further €15 million in support of an anti-corruption programme and €104 million for public administration reform . The summit could also confirm €10 million for a public administration reforms .
 Ukrainian citizens to the EU will be allowed visa-free travel to the European Parliament . It is also likely that visa- free travel for Ukrainian citizens will take a step forwards .
 Ireland and the United Kingdom will not be subject to the visa-free regime . However, Ireland and Britain will not have a visa- free regime .
 In accordance with the EU treaties, their visa regime remains subject to national and not EU legislation . The visa regime is subject to EU legislation, but it is not national .