 In 2014, Russia broke out of the post-Cold War order and openly challenged the U.S.-led international system . The Drivers of Putin’s Course Dmitri Trenin PAPER DECEMBER 22 .
 Moscow’s new course is laid down first and foremost by President Vladimir Putin . But it also reflects the rising power of Russian nationalism .
 In 2014, Russia broke out of the post-Cold War order and openly challenged the U.S.-led international system . In 2014.
 This was essentially the result of the failure of attempts to integrate Russia into the Euro-Atlantic community . This was basically the results of the failed attempts tointegrate Russia into Europe .
 The new period of rivalry between the Kremlin and the West is likely to endure for years .
 Russia's New Foreign Policy Course Russian-Western relations have palpably deteriorated since the last failed attempt at rapprochement during President Dmitry Medvedev’s term in 2009–2011 .
 Ukraine is the main geographical locus and symbol of the new rivalry, but not its primary cause . Ukraine is not the main geographic locus, but it is a symbol of new rivalry .
 To Putin, the West's approach to Russia barely respects Moscow’s interests and views, says the Russian leader . To Putin the West’S approach to Moscow, the U.S. barely respects the Russian president's views and interests .
 Russia’s failed rapprochement with and perceived humiliation at the hands of the West has opened the way to a more nationalist domestic and foreign policy course that replaces the remnants of Russian liberalism and internationalism .
 The centerpiece of this approach is winning full sovereignty for Russia by eliminating foreign political influence in the country . Moscow's special interests in its former borderlands are recognized .
 Fundamental to this vision are conservative values, rooted in the Orthodox Christian tradition .
 European Union mobilize Russians in support of country’s new foreign policy course .
 Confrontation with Russia carries the non-negligible potential of a direct military collision with former Cold War adversaries . Russia and the U.S. have been involved in the Cold War .
 Russia and the West must forge a set of strategic confidence-building measures to prevent a clash . The situation in Ukraine must not be allowed to escalate dangerously, says the author . Russia and West should forge a series of strategic measures.
Official communication between the Kremlin and Western government offices is exceedingly difficult and mutual trust is nonexistent . reliable channels of communication need to be built and credible dialogue partners found on both sides .
 To Putin, Russia should be, above all, an independent and influential nation, to Putin . Russia should also be an independent nation .
 Russia needs a national, meritocratic class of elites to avoid squandering its resources and losing independence to more powerful states . To achieve that and avoid squander its resources, Russia needs to be meritocratic .
 The urge to shut Russia out and pressure ordinary Russians should be resisted by all means . The urge for Russia to be shut out should not be resisted.
 Russia’s integration with Europe and the West more broadly as originally designed is off the agenda . ways must be found to open the door even more widely for people-to-people exchanges .
 The abrupt end of the quarter-of-a-century-long era of cooperation and partnership between Russia and the West did not come out of the blue . The return of confrontation and hostility between them, didn't come out the blue.
 The root cause of the dramatic reversal was the failure of Russia’s integration into the Euro-Atlantic political, security, and economic systems despite repeated attempts .
 In 2012 and 2013, the pretense of partnership became increasingly untenable . In 2012, the Pretense of partnerships became increasinglyUntenable .
 Russia granted political asylum to Edward Snowden, who leaked classified U.S. documents to the media . President Barack Obama's visit to Russia was canceled by Russia .
 The competing offers to Ukraine, one from Brussels to sign an Association Agreement with the European Union, and another from Moscow to join the Eurasian Economic Union, turned Ukraine into the site of a tug of war .
 Vladimir Putin's decision to return to the Russian presidency was announced in the fall of 2011 . These dramatic changes have often been portrayed as consequences of Vladimir Putin’s decision .
 Some say he needs to boost his popularity in wake of urban classes’ protests in 2011-2012 through appeals to Russian nationalism .
 Ukraine was the ideal place for an authoritarianism at home to be sustained, and aggression abroad was required . Ukraine's authoritarianism was required, and Ukraine was a place for it, says author .
 Ukraine's move to Europe would have presented a clear and present danger to the current Russian political system . Russia's current political system and those at the top of it are at risk, says CNN's Andrew Hammond .
Construction has proven inadequate as a tool of foreign policy analysis and an unreliable guide to foreign policy making . Time and again, that construction has proven ineffective as a tools of foreign Policy analysis .
 There are many drivers of Moscow’s foreign policy, from ideological underpinnings to its domestic needs and international ambitions .
 The prospects for Russia's confrontation with the U.S. and its estrangement from the West are real . With few places to turn internationally and a fragile domestic landscape, Russia's future is uncertain .
 The stakes for Moscow are higher than at any time since the fall of communism . The stakes are higher for Moscow than ever since communism fell .
 When Putin returned to the Kremlin in May 2012, Russia’s foreign policy changed course .
 The centerpiece of the new foreign policy tack has been winning full sovereignty for Russia . The new policy tack is to win full sovereignty.
 This sovereignty bid, in practical terms, represents Moscow’s clear breakout from the international system as it has been widely understood since the end of the Cold War .
 It challenges the unipolar world order by erecting barriers to U.S. democracy promotion and by refusing to submit to the norms and practices laid down, policed, and arbitrated by the West .
 Vladimir Putin raised this challenge as a consequence of his assessment of Dmitry Medvedev, his protégé, who stayed in the Kremlin from 2008 to 2012 . Putin raised the challenge as an consequence of the president's assessment of the presidency of DmitryMedvedev .
 Putin decided against allowing Medvedev to run again for reasons that were both political and personal . In the fall of 2011, Putin decided not to let Medvedeva run again .
 Medvedev had been sent by Putin, formally the prime minister, but still Russia's top leader, on a sort of scouting mission to the West to determine what was possible to achieve .
 As Putin looked at the balance sheet three and a half years later, the results were not promising . The results are not promising.
 Russia's foreign policy focused on improving Russia's relations with the West . He gave him a mandate to pursue a liberal foreign policy .
 Putin allowed Medvedev to respond positively to the reset policies of the Obama administration . The reset policies were aimed at starting fresh with Russia after the bilateral relationship had deteriorated .
 Putin encouraged Medvedev to negotiate not only strategic arms reductions with the United States but also joint ballistic missile defense arrangements with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The Russian president also encouraged the move to pursue modernization alliances with the leading Western economies .
 Joining would open the accession process with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the global assembly of advanced economies and democracies . Joining the OECD would be a new step in the process of opening accession processes .
 Putin was hardly pleased with the results of Putin's efforts to improve his relations with the West .
 No breakthrough has been achieved on key security issues, such as ballistic missile defense . But on key issues, no breakthrough had been achieved .
 The UN Security Council resolution that established the no-fly zone over Libya in 2011 was then misused by the West to remove strongman Muammar Qaddafi from power . Moscow's protestations about the illegality of that regime change notwithstanding .
 Putin concluded that the West’s approach to Russia offered scant respect for its interests or views . Putin also concluded that West's approach to the Russia offered no respect.
 Moscow’s June 2008 proposal to conclude a new European security treaty based on the principle of a Europe “without dividing lines”1 was politely acknowledged but essentially dismissed .
 The United States permitted Mikheil Saakashvili, Georgia’s president, to attack the rebel enclave of South Ossetia, killing Russian peacekeepers in the process .
 In the brief RussoGeorgian War that followed, the Western media and political circles sided with Tbilisi against Moscow .
 The U.S. response to the 2010 Russian proposal to create a joint ballistic missile defense was so tepid that it allowed Putin to conclude that the West continued to view Russia as a potential adversary .
 Moscow has a firm resolve not to allow such things to happen again in Syria . This led to a feeling in Moscow of being deceived and then ignored, says the author .
 Putin also inferred that the West’s treatment of Russia was not linked to a particular person in the Kremlin .
 His reputation in the West was generally good, and he ostensibly had liberal credentials . But he was not well-known to the West .
 Russia was free to cooperate with the U.S. and its allies, but only on their terms and on the agenda developed in Washington .
 The West counted on Medvedev staying in the Kremlin after the 2012 election and gradually seeing Putin off . It hardly escaped Putin’s attention though that the West counted the Russian president's presence .
 Medvedev was viewed as more modern, meaning softer and more accommodating, than Putin . Putin was seen as more accommodating than Putin, according to the Russian president .
 Angela Merkel called Medvedev her candidate in the presidential elections the following year . The Russian president had not announced his candidacy .
 To Putin, this might have sounded like foreigners having the audacity to pick Russian leaders .
 The United States administration of Barack Obama had no illusions about who was the top man in Moscow . But it clearly preferred that Medvedev get a second term as Russia's president .
 Putin decided in September 2011 to run again and make Medvedev his prime minister . The choice was greeted with a groundswell of disappointment and bitter criticism from Russia's liberals and the Western public alike .
 Putin's ears must have been vindication of his longtime suspicions that the West wished to keep Russia under some form of control, he says .
 The protests that broke out in December 2011 steeled Putin's determination to substantially revise Russia’s domestic and foreign policy . The protests in 2011 were the biggest protests in Russia's history .
Members of the country's new urban middle classes began a series of protests against Putin’s rule .
 Young professionals, entrepreneurs, and office workers took to the streets in Moscow and other cities across the country .
 Dmitry Medvedev had been charged with outreach to the IT generation and liberals at home . They now saw him as a fraud, and were angry with the political regime that had manipulated them .
 On May 6, 2012, on the eve of the presidential inauguration, the protesters clashed with the police across the river from the Kremlin .
 Western public opinion hailed this as the beginning of a Russian spring and the end of Putin’s Russia .
 The Russian protests were largely part of a U.S.-led effort to subvert previously stable regimes around the world . But in the Kremlin’s eyes, the Russian protests, like the Arab Spring that had begun a year before and the color revolutions of the preceding decade.
 The U.S. would be replaced with feeble but loyal democracies or, failing that, with controlled chaos . The United States would be in order to expand its global influence . They would also be replaced by feeble and loyal democracies .
 Vladimir Putin publicly suggested that the U.S. Department of State was engaged in rent-a-crowd activities in Russia . Russian recipients of foreign grant money.
 The West has historically been trying to hold Russia down for fear of competition . To Putin, the West has tried to keep Russia down, but to Putin, it has been difficult .
 After the end of the Cold War, with Russia weakened, the West refused to respect Moscow and its interests, as demonstrated by NATO’s eastward expansion .
 Russia's own integration into the West no longer an option, Putin had to balance power in Russia’s relationships with the U.S. and European Union .
 The problem was forging equal relationships between two pairs of visibly unequal entities . The problem, however, was forging unequal relationships between the two groups .
 His power is often likened to that of a monarch or a czar . He is supported by a long tradition of Russian governance .
 Putin's real impact is not of the same quality across the board of policy issues. Putin’s real impact on policy issues is not as much as his impact on other issues, he says .
 There are other major figures, both in private business and in the state-controlled corporations, who can and do weigh in on the decisionmaking process .
 The Kremlin is very attentive to public opinion polls and is careful to maintain broad support for its policies . It is essential for the continuation of the paternalistic political system, says Putin .
 Vladimir Putin has to make all the important decisions himself, with others advising him or implementing them . On foreign affairs and security policy, Vladimir Putin must make all his decisions .
 The Russian president's interpretation of the country's national interest and his philosophical views. These decisions are based on the Russian president’s interpretation of his national interest .
 Putin cannot decide everything on instinct. Of course, even in foreign and security policy matters, Putin can't decide everything by instinct .
 Russia is integrated with the rest of the world economically, intellectually, and physically, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin says Russia's relationship with the world is "integration"
 The West imposed sanctions on Russia in 2014 as a result of the Ukraine crisis . Those links cannot be fully undone even by the sanctions regime the West imposed on Russia .
 His views on foreign affairs and on Russia’s place and role in the world are of the utmost importance .
 Russia's second and fourth president has come a long way in his decade and a half in power . Russia’s second and third president has been in power for more than a decade .
 Putin started out in 2000 as a leader trying to restore and upgrade RussianWestern relations . He started out as a president after the Kosovo War .
 Putin reached out to Lord George Robertson, then NATO secretary general, and then U.S. president George W Bush . In his first few weeks in the Kremlin, Putin has met with Lord Robertson and George Bush .
 Putin sought an alliance with the U.S. before and after the September 11 terrorist attacks . Putin sought membership in NATO and integration into Europe in the name of Russia’s European choice .
 Putin ordered immediate, massive, and highly valuable support to the U.S. operation to defeat al-Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan . In 2001, Putin ordered an immediate and massive support for the operation .
 Putin has felt increasingly alienated by the West since 2003 . From 2003 onward, he has felt more alienated with the West .
 The U.S. invasion of Iraq that year distracted Washington from seeking closer engagement with Russia .
 Russia had to live with the United States withdrawal from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty . The treaty severely limited missile defenses of both countries to bolster nuclear deterrence .
 It also had to accept the reality of NATO expansion to the Baltic states and a U.S. presence in Central Asia and Georgia .
 Putin’s own attempt to resolve the conflict in Transnistria was scuttled on the verge of his November 2003 visit to Chi�’inău to sign the agreement . The Kozak memorandum was a result of U.S. diplomatic intervention with Mold
 The case of Mikhail Khodorkovsky persuaded Putin that Russia needed to keep its energy riches under national control . Russia's energy riches have been under the control of Russia for years .
 Khodorkovsky defied Putin politically even as he tried to sell his oil company, YUKOS, to an American oil major .
 The media campaign by Khodorkovsky’s allies and sympathizers in the West against the Kremlin after his arrest in October 2003 dimmed Putin's view of the motives of Western policies .
 Putin had dropped his early expectations about Russia becoming part of an enlarged, Atlanticist and European West .
 Putin took Russia out of the West’s political orbit after accusing foreign powers of seeking to weaken and dismember Russia .
 He began developing an independent trajectory focused on national interest rather than national interest . As before, he was aimed at integration into the West .
 Putin soon became a vocal and public critic of United States global domination . He lashed out against the post-Cold War world order in February 2007 speech at Munich Security Conference .
 Putin went to the NATO summit in Bucharest to impress upon U.S. and European leaders . He said Ukraine was offered a path to join the alliance if that country were offered .
 Western leaders generally took the Russian president's admonitions as a sign of Moscow’s resurgent neoimperialist ambitions .
 Germany and France succeeded in blocking Kiev’s plea for a NATO membership action plan . Ukraine and Georgia were promised membership in the alliance at an unspecified date .
 Tbilisi moved against South Ossetia four months later, apparently in an effort to solve ethnic conflicts in Georgia by force . Georgia is now eligible for NATO membership .
 Putin went on record suggesting that Saakashvili had been encouraged by anti-Russian elements in the Bush administration .
 Putin may have been interpreted as a U.S.-backed attempt to “test’s young successor, Medvedev .
 Laying bare the deficiencies of the Russian military organization, the Georgia War spurred Russia’s military reform . The Georgia War had been formally launched a few months before .
 Putin made a major decision to begin a wholesale modernization of the Russian military through 2020 . The program is worth 20 trillion rubles, or $700 billion at the time .
 Russia needs a strong military before many other things, he says . The defense industry can be the locomotive of Russia’s reindustrialization, he adds .
 During his four years away from the Kremlin, Putin stayed in charge overall . But he kept a low international profile .
 He spent far less time on foreign visits and much more time traveling in Russia . He spent more time in Russia than he did in Europe .
 The Russian-Chinese border in 2009 included a long trek in a small Russian car along the sparsely populated and underdeveloped Russian- Chinese border .
 He reportedly became close with Father Tikhon Shevkunov, head of a monastery in central Moscow . He is also a prominent Orthodox Christian intellectual .
 Putin appeared imbued with a sense of history and a mandate from God . At the end of his four-year premiership, Putin appeared to have a mandate for God .
 The renowned pragmatist and self-avowed public servant, a country manager, turned into a missionary .
 Putin behaved like someone who was performing the work entrusted to him by the Almighty . Not only did Putin invoke God in his public remarks, he behaved like a person who was doing the work for him .
 Putin was relaxed amid the 2014 Ukraine crisis, this allowed him to stay relaxed and confident that God was on his side . Russia and the U.S. are in a bitter contest with the United States .
 Putin set out his new foreign policy program in a series of articles published ahead of the 2012 presidential election .
 The Keeper of Conservative Values in Putin’s view, Russia needed a sense of spiritual sovereignty . Russia needed spiritual sovereignty, Putin said .
 Putin’s answer to the first question was that Russia is a distinct civilization . Russia is the core of a special “Russian world,’ a supranational community of people who associate themselves with traditional Russian values .
 Russia should be the centerpiece of a large geoeconomic unit, a Eurasian union, he says . The former Soviet republics of the Commonwealth of Independent States would bring together the former Soviet Republics . Russia should also be a part of a Eurasia union, complete with
 Putin touted this Eurasian union as a means for Russia to escape becoming peripheral to Europe and Asia . Putin touted it as a way to deal on equal terms with the EU and China .
 Russia has transitioned from former president Mikhail Gorbachev’s optimistic but naive universalism to a much more realist worldview . The reassertion of the uniqueness of the Russian experience is the key to Russia's success .
 Support for globalization and Western integration has given way to promoting cultural and political diversity around the world . Support for multiculturalism and integration has helped promote cultural, political diversity .
 Putin, Russia has taken up the role of global defender of indigenous values . Putin has been in charge of Russia's role of protecting its own people .
 Russia has rejected Europe, not only as a mentor, but also as a model . For the first time in modern times, Russia has rejection of Europe as a role in the country's future .
For Putin, old Europe was still essentially solid and acceptable, but the twenty-first-century European mainstream is just the opposite . For Putin, the old Europe is still essentiallySolid and acceptable .
 The band Pussy Riot staged public protests at Moscow’s main Orthodox cathedral and elsewhere . The band was supported by Western support for the band . Russia's legislation banned the distribution of ‘gay propaganda’ to minors .
 Russia is rooted in the Orthodox Christian tradition . As it turned out, styling Russia as a keeper of conservative European values was only a way station for stressing unique Russian ones .
 The sanctity of the family as a union between a man and a woman, the indispensable role of religious faith, the function of traditional religions as spiritual compasses, the centrality of state among all political and social institutions .
 The Russian Orthodox Church is a close domestic partner of the Kremlin . It has called for a further strengthening of its relations with the Russian Orthodox church .
 The Orthodox Church, headed by the energetic Patriarch Kirill since 2009, has cooperated with the Kremlin in an attempt to build the Russian world .
 In geographical terms, this community roughly coincides with the canonical territory of the Russian Orthodox Church, including Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova .
 The Church was also instrumental in the Kremlin’s short-lived attempt to achieve a historic reconciliation with Poland .
 It has been actively engaged in a difficult dialogue with the Roman Catholic Church . It has eyed it as its spiritual ally against aggressive secularism .
 Russia has sought to amplify Russia’s presence in the Middle East by supporting Christians there . It has also sought to raise awareness of Christians there.
 The Kremlin has sought to deepen its ties to Islam over time . The Kremlin, meanwhile, has sought a deeper ties to the Islamic world .
 A decade ago, Putin called Russia a staunch protector of Muslims . In the wake of the second Chechen campaign, Putin said Russia was a staunch defender of Muslims.
 Moscow relies on traditional Islam and moderate Muslim clerics to isolate Islamist radicals . Moscow has been relying on traditional Muslims to isolate radicals .
As Russia reenters the Middle East, the Kremlin relies on domestic allies to carry out a number of diplomatic missions . In addition, Russia relies on foreign allies for diplomatic missions.
 Ramzan Kadyrov has been active in gathering support for Russia across the region . Head of the Chechen Republic Ramzan. Kadyro has been actively supporting Russia in recent years .
 Chechen-staffed units guarded a Russian engineering battalion that was sent on a peacekeeping mission to Lebanon following the 2006 war with Israel .
 Kadyrov and the president of Tatarstan, Rustam Minnikhanov, were active in Moscow’s March 2014 attempt to reach out to the Crimean Tatars . The Tatars are an indigenous minority in Crimea that was important to placate .
 Putin, given his KGB background, is the Russian leader friendliest to the country's Jewish community .
 The community has dwindled dramatically in the last quarter century as a result of mass emigration to Israel . But it still includes some of the leading lights of Russian culture, science, and the arts .
 Putin regularly meets with its leaders and often invokes the Holocaust . Putin often meets with his leaders and frequently invokes Holocaust .
 In Putin's mind, the Jewish people are among Russia's most sincere allies in keeping the memories of World War II and Nazi atrocities in Europe.
 Buddhism, the fourth indigenous religion under Russian law, stands somewhat apart . Buddhism is the fourth ethnic religion under the Russian law .
 It is strongly present in only two Russian regions, Kalmykia on the Caspian Sea and Buryatia in eastern Siberia . It is strong present in just two regions.
 Kremlin respects both republics’ Buddhist legacies and seeks to tie them into Russia’s confessional diversity . Dalai Lama visits to Russia by the spiritual head of Buddhism are not welcome lest they damage Moscow's relations with Beijing .
 Putin’s view of history is measured not in terms of ideology, but rather in the attitude toward the Russian state .
 The czars of the Romanov dynasty, which reigned from 1613 to 1917, were of uneven quality as statesmen, but they were alloyal to Russia, their realm .
 Vladimir Lenin and his fellow Bolshevik revolutionaries were initially against the state and saw Russia as little more than a trigger for a world communist revolution . By contrast, Vladimir Lenin was initially against Russia .
 In the name of an imported ideology, they destroyed traditional Russia . Russia's traditional Russia was destroyed by the ideology .
 Joseph Stalin was guilty of mass atrocities, but he was also a state builder . He led the country’s defense in World War II and then turned the Soviet Union into a superpower .
 Mikhail Gorbachev was most responsible for losing Russia yet again, ushering in the other major geopolitical catastrophe of the twentieth century . His successors were of varying degrees of competence.
 Putin often considers opposition to the existing regime to be tantamount to opposing the Russian state, even the country itself . In the context of Russia’s political system, Putin often thinks opposition to existing regime is tantamount.
 He has even called this a tradition of sorts, going back over a hundred years . He has called it a tradition going back more than 100 years .
 During World War I, the Bolsheviks wished for a Russian military defeat as a way to provoke a revolution . In 1917, Lenin returned to Russia from Switzerland with the assistance of the German military’s high command . Leon Trotsky came back with money collected by socialist sympathizers in the
 For Putin and his associates, preventing a new upheaval in Russia has been a principal concern at least since the 2003–2005 color revolutions in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan .
 Moscow’s responses to those revolutions were dictated not only by geopolitics but also by domestic political considerations . Moscow's responses were dictated by geopolitical and political factors .
 The Kremlin saw both as having been conceived, funded, organized, and guided by the United States . The Kremlin also saw both the Kremlin and the U.S. as being conceived and funded .
 The aim of those operations was to ease Russia away from strategically important areas on its borders . The aim was to turn Ukraine into a military base aligned against Russia .
 Putin has been lashing out at elites who oppose the government’s policies and maintain close ties with or are sponsored by foreign groups .
 Putin construed a link between the Russian liberal opposition and the interests of the country’s foreign competitors, primarily the United States .
 Russia's foreign-funded nongovernmental organizations engaged in "political activity" in Russia, a term very loosely defined .
 The stigma was meant to stick to neutralize foreign-funded protesters as agents of a foreign power .
 Russian police scuffled with demonstrators on eve of 2012 presidential inauguration . More stringent rules were applied to public's activities, including demonstrations, rallies, and marches .
Attacking police officers on duty was regarded as a particularly grave offense . Attacking police on duty is regarded as an especially grave offense.
 In January 2012, leading Russian liberals were given an object lesson in patriotism . Even before that, Russian liberals had been given a lesson.
 The liberals were subjected to a fierce and highly personal campaign by Kremlin loyalists . They had sat down with then U.S. ambassador Michael McFaul on his first meeting on the job in Moscow .
 McFaul was the architect of the Obama administration’s reset policy . McFaul himself was branded a prime instigator of Russia's anti-Putin revolution .
 John Tefft arrived in Moscow in August 2014 . He was credited by the Kremlin-friendly media as the mastermind of the revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine . He had previously served as the United States ambassador .
 Putin: countering revolutionary trends in Russia required consolidating conservative forces . Putin: "naming and shaming" potential troublemakers needed to be more conservative .
 Kremlin has sought to rally forces around traditional values deemed better suited to Russia than Western ideological innovations . Since 2012, the Kremlin has tried to rally those forces aroundtraditional values .
 Putin toyed with the idea of raising the new elites through municipal self-governance . Putin also disciplined the old elites at the top .
 He has sought to promote new, more nationally conscious younger people to important positions . He has also sought to expand his control over the political and economic establishment .
 Putin's system of power is full of internal tensions and dangers, according to the Russian leader .
 Putin’s essential statism and his reliance on the bureaucracy demand that the bureaucracy be protected from foreign influence . Putin is known for his use of statism.
 New regulations include a ban imposed in 2012 on owning assets abroad and a requirement to declare foreign property .
 Government officials are only permitted to have Russian citizenship . They must report contacts with foreigners to the state .
Military and police officers must seek permission to go abroad on vacation and other personal trips . Military and police officer must also seek permission for personal trips to the United States .
Moscow has not formally given up seeking a visa-free regime with the EU and even with the United States . The measures are not exactly aimed at isolating Russians from the rest of the world .
 More official control in areas linked to national security. But they do mean more official control of areas.
 Putin expressed satisfaction that the elites would be less vulnerable to foreign pressure and more controllable inside Russia . U.S. and its allies imposed further sanctions on scores of senior Russian officials .
 He even publicly commended the United States for sanctioning members of the Russian political and economic elites . He said it helped him with his own effort to nationalize them .
 Putin has sought to elevate their thinking and unify them, including some members of the intelligentsia . Putin has tried to unify the elites around a platform of state-centered patriotism .
 The Kremlin has revitalized certain organizations with a reach beyond Russia’s borders . The Russian Geographical Society, the Imperial Russian Historical Society, and the Russian Military Historical Society are among them .
 These societies are patronized by the president and chaired by top officials . State Duma Chairman Sergei Naryshkin, Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin, and Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu .
 Putin has energetically supported efforts to provide Russian schoolchildren with a common view of their country’s history .
 The adult population has been treated to a rich menu of television series about the czarist and Communist periods . The series has sought to show the complexities of Russia’s historical path .
 The primacy of national sovereignty, with strong references to the patriotic wars that Russians fought against foreign invaders, most notably the German Nazis during World War II, chimes with the sentiments of most ordinary Russians .
 The memory of the war against the Nazi invasion is elevated in Russia almost to the level of a secular religion .
 Many ordinary people have become more cautious about the present and the future as a result of the 2008–2009 financial crisis and the growth stagnation that began in 2014, with the country sliding into recession .
 Russia's efforts signify a reversal of the dynamics that have prevailed since the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet communist system . These efforts also signify an open and growing values rift between more traditionalist Russia and the increasingly postmodern European Union .
 Putin has sought to nail down the principles of equality and reciprocity in relations with the U.S. Since the beginning of his third term, Putin has been seeking equality with the West .
 Putin was consistent in his drive to minimize Western support for projects within Russia . He was consistent with his efforts to minimize support for Russia .
 He ordered a review of U.S.-Russian agreements . He ended those that still listed the United States as a donor country and Russia as a recipient of United States aid .
 Russian government gave aid to Russian government as it was disposing of nuclear weapons to carry out treaty-ordered reductions . He did so even when that aid was provided to the Russian government .
 The Cooperative Threat Reduction Program was initiated in 1991 by then U.S. senators Sam Nunn and Richard Lugar . The program was one such example .
 Moscow ended agreements in which the United States was materially supporting Russian law enforcement agencies, particularly in the area of counternarcotics .
For the Kremlin, government policies funded by foreign money were no longer tolerable . For the Kremlin it was not tolerable for the Kremlin .
 The Kremlin also decided not to allow anti-Russian moves in the West to go unanswered .
 The Russian parliament banned the adoption of Russian children by U.S. citizens . The practice had been well established since the 1990s .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs intensified its efforts on behalf of Russians seized in third countries on criminal charges at Washington’s request .
 Where Moscow thought it necessary, tit for tat became an established practice . Where Moscow thinks it needed to be a practice.
 Putin realized in May 2012 that Obama would not come to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit due to the requirements of the United States presidential campaign . He retaliated by pulling out of the U.S.-hosted G8 meeting of the world’s leading industrialized nations at Camp
 Putin had also declined to attend NATO heads of state meeting in Chicago that was to have been held in conjunction with the G8 summit .
Putin explained his absence by arguing that he needed to work on forming a new cabinet, even though this was nominally the job of the new prime minister . Exhibiting virtually the same logic as the president, that domestic issues trump foreign policy considerations .
 The Putin-Obama meeting did eventually take place in June 2012, on the margins of the G20 meeting of the world's major economies in Los Cabos, Mexico .
 The relationship was definitely not helped by the differences over Syria . Syria's relationship with Syria has been a source of controversy .
 Russia did not just protest against U.S. foreign policy; it actively opposed it . For the first time since the end of the Cold War, it did not only protest against it .
 Moscow refused to accept Washington's verdict on Bashar al-Assad’s regime and ramped up its own support for Damascus .
 Russia was only prepared to engage with the U.S. on the basis of equality and compromise, which was not the Obama administration’s idea of cooperation .
 Putin masterfully delivered Assad's acceptance after having stayed the U.S. president’s hand, preventing a strike on Syria . The only time this worked was in 2013 on the issue of Syria's chemical disarmament .
 The U.S.-Russian rift over Syria was compounded by the case of Edward Snowden . The case is the latest in a long line of tensions between the two countries .
 The former U.S. government contractor arrived in Moscow in the summer of 2013 after leaking classified documents to the media . He arrived in the city after leaking numerous classified documents.
 Snowden's saga became a global test of national sovereignty for a whole range of countries . Snowden’s saga became an international test of sovereignty for the entire world .
 China sought to wash its hands of him; Latin American leftist regimes, under U.S. pressure, withdrew their early offers of asylum . EU countries closed their airspace to a Bolivian presidential plane, forcing it to land, because they were tipped off that it might have been carrying
 Russia was only prepared to hand over the fugitive to U.S. authorities if Washington agreed to a mutual extradition treaty . The United States categorically rejected the treaty .
 Putin must have been imagining what the U.S. president would do if a Russian citizen with Moscow's secrets ended up at a major United States airport, he says .
 Putin appeared proud that Russia was the only country that did not bow to the U.S. government’s pressure to hand over contractor-on-the-run .
 Putin was not even deterred by the prospect of Obama canceling a rare visit to Moscow and thus damaging their personal relationship still further .
 In February 2014, Obama and most Western leaders stayed away from the ceremonies associated with the Sochi Olympics . The $50 billion project was intended to be a showcase of modern Russia .
 Snowden's permission to stay in Russia was extended by another three years . Later in 2014, Snowden’s permission to remain in Russia is extended by more than three years.
 Putin looked ready to reconnect with Obama by the summer of 2012 . Putin has made it clear that he was going to deal with his counterpart in Washington strictly on equal footing .
 The U.S. was not the main focus of Moscow’s new foreign policy during the previous reset period .
 Putin's desire to enhance Russia’s independence from the West and build a more balanced relationship with both the U.S. and the European Union . Putin also wants to benefit from the rise of China and East Asia to spur Russia's economic development .
 Putin had already begun to favor regional integration with post-Soviet countries in Eurasia over integration with European Union .
 Moscow and Brussels had reached an agreement on four areas of cooperation in 2004 . But further integration soon stalled .
 Putin put forward his own idea of a ‘Greater Europe’ during a 2010 visit to Germany . It found few takers there or in Europe as a whole .
 Moscow interpreted this as a way to tie those countries more closely to the EU at the expense of Russia’s interests in the region .
 Putin decided to strengthen Russia’s home base and build a power center in the middle of the Eurasian continent . EU's propensity to treat Russia as an object of its policies rather than as an equal partner, Putin decided .
 A key part of Putin’s response was his plan for a Eurasian Economic Union . Putin's response was to a plan for the Eurasian economic Union .
 The word "economic" was only reluctantly and belatedly added to the name . This effort was not just economic; indeed, the word “economic’s” was only reluctant and belately added .
 To Putin, the Eurasian Economic Union was and remains an important means to stake out a space where Russia is still the most influential player . Russia is now the most powerful player in the world .
 It could stop the advance of Russia’s competitors, the EU in the west, China in the east . It could create a better position for bargaining over the terms of engagement with those competitors .
 Putin has begun paying more attention to Asia. Seeking to better balance Europe, Putin has been focusing more attention on Asia .
 Russia's most economically depressed and sparsely populated regions, the Far East and eastern Siberia, physically touch the world’s most dynamic and populous one . This shift is necessary anyway due to the uncomfortable fact that Russia”s most economicallydepressed regions, such as
 Moscow is fully conscious of the changing global economic and political balance, which favors East Asia . Moscow is also fully aware of changing global political and economic balance .
 Moscow has been eager to benefit from Russia’s physical presence in Asia, including its long border with China and proximity to Japan and South Korea . The rise of the non-West as a positive development leading to a global environment with more checks and balances .
 The EU's slow recovery from the euro crisis has added to Russia's urge to rebalance and take into account Asia's growing importance . The EU’s slow recovery.
 Putin's desire to solidify Russia's position both at home and abroad. From Theory to Practice, this turn toward Asia is an example of Putin’s desire tosolidify Russia’'s position in Asia .
 No recent issue has brought Russia’s domestic and foreign policies as intimately together as Crimea and Ukraine . But no recent issue is bringing Russia's foreign and domestic policies together .
 Putin turned the concept of a Russian world, until then a low-key, soft-power exercise, into a geopolitical project . With this crisis, Putin turned this crisis into a political project, says Peter Bergen .
 Russia's policies toward Ukraine were informed by the Kremlin’s competition with the EU in its desire to bring Kiev into the Eurasian integration project . The Kremlin's policy was informed by its competition with EU in 2013 .
 Putin first showed Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych the stick in the form of losses that would be sustained as a result of Ukraine’s choice in favor of association with the EU . Then Putin offered the carrot in the forms of Russian credits, stimulating Ukraine's accession to the
After protests began in Kiev in late November 2013, Moscow used them to send a strongly antirevolutionary message to the Russian people . The message was aimed at convincing them that overthrowing the existing order was a path toward destruction, dictatorship, and misery .
 Russia remained remarkably passive in Ukraine, counting on Yanukovych to cling to power or failing that . At the same time, Russia stayed remarkably passive.
 The Euromaidan revolution in Kiev that reached a climax in February 2014 was scrapped in February . It was the first time the revolution was held in Ukraine .
 Putin put contingency plans for Crimea and Sevastopol into action . In 2008, Ukraine led by people who wanted to bring it into NATO (Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Yulia Tymoshenko)
 He used the armed forces to secure them for Russia and then, in a truly audacious move, held a referendum there . The referendum overwhelmingly supported the territories’ accession to the Russian Federation .
 Putin's decision was Putin's very own and can only be compared to the crossing of the Terek River in Chechnya in the fall of 1999, which represented the beginning of the second Chechen campaign .
 Crimea was incorporated into Russia without a shot being fired, and Putin’s popularity among Russians skyrocketed .
 Moscow began supporting the anti-Euromaidan opposition in Ukraine’s Russophone eastern and southern regions, accounting for around half the country's territory and population .
 Russian-world identity is being protected against Ukraine's western regions and Kiev's pro-Western elites . These efforts were undertaken without serious preparation, simply on the assumption that the Russianspeaking regions would instinctively rise to protect their Russian world identity .
Had Moscow seriously worked over many years to help Russian-speaking Ukrainians find their voice to weigh in on national decisionmaking, it would have assisted in the development of regional elites to balance Kiev .
 Putin mentioned in his March 2014 Crimea speech to parliament. The plan aimed to unify eastern and southern Ukrainian provinces, from Kharkov to Odessa .
 Putin vows to defend the rights of ethnic Russians and those who identify themselves with Russia .
 Moscow placed on issues of language and ethnicity in Ukraine marked a dramatic change from its previous agenda of backing the territorial and political status quo .
 Putin began to implement the ideas of the writer Alexander Solzhenitsyn, who had proposed in 1990, before the fall of the Soviet Union . The state was created on the territory of the then Soviet republics of Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and the mainly Slav-populated northern
 Neighboring countries with large groups of ethnic Russians immediately took note of the change in the Kremlin's policies .
 Belarus and Kazakhstan publicly insisted they would keep full sovereignty even as they acceded to the Eurasian Union . The Baltic states sought support from their NATO allies .
 Within Russia, Putin's popularity shot up to 87 percent in August 2014, 16 one of his highest ratings . Putin’s popularity rose to 87 per cent in August.
 Putin’s policy of materially supporting anti-Kiev militants in eastern Ukraine struck the right balance . For the Russian public as a whole, Putin's policy of supporting armed militants in the province of Donbas struck right balance.
 Putin’s standing up to the pressure of the sanctions that the U.S. and the West imposed on Russia as a result of the 2014 Ukraine crisis won him additional respect among ordinary Russians .
 The Russian government took a series of protective measures in response to the sanctions .
 Moscow decided to go ahead with a national payments system based on China's UnionPay model . In March 2014, Visa and MasterCard’s servicing of some Russian bank cards was interrupted .
 Faced with threat that it would be excluded from the international system of interbank payments . Russia started developing a domestic equivalent .
 Moscow responded with a series of import-substitution measures, as well as its own sanctions against Western agricultural products . The sanctions follow in the wake of the July 2014 downing of a Malaysia Airlines passenger jet in eastern Ukraine .
 Moscow has begun to use the sanctions as a stimulus for domestic production and other activities, such as technological research . With interdependence now seen as a vulnerability rather than an asset, Moscow has started to use it as an asset .
 Russia has intensified efforts to secure Russia’s segment of the Internet . It also demands that all personal data on Russian citizens be kept on servers inside Russia .
 Putin eliminated the tycoons’ influence on policymaking in the early 2000s . The oligarchs are less concerned with nation and state building than the oligarchs .
 The shrinking pie calls for reapportioning assets, all in the name of national mobilization . "The shrinking pie" is the latest in a growing trend of shrinking assets .
 U.S.-led sanctions have even played a major role in helping Putin rally the Russian people around opposition to foreign pressure .
 The Russian public’s attitudes toward the U.S. have grown decidedly negative . Russian public's attitudes toward U.
 Patriotic mobilization has made it impossible to mount anti-Kremlin campaigns of the sort that Moscow and other major cities witnessed in the winter and spring of 2011-2012 .
 An attempt to protest against Putin’s policies on Ukraine in spring 2014 was attended by several times fewer demonstrators than protests two years earlier .
 The so-called Moscow peace march in September 2014 drew a somewhat bigger group, but the authorities had no reason to fear political consequences from this .
 Local and regional elections across the country in the same month demonstrated solid support for pro-Kremlin candidates .
 Putin is the leader closest to a present-day absolute monarch . Russia’s political system is clearly czarist, and Putin is closest to the present day monarch .
 Russian president is not as detached from reality as he is often portrayed in Europe . But the Russian president has not been as detached as he has been in the past .
 European leadership operates in an environment with no parallel elsewhere. Rather, it is the current European leadership that operates in a different environment . The current European leaders operate in a similar environment.
 Putin’s liberal critics long ago lost patience with him, and some Russian elites may feel increasingly uneasy with him . The president manages to stay in touch with ordinary Russian people .
 Vladimir Putin stays in power with consent of the governed, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: This is the secret to Vladimir Putin staying in power .
After seven decades of communism and two decades of official preaching of liberal values, Russian state is now on the rise . Russian state, not ethnic-nationalism, is now in the middle of a renaissance .
 Competition with the United States not only tests the strength of these nationalist leanings but can actually invigorate them .
 Once again, Russians feel threatened by the world’s most powerful country of the day . Response requires mobilizing all available resources, tightening discipline, and rallying around the national leader .
 Russia is under attack in the form of sanctions and other restrictions . His popularity will not stay above 80 percent forever, but for the foreseeable future the bulk of the Russian population will stand by him .
 The Kremlin can plausibly blame them on the economic warfare waged by the West . If severe economic problems develop, the Kremlin can be blamed .
 Putin can draw inspiration from the fact that the Russian people have been historically best at home defense . Russian people are willing to sacrifice much for the common cause .
 In the next few years, there is unlikely to be any letup in the U.S.-Russian confrontation . In the past few years.
 The United States will not accept Russia carving out a sphere of influence in its neighborhood . The U.S. will not allow Russia to carve out a spheres of influence.
 Moscow will continue to defy U.S. global hegemony and act in its own self-interest, guided by its own set of values . Moscow will not seek prior United States or EU approval .
 It will only agree to the norms and principles that are negotiated by all important actors and apply equally to them all . The rules will only be agreed to by all actors .
 confrontation with Russia carries the non-negligible potential of a direct military collision with former Cold War adversaries . But confrontation could have unforeseen consequences .
 Russia and the West should forge a set of strategic confidence-building measures to prevent a clash . The situation in Ukraine in particular must not be allowed to escalate dangerously, says the author .
Official communication between the Kremlin and Western government offices is difficult and mutual trust is nonexistent . reliable channels of communication need to be built and credible dialogue partners found on both sides .
 The West will have to promote engagement and resist by all means to shut Russia out and put pressure on ordinary Russians . The West has to push the urge to shut Russian out and pressure ordinary Russians.
 Vladimir Putin has spent 15 years at the pinnacle of power . Now in his early sixties, he is increasingly concerned with his legacy .
 He probably sees his mission as much more than avoiding a new revolutionary catastrophe in the mold of 1917 .
 He is determined to return Russia to the top as a key member in a new global system of checks and balances . He wants to return the country to a new U.S.-dominated order .
 For Putin, Russia should remain, above all, an independent and influential nation, but for that it must become much stronger than it is now . Russia should be an independent country, but must become more stronger than now .
 Moscow will have to lean closer to Beijing in the near and medium term, apart from defense-driven reindustrialization and import substitution in response to sanctions .
 China is the only major world economy impervious to U.S. calls for sanctioning Russia . China is only major global economy Impervious to calls for sanctions .
 Putin will seek to minimize Moscow’s one-sided dependence on Beijing by developing ties to other BRICS countries . Brazil, India, China, South Africa, and South Africa are among the BRICS nations .
 The U.S. and China are aligning themselves with either of the two poles . In reality, the world is moving toward new bipolarity, this time between the United States and China .
 Europe and Japan would side with the United States, and Russia would go to China . The U.S. and Japan will side with each other, and China would also side with them .
 It has territory, resources, and a sizeable nuclear arsenal, for all that is worth today, but it lacks real economic strength . It is a small nuclear arsenal.
 Unless it deals with this massive deficiency, Russia will not be able to play in the top league . Russia will be unable to play for the first time in a decade .
Given the present circumstances, it will have nowhere to go other than to China . China is the world's most populous country .
 Exit Greater Europe stretches from Lisbon to Vladivostok . The region stretches from Shanghai to St. St. Petersburg .
 Russia needs to turn inward if it is to avoid squandering its resources and ultimately losing its cherished independence to China, if not to the U.S. What Russia needs is to turn toward China, according to the Russian president .
 It needs a new, national class of elites that is based on meritocracy and devotion to the country and its people, not proximity to a leader .
 It also needs fair and transparent domestic regulations that are based on the rule of law and backed by independent courts and a professional law-enforcement apparatus .
 The demonopolization of the Russian economy is also key, including streamlining profligate state corporations and supporting responsible private businesses at all levels .
 Russia should build up a modern science-technology-education complex and administrative system that is accountable to the public . Russia should also build up an administrative system accountable to its public, says the author .
 An alternative would be creating a semi-isolated national regime under one leader that would hardly survive its creator .
 Fred Weir, “Russia’s Plan to Avert Second Cold War,’.
 The Arrest of Vladimir Yevtushenkov Recalls That of Mikhail Khodorkovsky,” Economist, September 20, 2014 .