 The Western Press has now passed along the frenetic Ukrainian government’s claim of a ‘Russian Invasion’ now that the latter is losing its punitive expedition in the East . It is not comforting that the West has now decided to simply pass along.
 Ukraine’s army has lost through a variety of missteps, poor morale, and other factors, but the facts show that it has been nearly completely pushed out of its positions in Eastern Ukraine and suffered significant losses .
 Its performance has been surprising in recent weeks, considering its superiority in arms, equipment, and organization . The company's performance has also been surprising.
 It previously appeared to have pushed the rebels to the brink of extinction in mid-August .
 It is no more a Russian Invasion than Ukraine’s use of Chechen, Belarusian, and Georgian volunteers . It is an invasion of the Donbas region by those countries .
 The evidence of invasion–satellite photos and about 10 out-of-uniform Russian soldiers captured by Ukraine does not suggest anything on the scale of what occurred earlier in Crimea .
 This evidence is consistent with organizational and material help, and the occasional presence of volunteers and adventurers . This evidence shows that volunteers are often involved.
 Most important, even if reports are completely believed, they suggest at most 1,000 Russian troops are involved . Most important. Most important . Even if it is completely believed.
 There are 20,000 plus belligerents or more on either side of this conflict . The conflict is currently being fought on both sides .
 Russian troops might be well equipped and professional, but 1,000 of them cannot defeat an army of 20,000 in a few weeks .
 Most of what one sees is a ragtag rebel army, mostly armed with light equipment, APCs, a handful of tanks, and mortars and artillery pieces . The rebel army includes old men, Soviet and Russian veterans presumably, including Russian veterans .
 Russian probably lent, sold, or gave the rebels the assistance of self-propelled artillery . This is not so unlike the help provided by NATO states in the form of uniforms, intelligence support, body armor, MREs .
 Everyone is getting help, receiving foreign fighters, and other forms of visible and invisible support . People are getting help.
 Ukrainian Army alienated more and more people with its tactics, shelling, and obvious disregard for the citizens of its East . What one has also seen is a well-led and relatively disciplined rebel force that flourished to a greater degree .
 The whole war is an unfortunate, if not altogether preventable, tragedy. That said, that said, the whole war was an unfortunate and preventable tragedy .
 The Ukrainian government's existence was brought about through a violent coup, even as the ink was still wet on a negotiated settlement with the Yanukovich government .
 Ukraine stood up an armed force with minimal training and support, and populated it with patriots and also extremists . Second, Ukraine thereafter stood up a armed force, with minimalTraining and support .
 It then proceeded to shell civilian areas of Donetsk and Lugansk, the main cities in the East, with nary a peep from the West .
 The uniforms of volunteer organizations in Eastern Ukraine have Nazi symbols incorporated into them . We are told ‘Putin in like Hitler’ when the uniforms of these volunteer organizations are worn .
 The generals of Ukraine have abandoned whole units, and we see significant desertions, massacres, low morale, and surrenders among them .
 The West wants to pretend this is some grave injustice and proof of how evil the Russians are . The rebels, fortified no doubt by some Russian help, proceed to beat the Ukrainian government troops and volunteer battalions .
 Europe and the Ukrainian and Russian people are fraternal nations that share a common religion, common history, and common ancestry . This war is an incredible tragedy for Europe and Russia, says Peter Bergen .
 Ukraine in its present form likely cannot continue and cannot be governed. In truth, Ukraine in the present form can't be governed, in truth .
 The Russophone East and the Ukrainian-speaking West have spent much of the last few months at war with one another . There is much love lost and distrust, and the Poroshenko government has alienated both its supporters and its opponents .
 A peaceful settlement, perhaps with a demilitarized zone and UN peacekeepers, is far preferable for everyone involved to this continued, brutal war . A peaceful, negotiated settlement, maybe with a peacekeeper and demilitary zone, would be far preferable .
 The U.S. wants to rush us headlong into war over Ukraine . The same cretins wanted to plunge the United States into a war over Georgia .
 Putin has the trump card here – natural gas, something that can only be shipped economically via pipeline . The gas is a natural gas that can be shipped via a pipeline .
 The United States can't replace that gas through transport by sea tankers . We simply can't move enough of it fast enough to replace Russia’s supplies .
 I think the situation could have been easily resolved, even after the coup, with satisfaction on both sides . I think it would have been easier to resolve, even if the coup had been resolved .
 Acquiesce in the partition of the country, bribing Kiev with aid, debt forgiveness , the promise of EU membership and the continuation of subsidized gas .
 West Ukraine and Georgia agree not to incorporate West Ukraine or Georgia into NATO . The Baltics and other border states also agree to a similar status of forces agreement for East Ukraine .
 I think Russia would have taken the deal, and western Ukraine would have also taken it as well once they knew there was no possibility of military support . I think the deal would have been good for Ukraine, and Russia wouldn't have taken it .
 Economically, it would be decidedly in their interests to cast off the east anyhow . It would be in the interests of the East anyhow.
 Putin has been painted into such a monster that we can’t back down. Even now, such a solution could work, except that we have painted Putin into a monster .
 I think there is a nationalist dimension to the Ukrainians though that does not want to give up one inch of territory . I think the Ukrainians are more nationalist than the Ukrainians .
I also understood a lot of important natural resources, particularly coal, are in the east . I also understood that a number of important resources, including coal, were in the East .
 The East was all that inclined to separate. I’m also not convinced, without massive Russian agitation, the East was also inclined to split .
 There's definitely that nationalism, but it's strongest in the far west . In reality, it has the most differences with the east .
 Ukrainian government's unwillingness to compromise was always predicated on Western support . I think the Ukrainian government’s unwillingness to compromises was alwayspredicated on West support .
 The majority in the east didn't want outright separation, but neither did they want to accept the new government . The majority of the east probably didn’t want outrightseparation, but they didn”t want a separation .
 Crimea would be in permanent political minority status with Crimea gone . With Crimea gone, the Crimea would have been in political minoritystatus .
 Knowing that, they would have demanded some form of autonomy that was close to independence, they could have demanded autonomy . They would have been able to do so if they wanted autonomy .
 Russia would have exploited that situation, and the autonomous provinces would create difficulties in EU integration . Russia would be able to exploit that situation.
 The east would have a lot to gain from European integration, while the east would lose a lot . The east does have more industry, but it is antiquated, and it's antiquated .
 An outright separation would have been strongly opposed in the west . There would also be a mixed reception in the east, says author .
 Both sides could be incentivized to accept separation, says John Sutter . Sutter: It would be a sensible separation, and I think both sides should accept it .
 I think it fits with the history and cultural makeup of the country . I also think it fit with the country's history and culture .
National unity. But perhaps I am approaching things too theoretically and overlooking the strength of sentiment for national unity, says author .