 Ukraine's new president, Petro Poroshenko, takes part in inaugural festivities at St. George's Palace .
 Ukraine is Ukraine's largest country in the world . The country's population is estimated to be at the highest level in the country's history .
 Russia demands the release of two journalists detained by Ukrainian security forces at a checkpoint in the restive east of the country . Agence France-Presse says the journalists were detained by security forces .
 The journalists were working for Russia's Zvezda, or Star channel, which is owned by the Russian defense ministry . The channel airs patriotic programs .
 The reporters were handcuffed and questioned at a checkpoint outside the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk . They were taken away in a helicopter .
 Ukrainian soldier searches a driver at a check-point in the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk on June 6, 2014 .
 Ukraine's National Guard says it detained journalists on suspicion of monitoring and collecting information . The journalists were detained at a checkpoint in Ukraine, the National Guard said .
 The journalists were carrying press accreditation handed out by the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic, the National Guard said .
 The Life News reporters were freed a week later following the intervention of Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov .
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry voiced hope that there would be a breakthrough on ending the Ukraine crisis . Washington could avoid imposing new sanctions against Russia .
 "I'm confident there are ways forward," he said . "Our hope is that we won't have to move to more serious sanctions and other steps," he added .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered the border service to reinforce the state border with Ukraine .
 Putin issues order for border guards to take all necessary measures to prevent illegal crossings . Kiev admitted Thursday that three of its border posts had been seized by separatists .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko called in his inaugural speech for separatists in the east of the country to lay down their arms . He said he would guarantee a safe corridor for Russian fighters to go home .
"I want peace and I want peace to happen," Poroshenko told parliament after taking the oath . Poroshenko said he wants peace "to happen"
 Ukraine's new President Petro Poroshenko looks on during a ceremony of his inauguration in Kyiv .
 Petro Poroshenko was sworn in as Ukraine's fifth post-Soviet president on Saturday . Russia has been in a continuing crisis with the Ukraine since 2008 .
 Poroshenko, a 48-year-old billionaire who won the presidential election on May 25 with 54. percent of the vote, took the oath in the Ukrainian parliament .
 He vowed to maintain the unity of his country, as the east is embroiled in an uprising by pro-Russian rebels .
 Poroshenko promised the residents of the Donbass region that he would decentralize power and guarantee the free use of the Russian language . The region is largely in rebel hands .
 Poroshenko said there would be no compromise with Russia on his pro-European stance and the status of the Crimean peninsula . At his inauguration, he said he would not compromise on the issue .
 An armed pro-Russian militant holds hands with his girlfriend in front a barricade at a check-point in the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk on June 6, 2014 .
 A woman and her daughter walk in front burned vehicles in the eastern Ukrainian city of Kramatorsk on June 6 .
Pro-Russian separatists seized the city hall in the eastern Ukrainian city of Kramatorsk on June 6, 2014 .
 Young people walk past a barricade at a check-point in the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk on June 6, 2014 .
 Pro-Russian separatists shot down a Ukrainian army plane as fighting raged in the eastern town of Slovyansk . Pro-European billionaire businessman Petro Poroshenko was inaugurated as Ukraine's president Friday .
 Vyacheslav Ponomaryov said Antonov An-30 intelligence plane had been shot down . The self-appointed mayor of the city said an Antonov intelligence plane was shot down.
"The residents who saw it applauded," Ponomaryov told Reuters by telephone . "The residents ... saw it applaud," he said .
 A spokesman for Ukraine's "Anti-terrorist operation" or ATO later confirmed the plane had been shot down . But said it was an An-26 transportation plane carrying humanitarian aid .
 The Ukrainian army and defense ministry were not available to comment on the reports . The Ukrainian Army and Defense ministry are not available.
 A photographer in Slovyansk, a city of 130,000 people in the province of Donetsk bordering Russia, said she saw the plane, visibly on fire, slowly descending but did not see it crash .
 Residents said the sounds of shelling reverberated around the city on Friday . Residents said they heard the sound of shelling .
 One separatist in Slovyansk told Reuters there had been shooting in the city center . He did not know how many people were killed .
 Pro-Russian militants run near their check-point in the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk on June 6 .
 Resident Larissa Akincheva said she stayed away from her work as a store clerk due to the heavy shelling .
 There are signs that an increasing number of families are fleeing the violence in the two regions . There are also signs that a number of people are fleeing.
 Donetsk airport is still closed after heavy fighting almost two weeks ago . People are taking to their cars and driving to the border .
 A queue of more than 40 cars inched along the hot sun-warmed tarmac toward the Russian border .
 Pedestrians cross the Ukrainian-Russian border at the Ukrainian check-point of Izvarino in the Luhansk region, eastern Ukraine, on June 6, 2014 .
Residents who feared getting caught in the crossfire between Ukrainian soldiers and rebels have started leaving Luhansk . Residents are leaving the eastern city.
 "In some offices people were allowed to leave work early to race home," RFERL reported .
 A power vacuum has developed in Luhansk, since separatists took over the regional administration building late in April . Officials have intimidated elected officials into silence .
 RFERL report paints a grim picture of how life has changed for civilians in eastern Ukraine since the beginning of the crisis .
 People walk on platform of a railway station in Odessa after arriving by train from the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk on June 6, 2014 .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said he welcomed plans put forward by Ukrainian president-elect Petro Poroshenko . Putin had a brief initial meeting with Poroshenko earlier this week . Putin said on Friday that he welcomed the plans to stop violence in Ukraine .
 Ukraine must stop what he called a "punitive" military operation in its southeast region . He also warned Russia would retaliate with measures to protect its economy if Kyiv signed an association pact with the European Union .
 Obama urged Russia's Vladimir Putin during a brief informal meeting in France on Friday . Obama urged Putin to seize the opportunity to ease tensions in Ukraine after the election of Petro Poroshenko as president .
 Ukraine’s border service announced on Friday it had closed eight checkpoints along its porous eastern border with Russia . Kyiv's increasingly fragile grasp over its eastern frontier under the weight of rebel attacks .
 Ukrainian officials say a steady influx of fighters and supplies from Russia has fed the insurgency in the east . It also arrives amid claims by Ukrainian officials that the Kremlin disputes that the influx is fueling the insurgency .
 Both rebel leaders and volunteers have recently freely admitted that fighters from across Russia have traveled to eastern Ukraine to take up arms against the military . But both rebels and volunteers themselves have recently admitted that they have been involved .
 Pro-Russian armed militants stand guard at a barricade in front of a regional state building seized by separatists in Luhansk on June 2, 2014 .
 separatists have staged brazen raids on bases in the Luhansk Region . They reportedly forced guards into abandoning several of them . The rebel leadership has declared a “People’s Republic ofLuhansk’Sansk”
 Ukraine’s State Border Guard Service says it had fought off a separatist attack late Thursday night at a border crossing in the neighboring Donetsk Region . A number of rebel vehicles were destroyed .
 Ukrainian President-elect Petro Poroshenko and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, met on the sidelines of a D-Day commemoration ceremony in Normandy on Friday . They agreed on the need to speed up the peace process .
 Poroshenko, who will be sworn in on Saturday, has promised a swifter and more effective military operation . Kyiv has pitched as an ""anti-terror" operation against the rebels .
 An alleged air strike on the separatist-controlled Luhansk regional administration building earlier this week killed eight civilians and strengthened rebels’ resolve . But that goal has so far proven elusive, especially after an alleged air strikes on the building .
 Ukrainian officials blamed the attack on a botched attempt by rebels to shoot down a fighter jet . Ukrainian officials blame the attempt on the botched attempt.
 The increased violence has spurred Russia to call for a humanitarian corridor . Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev claims that thousands of civilians have flocked to Russia .
 Ukrainian officials disputed that claim, saying no such humanitarian crisis exists . Ukrainian officials, however, said no such crisis exists.
 Poroshenko will likely outline his plan for calming the crisis in eastern Ukraine in his inaugural address on Saturday . Poroshenko is expected to outline his plans in his first address .
 Pro-Russian separatists operating from the grounds of a church in the eastern city of Slovyansk killed a member of the Ukrainian interior ministry's special forces . Two others were wounded in a mortar attack on Friday, the ministry said .
 Slovyansk has been at the heart of a two-month insurgency in the Russian-speaking east . rebels opposed to the overthrow of a Moscow-leaning president and the formation in Kyiv of a pro-European government .
 Fighting in the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk has intensified since the election of Petro Poroshenko as president on May 25 . It followed the fall and flight of the pro-Moscow Viktor Yanukovych in February .
 A picture taken on June 6, 2014 shows a destroyed building of the Dubrava camping camp in a forest near the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk .
 The new incident took place on the eve of the inauguration in Kyiv of Petro Poroshenko as president .
 The pro-Western businessman has promised to unveil a peace plan soon to end the rebellions in the east .
Ukrainian forces fended off an attack by separatists on a border post about 95 km to the east of Donetsk .
 The Border Guard service said 15 separatists had been killed in the attack . Five Ukrainian personnel were wounded in Thursday's attack, the service said .
 The rebels’ two armored personnel carriers, one had the name of the separatist formation "Battalion Vostok" painted on it . A military transport vehicle covered in bullet holes stood abandoned at the checkpoint .
 separatists say they have no information about losses from the rebel side . A spokeswoman for the separatists said she had no information from the rebels .
 The leaders of Russia and Ukraine met on Friday for the first time since Moscow annexed Crimea . World leaders commemorated the 70th anniversary of the World War Two D-Day landings in France .
 French President Francois Hollande and German Chancellor Angela Merkel met Russia's Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian president-elect Petro Poroshenko for a 15-minute meeting . The meeting was held before an official lunch for visiting world dignitaries .
 Angela Merkel, Petro Poroshenko and Vladimir Putin seen after lunch in Benouville, France . German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Russian President Vladimir Putin met in France .
 Hollande's office said the two men shook hands and agreed that detailed talks on a ceasefire between Kyiv government forces and pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine would begin within a few days .
 They discussed political steps to de-escalate the crisis including Russian recognition of Poroshenko's election as well as economic relations . They also discussed the possibility of de- escalating the crisis .
 The president invited Poroshenko to Normandy as his personal guest at the last minute in an effort to break the ice between Moscow and Kyiv . Fighting continues in eastern Ukraine between government forces and pro-Russian separatists .
 World leaders and veterans earlier paid tribute to soldiers who fell in the liberation of Europe from Nazi German rule . Allied forces landed on Normandy beaches on June 6, 1944 .
 Wreaths, parades and parachute-drops honored history's largest amphibious assault . 160,000 US, British and Canadian troops waded ashore to confront German forces . The assault hastened the advent of peace in Europe .
 President Barack Obama joined Hollande to commemorate victory and reaffirm US-French solidarity . The 9,387 white marble headstones of fallen U.S. soldiers are at the Normandy American Cemetery .
 The U.S. should press Ukraine's new leader to stop violence and talk to separatists, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov says .
 Lavrov said Ukraine's pro-Western government should take the first step to stop the fighting . Lavrov voiced confidence its opponents in eastern Ukraine's Luhansk and Donetsk regions would follow suit .
 The G7 leaders, holding a summit without Russian President Vladimir Putin, threatened to impose harder-hitting sanctions on Russia if it does not help restore stability to eastern Ukraine . Pro-Russian militias operate at will.
 Lavrov and Kerry met a day before commemorations of the 70th anniversary of the D-Day landings . The D- Day landings helped an Alliance including the United States, Britain and the Soviet Union defeat Nazi Germany .
 Ukrainian soldiers man a checkpoint near Slovyansk in the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine on June 4, 2014 .
 Russia said on Thursday its ambassador to Kyiv would attend the inauguration of Ukrainian president-elect Petro Poroshenko . Russia has criticized Ukraine's attempts to crush pro-Russian separatists .
Kyiv has intensified its "anti-terrorist operation" since Poroshenko was elected on May 25 . Scores of separatist fighters and Ukrainian troops have been killed in heavy fighting in eastern Ukraine .
 It was unclear whether any other Russian officials would attend Poroshenko's inauguration ceremony on Saturday .
 Pro-Russia militants guard a check-point on the outskirts of the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk on June 4, 2014 .
Unverified video purporting to show separatist leader overseeing execution of two men . Earlier on Thursday, a disturbing but unverified video made the rounds on social media .
 acting President Oleksander Turchynov's official statement on the video may point to the video actually being authentic . Kyiv Post's Christopher Miller writes that acting president's statement on video might point to video being authentic.
 Turchynov "vowed to avenge the men's deaths and said he holds Russia's leadership responsible for their execution," according to the Kyiv Post .
 The separatist leader thought to be speaking in the video is Igor Bezler, nicknamed "Bes" which means "Demon" in Russian . He is thought to have been speaking in a video .
 The two men supposedly executed are believed to be a Ukrainian activist and the head of the local Ukrainian Security Service in Artemivsk . The men are thought to be Ukrainian activists and security service head .
 At this moment, all agreements have been violated by the Ukrainian side . At this time, all agreement has been violated .
 Turchynov warns that another pair will be shot within an hour, and two more at one and a half hours, and so on, until all the officers in captivity are dead . He warns that the next pair of officers will be killed in an hour .
 The Interpreter's live blog has more on whether this video could be authentic or fake . It's not clear if this video is real or fake.
 The United States will strengthen its presence in the Black Sea region, Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel says . The U.S. will continue to send warships to the area, Hagel said .
 The tour coincides with a visit by President Barack Obama to Poland this week . Obama promised to increase military support for eastern European NATO members .
 Formerly a secretive Communist state, Romania is now a member both of NATO and the European Union . Romania is a member of both NATO and EU .
 Bucharest has hosted joint military exercises with U.S. forces on its soil . Bucharest is among the staunchest supporters of Western sanctions against Russia .
 Hagel was on a visit to the Romanian port Constanta, which recently hosted United States ships carrying out the navy exercises . The Aegis guided missile cruiser USS Vella Gulf is currently berthed .
 The $1 billion fund will allow for a "stronger presence of United States ships in the Black Sea," Hagel said . The presence of the Vella Gulf was an expression of Washington's commitment to regional security .
 The guided-missile frigate USS Taylor and the Turkish frigate TCG Turgutries conduct a tactical maneuvering exercise on May 11, 2014 .
 Seven of the world's leading industrialized nations met in Brussels over Wednesday and Thursday . Russia was pointedly not invited .
 This is the first Group of Seven meeting that did not include Russia since the 1990s . This was the first group of seven meeting that didn't include Russia .
 President Barack Obama said on Thursday Russian President Vladimir Putin must recognize and work with Ukraine's new government and stop "provocations" along its border . Obama said Russia must recognize the new government, or face tougher sanctions from G7 group of nations .
 Vitali Klitschko is the leader of Ukraine's UDAR party . He was elected as Kyiv's mayor on Thursday morning . He took his oath of office on Thursday .
 Klitschko was one of the opposition leaders at the forefront of Maidan protests in Kyiv's Independence Square .
 He was a presidential candidate in Ukraine's elections until he withdrew and threw his support behind the eventual winner, Petro Poroshenko . He was also a presidential candidates in Ukraine.
 Klitschko was the World Boxing Council's reigning heavyweight champion . Before turning to politics, he was the WBC's reigning champion .
 Senior Correspondent Dan Peleschuk talked to Klitschko about his political aspirations long before the Ukraine crisis began .
 Ukrainian President-elect Petro Poroshenko said he would try to secure support at meetings with world leaders in France this week . He may discuss the question with Russian leader Vladimir Putin, he said .
 Poroshenko said it would involve de-centralization of power to the region, local elections, and an amnesty offer . He discussed it with U.S. President Barack Obama on a visit to Poland .
 Ukrainian leaders have mooted similar proposals in the past but they have been quickly discarded . Pro-Russian separatists and government forces have been mounting this week .
 Poroshenko, Putin, Obama and most European leaders will be at commemorations in Normandy, France this week . The 70th anniversary of the D-Day landings during World War Two will be marked in Normandy .
 The amnesty would be offered to "people who did not commit crimes" without elaborating . He said he would offer the amnesty to those who didn't commit crimes .
 Ukraine's government, backed by Poroshenko, is conducting a security operation to try to defeat pro-Moscow insurgents in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia has accused Kyiv of violating international law . There has been heavy loss of life, and Kyiv has been accused of violating law .
 Senior Correspondent Dan Peleschuk traveled to the pro-Ukrainian region of Dnipropetrovsk as violence raged between pro-Russian militants and Ukrainian forces .
 bullets fly and artillery shells explode in parts of rebel-held eastern Ukraine . Dnipropetrovsk, Ukraine, is a city in the east .
 Dnipropetrovsk has emerged as a pro-Ukraine stronghold while a separatist insurgency rages on next door . A southeastern region that borders the violence-plagued east has emerged.
 To those familiar with Ukraine’s social and political divide, that might seem somewhat strange .
 The separatist conflict in the neighboring region of Donetsk has provoked a strong counter-reaction . But as the conflict intensifies, it has provoked what observers describe as a strongcounter-re action .
 Dnipropetrovsk is not a bastion of Ukrainian nationalism, like large parts of western Ukraine . It's not because it’s not a Bastion of Ukraine, but it's not.
 Ukraine's Dnipropetrovsk is a city in Ukraine's Donetsk region . The region has been in Ukraine for more than a decade .
 Lampposts along a main road that leads to the regional capital are painted with the colors of Ukraine’s flag . towering billboards feature patriotic messages .
 Ukrainian flags drape from buildings and hang from car antennae in the city of Dnipropetrovsk .
Former President Leonid Kuchma and former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko are among Ukraine's most famous politicians .
 Tymoshenko cast her ballot in last month’s presidential election in this city . On a side note, she voted in the presidential election .
New Kyiv authorities installed Ihor Kolomoisky as the region’s governor . He was credited with reining in would-be separatists . The new authorities installed him after Yanukovych's ouster .
 One of Kolomoisky’s more controversial methods has been to offer cash bounties for armed separatists and their weapons .
 He also launched an anti-separatist police force and a local ‘self-defense’ unit . Both of the units are reportedly funded in part by local businessmen .
 Kolomoisky opened a dialogue with pro-Russian elements and others displeased with the government . The most striking action was to compromise by opening up a dialogue .
 Borys Filatov, a local business tycoon who now serves as a deputy to Kolomoisky, outlined that approach in an interview last month .
 Dnipropetrovsk seemed unlikely to descend into the same pro-Russian frenzy . But even before the separatist crisis unfolded in Ukraine’s east, it seemed unlikely .
 Bogatyrev, who edits the independent Popular Newspaper, called the separatist east an “enclave’s long sought to pitch itself as a unique region . The separatist east is a region whose decrepit factories and coalmines feed Ukraine's budget .
 separatist movement in Donetsk and Luhansk was fueled by angry pensioners and disenfranchised, blue-collar workers . The separatist movement is fueled by anger from pensioners.
 Dnipropetrovsk, Bogatyrev pointed out, is not only better off economically than its eastern neighbors, it's also more diverse culturally and socially .
Unlike its eastern neighbors, this region doesn't seem to share a burning nostalgia for the USSR's heyday .
 During the months-long pro-European protests known as “Euromaidan,’ activists staged sizeable pro-Ukraine protests . Some of which reportedly outnumbered the pro-Russian demonstrations that were held simultaneously .
 Dnipropetrovsk’s renewed patriotism is natural or state-sponsored . Some locals find they’re ready to fight for the cause .
 Sergei Seroklin, a 40-year-old handyman, approached a downtown recruiting station for the “territorial self-defense battalion,” eager to sign up . The battalion is called ‘territory self- defense battalion’
 The flyer posted outside guaranteed enlisted men $500 per month and officers up to $840, as well as legal support and insurance . The flyer was posted outside.
 Seroklin, a stout, muscular man with military experience, says he wasn't a particularly ardent supporter of the anti-Yanukovych demonstrations .
 Petro Poroshenko was elected in a landslide vote last month . The billionaire chocolate magnate is a big fan of Ukraine’s president .
 Seroklin says watching his country slide deeper into turmoil is not an option . But he says watching the country slide further into turmoil isn't an option.
 Andrei Bander, 37, said he feared he would not be back any day soon . Bander's four-year-old daughter is on his hip, he said .
 We will head to Russia though because it's clear we need to leave Ukraine . We will go to Russia but we will leave Ukraine because it is clear it needs to be left .
 "I don't see anything good left here," he says . "I'm waiting for a taxi in the no man's land beyond the check point," he said .
 Some families were trying to leave. Some men waited in their cars to get back to the town but were not being let through the roadblock by Ukrainian forces .
 Soldiers fired warning shots in the air when one car tried to drive up to the check point . One car, coming from the direction of Slovyansk, tried to get into the car park .
 Children and their mothers leave the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk on June 4, 2014 for safety .
 NATO's top military commander accused Russia of destabilizing eastern Ukraine through the use of Russian-backed forces . NATO's chief military commander demanded that it stop interfering .
 Most troops had withdrawn or were in the process of withdrawing, U.S. Air Force General Philip Breedlove says . Some appeared intent on staying, he says .
 "It is very clear that the Russian influence is a part of this," he said . "It's very clear" that Russia's influence is "very clear"
 US Secretary of State John Kerry has raised concerns with Moscow about reports of Chechens crossing into Ukraine from Russia to join rebels .
 Ukrainian Defense Minister Mykhailo Koval attends a defense ministers meeting at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization headquarters in Brussels on June 3, 2014 .
 The narrative is unclear, as the BBC reported that separatists "seized" a border guard base and a National Guard base . The Associated Press said Ukrainian forces ""abandoned"" a military outpost in Luhansk .
 Ukrainian forces left their post after running out of ammunition in an hours-long gun battle with pro-Russian militants .
 Luhansk saw a day-long exchange of gunfire on Monday . Each side blamed the other for an explosion that killed at least two people .
 rebels said the destruction was caused by a Ukrainian air strike . Ukraine said it was the result of a misfired heat-seeking missile launched by rebels .
 Tracer bullets fired by pro-Russian militants at the patrol service regiment of the National Guard of Ukraine based in eastern Ukraine .
 The separatists seized the building of the patrol service regiment of the National Guard of Ukraine based in the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk .
 A pro-Russian militant examines damaged Kalashnikov rifles at the National Guard of Ukraine building in Luhansk .
 Government forces pressed on with an offensive in eastern Ukraine on Wednesday, claiming they had inflicted heavy losses on separatist fighters . The rebels denied this claim, though this was denied by the rebels .
 Aleksander Boroday, "prime minister" of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic, was quoted as saying by Interfax news agency .
 Two servicemen have been killed and 45 wounded, a government spokesman says . The fighting is described as "heavy," the spokesman says.
 Ukrainian troops man a check-point near the eastern Ukrainian city of Slovyansk, Donetsk region on June 4, 2014 .
 The offensive in Slovyansk followed a daylong firefight on Monday in Luhansk, a town further to the east on the Russian border .
A resident of a nearby apartment block said she saw guns and ammunition being removed from the base .
 President Barack Obama called Ukraine's President-elect Petro Poroshenko a ""wise selection" to lead the country . Obama pledged more military aid to help address security threats from Russian-backed separatists .
 Obama spoke to reporters after a meeting with Poroshenko in Warsaw . He said they discussed the new leader's plan to restore peace, boost economic growth and reduce energy dependence on Russia .
 US President Barack Obama and President-elect Petro Poroshenko of Ukraine hold a meeting in Warsaw, Poland on June 4, 2014 .
Senior military and security officials informed acting President Oleksander Turchynov of the "anti-terrorist" operation's success in parts of the Donetsk region .
 Many of the town's women and children have left in recent days as the fighting got worse . Many of them have left the town as fighting gets worse .
 Daria, 27, said she was trying to leave with her daughter . "We counted the number of fires and impacts," she said by telephone .
 A woman leaves with her daughter during a shoot-out between pro-Russia militants and border guards in Luhansk, eastern Ukraine on June 2, 2014 .
 He puts the number of dead and wounded on the separatists side at about 300 . He put the number on the separatist side at 300 .
 Petro Poroshenko called for a resumption of military operations by government forces to quell rebellions by pro-Russian militia across the Russian-speaking east . President-elect Poroshenko scored a resounding election victory on May 25 .
 Ukraine's new president meets world leaders this week ahead of his inauguration next Saturday . Tensions high between Ukraine and Russia are likely to dominate diplomatic exchanges .
 No formal talks are planned for President Obama and other European leaders in Warsaw . He is expected to meet with Obama and European leaders on Wednesday . He will see Russia's Vladimir Putin at World War Two D-day celebrations in France .
 Emergency doctors evacuate a wounded border guard from the Federal Border Headquarters building in the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk on June 3, 2014 .
 The U.S. is reviewing its military presence in Europe as a result of Russia's intervention in Ukraine, the White House says . The White House is on a four-day European trip by President Obama .
 Obama will call on Congress to support a "European Reassurance Initiative" of up to $1 billion to increase U.S. military rotations .
 The effort would involve increased participation by the U.S. Navy in NATO naval force deployments . It would include "more persistent deployments" to the Black and Baltic seas .
 Agence France-Presse has more on the proposed European Reassurance Initiative . The European Union has also proposed a European ReAssurance Initiative.
 Fighting raged in eastern Ukraine for the second straight day on Tuesday as the army rolled out an offensive against pro-Russia separatists holding the city of Slovyansk . The army claimed to have inflicted losses on the rebels .
 The fighting follows a day-long fire-fight on Monday in Luhansk, a town further east on the border with Russia . The fighting followed an attack by separatists on a border guard camp.
 At least two people were killed in the city center of Luhansk, which like Slovyansk is under separatist control . rebels say the blast came from a Ukrainian air strike but Ukrainians say it was caused by a misfire of a heat-seeking missile .
 The Kyiv government says the fighting is fomented by Russia, which opposes its pro-Western policies . It accuses Russia of allowing volunteer fighters to cross into Ukraine to fight alongside rebels .
 A teenager examines burned cars near a Federal Border Headquarters building in the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk .
"If they refuse to lay down their arms they will be destroyed," says Vladyslav Seleznyov, a spokesman .
 He could not confirm reports of wounded on the Ukrainian side around Slovyansk . He said there were preliminary reports of dead and wounded among the separatist fighters .
 A Ukrainian military column was attacked on its way to Slovyansk from its base in Izyum, to the north-west . Defense analyst Dmytro Tymchuk, who is recognized as having good military sources, says one person was killed on the Ukrainian side .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry threw its weight behind the separatists' argument . It called the reported strike a crime committed by Kyiv against its own people .
 At least two people were killed and several injured in an explosion in Luhansk on Monday . separatists controlling the eastern Ukrainian city said the explosion was result of an air strike by the Ukrainian military .
 Kyiv side said it was caused by separatists who had launched a heat-seeking rocket at a Ukrainian plane . But the missile had zeroed in instead on the rebel-occupied regional administration building .
 A video clip published by local people on a Russian social media page showed two bodies lying in parkland near the main regional building . One of the bodies was that of a woman, according to the clip .
 Interfax quoted unnamed separatist sources as giving a higher death toll of five . The death toll is said to be higher than five .
 The video shows a man pumping the chest of a prone victim to resuscitate him . Other people carried other casualties in makeshift stretchers made of blankets .
Malysh quoted eyewitnesses as saying more than 10 wounded had been taken to the main regional hospital . Malysh quotes eyewitnesses saying 10 wounded were taken to main hospital .
 Defense analyst Dmytro Tymchuk says Ukrainian security chiefs have begun a "full-scale operation to neutralise terrorist groups" in Luhansk . Earlier, defense analyst said Ukraine had reliable military sources .
 Vladyslav Seleznyov denied there had been any air strike against the regional administration offices . He said the operation against the separatists was against the government .
 He acknowledged air strikes against two separatist checkpoints in Luhansk region . But he acknowledged air attacks against two checkpoints in the region .
 A heat-seeking device was launched but it fell on fighters themselves and destroyed part of the wall of the administration building .
 Separatists had fired the missile from the roof of the state security building they are occupying . It homed in on the main administration building, also held by the rebels, a senior military official said .
 Recruits of volunteer battalion Donbass take part in military exercises on the shooting range of Ukrainian National guards near Novo-Petrictsi village, near Kiev .
 For weeks, the hulking administration building was home to the disenfranchised, largely blue-collar masses that’d driven the protest movement here .
 Inside the Soviet-era monolith, the corridors were scattered with broken furniture and festooned with anti-Kyiv slogans and crude denouncements of both Ukrainian and Western leaders .
 The separatists’ answer to the sprawling barricades and tent encampments of Maidan . It was the nerve center of the months-long anti-government protests in Kyiv .
 Vostok Battalion fighters cleared most of them out of the building within hours, leaders say . The move was aimed at rooting out looters and other ruffians that had plagued their ranks .
Men from eastern Ukraine, Russia and Ossetia cleaned their weapons side by side in a former Ukrainian army base . Now the headquarters of a separatist militia in the city of Donetsk, Donetsk .
 Battalion Vostok — or the East Battalion — is a heavily armed, well-organized fighting group that has burst onto the scene in Ukraine's Russian-speaking east . It appears to be seeking to lead the fight to prise the region from Kyiv.
 The group encountered at the former Ukrainian base included at least five fighters from the Russian Caucasus region of North Ossetia and from a Russian-backed enclave of Georgia .
 They acknowledged they had been fighting alongside Chechens from Russia's former rebellious region of Chechnya . But they said they had now gone home .
 The presence of fighters from Russia and other parts of former Soviet space is likely to feature prominently in talks this week . Ukraine's President-elect, Petro Poroshenko, meets President Barack Obama and later, possibly, Russia's Vladimir Putin .
 Pro-Russian armed militants of Vostok Battalion rest near the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk on June 1, 2014 .
 South Ossetia is a Russia-dependent breakaway region of Georgia . It is populated by the same, mostly Orthodox ethnic group as the northern part of Georgia.
 In 2008, Moscow and Tbilisi fought a brief war over South Ossetia . Russia now considers an independent state, though it is unrecognized internationally .
 Russia's envoy to NATO accused the Western alliance of encouraging the use of force by the Ukrainian government in eastern Ukraine . Russian news agency RIA reported .
Alexander Grushko met ambassadors of NATO member states in Brussels . He said "unprecedented activity by the alliance near Russia's borders was adding to tension and could undermine existing security arrangements .
 NATO envoys accuse Russia of backing armed rebels in Ukraine . The Ukraine crisis has brought ties to a post-Cold War low, an alliance spokeswoman says .
 NATO suspended all practical cooperation with Russia in April to protest its annexation of Crimea . It left the door open to contacts at ambassadorial level or higher .
 The Western military alliance has sought to reassure eastern European allies alarmed by Russia's takeover of Crimea . It has stepped up exercises and sent more fighter aircraft and ships to region .
State-run RIA quoted Grushko as saying it is excessive, inappropriate, and weakens stability, security and predictability in the Euro-Atlantic region .
 He said that "demonstrations of military muscle and calls for increased military spending" were "a dead-end street" He called for increased spending in the military .
 Ukrainian President-elect Petro Poroshenko and the pro-Western authorities in Kyiv defy Russia's calls for an end to the government's military operation against pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 NATO allies commended Ukraine's May 25 presidential election as a clear vote for the unity of the country . Russia urged Russia to "engage constructively" with Poroshenko, a spokeswoman says .
 They also called on Russia "to stop the flow of arms and weapons across the border, to stop supporting armed separatists in Ukraine"
 Pro-Russian militants of the so-called 'Eastern battalion' rest at a camp in the forest near the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk .
 It appears there was an explosion of some kind in Luhansk, following the attack by separatists .
 What remains unclear is what caused the explosion, and who was responsible for it .
 The Ukrainian military have denied any air strike in Lugansk, saying most probably something detonated in the building . The military say most probably the explosion was in a building .
 The pro-Russia crowd are adamant that one of the SU 27s that flew overhead hit the building with some kind of missile . Pro-Russia fans are adamant one of them flew overhead.
Firemen climb to Regional State building seized by separatists after explosion in Ukrainian city of Luhansk .
 A pro-Russian militia attacked a Ukrainian border post with automatic weapons and grenade launchers in the early hours of Monday .
 Security sources say a force of separatists had occupied the upper floors of a nearby apartment block . They were shooting into the border post on the southern edge of Luhansk .
 border post spokesman Oleh Slobodin: "There has been no let-up in firing for seven hours now" Border post spokesman says there has been "no let up in firing"
 Pro-Russian militants and firemen run away as they leave the Regional State building they seized during a shoot-out with Ukrainian border guards in the eastern Ukrainian city of Luhansk .
 Ukraine's eastern region has been riven with separatist armed rebellion for the past two months . The Kyiv government says it is fomented by Russia .
 armed fighters from Russia and the Caucasus region are fighting alongside rebels who are fighting rule from Kyiv . It says armed fighters are fighting along with rebels from the region .
 Ukrainian border service says separatists at Luhansk border post were sniping from private apartments . The separatists had stopped people leaving the residential block they had occupied .
 The Ukrainian army is taking part in an "anti-terrorist" operation to try to crush rebellions in the east . The army is trying to crush the rebels in the East .
 Border guards said on Monday that the army had not yet reinforced to help them fend off the attack in Luhansk .