 Russia is opposed by the USA, NATO, the EU and the rest of the world if necessary . These enemies are demonized and appear as a home of evil, says the author .
 Global conspiracy, Jews and Masons continue their existence in the Russian propaganda .
Images of the fascists as a symbol of evil and the Victory as a triumph of good were formed . These ideas were the basis of the Soviet identity, which is still there .
 propaganda causes emotional reactions which are often stronger than rational arguments . By manipulating these ideas, propaganda causes emotions to be stronger thanrational arguments .
 The situation in Ukraine was intentionally moved into the plane of this myth . It makes the whole system immune to rational denial, shifting the conflict from the rational to the emotional sphere .
 Moscow is their ally, inspirer and patron . Since the USSR is identified with Russia, all who struggle against fascism, continue the cause of Russia, and Moscow is its ally .
 Events in eastern Ukraine are in a strange way covered along with historical overviews . Events in the region are often covered in history and history .
 References to "Great Victory" are inserted everywhere in propaganda texts . References to the ""Great Victory"" are inserted throughout the texts .
 It's hard to say which entity in the east and south in one way or another does not support this myth . It's not clear which entity is in the south or east or east.
 Even Ukraine itself regularly, at least once a year on relevant dates, continues to glorify the Great Victory . Even Ukraine has a history of its own history, and its history continues to be celebrated .
 Russia speaks of itself as the centre of the Slavic world and cultivates "Slavic" and "Eurasian" identity for its audience .
 The myth about the "triune people" and "brotherly nations" is being actively spread in Ukraine . The myth was invented by the Soviet propaganda .
 It is also worth mentioning the associated myth about the "Russian world" as an environment of Russian language and mentality .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is expected to make a speech in Moscow on February 14 . Putin's government has said it will not comment on the issue .
 The idea that Ukrainian and Russian soldiers can shoot each other was unacceptable . The idea was in the category of fiction, it was in a fiction category .
 The myth quickly dispelled this myth for many Ukrainian . Fortunately, the reality quickly dispelling this myth quickly .
 Those who preferred the myth, perceived Ukrainians as enemies and traitors, were perceived as enemies . Those who prefer the myth were also perceived as traitors .
Working with the population in occupied territories, Crimea, February 2014 . The Crimea is the region of Crimea .
 In Crimea, this myth is spread to justify the occupation, in the east and south it is spread . In the east, it is spreading to justify separatist movements .
 Miners and pensioners want to live with dignity and salaries and pensions are higher in Russia . People are just tired to count kopecks and live from salary to salary .
 The cult of militarism and the Russian army, justification of expansion and annexation of territories of other states, is a Russian military cult . The cult is the justification of annexation of territory of other countries .
 The messages are designed for the Russian audience, but because of the corresponding segment of the Internet and the spread of Russian nationalism in Ukraine they reach us as well .
 Russia is culture and spirituality. Great cultural and spiritual heritage of the Russian people deserve proper recognition . Russia's culture, spirituality and spirituality should be given proper recognition, says the author .
 Some products of Russian culture are conductors of the modern Russian propaganda by themselves, including myths of Slavic unity and the cult of autocracy .
 The products are an integral part of the information space where citizens of the eastern and southern Ukraine remain . Their impact should not be belittled .
 Russian propaganda demonstrates the conflict in the east as a clash between good and evil, light and darkness .
 The myth of the "Russian soul" is specific for the Russian idea . It is an irrational world view which is sustainable and viable due to such irrationality .
 The meme "this country cannot be defeated" is an example of promotion of this myth on the Internet .
 Often this myth is combined with the myth of confrontation of Russia with foreign enemies . The myth is often linked to the idea of confrontation with Russia's enemies .
 The conflict in the east gains features of the struggle between good and evil, God and Satan . It brings religion motives in Russian propaganda .
 You know it is immediately visible when a person says a chant and when he/she speaks in their own words . You know, it is immediate visible when someone says a chants and when they say a chant .
 The texts seems to be identical, however the content is radically different . The texts seem to be similar, but the content of the texts are radically different.
 The cultivation of the myth of Russian spirituality occurs against the background of demonizing the U.S. and Europe .
 The myth of "the decaying West" in Soviet times was of economic importance . Now assumes role values and spiritual meaning .
 myths on which this cult is based are mainly based on those that we have considered above . And myths are based on what we think is a cult .
 Kiev residents are alien people Ukraine is the project of the USA and Western special services . Ukraine is a project of U.S. and Western Special Services .
 This myth is based on the directive about the global conspiracy and continuation of the Cold War . This myth was based on a directive from the U.S.
 It is actively promoted by the Russian media, separatist groups, a number of political parties and on the Internet . Local media are engaged in promoting it as well .
 Ukrainian authorities on integration into European structures in the Russian propaganda turns to identifying with them . All the labels which "decorate" Russia are applied to Ukraine .
 May-June 2014 Publications on pro-Russian and separatist resources build ""right"" associations .
 The myth about a Bandera follower is associated with the archetypes of betrayal and blood vengeance . The myth of the Victory easily activates negative emotional states among the audience .
 The division of Ukraine to the east and west is maintained . It gained mythological traits itself and fits into the whole system .
 Crimean Information Agency quoted head of the Federation of Crimean Tatar Communities U.Selya .
 Bandera are not 'right', they speak Russian, demand federalization, do not recognize their followers as heroes . They are not right, they speak Russians, demandFederalization, and try to make Russian official language .
 The most vivid representative of the right movement in Ukraine, the Right Sector, occupies a proper place in Russian propaganda . The Right Sector is the most vivid representation of the Ukrainian right movement .
 Maydan, and therefore the entire new Ukraine, is associated with the Right Sector . Maydan is a former member of the Ukrainian National Party .
 Russian propaganda associates the Right Sector with fascists as well . The Right Sector played a key role in the events on Maydan and in the military operations .
 The Right Sector defines the politics of Ukraine, including the politics in the east . The "fascist" Right Sector is the right sector of Ukraine's politics .
 This is the position of the Russian mass media, the controlled sector of the Internet, separatist groups, a number of local media and political parties in the eastern Ukraine . This is a position of a Russian massMedia, the control of the internet, and the political parties .
 Kiev is responsible for the conflict in the east Kiev started the war against its own people . May-June 2014 is the first time Kiev has been involved in the conflict against its people .
 This statement contradicts the common sense, but it does not contradict the virtual reality of Russian propaganda . This is not the first time this statement has been published in Russia .
 "westerners" never liked the east and always wanted to do something bad to residents of the east. Especially if in this reality ""westerners"" never liked it .
 Currently, this stereotype is actively spreading in the east and the south of Ukraine .
 Donetsk people's republic and Luhansk people's Republic are legitimate governmental entities . They call the terrorists "militia" and "terrorists" They say they are legitimate government entities and laws of full value .
 The head of Luhansk regional council V.Holenko said there are hundreds of killed people .
 "demonstration of children" in Slavyansk on 6 May was the real masterpiece of propaganda. But the ""demonstration of children" was the "real masterpiece of propaganda," says the author .
 Regularly there are rumours that in certain cities the Ukrainian army poisons water in the water supply system .
 Currently, these rumours take the form of "news" on the web sites of separatists and terrorists .
For example, we recorded facts of shelling the settlement with mortars . For example, it was a case of shelling with mortar .
 The mine was filled with several layers of gauze where there were unknown larvae, worms and wool . There were unknown worms, worms, wool, and wool.
 A terrorist speaks about liberation by Ukrainian army of Shchastya town near Luhansk . A video from a Russian TV channel was circulated online .
 They eliminate local residents, kill women and children, they kill everyone who is from 16 to 50 years old . They kill everyone from 16-50 years old, including children .
 A Syrian girl presented as a victim of the Ukrainian military was presented as victim of Ukrainian military .
 In this myth, there never was understanding and dialogue between the east and the west . The myth is based on a myth of the east-west relationship .
 This stereotype is extremely dangerous not only because of subtle mimicry of Russian propaganda . The stereotype is very dangerous. It is also a very dangerous stereotype .
 The myth is formulated in such a way that it fits well into the public dialogue, it is included in the public agenda . The myth requires a relevant response from Kiev .
 Kremlin manipulators impose on us, not what is necessary, says CNN's John Sutter . "This plays into the hands of the aggressor," says Sutter. "They say and do what Kremlin manipulator impose on me, not the necessary"
 Donetsk City Council's address to the parliament of Ukraine dated 7 May 2014 . "Nobody hears Donbas," read the address .
 Justification of fighting has created the momentum ""from Kiev" and the momentum "towards Moscow" in the audience .
 All the citizens are united in their desire to separate from Kiev and return to the bosom of Russia .
 All the detained people participated in clashes during the disturbances in Odessa, the presenter said .
 Russia will not leave the "Russian Spring" to its fate and will come to aid for sure . Russia will be ready to help Russia in the coming years .
 Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics always say that military assistance is a question of time . Representatives of the Donetsk and Lhansk republics say military assistance has been a question.
 The assistance is not only of military nature, it may be humanitarian as well, it is also humanitarian .
 The article contains illustration in the form of a picture allegedly taken on the Ukrainian-Russian border . The article was published in the Ukraine-Russian newspaper .
 The Ukrainian army is demoralized, anarchy reigns there, it is poorly equipped . The army is in disarray, and the army is badly equipped .
 This is a classic propaganda war trick, which adds enemy soldiers confidence in their combat superiority . This is the classic propaganda wartime trick, says the author .
 Soldiers reported that their commanders keep soldiers in complete informational isolation . Soldiers reported their commanders kept them in complete information isolation .
 Only for communicating with a civilian neo-Nazis can shoot both soldiers and civilians .
"Not all youngsters know whom they are actually trying to kill," one of the warlords of terrorists S Zdrylyuk said .
 They fear that they may be shot just as policemen in Mariupol . They do not want to fight for the junta, however they fear they will be shot as policemen .
 Few people are ready to fight for militia, few people ready to be completely involved in the civil war . There are few people prepared to fight in civil war.
 "The desire to escape from this horror somewhere dominates," the Novorossiya web-site writes .
 The Luhansk XXI Vek newspaper said the Ukrainian military shell country territories . "Instead of locations of militia they hit gardens of local residents," it said .
 Ukraine is an incapable state, a sick organism that lives on a respirator . March-June 2014 Ukraine can last just a few days more because it is incapable state .
 Over the last fifteen years, the IMF cultivated a myth of loans as a slave yoke that the IMF, the USA and other countries hung on Ukrainians .
 This image is linked to the myth of the global conspiracy, demonized image of the U.S. and the Soviet Union . This image has been linked to a myth of a global conspiracy .
 The economic dependence from Russia is not perceived as a problem, but rather an argument that proves objectivity of the ""brotherhood of peoples" and the inevitability of future reunion . Russia's economic dependence on Russia is also emphasized by the propaganda .
 It also justifies the separation of the region from the Ukrainian state . It provides confidence in the bright future after separation .
This myth persists in the east, and it is actively supported by separatists themselves, local media, business and political figures . This myth persists.
 An information war against Ukraine began long before winter events in Kiev .
Hundreds of lives were killed in Slavyansk and Mariupol, including hundreds of lives .
 Fundamentals of the Russian myth, which infected citizens in the east and in the south of Ukraine, were laid not during recent decades, but long before Ukraine gained its independence . So fighting them will last much longer then the counter terrorism operation will last longer then.
 Ukraine will implement at least some measures to fight this myth . It may last for decades, of course, provided that Ukraine will implements some measures. It may be a long-term solution to the myth .