 Russia was finishing its illegal annexation of Crimea this week . Five years ago this week, Russia was trying to legitimize it by a so-called referendum .
 The annexation was going on for a whole month from 20 February 2014, until Russia established full control over the peninsula . The annexation went on for the whole month until Russia became full control.
 The 15,000 Ukrainian troops located in Crimea didn't shoot to defend themselves and the peninsula from the Russian invasion .
 A transcript of the National Security and Defense Council meeting held on 28 February 2014 reveals the real state of Ukraine at the end of February 2014 . It allows judging whether Ukraine’s decision to not protect Crimea by force was right .
 Ukraine is still reeling from the Euromaidan revolution and flight of ex-President Yanukovych . At that time, Ukraine needed at least some time to improve the extremely low combat capability of its armed forces .
 At the onset of Russian aggression on 21 February 2014, 20,000 Russian soldiers were already in Crimea . 38,000 more stood along the Ukrainian border in the East .
 No matter who you will agree with in the published RNBO discussion below, special attention should be paid to the words of Yuliya Tymoshenko .
 In 2014, she recommended Ukraine be like a “dove of peace’s’. She argued against the redeployment of Ukrainian armed forces from the West to the East when Russian aggression was already at the gate .
 RNBO meeting took place directly in the walls of Parliament . Most of its participants just began to fulfill their duties .
 Andriy Senchenko is the former Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Reforms of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea . He is a former Deputy PM of the Crimea.
 The question that we must discuss today is the threat to our territorial integrity. The question we must talk about today is what we need to do to protect our territory .
 This is a question of de-facto direct aggression of a neighbor state against Ukraine. This is the question of direct aggression against Ukraine, says the author .
 separatism is artificially supported and spread on the territory of Ukraine . This is a matter of separatism, which is artificial supported and spreading on Ukraine's territory .
 The first aspect, which is very threatening, is the full use of the Russian Federation’s military personnel . The first part of the military personnel is a very threatening aspect .
 servicemen, “Berkut’s special service and other law enforcement officers of Ukraine who serve in Crimea. They turned completely to serve the coordinated military invasion carried out by the political and military leadership of Russia .
 The third extremely dangerous element is the fact that airports and other transport infrastructure of Crimea are taken under control, or blocked by masked servicemen of the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Federation .
 The fourth element is the massive support of the Russian Federation’s actions by locals . The Russian Federation's actions are supported by locals, according to reports .
 We must prevent shooting and victims among the civilians or the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Federation . We need to prevent shooting, victims among civilians and the Black sea Fleet of Russian Federation, we say .
 Many of them do not accept the new power and are not to execute orders, or have already betrayed their oaths altogether . Many of the new leaders have not been able to execute their orders .
 The situation in the Naval Forces of Ukraine is particularly difficult . The situation is especially difficult for the Ukrainian forces .
 The moral and psychological climate in the leadership is extremely low, if not to say traitorous. The moral, psychological climate is very low, says the author .
 The head of the Sevastopol division of the Ministry of Internal Affairs has resigned . In addition to the police, we have around 1,000 internal troops in Crimea .
 There are very few among the police. We are establishing contact with servicemen who have not betrayed, but there are very many among them .
 "Berkut" personnel have defected to the aggressor's side with their weapons and forwarded it to the prosecutor’s office to initiate criminal cases .
 Those seizing strategic objects in Crimea are special forces, which underwent military training in hotspots of Russia .
In order to respond appropriately to threats, I ask you to allow our Armed Forces to be brought to full combat readiness . In order to response appropriately to threat, we should bring our armed forces to full readiness .
 It was systematically destroyed by Yanukovych and his colleagues under the leadership of Russian special services . It was systematic destroyed by his colleagues, according to a report .
About 5,000 troops from the whole country will be capable of carrying out combat missions . Today, we will be able to gather a military group of about 5,00 troops .
 I ask for permission to conduct large-scale military exercises because the readiness of most units to carry out combat missions is highly dubious .
1.5-2,000 at most would be ready to carry out orders with the use of weapons . However, 1.5 to 2,000 would be able to carry on orders.
 Russian forces are deployed to Crimea from the Russian Federation General Staff . Black Sea Fleet forces and the Special Forces of the Chief Intelligence Directorate are deployed .
 We intend to make a statement on holding consultations at the level of foreign ministers within the framework of Budapest memorandum .
 The Russian aggression against Ukraine should be urgently considered by the UN Security Council . Russia's annexation of Crimea should be considered as part of the Ukraine crisis .
 Sashko Bilyi was seen in one of the Oblast Councils with a gun . This is because they saw him with the gun. This was because he was seen with the weapon .
 As long as the law in Ukraine is not followed, the occupation of buildings and property by so-called “patriots’ continues, the enemies of Ukraine will have strong arguments to do the same .
 We can not talk about urgent membership in NATO, it will cause even greater Russian aggression, it is said . We can't talk about urgently joining NATO, we can not discuss urgent membership, it's not a problem .
 In 2008, real military Russian aggression started on the territory of Georgia thanks to the signing of the Membership Action Plan in Bucharest .
 I would ask you, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Prosecutor General, and the Ministry of Defense to work out in camera the technology of detaining the criminal agents implementing a military operation against Ukraine .
 There's separatism, there’s terrorism, because they cooperate with terrorists who hold the Crimean parliament and seize strategic objects .
 We must capture what the armed forces of Russia are doing, as much as possible, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We have no opportunity to introduce it in Crimea, we can not involve internal affairs agencies, which do not exist today, as well as the Security Service . The Security Service does not exist in Crimea .
 This must be created, and only then can we talk about introducing some kind of law . This must have been created. This must also be created .
 The Crimea has been in conflict with Russia since March 2014 . The Crimea is the region's most volatile region . The region has been wracked by violence since then .
 The Minister of Defense says we have no strength to defend Kyiv .
 We have a lot of patriotic guys who are will serve, but they need uniforms to wear, weapons, and proper training to fight . We have some of the world's best-known fighters, but we need uniforms, weapons and training .
 The military personnel of the Russian army armed with the most modern weapons are there . It is impossible to deploy the untrained guys to the Crimea because the military personnel are there.
This will be used as a reason for deployment of troops into continental Ukraine . This will be the first time troops have been deployed to the region .
 I did not want to speak, but as the leader of the largest party I cannot keep silence, says the party's leader . "I did not wants to speak," he says .
 The price of today’s decision is incredibly high and we do not have the right to a mistake . The price is very high, and we don’t have theright to a mistakes .
 Putin wants to implement the Abkhazia scenario and only waits for us to give him a reason . I have been consulting with the most experienced people and I can say that Putin want to implement this scenario .
 If we had at least one chance out of a hundred to win, I would be the first to support active measures . I would also support active Measures .
 I have also talked with our foreign partners, and they also confirm – Russian troops on the borders, and ask not to make any moves . I have talked with their foreign partners. They also confirm that they have not made any moves, and asked not to move .
Without them we are completely powerless. We have to listen to them because without them we're completely powerless . Without them, we have toListen to them. We need to listen.
 The Ukrainian government has called for the international community to stand up for Ukraine . Ukraine has been in Ukraine for more than a decade .
 We must become the most peaceful nation on the planet, just behave ourselves like peace doves . We must be most peaceful. We must also behave ourselves as peacedoves .
For example, invite leaders of European countries to a peace summit in Kyiv or Crimea . For example, invites leaders of Europe to a summit in Ukraine or Crimea.
 The information from our channels fully confirms Russia’s readiness to deploy troops concentrated along our border . The information confirms Russia's readiness to deployed troops along the border .
 Both Americans and Germans in one voice ask us not to start any active actions . Putin will use it to start a large-scale land invasion, according to their intelligence, says CNN .
 We have to hear Western partners, and they need time to make decisions, says CNN's John Sutter . Western partners need time, he says .
 Russians will take into consideration only strong players. If we consider the level of readiness of Russian troops on our eastern borders, then we must do everything to be able to defend ourselves . Russian troops are ready to defend themselves.
 We must immediately begin to transfer existing forces from the Center and West to East and South . We need a full mobilization of the country, we must immediately start to transfer forces .
 The West must do our utmost to be able to defend ourselves, including solely by our own means, if there is no military assistance from the West . We must do the utmost to protect ourselves, even if there's no military help from the west .
National Security and Defense Council votes on introduction of martial law in the country . National Security and Defence Council votes to introduce martial law .