 There are several objective reasons why the agreements reached during the Minsk negotiations cannot be completed to the end by any of the parties .
 The article is an attempt to organize information, received from open sources, on the contradictions that exist in the process of the Minsk negotiations .
 It is necessary to stir up parochial and national feelings in them separately . It is needed to stir the national feeling in the way it does .
 We need to convince everyone that the Georgians are placed in Abkhazia. We must convince everyone to put Georgians in the country.
Russia's imperial policy has led to the occupation of several countries' territory by that state . Russia's imperial policies have led to occupation of many countries' territories .
 Russia is trying to present its armed aggression against these countries as internal conflicts . Russia has been accused of using its military force as an excuse for its actions .
 The essence of a hybrid war is that kind of misleading attempts and trying to present an external armed aggression as internal conflicts on the occupied territories . The aim is to create an external conflict on occupied territories.
 The international community believes the Minsk negotiations to be one of the means to deter the Russian aggression . Currently, the international community thinks the negotiations are the best way to deter Russian aggression.
For Russia, they are a tool to make Ukraine surrender its interests and, in fact, to capitulate . For Russia, it is a tool for making Ukraine surrender to its interests .
 The text of the agreements was written in Russia and in the interests of Russia itself . As it will be shown below, the text is also shown below .
 The agreements reached clearly contradict many articles of the Constitution of Ukraine . The agreement reached clearly contradicts many articles in the constitution .
 At the same time, due to the existing contradictions, they cannot be completed by any of the parties . At thesame time, they can't be complete by any party .
 We present an attempt to systematize the existing contradictions in Minsk agreements below . We present a try to systemate the contradictions.
 Most of the facts outlined below are taken from publications and interviews of the ex-judge of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine . Viktor Shishkin is the first Prosecutor General of Ukraine, the first prosecutor general of Ukraine.
 He carried out extensive work on legal assessment of all aspects of the Minsk negotiations . He was also involved in the negotiations with Russia .
 V Shishkin considers compatibility of the Minsk agreements with the legislation and Constitution of Ukraine in a most detailed way .
 President Petro Poroshenko's order to confer powers on Leonid Kuchma during the Minsk negotiations .
 Leonid Kuchma is granted authority only to represent Ukraine, but not to sign anything . As it follows from the text of the Order, he is granted power to represent the country .
 Leonid Kuchma acts on a voluntary basis during the Minsk negotiations, an order says . The order also mentions that LeonidKuchma acted on the voluntary basis .
 The representative of Ukraine in the trilateral contact group has no right to sign any document . The Ukrainian government has been unable to sign the document .
 According to the Minsk agreements, we make commitments under some international document . The Minsk agreement is based on some international agreements .
 Article 9 of the Constitution of Ukraine stipulates Ukraine's international treaties are only binding if ratified by the Verkhovna Rada .
International treaties become national law if Parliament gives its consent for them to be binding . In other words, international treaties become international law if the Parliament gives their consent .
 The Minsk agreements were not ratified either by Parliament of Ukraine or by the Parliament of Russia . Minsk agreement was not ratified by the Ukrainian Parliament .
 The Minsk agreements are not binding for Ukraine, since they were not ratified by the Parliament . The representative of Ukraine at the negotiations in Minsk was not authorized to sign them .
 Ukraine is represented by Viktor Medvedchuk at the Minsk negotiations . Leonid Kuchma, Ukraine, is represented at the negotiations .
 Viktor Medvedchuk appears in a number of criminal cases, in particular the case on the illegal privatization .
 It is Viktor Medvedchuk who is the main ideologist of separatism in Ukraine . It is also the main Ideologist of separatistism in the Ukraine .
Under his direct participation the separatist organizations in Ukraine were created and funded through him by the Kremlin . Under his direct involvement the separatist groups in Ukraine are created andfunded by him .
 Later they became the basis for the formation of the armed terrorist groups . Later they were formed as the basis of the terrorist groups.
 Viktor Medvedchuk is the author of the idea of the so-called "decentralization" and the federalization of Ukraine . He is also the founder of the Ukrainian National Council .
 Viktor Medvedchuk supervised the preparation of the so-called "referendum" in Crimea . Medveduk supervised the preparations of Crimea's takeover by Russia .
 Viktor Medvedchuk is now blackmailing the People of Ukraine by the execution of prisoners of war prisoners . He is blackmailing Ukraine's people by blackmailing them by executing them .
Medvedchuk is busy with the release of prisoners of war prisoners . Medvedchuk has been in power for more than a decade .
 A close friend of Medvedchuk's Nestor Shufrych is involved in the Ukraine negotiations . Shufych is also a friend of the Ukrainian leader, who has been involved in negotiations .
 He does not appear anywhere in official documents and is also an odious pro-Russian politician . By the way, he does not seem anywhere in documents .
 She is known for her statements that the Russian-Georgian war was started by Georgia . She is also known for saying that Georgia started the war .
 On the part of the terrorists some Zakharchenko and Plotnitskiy are taking part in the negotiations . The terrorists are also in talks with the government .
 There is no document confirming their powers as representatives of anyone or anything . No document confirms they are representatives of any government .
 Those individuals' participation in the negotiations is not required by any documents . Those individuals are not required to take part in negotiations .
 In Ukraine, the terrorists are one of the parties of the negotiations . The world's first precedent was set in Ukraine, when the terrorists were in the talks .
 The Russian regular troops operating on the occupied territories meet the definition of "terrorists" very figuratively .
 The attack is a Russian armed attack on Ukraine, according to a Russian military official .
 negotiations were initiated and are conducted with the representatives of the puppet administration created by that aggressor .
 "agreements" have nothing to do with international agreements. That sort of "agreement" has nothing todo with international agreement .
 The representatives of Ukraine at the Minsk negotiations didn't have the legal powers to. Ukraine's representatives didn't therefore have the power to do so .
 The evidence of this fact results in the Ukrainian people's adequate attitude towards the Minsk negotiations, says the Ukrainian government . The evidence shows that Ukrainian people are in an adequate attitude to the negotiations .
 It was often said that the Minsk agreements were written in the Kremlin and were essentially aimed at the capitulation of Ukraine to the Kremlin .
 Stepan Khmara is one of the authors of the Declaration of Independence of Ukraine . He was a political prisoner of the Soviet concentration camps . The Hero of Ukraine is a human rights activist .
 Minsk negotiations are nothing more than a surrender of Ukraine's interests, he says . In his appeal, he directly and reasonably highlights the fact that Minsk talks are not a surrender, he adds .
 The Ukrainian government cannot sign something that contradicts the national legislation . The government can't sign something.
 Ukraine cannot make commitments on changing the status of territories, if it is stipulated by Ukrainian laws .
 It is proposed to announce the amnesty for the terrorists who committed war crimes . It is also proposed to make it easier for terrorists to commit war crimes.
 This paragraph highlights the inadmissibility of persecution of the terrorists' leaders . This is the first paragraph of this article .
 Those who will victimize terrorists for their crimes will automatically become outlawed . Those who victimize terrorism will be outlawed .
 The Ukrainian collaborationist government and the Kremlin use the participants of the negotiations, France and Germany, in order to give international status to their fraud .
 The essence of the fraud is to surrender the interests of Ukraine, freeze the war in the Donbas region . freeze any issues related to the liberation of the occupied Crimea . discharge war criminals from responsibility for the committed crimes .
It is impossible to hold elections when people have guns outside, and on the territory there are foreign troops and mercenaries . It is impossible for elections to be held when people are armed with guns outside .
 It is impossible to hold elections where there is no Ukrainian government, and then to withdraw and establish control over the border . In particular, it is impossible.
It is impossible to hold elections until normal conditions for the vote are created . It is impossible for elections to be held until normal condition for the voting is created .
 It is necessary to withdraw occupational troops from the occupied territories. It is needed to withdraw troops from occupied territories, it is necessary .
 The elections in Donbas region on such terms is the only way the return of the Ukrainian legitimate authorities to these territories . The elections are only way to return the Ukrainian authorities to those territories .
According to Minsk agreements, elections in occupied territories will be held under the control of terrorists . This paragraph confirms that according to the Minsk agreement, elections will beheld under terrorists .
 If the Constitution is not amended in terms of decentralization, Minsk-2 will not be fulfilled . Petro Poroshenko at the time began the propaganda company inside Ukraine, that purportedly, if the Constitution isn't amended, then Minsk 2 will not.
 The precedent was created when the country-aggressor requires amendments to the Constitution of the country, which it attacked on .
 The purpose of it, ultimately, is to give a constitutional right of self-determination to the occupied territories . The purpose is to provide self- determination to occupied territories.
 Poroshenko uses the Minsk agreements in order to lobby his own interests . In this case, Poroshenko is using the agreements to lobby himself .
 The conditions of martial law exist regardless of whether the head of the state declared this law or not . The conditions are known as the conditions of the law .
 Petro Poroshenko does not respond to these conditions by imposing martial law, says Viktor Shishkin . He says the President's position is only his personal.
 The conditions of martial law or state of emergency exist objectively, creating legal relations peculiar to such a state . Those who in accordance with his constitutional powers should respond to them by the introduction of this state . They do not invoke such actions .
 First, proper acts were adopted, in particular, on military-civil administrations .
There are numerous amendments to the laws relating to the prosecution of war criminals . There are also numerous amendments. The laws relate to prosecuting war criminals.
 Ukraine's Constitution is a direct prohibition to amend the Constitution of Ukraine . This means a direct ban on amendments to the constitution .
 The President himself does not have a right to sign this provision . Much less to give such assignment or task to someone else .
 Nobody had the right to commit oneself with the obligations to change the electoral law, says Ukraine . Russia and militants on behalf of Ukraine.
 It is only the Parliament who can make laws and decide in what order this should be done and in what period. Parliament can only make laws, it's only the parliament who can .
 Ukraine dictated the essence of the law, but also the period in which it must be taken . Not only is Ukraine dictates the essence. But also the time in which the law is taken .
 In the Minsk agreements, no word is said about the de-occupation of Crimea .
 Crimea is mentioned neither in Minsk-1, nor in the Geneva agreement. Crimea is not mentioned in M Belarus-2, nor the Geneva deal .
 The Kremlin authorship of the text and the collaborationist essence of the negotiators. Which adds further credence to the Kremlin's authorship and the authorship.
 The agreement on the withdrawal of troops from three areas of Donbas region was signed on September 21, 2016, in Minsk, Minsk .
 The text of the document says that the units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and armed forces of separate regions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts of Ukraine are liable to decoupling .
 This is a serious concession of Kiev to Moscow, and it can be regarded as the agreement that Russia is not involved in armed conflict . This is certainly a serious concessions to Moscow .
 These men and their subordinates before were not considered to be such representatives . The men and subordinates before had not been considered as representatives .
 These "concessions" are likely made under the pressure of Berlin and Paris, according to a report .
 Former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine Volodymyr Ogryzko describes future prospects of Minsk negotiations . Most accurately the future prospects were described by the former minister of foreign affairs .
 It is impossible to expect that Moscow will easily back down and withdraw their troops . It is also impossible to Expect that Moscow would easily back up and withdraw its troops .
 The Russian side does not understand the necessity of making serious decisions until it is forced to do it . Russian side doesn't understand the need to make serious decisions .
 Ukrainian army has increased its military capabilities in recent years . It has been forced by a strengthening of economic sanctions, on the one hand .
 The negotiations will reach a blind alley, and I do not exclude any scenarios in the future, including negative ones . Otherwise, the negotiations will reached a Blind alley, he says. Otherwise, he doesn't exclude any other scenarios .
 The people of Ukraine are widely discussing the Minsk negotiations issues . They are also discussing the issues of the Ukrainian government .
 There are published specific constructive suggestions that were stated by different people at different time . Below there are specific suggestions that have been published .
 Minsk is a good alternative to the Minsk process that reached a blind alley . They are a "good alternative" to theinsk process, says CNN's John Sutter .
 To admit that the "agreements" constitute, in fact, an ultimatum for Ukraine, delivered by Putin, Putin .
 Ukraine was forced to agree to the terms of the ultimatum through a military pressure and outright aggression of the Russian Federation . To claim that Ukraine had been forced to agreed to the demands through military pressure, the claim was made by Ukraine .
 To declare that Ukraine will perform the terms of "Minsk ultimatum" only if they do not threaten the integrity, sovereignty and constitutional order of Ukraine .
 The full control restoration of Ukraine on the state border with Russia in the Donbas region is an undisputable condition for further actions to restore the democratic public sector, lasting peace and order .
 Any separate contacts of international organizations, bypassing Kiev is what the Kremlin wants the most . The Kremlin wants to bypass Kiev .
 All negotiations with Russia or Western countries should be conducted with a mandatory requirement of Crimea de-occupation . Crimea is a peninsula in Crimea, Crimea has been occupied by Russia and Ukraine .
 To increase pressure on the Kremlin, starting the elaboration of the documents on the reparation for damage caused as a result of the military aggression .
 The continuation of the war is the biggest lever of pressure on Russia for Ukraine for Russia . Ukraine is the most important country in the world, according to Russia .
 These are "hybrid" negotiations, that were started in collusion and in a close coordination with the Ukrainian authorities .
 This is a way not to stop the war but to continue it on terms that are primarily beneficial to the Kremlin . This is not a way to end the war, but to keep the war alive, says the Russian president .
 If the international community allows the collaborators in power of Ukraine surrendering the interests of Ukraine, everyone will lose . The international community will lose.
 Europe will lose a powerful military ally on the border with the terrorist state an aggressive Russia .