 In 2014, Ukraine sought to redraw Europe's map by way of military aggression . For the first time in seven decades, a state sought to Redraw Europe’s map by means of military aggressive .
 Russia's theft of Ukraine's Crimean peninsula commanded condemnation and economic sanctions from around the world . Russia’s theft of Crimea commanded condemnation, economic sanctions .
 The Ukrainian people will not watch as Russia continues its creeping annexation of our country . Russia continues to take over Ukraine .
 Moscow is facing further sanctions for its latest assault on Russia . But we also need the support of the international community in the form of further sanctions against Moscow .
 Russia's attack in the Kerch Strait and the Black Sea was not an isolated incident . Russia’s attack was not a isolated incident, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia has regularly violated international rules of navigation and treaties in both waters and the Sea of Azov . Since 2014, Russia has been regularly violated by Russia in both the sea and the sea .
 It has stolen energy supplies and fisheries, harmed Ukrainian livelihoods, and blocked traffic and trade to our ports . It has also stolen our energy supplies, fisheries, and harmed our livelihoods .
 This summer, Russia raised the tensions, regularly halting commercial ships destined for Ukrainian ports . Russia has also halted commercial ships bound for Ukraine .
 Extensive delays can cost each ship as much as $10,000 to $12,000 per day on each leg on each ship .
 Russia is engaging in economic warfare, trying to slowly suffocate our export markets . Russia is engaged in an economic warfare. Russia is trying to suffocate its export markets.
 The words of Western condemnation this fall have only worsened Russia’s behavior . Russia's behavior has only worsened since the fall, according to Russian media .
 Russia brought the situation to a head on Nov. 6 as Ukrainian naval boats sought to make their way from the Ukrainian port of Odessa to Mariupol . The situation has been tense since the Ukraine-Russia crisis began in November .
 Ukraine's ships never aggressed Russia's Navy, never opened fire despite being goaded, and were attacked with gunfire and missiles . Russia's ships were seized while sailing home in international waters .
 This was a direct, unprovoked military attack by Russia’s armed forces on Ukraine. This was the first time Russia's armed forces had attacked Ukraine's military forces .
 The crisis continues, with servicemen and boats being held in Russian custody . Hundreds of ships being blocked in the Sea of Azov, denied permission to pass through the Kerch Strait .
 Ukrainian ships carry flags of other countries and have been commandeered by Russia . These are not just Ukrainian ships; they carry the flags of others countries .
 Russia now has a challenging number of naval ships in the Black Sea, meaning it can threaten NATO members Romania, Bulgaria and Turkey .
 Russia’s fighters were intercepted, not for the first time, over the Baltic region . Russia had not filed a flight plan.
 It wants to return to an era where property and land are seized by force . It wants a return to a time when land and property are taken by force.
 It starts with Ukraine and continues westward as far as the democratic world will allow . It begins with Ukraine. It starts in Ukraine and ends with Ukraine . It starts as far from Ukraine.
 Stand up for what is right or continue appeasing President Vladimir Putin . Stand up to what's right or stop appeasing Putin .
 If history has taught us anything, it is that appeasement has deadly costs . If history had taught us any, it's that Appeasement can be deadly .
 Despite Kremlin propaganda, Mr Putin is weaker than he would have the West believe, according to the Kremlin .
 The West can — by raising the cost of his aggression — force him to fall back into line . West can also raise the costs of aggression to force him back to line .
 Russia has deployed chemical weapons in Britain; undertaken cyberattacks and hacking attempts across the West . Russia has also undertaken cyber attacks and cyberattacks across the world . It has fomented a war in Eastern Ukraine that has caused more than 10,000 Ukrainian deaths .
 President Trump showed true leadership by canceling his meeting with Mr Putin at the G-20 in Argentina over Russia's seizing of Ukrainian ships and sailors .
 We have enjoyed tangible support from the White House and Congress, including defensive weapons, including stronger sanctions and more secure American energy supplies . The White House has also supported stronger sanctions, more secure U.S. energy supplies, says CNN .
 Russia has been accused of threatening our collective security in the past . Russia and the United States are raising the cost of Russia's security . Russia is a key part of the European Union's anti-Russia strategy .
 With Crimea and Donbas under occupation, our common task is not to allow Russia to spill its aggression into the Sea of Azov . With Crimea, we are not to let Russia spill it into the sea.