 The undersigned certify that this thesis meets master’s-level standards of research, argumentation, and expression .
 The conclusions and opinions are those of the author. Mark Conversino is the author of the document . The conclusions are that of the authors .
 An Armor officer, Major Deuble graduated from Basic Officer Leader Course in 2007 .
 Major Deuble deployed to Iraq in Support of Operation Iraqi Freedom . He was assigned to 3d Armored Cavalry Regiment . He served in Iraq in support of Operation Iraq Freedom .
 returning from deployment Major Deuble attended the Maneuver Captain’s Career Course at Ft.
 Major Deuble was assigned as a company commander in 4th Brigade, 1st Armored Division . He was assigned to the 4th brigade in the 1st armored division .
 Major Deuble deployed to Afghanistan as an executive officer of an Advise and Assist Team . Deuble was deployed as a senior officer of the Advise & Assist Team.
 MAJ Deuble returned to Ft Benning as a Small Group Instructor after returning from Afghanistan . Deuble is a small group instructor in the Small Group Instructors class .
 There are several people who I must thank, as I could not have finished this research project without their guidance . There are a number of people who have given me advice .
Without your humor to lighten my frustration and your advice through this adventure I would have been lost. James Kiras, without your humor, he would be lost .
 Mark Conversino for his great cultural insights and strategic view of the region . Conversino is a well-known cultural expert for his cultural insights .
 His willingness to explain Russian mindset and share his experiences from inside Russia was incredibly useful, and often entertaining .
 I want to thank my wife for her unending support through this project. Last, but certainly not least, he wants to thank her.
 The endless cultural discussions or translation requests never gave her pause . She was never given a pause .
 The annexation of Crimea in 2014 alarmed western security analysts . Crimea was annexed by Ukraine in 2014 .
 International media outlets reported stories of the “little green men’s” who waged a new form of warfare .
 Few analysts looked at if these new tactics were actually new and if they were effective in achieving Russian objectives .
 This research examines how effective Russian unconventional warfare efforts have been in three contemporary case studies .
 The case studies examined are the Russian-Estonia conflict in 2007, the August War with Georgia in 2008, and Russia’s conflict with Ukraine in 2014 .
 Russia is likely to use unconventional warfare in a predictable manner, says a study of Russian unconventional warfare activities . The study shows that if Russia is placed in a certain strategic context then they are likely to utilize unconventional warfare .
Highlighting this ‘blueprint’ enables strategic planners to better plan for and mitigate Russian unconventional warfare activities in the Baltic State . Highlighting this "blueprint" enables strategic planner to better planning for and mitigating Russian unconventional Warfare activities in Baltic State.
 In the wake of the Maidan uprising, analysts world-wide took notice . Just over a year later, analysts took notice of the uprising .
 European security experts touted the article as Russia’s modern Art of War, elevating it to what media today refer to as the Gerasimov Doctrine .
 The annexation of Crimea on March 18, 2014, shocked many security analysts . This "doctrine,"" combined with the annexation of the Crimea in March 2014, shock many analysts .
 Hybrid warfare, the label for the type of war Gerasimov depicted, seems to be the method of prosecuting quick and decisive wars today without appearing to wage war .
 Security analysts focused significant attention on whether hybrid warfare incorporated both information operations and cyber domain .
 The effectiveness of the doctrine’s application, however, received little attention .
 This paper examines if Russia's modern applications of unconventional warfare methods were effective in achieving Russia’s stated and perceived national objectives during recent conflicts .
 Attempting to scope hybrid warfare is difficult for reasons that begin with the core terms of the subject . The subject is difficult to understand.
 The terms hybrid warfare, Non-linear Warfare, and New Generation Warfare, have meanings prone to biased interpretation or narrowly constrict the researcher/reader .
 The term "hybrid warfare" has grown too broad to add value in scoping an evaluation .
 Non-linear Warfare infers have the flexibility to capitalize on regional events . Non- linear Warfareinfers have flexibility to opportunistically capitalize on region events .
New Generation Warfare implies that the tactics are unprecedented and revolutionary . New Generation Warfare is a new form of warfare .
 Each of these terms lacks a doctrinal foundation or linkage . In addition, each of these words lacks a doctrine or linkage.
 The terms are further hampered by their frequency of use and the fact the phrases often are erroneously interchanged, contributing to impreciseness of language .
 Vladislov Surkov, a political advisor to Vladimir Putin, used the phrase non-linear warfare to describe these actions . Surkov used the term non- linear warfare.
 Non-linear warfare is “fought when a state employs conventional and irregular military forces in conjunction with psychological, economic, political, and cyber assaults. Non- linear warfare is not ‘fought’
 Use of unconventional warfare provides a clear framework and understanding as the term is doctrinally defined . Use of the term unconventional warfare gives a clearframework and understanding .
 Russia's recent approach to its military campaigns in Ukraine and threats to eastern Europe. As such, unconventional warfare is the term used throughout this thesis .
Accurately assessing the effectiveness of Russia’s recent unconventional warfare efforts is critically important . Accurately assessing the impact of Russia's recent unconventional Warfare efforts is critical .
 Doing so prevents a strategist from incorrectly viewing opportunistic advances as “coherent, preconceived doctrine’s or strategy .
 A strategist must ensure necessary resources are allocated to combat a threat that has been proven effective . A strategist, however, must also ensure necessaryresources are allocated .
 Russia's relationship with the West continues to fray . It is imperative to understand if unconventional threats displayed during recent conflicts were effective in achieving Russian national objectives .
 The results will show whether Russia is likely to incorporate unconventional warfare aspects into future conflicts . The results are expected to show if Russia will use unconventional warfare elements in future conflicts.
 Russian efforts are not new, but rather a means to conduct limited wars to achieve objectives without crossing certain thresholds of escalation . This thesis aims to assuage the alarmist reactions of analysts and politicians by showing that Russian efforts aren't new .
 Russia's conflict with Estonia in 2007; Russia’s conflict with Georgia in 2008; Russia's invasion and Annexation of Crimea in 2014 . Russia's annexation of Crimea was in 2014. Russia's war with Estonia was in 2007 .
 Estonia challenged Russia’s prestige and influence in the former Soviet Union in 2007 . Estonia, a former Soviet Republic, is now a NATO member .
 Russia responded with a blend of political and mostly non-violent coercive means to cause Estonia to capitulate to Russia’s wishes .
 Russian focus primarily on non-violent unconventional means to achieve effects within Estonia . This case study illustrates Russian focus mainly onnon-violent methods to achieve effect in Estonia .
 The August 2008 war with Georgia has a different focus for Russian unconventional warfare . The 2008 war has been dubbed the August 2008 battle with Georgia .
Tensions between Russia and Georgia over the latter’s aspirations to join NATO, as well as Russian concern of Georgia's energy pipeline to the Caspian Sea, led to a much more violent conflict .
 This case study offers an examination of Russian unconventional warfare actions undertaken in a supporting role of traditional conventional combat . The case study is based on a case study of Russia's unconventional warfare.
 The Russian conflict in Ukraine offers yet another variance in the Kremlin’s application of unconventional war .
 Crimea is home to Sevastopol, the strategically important warm water port that traditionally hosted the Russian Black Sea Fleet . Access to the Crimea has long been a concern of Russia .
 A large Russian diaspora, approximately 60% of Crimeans are ethnic Russians . Russia has employed a mix of violent and non-violent efforts under the claim of the right to protect doctrine .
 This case study offers a middle ground between the strategies employed in Estonia and Georgia . The case study is based on a case study in Estonia .
 Russia has used unconventional warfare in many other conflicts such as Lithuania in 1991, the Transnistrian War in 1990, and both Chechen wars . Russia has been involved in several other conflicts in the past, including Lithuania, and Chechen .
 The full 4 range of unconventional warfare, from non-violent actions to violence in support of conventional troop actions, is compared . By examining these three case studies, the full 4 case studies are compared .
 Russia uses unconventional warfare against other nations. By limiting the scope of the evaluation to these three case studies, Russia appears to be using unconventional warfare .
 This picture then allows an assessment of Russia's unconventional warfare efficacy . It then allows a view of the Russian military's effectiveness .
 Many different frameworks available to evaluate unconventional warfare techniques . There are many different frameworks for evaluating unconventional warfare .
 United States doctrine breaks down unconventional warfare into seven phases . It offers the phase structure as a means of framing the evaluation .
 This construct, however, favors employed forces over other non-violent capabilities and domains that do not fit neatly into the phases . This construct is not a good idea, but it is a good example of how to use it .
 This construct has a linear approach that implies a bias of causation . Also, this construct has been used to determine the cause of a bias .
 This approach is much too broad for effective analysis and lacks an understanding of the degree of unconventional warfare contributed towards success using a range of unconventional means .
 RAND analyst Andrew Radin proposes a framework with three categories to capture the full unconventional spectrum .
 These categories are Nonviolent Subversion, Covert Violent Action, and Conventional Aggression . These categories include nonviolent subversion and Covert violent action .
Conventional Aggression is Russian use of conventional forces “supported and legitimized by a range of propaganda, covert action, and 11 phases are preparation, initial contact, infiltration, infiltration and organization, buildup, employment, and transition . The seven phases are preparing,
 Russian actions during each of the case studies will be classified into the above three categories . The results will be compared against both the stated and perceived Russian national objectives of each conflict .
 Research aims to present findings on how effective Russian unconventional warfare efforts have been in the case studies compared to Russian stated or implied national objectives in those countries .
 To do requires understanding Russia’s national objectives during the time periods noted above . Russia's national objectives are noted above.
 Russia has kept classified much of its desired strategic end states in the three contemporary cases . The three contemporary states are Russia's three most important states .
 The author uses public statements made by Russian officials and military officers, military doctrine, published national strategies and interviews to establish national objectives of the Russian Federation .
 Study does not attempt to predict if those tactics may be used against a NATO-allied country . Findings may lead the reader to implications of further use of unconventional warfare tactics against similar states .
 Russia's strategic culture has been developed over time by the unique characteristics of Russia’s geography, societal, and military history . This strategic culture was developed by theunique characteristics of the country .
 Russian geography has always held several truths, even with all the boundary changes .
 The first truth is that Russia has always maintained a vast territory within its borders . Russia has maintained its vast territory in its borders.
 The expanse of Russian territory has been both an asset and a danger to the country’s leaders .
 The enormity of the terrain demands a massive standing army to defend and secure the borders . A massive army is needed to protect the borders of the country .
 Russia needed to equip and feed the masses of its soldiers that were often focused on internal stability . Russia's military was often focused in internal stability.
 The second truth is that large expanses of Russian territory are not hospitable, leaving sections sparsely populated .
Russian winters have protected the heartland of Russia . The harshness of Russian winters has protected this terrain .
 The introduction of the ICBM changed this calculus, but the focus on mass shifted from personnel to quantities of missiles . The focus of mass changed from personnel.
 The Soviet Union was able to become the technological powerhouse of the 1960-70s because of the unquestionable mass of their Army following World War II . 7 exhaustion, starvation and the conflict with the mobilized Russian population.
 The forces of Napoleon in 1812 and Nazi Germany in World War II had initial successes, but foundered on rocks of Russian geography .
 Russian people have a collective cultural feeling of isolation and victimization. This repeated experience by the populace has generated a collective culture of victimization and isolation .
 In turn, these feelings influence how Russians view their position in the world .
 Russian citizens' feelings do not directly translate into Russian actions . While these feelings shape a collective Russian perspective, they don't directly translate to actions .
 Russian strategic actions have evolved and changed in response to Russia’s perception of its strength . Russia's narrative of victimization has been persistent, but it has been changed by Russia .
 Russian strategic culture influences these views but is not deterministic. In summary, Russia's strategic culture is not a deterministic .
 Some authors elevate culture to the penultimate decider of war . Some authors, such as Alastair Johnson, elevate culture and war to war .
 Others, such as Colin Gray, make the distinction that while culture is a vital component of a national leader's strategic makeup, it is just one component of many .
 Prime-Time for Strategic Culture, Report prepared for United States Nuclear Strategy Forum .
 At the height of the Soviet Union’s power, mass and firepower were more prominent approaches than deception .
 After the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia appeared to have shifted to deception strategies . Russia perceived itself as conventionally weaker than most of its adversaries .
 As Russia regains its strength, another evolution of strategy has begun, with a renewed emphasis on combining deception with conventional forces . Russia's strategy is to combine deception and conventional forces.
 General Valery Gerasimov detailed his thoughts on how unconventional tactics had been effective in the Arab Spring and the Color Revolutions . He also detailed how the United States had used political warfare against Russia .
 He pondered how to effectively combat these tactics with conventional forces . He said he would be able to use these tactics against conventional forces.
 The article did not outline a new Russian plan for unconventional warfare . Some analysts suggested that some analysts suggested a new plan was more unconventional .
 Russian leader viewed the effectiveness of unconventional warfare efforts and how those efforts could be combined with new technology and information operations to achieve national objectives .
 Russia’s conflicts with Estonia, Georgia, and Ukraine, is the most recent evolution of Russian strategic thought . This change in thinking is also evident in Russia's conflicts with Georgia and Ukraine .
 Mark Galeotti coined the term Gerasimov Doctrine essentially as a marketing ploy for his blog on Russian activities . Galeotti is one of four people to use the term for his Russian blog .
 He has since apologized for creating the phrase as he feels it negatively impacts the analysis of Russian activities . The phrase has since been removed from the English language .
Russian leaders are trying to earn favor from the Kremlin, says Galeotti . Galeotti feels that Russian leaders are opportunistic and fractious. Galeotti says they are seeking to earn favors from Kremlin .
 Russia has a new doctrine impedes the full understanding of why decisions were made internally. Implying that Russia has the new doctrine is not enough .
 partisan movements, while unorganized, disrupted the invading forces, resulting in the Red Army gaining time and space to reconstitute, mobilize, and maneuver . These partisan movements are often unorganized.
 Lenin, Mikhael Tukhachevsky worked to incorporate partisan elements in support of the Soviet Red Army . Stalin recognized the benefit of partisan warfare against a stronger opponent .
 Stalin looked to unconventional warfare. Facing the threat of a technologically superior German military, Stalin looked at unconventional warfare . Stalin was wary of the threat.
 These units could help shape and prepare the environment in support of conventional forces . They could divert German strength away from the front of the battle .
 The effectiveness of the groups in the Soviet partisan movement greatly varied with their ability to coordinate with the Red Army . The effectiveness in the groups was greatly varied.
 Many partisan operations were countered swiftly by the German forces . There were several exceptional successes, but many partisan operations.
 One such success was the partisan preparation of the battlefield in Operation Bagration in 1944 .
 partisan cells conducted over 1,100 coordinated attacks on the rail lines Germany used to support their troops with reinforcements . Immediately prior to this operation, partisan cells carried out 1, 100 coordinated attacks .
 The attacks damaged over 4,100 sections of rail and greatly contributed to Soviet success in the operation . The attacks damage more than 4,000 sections of railway and greatly contribute to Soviet successes .
 The Soviet Union had a wide scope and scale in World War II . Many countries had partisan movements in the Soviet Union .
 Whole German battalions were redeployed from the frontlines to counter the partisan threat .
State-sponsored and organized partisan groups can directly enhance conventional operations, as in Operation Bagration . They also learned that state- sponsored and organizedpartisan groups can direct conventional operations .
 Many of the partisan groups, however, were impromptu and organized around cadres of Red Army soldiers that escaped being captured by German forces . Some of the groups were organized by Red Army cadres .
 The Yugoslovian partisan movements caused Axis leaders to divert several dozen divisions to pacify Tito .
 Maskirovka translates as masking or camouflage . The Russian word maskiroVka is the same as the word camouflage .
 This simple definition obscures the true meaning of maskirovka in a Russian cultural context . It is a simple definition, however, which is not true .
 The concept of maskirovka has evolved to incorporate all elements of deception . The concept has evolved into a form of deception that includes deception .
 Russian utilization of this concept originally mirrored the simple definition of the simple concept . Russian use of the concept was originally mirrored by a simple definition .
 The first Russian school of maskirovka, opened in 1904, taught basic camouflaging of personnel and vehicles . The school was the first in Russia to open in 1904 .
 At the time, their understanding of the concept matched Russian military capabilities to maneuver . In essence, it was a very tactical application .
 By the Second World War the Soviet Union’s military strength had grown, and so too had its understanding of how deception could be used . By the second World War, the Soviet U.S. military strength was growing . The Soviet Union had a better understanding
 Maskirovka transitioned from masking to “the means of securing combat operations and the daily activities of forces’s daily activities. “ misleading the enemy about the presence and disposition of forces, objectives, combat readiness and plans.
 Military deception contributes to achieving 13 Cental Intelligence Agency. Military deception is a key part of the agency's success .
 General Georgy Zhukov used the concept of maskirovka to conduct an operational level deception plan to support his attack on Rzhev-Vyazma . The concept was used to support the attack.
 These companies repeatedly acted as if they were offloading the vehicles at the railhead, appearing as a massive bottleneck and vulnerable target .
Fake radio traffic was supported by fake radio traffic that reinforced the efforts of the companies .
 The deception worked, and the Luftwaffe repeatedly conducted air strikes against the fake vehicles, drawing resources away from the assembly area from which Zhukov launched his assault .
Twenty years after Zhukov’s experience, and after Soviet victory in WWII, the strategic context for the USSR changed again . Twenty years after the Soviet victory, the USSR's strategic context changed again.
The Soviet Union was a superpower by this time, armed with nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union is now a superpower .
 Recent deployment of U.S. missiles in NATO countries made Soviet leaders feel disadvantaged in the balance of power .
 To counter this imbalance they looked to apply maskirovka at the strategic level . To counter the imbalance, they tried to use maskiroVka at a strategic level.
 The Soviets attempted to covertly deploy nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba, complete with Soviet operators concealed as businessmen .
 Operation Mars would fail overall some of its deception operations did cause an ineffective expenditure of German air power . While this operation, named Operation Mars, would fail, some of the deception operations would fail .
 Russian soldiers take “selfies’ while their devices have geolocation tabs enabled and posting them on social media . Incidents like this would be repeated later in Ukraine with Russian soldiers taking ‘selfies'
The Soviet focus on deception during their conflict with Czechoslovakia in 1968 forecasted the prominent role deception would take in future operations . The Soviet focus in 1968 was on deception.
 Operation began with several elements of maskirovka . The invasion would quickly turn conventional .
 The Soviet Union hosted the SUVMA Warsaw Pact exercise, a plausible excuse to position over 16,000 Soviet troops in Czechoslovakia .
 The Soviet Union also “assisted’s Czechoslovakian forces in conducting a logistical convoy of fuel and ammunition out of Czechoslovakia and into East Germany .
 The Soviet Union kept its forces confined on bases so as not to appear aggressive . While there was an increased Soviet troop presence, there was a increased Soviet presence .
 Two planes landed at the Prague Airport full of civilian-clad, military-aged males .
 The males passed through customs and proceeded to the Soviet Embassy, whose occupants armed them . The males were armed by the occupants .
 The ununiformed group then proceeded to take the Prague Airport, allowing the landing of special operations forces, ammunition, and supplies . The group then took the airport.
 Uniformed Soviet troops then cordoned the Czech forces on their bases . armored columns moved across the border in support of the dismounted forces .
 These initial maneuvers were conducted under complete radio silence, so as not to give away Soviet positions, an increase in activity, or raise suspicion .
 The concept of maskirovka evolved from a tactical to a strategic application . It was pivotal in Soviet strategic thinking during these historic examples . The concept was pivotal during these historical examples .
 Since then, it has become a pillar in Russian planning and decision-making . The Russian government has been in charge of planning and planning for years .
 Russian leaders learned several lessons from the iterative growth of their deception planning .
 The first lesson is that deception can buy time to conduct military activities . Deception can be used to buy time for military activities, say experts .
The value of attribution to deception is that it creates confusion that buys time and space . The value of attributing to deception. It creates confusion.
 This concept has only increased with cyber activities and social media, where attribution is already difficult . This concept was seen in each of the case studies presented later .
 Soviet theorists first conceived of Reflexive Control Theory in 1960 . The theory was first conceived in the 1960s .
 Reflexive Control Theory became a means to increase friction and uncertainty in the mind of an adversary .
 Major General A Ionov wrote extensively on how disinformation campaigns directly increase uncertainty leading to delayed decision-making . He said maskirovka could be used to assist Reflexive Control aims .
 Russian thoughts on Reflexive Control Theory would evolve again after the U.S. victory in Operation Desert Storm .
 The operation highlighted how computers and sensors could enhance intelligence gathering operations and synchronize attacks .
 Colonel S Leonenko recognized that computers could degrade the effects of reflexive control by being able to accelerate both the pace of decision-making and the credibility of the information received .
 Timothy Thomas predicted that information sensors would become vulnerable to overloading 20 Timothy Thomas . He also predicted that these information sensors will become vulnerable. Thomas also predicted, however, that these data sensors would also become vulnerable .
 Reflexive Control Theory evolved again. With the introduction of global media outlets and development of social media platforms, Reflexive control theory evolved again .
 Russian Army Colonel Komov built on Leonenko’s work by adding several methods of applying the theory .
Each of these methods is greatly enhanced through the manipulation of mass media . Each of these techniques is greatly increased through the manipulations of massMedia .
 Joseph Nye introduced the term soft power, defining it as “the ability to get what you want through attraction rather than coercion or payments’
 Nye commented, “that the Russian curtailment of liberties, 22. Nye’s comments, ‘that the Russians curtailments of liberties’ Nye: “That the Russian curbsment of liberty, 22 Ibid, 246.
 Prestige draws attractiveness from both hard and soft power concepts, soft power from cultural allure and statesmanship . The center of both concepts revolve around attractiveness to a foreign audience .
 Robert Gilpen’s thoughts on prestige can be found in War & Change in World Politics . Gilpen's thoughts on the role of prestige are in the book .
 Russian leaders evolved or redefined a perceived Russian weakness into an unconventional weapon . As with the concept of maskirovka and reflexive control, Russian leaders have redefined their perceived weakness .
 Russia would risk international conflict to stop the movement of a war memorial in Estonia . This purposeful redefining of soft power explains why Russia wouldrisk international conflict .
 The unconventional warfare methods used to support these shifts also evolve over time . The unconventional Warfare methods used by the U.S. have also evolved over time.
 General Gerasimov’s writings reflect the latest pattern of thinking from senior Russian officials .
 The Russian theory of war allows you to defeat the enemy without ever having to touch him . The 2007 conflict with Estonia was an abject failure .
 Russia failed to achieve its strategic objectives and contributed instead to the long-term strengthening of NATO in the Baltic region . Russia's failure to achieve strategic objectives led to a long- term strengthening of the NATO region .
 The 2007 Estonia conflict varies from the other case studies in this thesis in three ways . The 2007 Estonian conflict is the most recent case study of the 2007 conflict .
 There is a serious challenge in directly attributing cyber actions to cyber attacks . Due to the unique makeup of the cyber domain and the lack of international cyber norms, there is a significant challenge to directly attribute cyber actions .
 Forensic mapping can lead to international networks of infected computers that are unknowingly being used for nefarious cyber activities .
 No direct evidence proves that Russian military hackers were behind the attacks against Estonia .
 This lack of direct attribution does not prevent the author from drawing inferences based on sizeable supporting, if circumstantial, evidence .
 The Bronze Soldier incident is the first time the Russian Federation attempted to coerce another state primarily through the cyber domain . The second way in which this case differs from the others is that this case is that the Russians are trying to coerced another state through cyber domain.
 The events also constitute the first overt coercive cyber attempt by a state in history . The events are also the first Overt coercive cyber attempts by a State in history.
 Russian cyber activities served in an enabling role aimed at suppressing communications in support of more conventional military operations . In the other case studies of this thesis, Russian cyber activity served in a enabling role .
 The intent of the virus is aimed at the denial of Iranian nuclear capability instead of coercing the Iranian government . The intent is not to coerce the government .
 Russian leaders likely never intended to commit conventional military forces to the operation, study finds .
 Estonia is the only country of the three that is a NATO member . The final way between this example in unconventional warfare and the others is that Estonia is only the only nation that is in NATO .
 Article V of the NATO Charter states that an attack on one NATO member is an attacked on all . Article V states that the attack on a member of the alliance is an attack.
 This Article carries considerable weight in influencing Russian strategic actions as the consolidated power of NATO allies potentially rivals or exceeds what Russia would be willing to commit in a limited war .
 In the 2007 conflict, this consideration played a large role in why Russia did not use conventional force options . In 2007, Russia used conventional force instead of conventional force .
 The country of Estonia has known more occupation in modern history than independence . The country has also had more occupation than independence.
After a brief period of independence from 1918 to 1940, Estonia was occupied by the Soviet Union . Estonia was invaded by the Soviets in the 1940s .
 Estonia became a part of the Soviet Union for the second time in a decade in 1944 . Estonia became part of a Soviet Union in 1944.
 Estonians felt they had traded one oppressive regime for another, forecasting tensions of 2007 . The Soviet Union “liberated’s Estonian territory from Nazi Germany, many Estonians said .
 On September 22, 1944, Soviet forces seized the Estonian capital city of Tallinn .
 Russia commemorated the event with a war memorial called the Bronze Soldier . The Bronze Soldier was the first of its kind .
 The Bronze Soldier consisted of a stone base structure, the bronze memorial, and an eternal flame . The bronze memorial was built in the Bronze Soldier's honor .
 The memorial also interred the remains of 14 Red Army soldiers who purportedly died in the battle for Tallinn .
 Estonian representatives extinguished the “eternal flame’ of the Bronze Soldier . The incident further exacerbates Estonian-Russian tensions, further exacerbating the tensions .
 ethnic Russians living in Estonia claimed they were being treated as second-class citizens . Over the next several years, ethnic Russians in Estonia said they had been treated as a second class citizens .
 In 2004, a series of events occurred that further worsened Estonian and Russian relations . The Estonian-Russian relations worsened in 2004, according to a report .
 Estonia became a member of NATO in March and the European Union in May . Estonia became member of the EU in May and is now part of NATO .
 Estonia's defense was finally bolstered by NATO's collective defense agreement . Estonia’s defense was also bolstered by the agreement .
 Estonia, and several other Baltic States, had sought a collective security arrangement in 1940 before it was incorporated into the Soviet Union . Estonia and other Baltic states had sought collective security arrangements in 1940 .
 Estonia's move by Estonia marked a significant step away from Russian influence . This move by the country is a significant move away from Russia .
After Estonia joined both NATO and the European Union, celebrations of Victory Day at the Bronze Soldier grew larger as ethnic Russians appeared to cling to the last overt symbol of former Soviet rule .
 At the same time, many Estonian citizens became less tolerant of the 4 Alistair Scrutton .
 There was also the 2004 Orange Revolution in Ukraine and the lesser known Tulip Revolution of Kyrgyzstan in 2005 .
 The Color Revolutions by Lincoln A Mitchell is a look at the revolutions and their impact . The color Revolutions are the latest in a long line of revolutions that have changed the world .
 The relocation of the Bronze Soldier soon polarized the population in Estonia . The population of Estonia was polarized by the move .
 Act provided legal basis for Estonian government to relocate the Bronze Statue . Act also allows for identification and return of remains of soldiers interred below it .
 Parliament passed the Law of Forbidden Structures on February 15, 2007 . Shortly following this Act, the Parliament passed a law of Forbidden structures .
 The Estonian Prime Minister thought the Law to be too antagonistic towards Russia and vetoed the proposal . Estonia's Prime Minister, however, thought the law was too antagonism towards Russia .
 Estonia announced an exploratory effort to see if there were interred bodies located under the memorial . Tensions between the two countries increased in April of 2007 .
 The Estonian government erected a large white tent over the structure on 26 April . The tent was erected in the Estonian capital, Estonia .
 This action caused widespread backlash from an ethnic Russian group called the Night Patrol . The Night Patrol is a Russian police force.
 Night Patrol focused on defending the original position of the Bronze Soldier . Made up of young ethnic Russians and some Russian citizens .
Members of the Night Patrol incited riots in the streets of Tallin leading to the worst violence in the city since the 1944 Russian occupation .
 While the riots occurred, a crippling series of cyber-attacks swept over Estonia . The riots occurred.
 The Estonian government decided to sever digital connections with the outside world . The attacks lasted from 26 April to 18 May 2007, only ending when the government decided.
 The Estonian government identified and repatriated all but four of the interred bodies . The Estonians identified and returned the bodies of the dead .
 Unlike the Georgian War and the conflict in Ukraine, the initial Russian objective in Estonia is clear .
 Russian leaders wanted to keep the Bronze Soldier memorial in its original location . The bodies of the Red Army soldiers remain undisturbed .
 There are two schools of thought regarding Russian intentions behind their actions . The Russian government has not commented on the matter .
 Russia used unconventional methods in an attempt to coerce Estonia into not moving the memorial . The first is that Russia used unorthodox methods in a bid to force Estonia to move the memorial. The first was that Russia tried unconventional methods.
 The second school of thought interprets Russian actions punishing Estonia for embarrassing Russia in the eyes of the international community . Estonia has been punished by Russia for its actions against Estonia .
 The cyber attacks began before the relocation of the memorial . This thesis does not side with either school of thought, though .
 This thesis evaluates the effectiveness of unconventional warfare methods in achieving their coercive goals in Estonia . The thesis is based on Estonia's coercive warfare methods .
 Russian sources have not openly discussed their key objectives . However, it is possible to infer them based on circumstances .
 The pro-Western outcomes of the revolutions led to a lessening of Russian influence in the region . The state's perceived loss of soft power for the state has been seen as a loss of hard power .
 Russia likely felt threatened by perceived NATO encroachment when Estonia became a member of the alliance . Estonia became member of NATO when it joined the alliance in 2010 .
 The Russian desire to test NATO’s strength and members’ commitment to NATO is likely to have a positive effect on NATO . These outcomes likely led to the Russian desire.
 Use of unconventional warfare efforts to deter Estonia into leaving the Bronze Soldier alone . 2.3 million people have been killed in Estonia in the past .
 Use of unconventional warfare efforts to coerce Estonia for relocating the Bronze Soldier . 3.5% of Estonia's Bronze Soldier is a Bronze Soldier. 3.7% of Estonian soldiers are Bronze Soldiers . The Bronze Soldier has been deployed in Estonia since 2007 .
Use of unconventional warfare to achieve objectives while keeping the conflict limited in scope . Use of unconventional Warfare to achieve objective objectives and keep the conflictlimited in scope. 4.5% of the conflict is unconventional warfare .
 The Russian government used non-violent subversive acts extensively to achieve objectives through unconventional means . As with future Russian operations in Georgia and the Crimea, the Russian government is using unconventional means to achieve goals .
 Of three unconventional warfare means, they relied heavily on actions through the cyber domain . Of the three, they rely heavily on action through cyber domain.
 Estonia was particularly vulnerable to attacks through the cyber domain . Estonia's citizens proudly marketed their country as “E-stonia’s” due to their level of internet connectivity .
 Cyberspace in Peace and War, 11. 24 digital ID and avatar that hosted medical and tax records .
 Jaan Priisalu, a former risk manager at a major Estonia bank, stated, “We live in the future.’s future,’ he said .
 Computers with internet protocol addresses originating from Russia began a Distributed Denial of Service attack . Estonian National Defense servers and Prime Minister’s office were attacked .
 Estonian Government erected a tent over the Bronze Soldier on 26 April 2007 . These attacks began shortly after representatives from the Estonian government erected the tent .
 A DDOS attack uses a system of either willing or corrupted computers to barrage a server with requests for information . The attack uses the system of both willing and corrupted computers .
 This barrage of requests temporarily overloads the server making information inaccessible and communication impossible . The server is overwhelmed with requests for information .
 The DDOS attacks increased over the next several days, temporarily shutting down the Estonian parliament . Most of Estonia’s banking capabilities include automatic teller machines .
Libicki’s work Chapter 2 Some Basic Principles. For more information on basic malignant cyber actions see Libicki's work Chapter 1 .
 Estonia's ability to govern effectively led to a loss of almost a billion dollars of revenue . Estonia’s capacity to govern was also shut down by the attacks .
 Several pieces of evidence suggest Russia was responsible for the attacks . Russia was behind the attacks, according to the report .
 The first piece is the number of IP addresses that linked back to Russia . The number of addresses linked to Russia is the first .
 Several addresses, for example, are limited directly to Russian state institutions . Several addresses are limited to state institutions.
 Russia used a bot-net that harnessed multiple computers throughout the world to both carry out the attack and to prevent direct attribution . These systems have a considerable cost to run and maintain, indicating government funding.
 The second piece of evidence was a series of instructions left on multiple Russian forums . The second part of the evidence was left on several forums .
 These instructions informed users how to conduct attacks, targets to hit and their priority, and when to hit the targets .
 The timing and scope of the operations far surpass organizational and technical capacities of random ‘patriotic’ hackers of the time . The timing of the operation far surpasses those of the random “patriotics of the times’s’
 The cyber-attacks began mere hours after Estonia erected a tent over the Bronze Soldier . Estonia erected the tent over a Bronze Soldier in a tent .
 The cyber attacks failed to achieve Russian objectives in Estonia . The cyber-attacks were centrally controlled and directed .
 The attacks are a series of computers networked together to apply mass effects on a network . The attacks appear to be the first of 20 Bot-nets .
 DDoS attacks are commonly used to create the volume of requests on a server that the attacks need to be successful . They are often used in attacks to create volume of attacks that the server needs to be able to handle .
Owners of computers that participate in Bot-nets are not even aware their systems are being compromised . Owners of computers who participate in bot-nets don't even know their system is compromised .
 The country weathered three days of the attacks while moving the statue to its desired location . The statue was moved to a new location .
 Russia's cyber actions failed to prevent the moving of the memorial, or even elicit an apology from Estonia for moving a symbol ‘sacred’ to Russians . Russia’s cyber actions didn't stop the memorial being moved .
 Estonia's decision to disconnect from outside sources came about from the country’s choice to disconnect with outside sources, albeit under duress . Estonia's monetary loss largely came from its choice to connect with the world .
 Estonians would receive more in aid and soft power from this incident than was lost over the three weeks . Ultimately, the Estonians will receive more from the incident than they would have lost .
 Punishment did not elicit an apology from the Estonian government . Punishment also did not elicited an apology.
 Cyber unconventional warfare methods failed to compel Estonia to take action . Cyber warfare methods did not compel Estonia.
 Employment of cyber assets, however, did assist the Russian Federation in keeping the conflict limited . The Russian Federation did not use cyber assets.
 Under siege, Estonia tried in vain to invoke the collective self-defense clause of Article V . Other NATO members did not agree that these events warranted a response using military forces .
 NATO's response to Russian actions proved to be slow and not overly reassuring to potential members . The event allowed the world to witness a long-term NATO response concerning the reinforcement of allies .
 Estonia now hosts the Cooperative Cyber Defense Center of Excellence in Tallinn . The center is based in Estonia .
 The Tallinn Manual is an important document in establishing cyber norms that could prevent cyber-attacks in the future or normalize 27 responses to those attacks . This Center houses the world’s leading annual cyber conference .
 Russian cyber attacks have severely hampered Estonia's ability to influence other NATO states . This response to Russian cyber actions has severely hampered their capability to influence Estonia, or other countries, in the future .
 Russian Federation also used several economic tools to achieve their objectives . Cyber attacks featured prominently as the main tool to conduct unconventional warfare .
 Russia made several attempts to apply economic pressure to Estonia . Estonia relocated the memorial to its new location in May of 2007 .
 Estonia saw a reduction in 60 percent of shipped goods originating from Russia . The country has seen a drop in 60 per cent of its shipments from the country .
Russia cut petroleum, coal, and fertilizer exports to Estonia by 50 percent . Russia cut petroleum and coal exports by 50 per cent .
 The Russian Federation can only apply limited pressure through energy manipulation due to other European countries being connected to Estonia’s energy pipelines . Estonia has large deposits of oil shale and is believed to have large deposits.
 Russia also halted operations on its segment of rail that operated within the GoRail international route . The suspension of goods is also a result of the suspension of operations on the international route.
 The economic pressure Russia used against Estonia failed to achieve Russian objectives in the same way as its cyber operations . Russia's economic pressure against Estonia fails to achieve Russia's objectives in same way.
 The financial weapons did not coerce Estonia to move the monument back into place . Estonia's financial weapons didn't coerce the country to move it back in place .
The economic pressure applied did not threaten to invoke Article V, thus fit within the Russian construct of a limited war . The economic pressure applying did not threat to invoke the Article V .
 The third nonviolent subversive effort Russia pursued was conducting information operations . The third subversive effort was conducted by Russia .
 These operations likely were aimed at garnering support for Russian actions and inciting Estonian youths to riot . These operations were likely to be aimed at gaining support for Russia's actions .
 Russian state-owned media repeatedly broadcasted videos that made rioters appear as peaceful protestors or covered the violent actions of the Estonian police .
 Several of its media sites broadcasted false interviews with detainees who claim to have witnessed executions by the Estonian police .
 The second disinformation event occurred with the visit of the Russian Foreign Minister to Estonia .
 The minister claimed that the Bronze Soldier had been sawed into pieces by the Estonians .
 In actuality, the statue was moved as one piece, but the striations that the Russian Foreign Minister referenced were casting lines from the bronzing process .
 The last event was a fake radio broadcast of an Estonian apology purportedly from Andrus Ansip, Estonia’s PM .
 If anything, the exposure of the blatant misinformation on Russian media led to what analyst Valeriano states as the shaming of Russia . The Russian media has been widely criticized for its misinformation on Russia .
 Russia's actions ended up vilifying Russia in the eyes of the international community and strengthening NATO over the long term . Its actions end up vilified Russia and strengthened NATO.
 Estonia relocated the Bronze Statue to its chosen location and became the driving force for constructing a new set of internationally agreed set of international buildings . Estonia relocated its Bronze Statue.
What it accomplished was to further cement Estonia’s position within NATO, not weaken it. What it did was to cement Estonia's position within the NATO .
 Russian Covert Violent Actions during the 2007 Estonian Conflict are difficult to attribute . Russia's covert violent actions are also difficult to directly attribute .
 Russian involvement can only be substantiated through reports and claims of Estonia Internal Security or the former Estonian Prime Minister Andrus Ansip .
Two sources suggest that the Russian FSB assisted in providing direction and supplies to the Tallinn rioters during the two days of rioting .
 Reports indicate Russian support of two different efforts leading up to the riots . Russian support for two different attempts leading to riots .
 The Estonian Secret Police documented meetings between Sergei Overtshenko and Dmitri Linter, the head of the Night Patrol, and the Russian Embassy's senior counselor .
 Estonian government banned sale of any alcohol to prevent its use in spreading violence or as flammable liquid .
 An Estonian named Aleksei Dressen, who was in Tallinn during the riots, was revealed by media sources to be an FSB officer . Five years later, he was named as an Estonian.
 Russia would later trade prisoners to get Dressen back . As evidence of the connection, Russia would then trade prisoners for Dressen .
 Estonian Internal Security documented an 18 April meeting between Andrei Zarenkov and Vadim Vassilyev . The political leader in Estonia opposed to relocating the Bronze Soldier .
 Russia is an active supporter of sowing discontent in Estonia over the relocation of the memorial . Russia also filled a directing role during the riots themselves . Russia has been involved in the recent riots in Estonia .
 Estonia's relocation efforts had the effect of accelerating the relocation efforts of the Estonia government . They actually had the effects of accelerating relocation efforts .
 Analysts suggest that the decision-making process of the Estonian government regarding relocating the Bronze Soldier accelerated the conflict, the direct opposite of Russia's intent .
 Similar to U.S. special operations, unconventional warfare is also a core mission for Russian Spetznaz units .
 For the first time in “cyber history, a state’s leaders attempted to utilize the cyber domain as the main medium to apply pressure and influence another state's decision making .
 Russian leaders tried to apply additional pressure through economic pressure, manipulation of energy supplies, and information operations . In concert with the cyber domain, Russian leaders try to apply more pressure through financial pressure .
 Russia's cyber-attacks backfired, leaving Russia to deal with the international fallout . Estonia stood up to Russia, and Russia's efforts backfired .
 The failure of unconventional warfare methods in Estonia shaped how Russia would use them to achieve national objectives in the future . Russia would have used the methods to achieve its national objectives .
 Russian leaders learned several lessons from Estonian experience, according to reports . Russian actions suggest that Russian leaders learn several lessons.
 The first is that unconventional warfare through the cyber domain is a powerful tool that can be used to increase the fog and friction of war and interrupt command and control .
 Russian leaders also learned that while the cyber domain is a powerful medium, operations cannot inflict enough pressure to coerce or punish when they are the main effort .
 In both the Georgian and Ukrainian wars, cyber operations would fill a supporting role, rather than the supported role . In both countries, cyber ops would fill the supporting role .
 The international community was unsure how to respond to cyber attacks . With the relative “newness’ of the cyber domain and a lack of established international norms on cyber behavior, the international community wasn't sure what to do .
 Russia may conduct limited operations without international interference. This uncertainty and delay potentially provides a time window in which Russia may Conduct limited operations. This could provide a time time window for Russia to conduct limited operation without interference .
 The operational use of cyber tools to support a lightning fast maneuver into Georgia in 2008 provides evidence that Russia learned this particular lesson well . Russia learned the lesson well.
 Russian unconventional warfare efforts in Estonia failed, but the relative low risk of the operations and lack of conventional violence made this conflict a valuable learning experience for Russia .
 lands occupied by Georgia acted as a buffer between Russia and the Muslim countries to the south . Over the last century, the lands occupied in Georgia acting as abuffer between the countries .
 Russia and NATO still view Georgia as a buffer between the Russian Federation and a North Atlantic Treaty Organization member, Turkey . Russia and Turkey still see Georgia as an important part of the NATO alliance .
 Other factors contribute to Georgia’s geographic importance in Russian eyes . Georgia is Russia's most populous state .
 Its Roki Pass offers one of the few transit points across a series of treacherous mountain ranges . It hosts the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline, a major gas pipeline for the area .
 Georgia shares its northeastern border with the unstable Russian province of Chechnya . Georgia also shares its northern border with Russia's unstable Russian state of Chechenya .
 Each of these geographical facts illuminates key Russian considerations for conducting a violent conflict against Georgia in the summer of 2008 .
 Tensions between South Ossetian separatist and Georgian police forces flared in the days leading up to 7 August . Several casualties on both sides were reported .
 The Georgians, observing the Russians massing ""peace keepers" in Northern and Southern Ossetia, sent armed forces to secure the South Ossetian capital Tskhinvali .
 The Russian 58th Army claimed to intervene for humanitarian purposes . The Russian “peacekeeping force,’ in actuality, advanced towards the city .
 Georgian forces fired artillery in front of the Russian advance . Georgian forces tried to buy time and negotiate space .
 Russia responded with a two-front ground campaign, a naval blockade, and a crippling cyber-attack . Russia took the artillery strike as a declaration of war .
 The two countries negotiated a cease-fire leaving South Ossetia and Abkhazia firmly in Russian hands . Five days later, the two countries agreed to a truce .
 The dates of 7-12 August, however, are as misleading and as contentious as the title of the conflict .
 The Russian downing of a Georgian Unmanned Aerial Vehicle by a Russian MIG-29 violated the United Nations General Assembly’s Resolution 3314 . The two countries were legally at war four months before the established date .
 The Russo-Georgian War began shortly after the election of Vladimir Putin as Prime Minister in 1999 . Other authors, such as Marcel Van Herpen, suggest that the war began soon after Putin's election as PM .
 The difference in the dates is not just an exercise in historical pedantry, it is a historical exercise in history .
 The date the Russian Federation decided to pursue conflict with Georgia is 2 is 2 . The title of the war itself is still a hotly debated topic .
 The Guns of August, 68, is critical to understanding the Federation's objectives, narratives, and the unconventional tactics involved in the dispute . It is the first time the Federation has been able to address the issue.
 Russia and Georgia have been involved in a series of frictions between the two countries . Russia's President Vladimir Putin has been in power since the 1990s . Putin's government has been criticized by Russia's foreign minister for its actions .
 As in Estonia, in 1991 Georgia voted to separate itself from the Soviet Union .
 The votes from the various areas of Georgia were not unanimous in their support for separation .
 Soviet leaders treated three regions of Georgia, Adjara, Abkhazia, and South Ossetia, as autonomous areas . The regions were mostly left to govern themselves .
 Each of the three areas had large populations of non-ethnic Georgian minorities . These considerations were believed to be vital in securing equal treatment compared to ethnic Georgians .
 The Georgian separation and proposed governmental reform eliminated these provisions in the contested areas . The Georgianseparation and proposed government reform eliminated the provisions .
 The announcement of Georgian independence led the leaders of South Ossetia and Abkhazia to immediately petition the Russian Federation for sponsorship and recognition as independent areas outside of Georgian control .
 Militia groups formed, and Russia quickly sent officers to lead the militias and provide aid to these groups . This armed tension eventually escalated into the Abkhaz War .
 militias in South Ossetia also clashed with Georgian forces. Shortly afterward, militias in the region also clashed.
 Russia, primarily responsible for sustaining and instigating the uprising, asserted itself as the negotiating power between the two combatants . Russia is responsible for the uprising and the uprising .
 Georgia, forced to capitulate, signed an agreement heavily in Russia’s favor . Georgia was forced to sign the agreement in Russia's favor .
 Relations between Georgia and Russia remained relatively stable after this agreement . Russia's focus on Chechen Wars in the years to follow was the focus on the Chechen wars .
 Vladimir Putin's rise as Prime Minister in 1999 would change with his rise as PM in 1999 . This stability, however, would change. This stability would also change with Vladimir Putin being PM .
 This thesis uses the year 2000 as the starting point of the ""Five Day War" due to this shift in Russian intent . This thesis is based on the year2000 as the start of the "Five Day war"
 Using this timeframe, challenges many of the stated and perceived Russian national objectives for the conflict with Georgia . The conflict has been described as a conflict between Russia and Georgia .
 Russia's aggression in Georgia was a response to the 2003 Rose Revolution, the 2004 election of Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili, and the corresponding turn to the West for aid and NATO membership .
 If the conflict's beginning was in 2000, it would have been more successful if it had a territorial conquest at its heart . But it may have also been more effective if it was a plan that had territorial conquest.
 In examining Russian national objectives concerning Georgia, three different sets of objectives arise . In examining Russia's national objectives, the author says.
 There are the stated aims of the country delivered by Putin himself, and a rare disclosure of 6 Cornell, Guns of August 2008 .
Three sets of sources present conflicting reasonings behind the objectives, so an examination of their thoughts is required to distill a comprehensive list .
 Russia's objectives in 2000 were essentially the same as in 1991 when Georgia broke away from the Soviet Union . Van Herpen states that Russia’s objectives were essentially similar to in 2000 .
 Russia would also incorporate South Ossetia into the Federation which would secure critical mountain passes that lined Russia's southern border . These objectives would also allow Russia to incorporate the region in the Federation . The Russian Federation would also be able to incorporate South Caucasus into the federation .
 The actions would prevent a state which opposed Russia's actions from harboring Chechen rebels . The action would also prevent Russia's action against Chechen separatists .
 Vladimir Putin offered the second set of objectives personally to President George W Bush at the outbreak of conventional fighting on 7 August . The two leaders attended the 2008 Olympics in Beijing .
 Putin stated that the Georgians had conducted an offensive into South Ossetia, including ethnic cleansing of over 2,000 South Ossetsian and Russians .
 Putin claimed Russia was intervening humanitarianly to 9 Van Herpen, Putin’s Wars, 206 . Putin claimed that Russia had intervened humanitarianly.
 Georgia allowed Russian planes to be based in Georgia and have Georgian overflight permissions several times throughout Russia's conflict with the Chechen territory . Georgia allowed Russia to bebased in Georgia.
 Saakashvili denied Russian requests for the use of basing and terrain, an occurrence that enraged Russia . However, there is an instance where SaakASHvili refused Russian requests.
For many reasons shown later in this chapter, this set of objectives hardly appears accurate . For many reasons, the objectives hardly appear accurate .
 The third set of objectives come from a Russian officer, who disclosed them after the hostilities of the Georgian war concluded .
 This set of objectives potentially carries the bias that they were disclosed only because Russia achieved the objectives . Russia achieved its objectives, the report says .
 Russian Federation sought to achieve each of the above five objectives while pursuing a limited war . The Russian Federation seeks to achieve every of theabove five objectives .
 Russia wanted to wage war under the threshold that would involve foreign intervention . The Estonian case was similar to that of the Estonian state .
 NATO action emboldened Russia even though one of Russia's leading calculations remained that the U.S. and its allies would remain out of the war . The United States and allies would still remain in the war.
 Russia employed an arsenal of unconventional warfare tools, including nonviolent subversive actions . Russia employed a range of unconventional Warfare tools, such as unconventional warfare .
 The opening salvoes of the Georgian War began in the year 2000 when the Russian Federation began targeting the legitimacy of Georgian sovereignty .
 Georgian assets felt the strain from dealing with the Russian actions . The Russian actions alone failed to achieve Russian national objectives effectively .
 These subversive actions included Political-immigration warfare, economic warfare, information warfare, and cyber warfare . The actions included political-immigration Warfare, economic Warfare, and information warfare .
 In 2000, Russia announced a new visa system that applied only to Georgia . Russia announced the new system in 2000 .
 Requiring visas to transit through the Commonwealth of Independent States was against the Commonwealth's laws . Both Russia and Georgia belonged to the Commonwealth .
 Russia gave South Ossetia and Abkhazia drastically relaxed visa standards . Russia additionally gave the two countries drastically relaxed visas standards .
 The first repercussion Georgia faced was a lowering of status in relation to other CIS members who were not being penalized by visa applications . Georgia faced a lower of status for other members of the CIS .
 Russian actions created different standards for the Georgian regions of South Ossetia/Abkhazia and the rest of Georgia . A second, more sinister repercussion is that the Russian actions create different standards .
 Georgia’s authority to 14 Welle, Deutsche. This variance in standards politically challenged Georgia's authority . Georgia has been challenged by a number of different standards .
 The visa system also had a large impact economically on daily commuters who lived in Georgia and worked in Russia .
 Russia doubled down on immigration as a form of unconventional warfare by issuing Russian passports to South Ossetians and Abkhazians . In 2002, Russia doubled up on immigration.
 This act directly violated international sovereignty laws as Russia cannot issue passports to non-Russian citizens . The act directly violates international sovereignty law .
 To the international community, Georgia no longer possessed the capability to defend its sovereignty, as a foreign state claimed Georgian citizens as their own . To the world, Georgia is no longer capable of defending its sovereignty .
 The passports also made traveling into Russia easier for Abkhazians and South Ossetians who now also received the perquisites of being Russian citizens .
 South Ossetia and Abkhazia have an increased identification with Russian culture and way of life over Georgian culture . This gain in benefits and quality of life led to an increase in benefits for the people.
 The most insidious and long-reaching impact of the Russian passport issuance was the creation of a new body of “Russians’ living abroada new Russian diaspora .
 Russia laid the plans for Russia to later claim crimes against their new ‘citizens’ as a just reason to go to war . These seemingly innocuous actions in 2002 laid the plan for Russia.
 Unconventional warfare by passportization unquestionably shaped the Georgian operating environment for future conventional actions by 16 Ronald Asmus .
In this capacity, unconventional warfare assisted future conventional actions in achieving three out of the six national objectives . South Ossetia, adjusted borders of Abkhazia and humiliating Georgian leadership were among the objectives .
 The actions were ineffective in directly achieving the objectives without being exploited by conventional forces . The actions, however, were ineffective, according to the military .
 Georgia's dire plea to NATO to NATO was rejected in 2008 . Russia showed such blatant disregard for international norms regarding sovereignty . Georgia's plea was rejected.
 Russia violated international norms, but did not trigger interference from NATO forces . NATO forces did not interfere with Russia .
 Russia stopped accepting Georgian visas to aid in waging economic warfare against Georgia . In addition to issuing visas and passports as a political tool, Russia also stopped accepting Georgia visas .
 Russia responded with overwhelming economic force to coerce Georgia . In 2006, Russia arrested four Federal Security Service of Russian Federation spies .
 Russia also closed all air corridors, railways, and roads leading towards Georgia . Russia also shut down all air corridor, railways and roads.
 These actions effectively blockaded Georgia, a move often interpreted as an act of war . Georgia's actions effectively blocked Georgia, according to CNN.
 Russia also banned both spring water and wine from Georgia, two of Georgia's most significant exports . Georgia also banned spring water, wine and spring water from Georgia .
 Georgia found all four spies guilty but turned the officers back over to Russia . Georgia found the officers guilty and turned them back to Russia.
 Upon the FSB officers' release, the physical isolation of Georgia has dissipated .
 Positive objectives, in contrast, are achievable by applying military or other sources of national power . Positive objectives are in contrast to those achievable by using military or others .
 subsidies allowed the Georgian government to avoid the pressure of regime change . These subsidies allowed them to avoid pressure from regime change.
 The economic pressure Russia applied did not contribute to achieving any of the three territorial-based national objectives . The economic pressures Russia applied didn't contribute to achieve any of these objectives .
 Russian leaders also waged an extensive information campaign against Georgia . Combined with both political and economic pressure, Russian leaders waged an information campaign .
 This campaign focused on delegitimizing the Georgian government and justifying Russia’s claims . This campaign was aimed at delegitimating the Georgia government .
 Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda published a psychological analysis of Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili in 2008 .
 In Ukraine, this report resurfaced appearing to be published by a well-respected military think tank .
 Analysts who looked more closely realized that the publisher had an additional word in their organization’s title .
 This tactic was a clear attempt to borrow the legitimacy of the think tank to discredit President Saakashvili . This tactic has been used to discredit the president, says the BBC .
 The report detailed the instability of the President who was known to fly into rages and make rash decisions . The report also detailed how the President was known.
 Strategic Studies Institute, 2011. 43 challenged the character of the war for those Georgians who had access to the Russian disinformation efforts .
 President of the government the information operation campaign cast doubt on the entirety of the Georgian government from 2004 and onwards .
 Misdirection via press releases also played an instrumental role in creating and sustaining a Russian narrative .
 The narrative was that South Ossetia and Russia were the victims of this conflict and that rash Georgian actions led to genocide and ethnic cleansing . This narrative is that the Georgian actions lead to genocide.
 Russian news agency reports Georgian UAV flights indicated an imminent invasion of Abkhazia by Georgia .
 Moscow Channel One broadcasted round-the-clock coverage of Georgian troops along the border . It claimed the massing of Georgian forces was part of Georgian peacekeeping forces .
 By July Moscow One changed its reports to cover the "massive build-up of troops" in Georgia across from the South Ossetian border .
 Russia used these contrived stories to justify, or use as cover in case exposed, massive reinforcement of Russian "peacekeeping" forces in both Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Russians used these stories as an excuse to stage forces for the eventual invasion, just as they had in Czechoslovakia in 1968 .
 Fifty Russian broadcasters flew into the South Ossetian capital, Tskhinvali, two days before hostilities broke out .
 The duration of the war was so short, having the preponderance of news sourced from Russian anchors cemented a Russian perspective of activities in the area .
 The flying in of the reporters gives credence to Russia's claim that Russia planned the invasion of Georgia .
 The combined effects of the information operation against Georgia, however, had mixed results . The combined results of the operation were mixed .
 The creation and protection of the "South Ossetian Victim" narrative directly enabled a conventional Russian response without foreign interference for the five days of the armed conflict .
 The disinformation of the massed Georgian forces also allowed for the temporary staging of additional Russian troops along the Georgian border, thus temporarily achieving Russia's third objective . The disinformation also allowed the temporary stage of extra Russian troops .
 These actions are perhaps best interpreted as shaping actions solely for the benefit of a planned conventional invasion. These actions, however, are not intended to be used for the purpose of a conventional invasion .
Supporting this information operations campaign was a crippling cyber campaign. Supporting this information operation was a devastating cyber campaign .
 The investigations show an extremely high level of coordination and scale that organized criminal organizations do not have the capability to conduct. They do note that the investigations show that the investigation shows an extremelyhigh level ofcoordination and scale .
 The Russian government also point the finger at the Russian government for coordination of the campaign .
 decentralization allowed Russia to claim that concerned citizens and hackers outside the control of the Russian government committed the cyber activities . This decentralization let Russia claim that concerns citizens were outside of the government's control .
 This camouflaging of Russian involvement is an excellent example of operational level maskirovka . This is a good example of the Russian involvement in the military .
 The scope and timing of the activities show Russian orchestration . The cyber practitioners may not have been from the Russian government .
Planning and coordination that far precedes even July. An undertaking of this magnitude requires planning and coordinating that far before July .
 Russia claimed Georgia was trying to cover up civilian deaths caused by Georgian force in recent skirmishes . Russia quickly claimed that Georgia was attempting to hide civilian deaths .
 Georgian news competitor announced that the company did not hack into its South Ossetian rival's site . The Georgian news company announced that it had not hacked into its rival's website .
 The DDoS attacks increased in intensity as the conflict progressed, eventually shutting down Georgian Banking capacity and the cellphone 27 Hollis, 4.5 years old .
 The cyber-attacks focused both on large infrastructure and local networks to blanket communications along Russian maneuvers . The attacks focused on both the infrastructure and the local networks .
 Cyber support at the tactical and operational level, such as Russian maneuver to Gori, indicates a close tie between the cyber practitioners and military planners .
 Russia used the cyber domain to effectively cut off Georgia's capability to communicate within government agencies . Georgia lost the ability to communicate a Georgian narrative of events.
 Russia gleaned information on Georgian military movements inside South Ossetia in order to defeat the outnumbered force more efficiently . In addition to the DDoS attacks, Russia gathered information on military movements in the region .
 Cyber intrusions also enabled degradation of several government sites . An image comparing Saakashvili to Hitler was published on the President's main site .
 Cyber played a significant role in supporting the Russian advance into Georgia . Cyber, as an unconventional warfare tool, played a major role in support of Russia's advance .
 Russia increased the fog and friction of war at all levels. Effectively destroying Georgia's capacity to communicate and exercise military command and control before the outset of conflict .
 Saakashvili made strategic decisions under increasingly stressful conditions . He made decisions without communication with his forces .
 At the operational level, the lack of communication allowed the masking of Russian troops from North Ossetia into South Ossetian .
 This camouflaging of movement through cyber is a reinvention of maskirovka at the operational and tactical levels of war . This camouflage of movement is a re-imagination of the cyber world. This camouflages of movement.
 The Russian use of the cyber domain did contribute to achieving Moscow’s national objectives in Georgia . The cyber domain helped Moscow achieve its national objectives.
 The unconventional use of cyber warfare assisted conventional forces in South Ossetia and Abkhazia largely uncontested . The unconventional uses of cyber Warfare assisted conventional force in moving into the region .
 The cyber actions demonstrated that Georgia could not protect its sovereignty in the cyber domain . The cyber action demonstrated thatGeorgia could not protection its sovereignty.
 Estonia and Georgia developed a closer relationship as Estonia assisted in Georgia's cyber recovery . If anything on this front, Georgia and Estonia developed a close relationship .
 The cyber campaign drew the most attention from the U.S. and NATO members . Of all the subversive nonviolent acts, the campaign drew most attention .
 The United States issued a stern warning to stop cyber-attacks and pursue a ceasefire agreement . The U.S. issued the stern warning.
 Russia denied that the cyber efforts were under their control . Russia also claimed that Russia news agencies were falling to cyber attacks of the same nature .
 Russian unconventional warfare acts that fell into the nonviolent category directly achieved only one out of the stated five national objectives in the Georgian conflict .
 The combination of immigration, economic, information, and cyber warfare eroded international confidence in the Georgian government .
 The ease with which the Russians committed these acts displayed that the Georgian government was incapable of defending itself . The ease of these acts showed that the Russian government was unable to defend itself .
 Russian subversive acts failed to directly achieve control over South Ossetia, adjusted borders for 35 Robert Haddick . Russian subversive act failed to direct control over the region, according to a report .
Russian unconventional actions did assist in conventional forces achieving these objectives . Russian unconventional actions helped in Russia's success, according to a report .
Long-term achievement of preventing Georgia from joining NATO may have been jeopardized . Georgia has emerged as the victim in the eyes of the international community in the months after the war .
 The Russian narrative debunked, camouflaged movement uncovered, and heavy skepticism of Russian denial of using cyber warfare . The subversive actions of Russia came to light, the Russian narrative was debunked .
 Russian Covert Violent Actions during the Russo-Georgian War 2008 were Russia’s attempts to pursue unconventional warfare through violent covert actions . Less numerous than the myriad subversive actions waged against Georgia between 2000-2008 were Russia's attempts to pursued unconventional warfare .
 Russian49 led South Ossetian militias, ethnic cleansing carried out by these same militias, and helicopter strikes against key targets . These covert actions consisted of a Reflexive Control campaign organized by Russian49 .
 Shortly after the downing of the Georgian UAV in Abkhazia, South Ossetian militias, funded, equipped, and led by Russian FSB officers, began attacks against Georgian police .
 These attacks appeared to harass and apply pressure to Georgian leadership . These attacks appear to be aimed at Georgian leaders .
 The militias escalated from bombing Georgian police officers to conducting mortar attacks on Georgian villages .
 The intent behind the shelling appeared to be to provoke Saakashvili into sending troops into South Ossetia and making Georgian forces appear as the aggressors .
 Georgia making the first move against South Ossetia would seemingly prove the Russian narrative and cause for war . Georgia's first move would seem to be the first to prove a Russian narrative .
 Georgia's advance into South Ossetia proved the value of these tactics in achieving Russia's decision . Georgia’s advance into the region proved thevalue of this tactic in achieving the decision . Russia's victory over Georgia in the last 16th round of the World Cup.
 South Ossetian militias also proved useful in gaining control over villages in the region . The militias also gained control of villages in Ossetia .
 As the Russian 58th Army progressed south towards the South Ossetian capital, the militias conducted ethnic cleansing, removing any Georgians.
 Russian peace keeping forces secured the villages in which the atrocities occurred . Russia denied any involvement with the militias or condoning the militia's activities .
 The Norwegian Helsinki Committee and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe both condemned the acts in 2009 after a year of thorough investigations . The Council of European Union also condemned the act in 2009 .
 Ethnic Georgians make up only seven percent of the remaining population of South Ossetia . As of 2016, ethnic Georgians made up only 7 percent of remaining population .
 The actions were made possible solely through the conventional activities that preceded them . South Ossetia's ethnic cleansing actions allowed for tighter control of the country .
 Ethnic cleansing activities likely would have drawn widespread support for Georgia . Had the activities not been overshadowed by the widespread disinformation operations and cyber targeting of the news agencies, it would have been more widespread support .
 Russian military hardware was used covertly to either pressure Georgia or mask movements along the border . Two incidents show Russian military equipment was used to pressure Georgia .
 Russian helicopters conducted a strike against Georgian administration buildings in Abkhazia, destroying the buildings .
 The helicopter attacks persisted throughout the next day, striking proGeorgian villages . The attacks continued throughout the day .
 Russia denied it was involved in the attacks, but later reports showed that Abkhazia did not have the equipment used to conduct the attacks . Russia denied that it was involvement in the attack, but reports later showed that it did not .
 Russian aircraft were also utilized a year later on 6 August 2008 when two SU-25 aircraft attempted to bomb a Georgian radar site . Russian aircraft also used in the attempt to bomb Georgian radar sites .
 The destruction of the radar system would have allowed greater masking of troop movements for the eventual Russian invasion . The destruction would have been more effective for Russia .
 The attacks were not directly attributable to Russia, but had negative ramifications nonetheless .
 The first was the March 13th vote of the Georgian Parliament to seek NATO membership . The vote was the first to seek membership in NATO .
 The United States Senate voted to sponsor both Georgia and Ukraine's membership . This was followed by the U.S. Senate’s vote to sponsor Georgia and Ukrainian membership . The Senate's vote was followed immediately by the United States senate's vote.
 The 2008 airstrike also delegitimized the Russian claim that they were caught unaware by Georgia's advance and had not preplanned the invasion of Georgia .
 The militias, reminiscent of the World War II partisan movement, proved to be the more effective tool . The militias were more effective than the traditional partisan movement .
 The militias’ use of covert violent actions to achieve a Reflexive Control Theory aim and ‘force’ Georgia on to the offensive enabled Russia to appear as the peacekeeper and the South Ossetian as the victims .
 Russia responded with conventional forces to secure both South Ossetia and Abkhazia without immediate legal objections from the international community . This outlook allowed Russia to respond with conventional force to secure the two countries without legal objections .
 Over the long-term, the militias’ actions once again cast doubts on Russia’s behavior and the legitimacy of its actions . Over the past few years, Russia's militias' actions have been criticized for their actions .
 The ethnic cleansing did immediately contribute to even more control of South Ossetia . But it did more to discredit Russia in the eyes of the international community .
 The Russian Federation’s conventional response to the 7 August 2008 Georgian advance into South Ossetia consisted of a multi-domain counterattack . Author’'s original work Russian Conventional Aggression.
 The operation ended with one major battle and most Russian actions going uncontested . Most Russian actions went uncontested throughout the conflict .
The use of conventional force achieved four out of the six Russian national objectives by 14 August 2008 . The use of traditional force achieved 4 out of six Russian objectives by 16 August 2008.
Conventional forces also used elements of maskirovka to achieve their objectives . Conventional forces, however, also use elements of masksirovkas to achieve objectives .
 The 58th Army, the main force responsible for the Russian ground invasion of Georgia, moved into North Ossetia last week of July 2008 .
 The unit participated in a massive combined exercise called KAVKAZ 2008 . The unit took part in a huge combined exercise known as KAVkAZ 2008.
Army exercises resembled maneuvers required to conduct an extensive invasion of another country . The announced focus of the exercise was counterterrorism .
 The exercise included coordinated air strikes and was supported by naval operations in the Black Sea . The exercise was part of a joint exercise with the British Navy .
 The fliers listed the strengths and weaknesses, not of potential terrorist targets, but the Georgian military . The Georgian military listed the weaknesses of the military .
 The handouts even broke down information on the training levels of each of the five Georgian brigades .
 The 58th Army maneuvered to the North Ossetian side of the Roki Tunnel .
 This was the one avenue of approach into South Ossetia that could support mechanized forces maneuver through the mountainous terrain . This was one avenue to approach into the region that could be used to support mechanization .
 The KAVKAZ 2008 exercise is the epitome of an operational plan utilizing the principles of maskirovka . The K AVKAZ2008 exercise is a part of an operation plan that uses the principles and principles of masksirovkas .
 Maskirovka was not only used to plan the operation, but also to preposition key personnel . The operation was also used to place key personnel in place .
 The 58th Army trained in the mountains of North Ossetia . The force's future commander worked as the South Ossetian Defense Minister .
 General Vasily Lunev, an Army level commander, was relieved of his position at the start of 2008 . He moved to the South Ossetian post .
 General Lunev transitioned from Defense Minister to commander of the 58th Army . Within hours of the Georgian advance into South Ossetia, he was in charge of the military .
 General Lunev's assignment in South Ossetia was to build situational awareness for the commander before he led the invasion to secure Abkhazia and South Ossetsia .
 The Russian Air Force violated Georgian air space in July . The violation was part of the build-up of ground forces .
 The Air Force flew four fighter aircraft into Georgia to deter the use of Hermes reconnaissance drones over the South Ossetian air space .
 Russia responded with a naval blockade in the Black Sea and a twopronged attack from the 58th Army . Russia responded to the attack with a military blockade in Black Sea .
 This attack created a contested front in South Ossetia and an uncontested front along the Abkhazian border .
 In the conflict’s only significant engagement Russian forces defeated the vastly outnumbered Georgian forces near the outskirts of Tskhinvali .
 As the conflict ended, Russian forces guarded the borders of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Georgia leaders appeared to be humiliated by their inability to protect their country .
 The only objective not achieved by Russia, preventing Georgia from becoming a NATO member, remains to be seen . Georgia is currently a member of the European Union .
 As with the covert non-violent actions, Russia’s conventional aggression caused the state to lose soft power appeal internationally while gaining military prestige .
 The unconventional tactics ranged from immigration warfare, economic warfare, creating a Russian diaspora, to masking conventional troop movements . The diasporaspora was used as a partisan force to mask conventional troop movement .
 Russian unconventional warfare tactics were not effective in directly achieving Russian interests . Russia's actions destabilized Georgia over a long period of time .
 By 2006 Russian leaders switched efforts from utilizing unconventional warfare tactics to attaining objectives, to enabling a conventional force to fight a limited war .
 Russian leaders used unconventional tactics to shape the political environment and raise the international tolerance of armed conflict . Russian leaders are trying to raise the world's tolerance to armed conflict.
 There are limitations in Russia's capacity to replicate some of their more successful actions . There are limited to Russia's ability to replicate the success of some of its most successful actions.
 Immigration warfare is primarily limited to former states of the Soviet Union that have a Russian diaspora or a population willing to play that role .
 The use of an exercise to mass forces on the border is a threat that Russia can repeat only in the Ukraine . Russia can use the exercise only in Ukraine.
 There are limits to Russian capabilities, but there are also lessons to observe in what Russia could reapply in Ukraine . In many cases, Russia did, and in many cases did.
 Russian militias are using Reflexive Control to appear as the victim and the "just actor" Russian cyber practitioners are all unconventional tactics that are not geographically bound to Russia .
 These tactics could arise in conflicts around the world in attempts to give Russia advantage, such as in Syria .
 Russia paid close attention to lessons it learned in Georgia 56 and refined its unconventional tactics before applying them five years later in Ukraine . Russia paidclose attention to the lessons in Georgia, Georgia and Ukraine .
Marcel Van Herpen wrote the month before the Russian annexation . This would offer Russia a pretext for intervening in Ukraine in order to protect its nationals .
 Ukrainian citizens in the city of Kiev and other major cities of Western Ukraine erupted in protest . Hours after the announcement, Ukrainians in Kiev and others in Western Ukraine erupt in protest.
 The Euromaidan movement called for closer ties between Ukraine and Europe and a distancing from Russia . The protests evolved into the Eurom Maidan movement .
 The destabilization the demonstrations caused eventually led to Yanukovych's flight from office several months later . The demonstrations led to the president's flight.
 The power vacuum this flight created, and years of Russian shaping operations, presented Vladimir Putin with an opportunity to act in support of his country’s interests in the region .
 He capitalized on the opportunity and swiftly utilized a myriad of unconventional warfare methods . He capitalised on the chance and swiftly used a variety of unconventional methods .
 Crimea annexation in 2014 resulted in the relatively uncontested annexation of Crimea in 2014, but also the frozen war of Eastern Ukraine and crippling sanctions emplaced upon Russia .
 Security analysts and Western leaders alike were surprised at the speed of the Russian operations .
Pg 58 Russian leaders began to lay the groundwork, through shaping operations, years before Yanukovych fled office . Pg 58 Russians began to lie the groundwork for their leaders in the 1990s .
 Russian officials once again overplayed their hand by becoming engaged in Eastern Ukraine . The tactics were overwhelmingly successful in Crimea, but they were also successful in Ukraine .
 Russia is facing international condemnation for a country that appeared to be imploding . To understand why Russia would risk international condemnation requires a brief look at Russo-Ukrainian history and Ukraine's geostrategic placement .
 In 1654 the Tsar of Russia and the leader of the Ukrainian Hetmanate Cossacks signed a treaty . The latter essentially swearing fealty to Moscow .
 Russia forced Poland to capitulate after 13 years of fighting . The Eternal Peace Treaty of 1686 ended with the Eternal Peace treaty . Poland was forced to accept the treaty .
 With the establishment of the Soviet Union in 1922, Ukrainians were allowed a limited autonomous rule under, Joseph Stalin . With the birth of the USSR, Ukrainians could have an autonomous rule .
 Ukraine became an essential part of the Soviet state as its land was the most fertile in the Union . It had access to the Black Sea and the Black sea . Ukraine became a key part of Russia as it became an important part of it .
 After World War II millions of Russians moved into the Crimea as well as the Eastern areas of Ukraine known as the Donbas region .
 At the same time, Stalin ordered the relocation of many Ukrainians, including the native population, from Crimea to Siberia .
 From 1932-1933 through Stalin’s forced food exportation a massive famine ravaged Ukraine now known as the Holodomor . The famine ravaged the country from 1932 to 1933 .
 Human Rights Watch, 1991. 59 transferred the Crimean region back to Ukrainian autonomous control .
 Some Russians would claim that Crimea has belonged to Russia since 1654 . Later on, some Russians would say that the Crimea has been in Russia for more than a decade .
 The people of Ukraine voted for independence on 1 December 1991 . The Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 .
 When it separated from the Soviet Union, Ukraine possessed one of the largest militaries in Europe . It was one of Europe's largest military bases .
 Black Sea Fleet is located in Sevastopol, Crimea, and Ukraine’s nuclear arsenal . Two key elements of this military strength were the Black Sea fleet, located in Crimea . Ukraine's nuclear arsenal is also located in the Crimea .
 Ukrainian government agreed to give up its nuclear arsenal in exchange for Russian acknowledgment of both the territory and sovereignty of Ukraine .
 In 1997, Russia and Ukraine signed an agreement splitting the Black Sea Fleet in half . Three years later, in 1997, the two countries signed a deal to split the Black sea Fleet .
 Russia leased the Sevastopol navy base, its only warm water port which allows year-round naval activity . The base is Russia's only warm-water port .
 Russia and Ukraine’s long history together and intermingling of the populace has led to Russia claiming a need to protect ethnic Russians and Russian speakers in Ukraine, a situation similar to Georgia .
 location of Russia's sole warm water port on Ukrainian soil makes the Crimean region strategically important to Russia . The Crimean region is Russia's only warm water ports .
 The Crimea and Donbas region also have vast natural gas resources making the area economically desirable . The region is also potentially threatening to Russia's energy strength in Europe .
 Russia has a vested interest in demonstrating the capability to influence the Ukrainian government . As the largest former state of the collapsed Soviet Union, Russia has an interest in influence in Ukraine .
 Divining Russian objectives in Ukraine presents the same challenges as the Estonian case study. Divining Russia objectives in the Ukraine presents same challenges.
 Russian officials have given a stated purpose for intervening in Ukraine . Russian officials give a stated reason for intervening .
 The same officials denied Russian forces being present in Ukraine for over a year . The same Officials, however, deny Russian forces were present for more than a year.
 The author’s perceived Russian objectives are based on prior actions and statements . The strategic objectives listed below are the author's perceived Russian goals .
 There are four perceived and one stated Russian national objectives for its involvement in Ukraine . There are also four perceived Russian objectives for their involvement .
 The primary perceived objective is the long-term subversion of Ukraine’s sovereignty . Ukraine's sovereignty is being subverted by Ukraine's political leaders .
 The word ‘Ukraine’ means borderland, and that is exactly what Russia seeks to maintain . Russia wants to maintain borderland .
 Having a weak satellite state amenable to Russian influence is a critical part of Russia’s regional strategic plan .
 Russia’s wish to keep Ukraine out of both the European Union and NATO at worst, or the West's spheres of influence at best. Subordinate to this objective is Russia's wish to keeping Ukraine out.
 The risk from Ukraine being influenced by NATO is a military concern directly threatening the border land between Russia and other NATO members .
 Putin has alluded to this threat several times in international speeches . Putin has hinted at this threat in recent speeches .
 Ukraine’s acceptance of the Association Agreement would have forced Ukraine to adopt economic standards hostile to the Russian controlled Eurasian Economic Union .
 The acceptance of the AA could also have paved the way to Ukraine’s membership in the European 7 Stephen Dayspring . The AA is the first time the AA has been accepted by the EU .
 Putin's long-term advisor Alexander Dugin is a chief proponent of this strategy . Dugin has been Putin's advisor for more than 20 years .
 Russia's sole warm water port in Crimea hosts the Black Sea Fleet . Crimea is one of Russia's only ways to project naval power year-round into the Mediterranean and elsewhere .
 The Fleet's location is a major strategic concern for Russian leaders . They were not satisfied with lease agreements that could be revoked or not renewed . The Fleet is a key strategic concern.
 Putin's stated goal for intervening in Ukraine sounds eerily similar to the humanitarian ‘just cause’ of the Georgian War . Russia’s perceived goals are similar to those of Russia's perceived goals .
 EU observers questioned Russian leaders about the clear violation of sovereignty . They responded that Russia was providing humanitarian aid to beleaguered Russian speakers in Eastern Ukraine .
 Both claims of Russia protecting rights of its ethnic population to vote and providing humanitarian aid were untrue .
 Secure long-term naval basing rights in Sevastopol Non-Violent Subversive Acts during the Ukrainian Conflict .
 Russian leaders began subversive acts in Ukraine well before the annexation of Crimea . Russian leaders started subversive acts well before Crimea annexation .
 Authors Stephen Blank and Peter Hussey make the argument that Russia began non-violent actions in 2006 . Other evidence suggests Russian unconventional warfare efforts against Ukraine began in 2004 .
 Russian manipulation and interference with the Ukrainian presidential election started a ten-year campaign of subversive action . It consisted of political, economic, information, and cyber aspects of unconventional warfare .
 Yanukovych's initial victory in the 2004 presidential election set off the Orange Revolution in Ukraine . Yanukovych’s initial win in 2004 set off Orange Revolution.
 An investigation into the rigged election found widespread tampering, an assassination attempt on Yanukovych’s rival, and funding from Russia .
 The Ukrainian Supreme Court immediately nullified the election's outcome, resulting in the ousting of Russia's proxy . The election was held in Ukraine's capital city, Kiev .
 The failure of relatively overt meddling reflected Russian concerns over the expiration of the Sevastopol navy lease . This failure of the navy lease reflected Russia's concerns over Russian concerns .
 The Orange Revolution lessened Russia’s influence over the people and government of Ukraine . Ultimately, the popular movement known as the Orange Revolution caused the Russian acts .
 Putin responded by calling the former “complex state formation’s sovereignty on the verge of existence . Ukraine and Georgia sought membership NATO .
 Russian officials began issuing passports to Crimean citizens, further undermining Ukrainian authority . Simultaneously, Russian government officials began issued passports to Crimea citizens .
 Following these actions, Russian propaganda began targeting the Ukrainian government, but of the country itself .
 Desovereignization of Ukraine” appeared in major Russian media outlets written by high-ranking Kremlin officials .
 Following articles, the Russian Orthodox Church entered the conversation over the Ukraine .
 Patriarch Kirill extensively toured Ukraine . He was a former KGB agent and head of the church .
 From 2009 to 2014, the Night Wolves held numerous rides throughout the Donbas region . From 2009 until 2014, they held many rides across the region .
 Its members rode through the countryside with the Russian flag waving on their bikes . The Russian flag was waving on the bikes .
 Yanukovych rode with the Night Wolves in the Ukrainian countryside, making Yanukovych wait for hours until his arrival . Instead of speaking with the head of the Ukrainian state, he rode in the countryside .
 Ukraine's head of t Ukraine wait sent a powerful message about Putin’s real intentions in the region .
 The outright rejection of Ukrainian sovereignty by Putin and President Medvedev directly violated the 1994 Budapest Agreement . The Russian Federation agreed to acknowledge and accept Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Russian election fraud made Russia appear to be an aggressor, combined with the Russian sponsored 2004 election fraud . This fact made Russia seem to be outsiders as a aggressor .
 There is some evidence that the Russian actions shaped Ukraine in Russia’s favor . There is also some evidence, however, that the Ukrainian actions shaped Russia's favor .
 The Ukrainian people elected Yanukovych as president in 2010 . Just a year after the barrage of propaganda and political statements, the Ukrainian people elect Yanukovych .
 Russian subversive actions in support of Yanukovych in 2004 can be interpreted as Russian progress in influencing Ukrainian sovereignty .
 Russian officials offered Ukraine bulk gas sales discounted by over 60 percent and $15 billion in loans . In a direct effort to pull Ukraine away from the European Union AA and towards Russia’s Eurasian Economic Union, Russia offered Ukraine Bulk gas sales discount .
21 Russia’s subversive actions to drive Ukraine away from the European Union succeeded too well . This offer occurred in November of 2013, just before Yanukovych was expected to sign the EU AA .
 Yanukovych could not turn down the offer, but his acceptance resulted in the rise of Euromaidan and his fall from office . Yanukovych was forced to step down from office.
 The attempt to manipulate Ukraine’s policy through economic actions negatively impacted Russia . Ukraine's economic actions directly drove Ukraine into the European Union's sphere of influence .
 Russian military infiltrated tens of thousands of soldiers into Crimea between November 2013 and March 2014 . The Russian military infiltrated tens of Thousands of soldiers in Crimea .
Ukrainian Special Police reported several major infiltrations beginning in February 2014 .
 The first infiltration by the Russian 45th Spetsnaz Regiment, specifically trained in unconventional warfare tasks, began in Crimea at the beginning of February .
 U.S. Army Special Operations Command, 2016. 66 in creating dissension in the Donbas region, was also spotted in Crimea at this time .
 Girkin is a former GRU colonel and a previous commander of the 45th Spetsnaz Regiment . He is also a former commander of a previous GRU commander . Girkin was a former colonel of the GRU.
 The colonel freely admitted to being in Crimea during the time, though denied his activities had any connection to Russia .
 Girkin attempted to bribe Ukrainian military officers to join the Russian cause . Girkin tried to bribe multiple Ukrainian military officials to join Russian cause.
 The 45th Regiment had some success with over 9,000 reported defections . Admiral Denis Berezovsky and the entire Ukrainian Berkut, or Special Police.
 After the annexation of Crimea, Girkin rose as the leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic in the Donbas region .
 He claimed that all separatist forces were under his control . He continued to deny his connection to Russia .
 Russia hired paramilitary groups to assist with security of the Sochi Winter Olympics . In addition to the infiltration of the 45th Spetsnaz Regiment, the government hired several paramilitary groups .
 These same groups were seen in Crimea blocking Ukrainian military units in their bases or intimidating the soldiers . The soldiers would not leave their positions so they would not be intimidated .
 The Chetnik Guard has documented ties to the Russian government in other conflicts . The Guard has been involved in several conflicts with the government .
 The group appeared in Crimea in February with the intention of protecting the “Russian people’s’ from Western influence .
 The group was armed and dressed in camouflage, but with no flags identifying its members’ country of origin . The group had no flags.
 The Chetnik Guard established checkpoints throughout Crimea, and controlled movement through the region . The CheTnik Guard is based in Crimea .
 advertisements seeking volunteers to “fight in Ukraine’s Ukraine appeared on Russian social media sites . In addition to these more organized efforts, advertisements sought volunteers to fight in Ukraine .
 The Civil Defense of Ukraine group established a page on the main Russian social media site, VKontakte. The group is based in Ukraine .
 The Crimean Parliament building was seized on 27 February . FSB and GRU seized the building .
 The troops were camouflaged, well-armed, and purposely sought to avoid a violent confrontation with Ukrainian forces . The troops, called “the little green men’s’ by media at the time, were called ‘the littlegreen men”
 At the same time, groups all over Crimea prevented mobilization and response of Ukrainian forces by swarming armored vehicles and gates with their bodies .
Ukrainian forces surrendering across Crimea. These coordinated actions, paired with cyber activities to isolate communications, led to Ukraine's surrender .
 In short order, groups captured the Parliament building, military bases, airstrips, and local media headquarters .
 Crimea announced a referendum proposing the annexation of Crimea by Russia in March . By 11 March, the “people of Crimea’s’ people had announced the referendum .
 Igor Girkin later announced in 2015 that the Russian government engineered the referendum . The referendum was engineered by the government .
 Crimean parliament members forced to sign referendum at gunpoint while heavily armored vehicles surrounded the building . FSB officers, supported by the militias, found members and forced them to sign the referendum .
 The ‘seizing’ of Crimea greatly undermined Ukraine’s sovereignty by illustrating that its leaders could not govern its territory . The “seizing of Crimea” greatly undermined the Ukraine's sovereignty .
 The action also gave Russia control of the Sevastopol naval base, a major strategic acquisition . Russia also took control of a naval base in the region .
 In Crimea, Crimea, the actions by "the little green men" were undeniably successful . The actions by “thelittle green men’s” were undeniablysuccessful .
 The same actions failed to achieve success when Russia attempted to apply them in the Donbas region . Russia also failed to apply the same actions in the region .
 Many of the "pro-separatist" groups moved northeast in an attempt to replicate similar results in the Donbas Region .
 The Donbas Region shares a border with Russia allowing for a greater chance of infiltration . The region has a greater chances of infiltration than Russia .
 Roadblocks and checkpoints sprung up separating Donbas from Western Ukraine . Donbas is in Ukraine's eastern part of Ukraine .
Self-defense groups and the Night Wolves held large rallies in support of separating from Ukraine . The self-defense group and Night Wolves also held rallies .
 Ukraine responded with military force and started a campaign to reclaim the separatist areas . This time, however, Ukraine responded to the separatists' request for help .
 Ukraine did not have the forces to evict the Russian-backed separatists . Russia "covertly" supported the rebels just enough to maintain rebel positions, the Russian government said .
 The conflict rapidly became a frozen war resulting in the signing of the Minsk Accords . The conflict quickly became arozen war resulting from the signing. The conflict was called a " frozen war"
 These accords have been brokered, yet are violated daily with skirmishes . The accords are brokenred, but are violated every day with skirmish .
 The international community responded with crippling economic sanctions at a time where Russia's economy was already struggling .
 Ukrainian government gained opportunity to display legitimacy and capability to stand up against Russia . Ukrainian forces gaining ground against the separatist forces .
 The Ukrainian government's response also reinforced the European Union's confidence in it . The European Union’s confidence in the Ukrainian government is also reinforced .
 Some analysts believe that having a frozen conflict benefits Russia in the long term . Some analysts say that having the conflict has a long-term benefits Russia .
 The conflicts appear unattractive to both the European and NATO organizations . Russia learned a lesson in the Georgian War, Russia learned in that war .
 Poroshenko’s administration seeks ever closer ties to the Western world, a situation that does not benefit Russia in the long-term .
 A key difference between the two attempted infiltrations in Ukraine was the use of cyber-attacks to support the maneuvers .
 As in the Georgian War in Chapter III, Russian cyber jamming of communications supported the infiltration of communications .
Self-defense groups and Spetsnaz units began pouring into Crimea . DDOS attacks strangled the Ukrainian government and media sites preventing quick and accurate reporting of events .
 Once the groups mobilized, the attacks shifted from overwhelming the internet infrastructure to denying service altogether . Once the attacks shift from overwhelming to denying services, they became more widespread .
 FSB and militia units took over the Ukrtelecom facility in Crimea . They installed blocking devices to shut down cellular traffic .
 Two cyber viruses called Ouroboros and Snake show long-term efforts to sabotage Ukraine .
 Snake also was designed to monitor intelligence, but this virus allowed the controller to take over the infected computers . The virus left the owners helpless .
 32 out of 56 discovered instances targeted the Ukrainian government . Snake and Ouroboros were found on computers outside of Ukraine .
 Crimea’s landline, internet, and mobile services shut down . Crimea's landline and internet services were shut down in Crimea .
 Military commanders struggled to receive guidance from higher authorities . Crimean citizens could not organize a resistance to the Russian forces .
 Many Ukrainian citizens and military posts simply surrendered . With no way to organize, many Ukrainian citizens were forced to surrender .
 Either Russia is not conducting significant cyber actions or Ukraine has had time to prepare to defend against them . Either Russia's cyber actions are not significant or Ukraine is not preparing to defend.
 Either way, the lack of widespread cyber-attacks allowed Ukraine to respond with a coordinated counter-offensive . Ukraine's cyber-attack was not widespread .
Media organizations around the world were able to capture the events further hampering Russian desires.
 Unconventional warfare pursued through the cyber domain played a critical supporting role in achieving success in Crimea .
 Russian officials learned from their experiences in Georgia in 2008 . They used the cyber attacks in an effective communication jamming campaign .
 Cyber-attacks alone, as in the Estonian case, would not have directly achieved any of Russia's objectives .
 Russian planners failed to extend this strategy into the conflict in Eastern Ukraine, potentially allowing Ukrainian forces to respond in a coordinated manner .
 Russian non-violent subversive action achieved two out of the four Russian objectives . Ultimately, Russia achieved two of four objectives .
 Occupying and then annexing the Crimea also directly undermined Ukraine’s sovereignty, as defined by the 1994 Budapest Agreements .
 The current frozen conflict in the Donbas region does make a NATO membership bid from Ukraine unlikely . Ukraine's current conflict does make it unlikely.
 71 already turned down a Ukrainian request for membership in 2008 . 71 already rejected the request in 2008.
 The European Union has reinforced its relationship with the new Ukrainian government . The AA was signed in 2014 with the aim of negotiating further economic collaboration .
 If Russian leaders intended to pull Ukraine away from Europe and Western influence, their non-violent actions negatively impacted achieving that objective . If Russia wanted to withdraw Ukraine from Europe, it would have been negatively impacted .
 The sanctions placed upon Russia have severely hampered the Russian economy . Lastly, the sanctions placed on Russia have also hampered the economy .
 Russia may have been willing to pay this price for security in Sevastopol, it was a costly decision . The decision was made by the Russian government .
 Russian forces participated in assassination attempts, intimidation, and torture, and tried to use Russian military equipment covertly . Russian forces also participated in assassinations, intimidation and torture .
 The 2004 assassination attempt of Viktor Yushchenko initiated Russia's covert action . The assassination attempt was the first attempt by Russia to kill him .
 Before the 2004 Ukrainian presidential elections, Russian agents slipped a chemical compound called Dioxin into Yushchenko's food .
 Dioxin becomes a deadly poison when produced in a highly concentrated form and only if a person is susceptible to it . Dioxins are produced in an extremely concentrated form .
 The sophistication of the laboratory required to produce the lethal concentrations of dioxin combined with the information of Yushenko’s vulnerability point to a Russian FSB operation, though it is unproven .
 WorldViews. 72 survived the attack and remains heavily scarred from the encounter .
 The widely publicized failure of the assassination attempt, combined with conclusive evidence that Russia rigged the 2004 election, led to the Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution was formed after the failure of an assassination attempt .
 This revolution caused a major political shift of Ukraine towards Europe and put Yushchenko in office . The revolution caused the country's political shift towards Europe, according to the author .
 Russia's naval base lease in Sevastopol at risk as Yushchenko claimed there would not be a new lease . This proWestern shift directly placed Russia’s naval base leases at risk .
 The Ukrainian government routinely accused Russian unconventional warfare forces of using murder, torture, and intimidation tactics to gain local control .
 The Ukrainian intelligence services accused Igor Girkin of murdering a journalist and a university student in Crimea . The journalist was a student at the Crimea University .
 Russia’s covert actions pale in comparison to those created by the use of Russian military equipment .
 The most serious setback Russia suffered by using covert violent action resulted from the downing of Malaysian Air Flight 17 . Russia suffered the most serious setbacks from the downed flight .
 The missile system had been “infiltrated” into the separatist territory to counter recent Ukrainian Air Force strikes . The missile systems had been "infilted’s" into separatist territory .
 The launcher had been maneuvered covertly into place by Russian forces to nullify Ukraine’s air power . The event appears to be an accident from the Russia/separatist side .
 This level of technologically sophisticated air defense was not anticipated by Ukrainian leaders . Ukrainian leaders did not expect this level of technology to be developed .
 The international community condemned Russia’s participation in the event and called for a joint investigation .
 The Russian Federation blocked the United Nations’ attempt to establish a tribunal into the matter . The United Nations had tried to establish an tribunal in the case .
 Dutch government reports prove missile came from a Russian launcher .
 The covert violent action attempts of Russian or Russian or Russiansponsored forces negatively impacted its strategic objectives . The covert violence attempts of Russia and Russia negatively impacted their strategic objectives.
 The assassination attempt of Viktor Yushchenko did undermine the Ukrainian sovereignty . The backlash from the international community far outweighed the positive gains .
 Malaysian Air flight downing highlighted the extent of the use of Russian military hardware . The downing of the Malaysian Air plane highlighted Russian military equipment .
 This dissonance, between rhetoric and reality, caused tremendous scrutiny of 39 articles . The article was published on Monday .
 Russia’s conventional forces did not play the decisive role in securing Crimea in 2008, says author .
 The forces did, however, play a critical role in annexing Crimea and reinforcing the frozen conflict of Eastern Ukraine . The forces also did, but did not take part in the Crimea annexation .
 Putin ordered a SNAP drill in Russia's Western Military District along the border of Ukraine . On the evening of 26 February, masked men seized Crimea's Parliament building .
 SNAP drills are designed to test regional units and strategic assets at a moment’s notice with little prior planning .
 The exercise included large numbers of transportation assets and long-range aircraft . The exercise also included large number of transport assets and aircraft .
 Initially, it appeared that Putin was putting on a display of power as the SNAP exercise coincided with the closing ceremony of the Sochi Winter Olympics .
 The exercise could be witnessed by state leaders from across the globe . Given the timing and the location, the exercise could have been witnessed by world leaders .
 It received large amounts of Russian and foreign media coverage, exactly as Russian leaders intended . It received a large amount of Russian media coverage .
 The Russian military reinforced the Sevastopol naval base with over 20,000 soldiers and Spetsnaz troops .
 Along with soldiers came anti-aircraft systems, heavy artillery, and attack helicopters . Along with the soldiers cameAnti-air craft systems and heavy artillery .
 The soldiers reinforced the base as the self-defense groups took over Crimean infrastructure .
 Russian soldiers and heavy weaponry maneuvered to secure key Crimean buildings and positions . Immediately after the annexation the Russian soldiers took control of Crimea .
 These soldiers continued to benefit from cooperation with the self-defense groups . These soldiers continue to help self-defence groups .
 The exercise was only possible due to the pre-positioning of units and leadership that the SNAP exercise helped mask . This effective cooperation with the paramilitary units was only Possible due to pre-positions of units.
 The Russian Black Sea Fleet also played a major role in the SNAP exercise . In addition to the land forces securing the naval base, the Russian Black sea Fleet also helped secure the base .
 Russian fleet effectively blockaded Ukrainian forces in port before the Ukrainian Navy knew they were in danger . Using jamming devices and taking up positions along the coast, the Russian fleet took up positions .
 The communication jamming assisted the cyber-attacks in isolating the peninsula and breaking down Crimea’s communication and decision-making abilities .
 Russian leaders effectively created a strong strategic reserve in case subversive and covert actions failed . But also directly secured Sevastopol with more troops than the disorganized Ukrainian forces in Crimea could defeat, achieving a vital Russian objective .
 Russia used the cover of exercises before in Georgia and did so again in September of 2017, hosting ZAPAD in Crimea . Russia also did so in Crimea in September 2017 .
 Russia again took the opportunity to reinforce the peninsula with AntiAccess Anti-Denial equipment . At a time when Russian backed separatists had broken multiple cease-fire agreements .
 This repositioning of equipment further strengthened Russia’s hold on the region . This rep positioning of equipment has strengthened Russia's hold on region .
 Second conventional action that impacted Russian achievement of its strategic objectives occurred on 14 August 2014 . The second conventional action occurred in the same month .
 A military convoy bypassed multiple Red Cross checkpoints along the Ukrainian border . On that morning, a military convoy passed through several checkpoints .
 The Russian military convoy consisted of over twenty armored fighting vehicles and multiple transportation trucks . The convoy was made up of over 20 armored fighting Vehicles and multiple trucks .
 The convoy purposely evaded the Red Cross and headed towards the city of Luhansk . The convoy was headed to the city. The convoy had been heading towards the town of the city .
 Russia claimed that the convoy was just humanitarian aid aimed at the beleaguered citizens of the city . Russia claimed it was just a humanitarian aid .
 In reality, Ukrainian forces had blockaded separatist forces in the city . The convoy appeared to be sent to break the city's siege .
 The Russian Federation is a major setback for the Russian Federation strategically . This result was a major setbacks for the Russia Federation .
 The use of conventional forces as an occupying force and a strategic reserve was effective for Russia . Overall the use of traditional forces was effective in Russia .
 The masked redeployment of conventional soldiers directly assisted with securing the Sevastopol base and acted as a deterrent threat for Ukrainian forces in the area .
 Russian actions in Eastern Ukraine negatively impacted Russian success by overtly violating Ukraine’s sovereignty . Russian conventional actions negatively impacted Russia's success in the region .
 NATO response to Ukraine's sovereignty challenge was met with a strategic mistake by Russian leaders . This open challenge of Ukraine’s sovereignty was met by a NATO response, a strategic error .
 Russian unconventional warfare efforts in Ukraine resulted in significant economic sanctions, condemnation by the United Nations and the Red Cross, a frozen conflict in Eastern Ukraine . The signing of the European Union's AA, and a NATO-led exercise in Ukraine, also resulted in sanctions .
Each of these results negatively impacted Russia's specific objectives in Ukraine and Russia's regional goals . Each of these goals negatively impacted Russian objectives in the Ukraine and the region .
 Russia had been waging other forms of unconventional warfare for over seven years . Russian forces seized the Crimea in 14 days .
 The conflict allows Russia to influence the contested areas over a longer period of time . The conflict, however, allows the conflict to continue for longer time .
 This long time horizon potentially allows Russia to reapply unconventional warfare methods to slowly shape decisions in its favor . Russia has a history of using unconventional warfare techniques to shape decisions .
 The downside for Russia is the associated cost both fiscally and in prestige . The downside is the cost of Russia's prestige and fiscality .
 Russian forces are now in several former Soviet countries at the same time that Russian leaders look to exert pressure on the ""far abroad" like Syria . Russia is now in many former Soviet nations at the time .
 Russia's capability to employ such a strategy diminishes, but also becomes more appealing . As Russian acts draw stricter sanctions, Russia's ability to use such tactics diminishes .
 Only when the sum of Russian activities are viewed together does a complete picture of Russia's war effort emerges .
 unconventional actions failed to achieve success outright, but they greatly enabled exploitation by conventional military forces . While unconventional actions didn't achieve success, they enabled exploitation of conventional forces .
 In Estonia, Georgia, and Ukraine, four major trends emerge . In examining these activities in the conflicts, four key trends emerge.
 These trends point to a Russian blueprint or “playbook’ for employing unconventional warfare .
 Understanding these trends allows a strategic planner to identify key decision points where the United States, or its allies, can intervene .
 The strategic planner can also develop mitigation plans when confronted with Russian activities that appear to match the trends found in Russian activities .
 The four major trends provide the basis for a framework from which the strategic planner can begin developing responses . The four key trends provide a framework for a strategic planner to develop responses .
 The first trend prevalent in each of the case studies is that Russia expended considerable effort to isolate the target state’s communications . Russia spent a lot of time in each case study, according to the study .
 The absence of foreign media in Georgia and Ukraine, and blocking of media in Estonia, allowed Russia to dominate the narrative to the international community instantly . The first was the absence offoreign media inGeorgia and Ukraine .
 Russia was the first to release information, including uncontested justifications and intent of actions, and this advantage gave it brief respites of time to gain objectives further . 1 Carl Clausewitz is the first Russian to release such information .
 In On War, edited by Howard Michael and Paret Peter, by Brodie Bernard and West Rosalie, 75. In On war, written by Michael and Peter, is written by Peter and Michael .
 Russia seized the initiative in the informational realm. These acts also allowed Russia to seize the initiative .
 Russian initiative provided it with a significant advantage. Due to the unique characteristics of information that make time a decisive element, Russian initiative provides it with an advantage .
 The second benefit Russia gained was the isolation of enemy command and control . Russia gained the second benefit from the Russian government .
 The paralyzing of the Ukrainian military command structure in Crimea prevented any semblance of coordinated or timely resistance . While not successful in both Estonia and eastern Ukraine, it was not successful.
 As distinct of a trend as isolation of communications, is the Russian perception of time . The trend is not a trend of isolation, but it is a trend in Russia .
 In each of the cases, the conflict was advertised as brief outbursts that sparked a Russian response .
 The case studies show that Russia had long been preparing the environment in each of the countries before more evident conflict began .
 This distinction is important as it impacts current Western planning methodologies. This is important for Western planning methods, says the author .
 A common framework for planning and analyzing operations is the phase construct from U.S. joint doctrine .
 The doctrine identifies the five phases as Shape, Deter, Dominate, Stabilize, and Enable Civil Authority . This doctrine identifies five phases.
 Often planners interpret Phase III, Dominate, as the application of conventional armed forces .
 Russian covert actions frequently seize the initiative and shape the battlefield over long expanses of time .
 These Russian shaping operations shorten the range of available options and response times of NATO counteractions . The Russian shaping operation is designed to reduce the number of options available .
 Russian concerns over triggering Article V prevented an armed escalation to conflict . In Estonia case, Russia's concerns over trigger triggered Article V prevent an armed conflict .
 Russia made every effort to not utilize conventional forces due to the threat of a NATO response . In both Georgia and Ukraine, Russia made all efforts to not use conventional forces .
 Only when it appeared that Georgian forces were securing key ground, or the 2 . For more information on the use of the phase construct in planning see Joint Publication 5-0 .
 Leaders from Russia also took several steps in the information operations realm to appear as the protector of the Russian people and culture .
 In all three cases, the initial narrative from Russian media was that Russian forces were intervening in a humanitarian capacity to help its citizens abroad .
 The last significant trend observed across the three case studies was the identifiable massing of Russian capabilities to achieve objectives . The study found that Russian capabilities can be used to achieve goals .
 The Russian strategic culture embraces deception, it also has a long history of following the principle of massing .
 Russia has not abandoned this principle, says Russian military spokesman . Russia has been building unconventional warfare assets in Ukraine, he says .
 Even when attempting to execute operations covertly, Russian intent may be deciphered from the frequency, intensity, and quantity of their efforts . Russia may be trying to execute covertly.
 The Russian weight of effort signals their intentions even in the face of extensive information and military deception operations . The weight of efforts signals their intention, says the Russian military .
 Russia's three case studies suggest a blueprint for how Russia approaches achieving national objectives in former Soviet Bloc countries .
 Russian leaders attempt to conduct Political Warfare through issuing a series of comments discrediting and undermining a target's validity as a government and sovereignty as a country .
 The comments frequently appear in short periods of time throughout multiple layers of government from ambassadors, foreign ministers, religious leaders, and religious leaders .
 The U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, FM 3-0 Operations, is in charge of training and doctrine Command . It is based on the central role that massing of assets plays in military operations .
 Russia uses refusals of services, tariff increases, and suspension of economic deals to manipulate states . Russia uses a series of refusal of services and tariff increases to manipulate countries .
 As tensions escalate, Russia attempts to increase pressure through energy manipulation, cutting off or limiting natural gas . Russia is also trying to cut off or limit natural gas in some areas .
 In some cases, such as Ukraine, the energy manipulation is in the form of enticement . In other cases, energy manipulation has been used to offer energy at drastically reduced prices .
 Russia uses state-sponsored media to spread misinformation, inspire nationalism, or to widen social divides . Russia uses of state- sponsored media tospread misinformation and inspire nationalism .
 Russia Today and affiliated state media sites attempted to inspire patriotism in the Russian diasporas . In each case study, Russia Today tried to invoke memories of Soviet heroes and the once proud Republic .
 In South Ossetia and the Donbas, the media frequently used false interviews covering phony atrocities against Russian citizens to mobilize its populace . 4.5% of Russian citizens are Russian .
 In both Georgia and Ukraine, Russia issued passports to their targeted area . In both countries, passports were issued to their target areas .
 By issuing these documents, Russia grows the diaspora and extends "their right" to protect Russian citizens anywhere .
 The issuance of passports to another state's body of citizens is also a direct challenge to capacity to govern and recognized sovereignty . 5.7% of passports issued to other states are issued to citizens of another state . 5% issued to the same state's government is issued to
 Russia utilizes military exercises to mask the movement of necessary equipment and personnel into the upcoming conflict . Russia has established pro-Russian movements and militias in the country .
 The 2014 SNAP exercise and the 2007 Zapad exercise are both examples of this covert tactic applied . 6.5% of SNAP exercise is a covert tactic used by the government .
 Once the masked mobilization from the previous phase is complete Russia utilizes various communication jamming and isolating tactics to prevent an effective response to occupying forces and also to stifle narratives counter to those pushed by Russian forces .
 The jamming can come in the form of massed cyber-attacks, military jamming equipment, or both in concert . 7.5 million people worldwide are jamming in concert, according to CNN .
 Russia employs deniable forces into the area to advise and assist separatist forces or seize key terrain outright . Once the isolation of leadership and communication platforms begin, Russia employsDeniable forces in the area .
 Russia responds with conventional forces to hold key terrain, bolster separatist forces, and directly achieve national goals . Russia responds to claims of atrocities, poor living conditions, or lack of ability to govern .
 Russia cautiously weighs the direct involvement of its military in the conflict . In an effort to avoid international intervention, Russia has been cautious about its involvement .
 Russian leaders maintain just enough military presence to keep conflicts ongoing to further destabilize the region . Russia's military presence is just enough to keep the region at risk, they say .
 The seized areas provide a base of operations to continue long-term subversive actions . Some conflicts do not lead directly to achieving national objectives, such as the current conflict in the Donbas Region .
 Russian actions in Estonia did not follow the precise sequence of events in the blueprint . Estonia was already a NATO member and Russian objectives were not to annex or occupy parts of it .
 Russian actions in Estonia proceeded through steps 1,2,3, and 6, according to Russian authorities . Even with these contextual considerations, Russian actions went through steps 2,3 and 6.5 .
 The Georgian and Ukrainian conflicts, however, followed the Russian unconventional warfare blueprint .
 If Russian leaders continue to employ unconventional warfare consistently, Western planners have several opportunities to more rapidly identify Russian intent and take preventative measures .
 Two steps should become vital identification and intervention points for planners and decision makers, Step 3, Information Warfare and Step 4, Passportization . Step 4 should be used to identify and intervene in decision-making .
 Identifying massed information operations at Step 3 allows the U.S. and allies to begin strong counter-narrative information operations . The United States and allies will be able to use this information to fight terrorism .
 Western planners need to generate joint-multinational deterrence efforts, says author . Russia is a major threat to the West, he says . The move should signal future cost and risk to Russia, he adds .
 Passportization is a flagrant violation of international norms and a clear indicator of Russian activities to come. Passportation is a Flagrant violation.
 The Russian passport issue should spur a staunch response from the United States and its NATO allies . The U.S. and NATO allies should take action .
Military planners can take to deter or mitigate Russian unconventional warfare actions . Many of the prudent U.S. responses to Russian aggression lay outside the scope of a strategic planner’s arsenal .
 The first action strategic planners should take is ensuring redundancy in communication plans . The first plan is to ensure redundancy in communications plans .
 Planners should examine current crisis communication plans for military, government, and government-run media infrastructures .
 In both Georgia and Ukraine, Russian forces were greatly enabled by the temporary disruption of communication . The disruption was caused by Russian forces.
 Secondary communication plans should be developed if digital communications have been disrupted by cyber-attacks or military jamming platforms . Government servers and telecommunications may be affected by affected government servers .
 Estonia, Ukraine, Georgia, Estonia, Georgia and Ukraine have been affected by downed infrastructure . It took several days to get another government to host the downed infrastructure, something that could be mitigated through prearranged agreements .
 The plan should also include operations to secure government-run media or have a relocation plan in case of conflict .
Enforcing robust communications is vital to the second action strategic planners should examine . Enforcing robust communication is key to second action Strategic planners must examine .
 Russian officials view information operations as military engagements . As seen in Estonia, Georgia, and Ukraine, Russian officials see it as military operations .
 Planners should adopt this view and treat information as a component of the battlefield where the key terrain is the narrative. Planners need to treat the battlefield as a part of the narrative .
 In each of the case studies, Russian leaders used control of the narrative, both internal and external, to appear to meet legal or humanitarian justifications for war .
 Planners should ensure their organizations are tied into the NATO Strategic Communication Center in Riga and mirror the organization's integration concept at lower levels .
 NATO developed the Strategic Communication Concept to integrate all the different agencies involved in disseminating a state’s narrative . NATO developed 85 the Strategic Communications Concept .
 Russia does not have to consider given it is an autocratic state. This integration allows the best massing of available information operation assets, says the Russian government .
 The focus of this integration should be to allow rapid and consistent responses instead of pushing through multiple layers of bureaucratic authorizations . This should be the focus of the integration process.
 The Center is an excellent source of information until higher levels of integration can be reached and utilized . Building the Center’s capacity to allow this type of integration would be optimal, however .
 Planners should ensure that a program exists to educate both military and citizens of the host country on Russian deception operations and misinformation . Planners also should also ensure that the program exists for both the military and residents of Russia .
 The NATO Strategic Communication Center routinely publishes documents detailing Russian information operation efforts . It is a useful starting point for the Russian intelligence operation .
 Latvia and Lithuania have begun similar programs to identify Russian influence operations and counter their narratives before they become pervasive . Both countries are trying to counter their influence operations before it becomes pervasive .
 At the more tactical level, if a planner views the information environment as a contested one, then information operations efforts should be tracked and responded to in a similar nature as other offensive actions .
 Information would allow a commander to make timely decisions to prevent Russian escalation . Information ""battle drills" and an information "common operating picture" would allow commanders to make decisions .
 Russian leaders continue to escalate down their unconventional warfare blueprint . If the efforts to seize and command the narrative fail, planners should be able to meet the next escalation, 4 Reding, Anais, Kristin Weed and Jeremy J Ghez .
 These documents aim to identify current information operations, their key messages, and how the messages are being manipulated . The documents are designed to identify information operations and key messages .
 Russian leaders sought to achieve their objectives through unconventional warfare tactics . Russia sought to prevent a state from invoking NATO’s Article V collective action clause .
NATO-led SNAP exercise does several things for allied forces . NATO-led exercise does many things for allies .
 The exercise, if planned and resourced, shows that NATO is not a bureaucratic behemoth . The first is that the exercise is planned and Resourced to respond rapidly .
 The second benefit is that it presents Russian leaders with the risk of escalation and the sum of their worst fears, NATO intervention .
 The third benefit is that it places more NATO members on the frontlines of the potential battlefield . The third benefits are that it puts more NATO member members on frontlines.
 Any casualties taken if conflict breaks out will further encourage the strength of NATO’s response to the situation .
 NATO responses in Estonia and U.S. responses in Georgia and Ukraine were slow and relatively non-escalatory . Responding in such a manner would throw off Russian decision-making process .
 This gap provides an opportunity to seize the narrative once again and prevent Russian escalation, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: "This gap provides a chance to seize a narrative once Again"
 The SNAP exercise response, however, needs further study for its potential long-term implications . The exercise response is currently being studied by the U.S. Department of Health .
 The initial escalation provides shortterm benefits but must be followed with activities that secure those benefits for a longer duration . The initial escalations provide short-term benefits, but must also be followed by activities thatsecure those benefits .
 SNAP exercise occurs only for the first use, then rapidly loses effectiveness . The shock value of the SNAP exercise is the same as the first time it is used .
 planners must emphasize supporting this exercise with a carefully crafted narrative so that the response cannot be used for Russian IO purposes . planners must also emphasize support for this exercise .
 Without a long-term sustainable plan, the exercise could present more issues than it solves . Without a plan, there could be more problems than it solve, experts say .
 planners need to realize the traditional joint phasing model used in military planning does not adequately cover the Russian 87 unconventional warfare approach to a limited war .
 Russian actions seize the initiative before Western planners ever realize that Phase III has even begun, preventing a timely response and forcing planners to be reactive .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff recently released the Joint Concept for Integrated Planning . To address this friction between observed actions and the phasing models, the Joint chiefs of Staff have released a new concept .
 The document calls for planners to embrace a mindset of the ‘competition continuum’ in state interactions . The document also calls for planning to embrace the “comp competition continuum” in state interaction .
 The Concept is not robust enough to usurp the utility of the phasing model in current planning efforts . It suggests one which views the environment as continually contested, is a step in the right direction .
 Planners must view the Russian unconventional warfare actions for what they are-an adversarial engagement .
 The conclusions of this study offer several opportunities for further research that would, in turn, strengthen United States and allied responses in the future .
 The first opportunity for further study is to examine Russia's unconventional warfare actions . Russia had to project power abroad, such as the current Syrian conflict .
 Answering this question provides potential options to apply pressure to Russia outside of former Soviet Bloc countries, potentially limiting escalation .
 COL Jermiah Monk questioned using a linear planning approach for non-linear operations . Monk also called for more research into the model .
 Strategist Everett Dolman questions the validity of a phasing model with endstates in his book Pure Strategy . Dolman argues instead that strategy should be about holding a continuous advantage .
 Many learned lessons have been forgotten in the US’s strategic pivot to the Pacific .
 Workable strategies and studies from earlier conflicts could prevent planners from starting from scratch .
 Researchers should interview people responsible for designing past NATO Strategic Communication plans and senior leaders and planners .
 Additional steps should be taken to capture the Soviet response to these actions, according to the British Foreign Minister .
 The third research opportunity is to compare the effectiveness of Russian unconventional warfare activities to the U.S.’s efforts . The third opportunity is the ability to compare Russia's unconventional warfare efforts to the United States' efforts .
 This thesis may initially have appeared as biased against Russian unconventional warfare efforts . It may have appeared to be biased against Russia's unconventional warfare effort .
 United States Special Operations sometimes employ similar approaches to achieve national objectives . U.S. Special Operations often employ similar methods to achieve objectives .
 The nine steps of the Russian blueprint have several similarities to U.S. special operations . The seven phases of unconventional warfare used by United States special operations are similar to those used by Russia .
 These similarities should be examined and contrasted to identify relative strengths and weaknesses of U.S. unconventional warfare efforts .
 If patterns and decision points can be identified in Russian actions, it is equally useful to identify those contained in the U.S. approach . The Russian government has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 U.S. military can plan to identify or mitigate operations aimed at disrupting unconventional warfare operations . By examining these patterns, the military can find ways to mitigate these operations .
 The last research opportunity is to develop a useable joint planning model . It would allow adequate response times for unconventional warfare actions in a limited war construct .
 The United States Special Operations 89 community uses a seven-phase unconventional warfare model . The U.S. Special Operations89 community uses the seven- phase unconventional warfare.
 This model does not tie into the current four-phase conventional planning model well, leading to uncertainty and misunderstanding between conventional and special operations planners . This model, however, doesn't tie into current planning models well .
 A new model was developed from the joint feedback of the two communities . planners must be well-versed in both systems to facilitate smooth transitions .
Developing such a model generates more options for decision makers and mitigates some of the effects of the covert actions . Developing such an option generates more choices for decision-makers .
 Research began by aiming to evaluate the effectiveness of modern Russian unconventional warfare actions as applied in three case studies .
 Russian unconventional warfare efforts were not effective in achieving Russia's strategic objectives alone . The Russian actions in Estonia, Georgia, and Ukraine are not effective, says the author .
 These efforts did dramatically shape the target operating environments for further exploitation of conventional forces . These efforts, however, did dramatically Shape the target Operating environments .
 Russian efforts either failed or would have failed. Without the use of conventional forces, the Russian efforts would not have failed .
 This conclusion does not undermine the threat that the Baltic States face from Russian unconventional warfare activity . The Baltic states face a threat from Russia's unconventional warfare activities .
 The states must continuously defend against Russian unconventional warfare efforts in their country daily . These states must continue to defend against Russia's unconventional warfare.
 The "little green men" may have appeared alien to some; the playbook driving them was anything but anything but .
 The analysis shows that Russian leaders are prepared to capitalize on long-term unconventional shaping operations should a window of opportunity arise .
 At the same time, the Russian roadmap to unconventional warfare activities provides several decision points where intervention is possible .
Much of Russia’s success required having a long-shared history with target countries, similar cultural ties, or a sizeable Russian diaspora . Much of Russia's success required to have long- shared history with targets .
 It remains unproven whether Russia can export these tactics abroad, potentially making it a very localized one .
 International Crisis Group Working to Prevent Conflict Worldwide, June 5, 2008 .
 Wood, Elizabeth, William Pomeranz, E Wayne Merry, and Maxim Trudolyubov are among the stars of the show .