 The massacre of the protesters and the police during the “Euromaidan” mass protests in February 2014 contributed to the overthrow of the Ukrainian government . Russian military interventions in Crimea and Donbas, the Russian annexation of Crimea and an international conflict between the West and Russia.
 It examines trial and investigation testimonies of wounded protesters, relatives of the killed protesters, prosecution and defense witnesses, and top officials of the Yanukovych government . It examines testimony of wounded Protesters, relatives and prosecution witnesses .
 The study also analyzes results of forensic ballistic and medical examinations and investigative experiments . The study was made public during the Maidan massacre .
14 self-admitted members of Maidan snipers groups. Such evidence includes testimonies of the absolute majority of wounded protesters, several prosecution witnesses .
 Videos presented at the trial showed that times of shooting of the absolute majority of protesters did not coincide with time of shooting by the Berkut policemen .
 Forensic medical examinations determined that the overwhelming majority of the protesters were shot from steep directions from the sides or the back .
 Initial ballistic examinations did not match bullets extracted from the bodies of killed and wounded protesters to the Berkut Kalashnikovs . The bodies of the protesters were found to be the same as those of those killed in the protests .
 Forensic examinations of bullet holes suggest snipers were shooting in Hotel Ukraina snipers above the protesters and in trees and poles .
 The analysis shows cover-up and stonewalling of the investigations and trials by the Maidan governments and the far right .
 The prosecution denied that there were any snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings .
 Not a single person is convicted or under arrest for the massacre of the protesters and the police almost seven years after one of the most documented mass killings.
This mass killing was a tipping point of the conflict in Ukraine and led to government overthrow . This mass killing led to the government overthrow of the Ukrainian government .
 It also led or contributed to a civil war in Donbas, Russian military interventions in Crimea and Donbas . It also ultimately led or led to acivil war in the region .
 This study reviews main findings of previous academic studies and divergent narratives by the Western, Ukrainian, and Russian governments . It analyzes trial and investigation testimonies, results of forensic examinations for the prosecution and the Maidan victims lawyers for the trial, videos and photos presented at the trial .
 The GPU arrested in April 2014 and charged the Berkut special company commander and two members of this police unit with the murder of 39 out of 49 killed Maidan protesters on February 20 on Yanukovych order .
 The trial of two policemen from a Berkut special company began in January 2015 . The arrested Berkut commander was released by a court and escaped from Ukraine .
 A killing of a Georgian protester on February 20 was not included in the charges . The circumstances of his killings have not been officially disclosed .
 The Prosecutor General of Ukraine announced in 2019 that the investigation of the Maidan massacre was complete .
 The five Berkut members were released by a Kyiv court of appeals under President Zelensky’s order . They were exchanged to Donbas separatists in December 2019 .
 The trial examined by that date all evidence presented by the prosecution, including testimonies of relatives of killed Maidan protesters, witnesses, videos and photos .
 The Berkut defense victims were also presented at the trial before it stopped . A verdict stage was expected in Spring 2020 .
 The trial was suspended because of the release and exchange of the Berkut policemen . The trial is suspended due to the release of the policemen .
 The Maidan massacre trial resumed since for 2 Berkut policemen, who returned from the exchange to Donbas 4 separatists, and in absentia for 3 Berkut policeman who remained in separatist-controlled Donbas .
 Viktor Yanukovych, his SBU, Internal Troops, and Berkut commanders were charged in absentia with ordering the Maidan massacre . But they were not brought to the trial because they resided in Russia or Russian-annexed Crimea .
 The GPU and DBR announced in November 2021 that their investigation of Yanukovych, his ministers of internal affairs, defence and defence, and the SBU, Internal Troops, and Berkut heads and commanders for the Maidan massacre was finished .
 Expanded charges against them for the massacre included perpetration of a terrorist attack, mass killing, and creation of an organized criminal group .
 The Berkut commanders and members, ex-president Viktor Yanukovych, his SBU, Internal Affairs and Internal Troops heads and commanders, and their lawyers denied their involvement in the Maidan massacre . They said that Maidan leaders and snipers massacred the protesters .
 This is the highest profile political crime in Ukraine and one of the most significant in contemporary Europe in the 21st century . This is a highest-profile political crime. This is one of Europe's most significant political crimes in modern Europe .
 The Maidan massacre trial in Ukraine is the trial of the century because of its political significance . It is the first trial of its century in the Ukraine .
 Many of the moments of these killings were captured in various videos . Communications of SBU Alfa snipers and commanders during the massacre were intercepted .
 Most of them were transferred to the State Bureau of Investigations in 2019 to continue the investigation . Most of the cases were transferred in 2019 .
 The GPU during the entire investigation was headed by Maidan politicians or confidants of Poroshenko and Zelensky . Both of whom publicly blamed the Yanukovych and Berkut police for the massacre .
 Maidan victims lawyers, who were themselves Maidan activists, publicly supported the GPU investigation . They criticized the investigation initially for being too slow .
 A then head of SBU in the Kyiv region was charged with responsibility for the killings of some of the killed Maidan protesters on February 18 and 19 .
 The trial of Berkut policemen did not start because they were released by courts and ended up in Russia . But the trial of the Berkut police officers did not begin because they had been released .
 Four policemen were killed and several dozen wounded by unknown persons of unknown allegiance at the start of the Maidan massacre on February 20 . The GPU stated that four policemen were dead and severaldozen wounded .
 The GPU charged in 2018 a Maidan protester with killings two police officers . He was released and escaped from Ukraine after intervention of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine .
 associates of Bulatov in the Automaidan testified in 2014 after the Maidan and in 2019 that he staged his own abduction, torture, and crucifixion . The documents from his investigative criminal case show that associates ofBulatov testify in 2014 .
 One of them testified that Bulatov told him shortly before his disappearance that he planned to stage his own abduction . One of the witnesses said he told him before he was abducted that he was planning to do it himself .
 Another testified that she heard from Bulatov and other Maidan activists about need for some "fiery information" in order to regain popularity of the Automaidan .
 Other Automaidan leaders testified that there was no rationale for Bulatov’s kidnapping and torture . They regarded his staging his own kidnapping as a real possibility .
 Two of them testified that the light wounds and his appearance did not match his statements about being kidnapped and tortured for a week without food . Two of the witnesses also testified that his appearance didn't match his statement .
 Government forensic expert determined Bulatov’s wounds could have been inflicted by himself or by someone else with his agreement using sterile materials and disinfecting wounds . They did not have any signs of infection.
 The government forensic expert also determined that there was no damage on his hands that would be consistent with Bulatov being handcuffed .
 David Zhvania is a former associate of Poroshenko and the head of the parliamentary committee during and after the Maidan . This is consistent with a testimony by a former associates of the president .
 He said Maidan leaders staged the abduction and 8 crucifixion of Bulatov and other high-profile cases of violence, such as the Maidan massacre . He said that Maidan leader, whom he names, staged the abductions and eight crucifixions .
 In another case, an elderly Maidan protester was killed and several wounded in Khmelnytskyi by another Maidan protestor .
 The GPU reversed this investigation as politically inappropriate and charged an SBU Alfa officer for shooting the protesters from the second floor inside of the SBU building . The police officer was arrested and charged for the incident .
 Security Service of Ukraine publicly stated that the GPU investigation was falsified . But the security service of Ukraine said that the investigation was not falsified.
 This is consistent with the content analysis showing that the protesters were shot from the SBU porch and not from the second floor . This is not the first time the protesters have been shot at SBU . The content analysis shows that the demonstrators were shot at the porch .
 The Maidan massacre has been central subject of only a few academic studies . Previous studies and Conflicting Narratives of the Maidan Massacre have been a few studies .
 concealed shooters or "snipers" massacred the unsuspecting Maidan protesters from Maidan-controlled buildings or areas .
 Kudelia argues that the violence was initiated by the Maidan protesters . She says the Berkut police then massacred unarmed protesters .
 The Maidan politicians and the Ukrainian and Western media are not based on a comprehensive analysis of the case of political violence . They are uncritically accepted claims by the Maidan and Ukrainian media concerning the massacre perpetrators .
 Government snipers, led by Internal Troops and SBU Alfa commanders, massacred Maidan 11 protesters from government buildings and the Hotel Ukraina and Kozatsky Hotel . One of the snipers was killed in the HotelUkraina .
 Internal Troops and SBU Alfa commanders, named as being in charge of the massacre, were not charged by the prosecution in Ukraine . Some of them continued to serve in commanding positions after the Maidan .
 Previous studies did not examine systematically evidence revealed by Maidan massacre trials and investigation .
There is not a single academic study of trials and government investigations of the Maidan massacre . There is not one academic study.
 Vladislav Surkov, an aide of Russian President Vladimir Putin, was personally coordinating foreign “snipers’ on the Maidan . He presented no supporting evidence, according to the SBU .
 Serhii Leshchenko, a member of the Poroshenko's faction in the parliament, revealed that Surkov arrived in Kyiv by plane after the massacre was already over .
 Joe Biden, the U.S. vice-president, spoke to Yanukovych on February 20, 2014 right after the massacre . He demanded a withdrawal of security forces, specifically snipers and paramilitary units most responsible for the violence .
 The United States and other Western governments did not release their intelligence assessments and other information concerning this massacre . Results of such reported involvement of the FBI in the Maidan massacre investigation also were not revealed .
 The Maidan massacre investigations and trials contrasts with other politically important criminal cases and trials, such as the Yuliya Tymoshenko trial during the Yanukovych presidency, and cases of corruption in the Ukrainian government after the “Euromaidan’s’
 The European parliament rejected 17 requests by one member to include investigations of the Maidan and Odesa massacres on its agenda .
 In these letters, he named such People's Front leaders as Oleksandr Turchynov (the acting president after the Yanukovych overthrow and the current head of the National Security and Defense Council) Andriy Parubiy (the head of Maidan Self-Defense) and Ser
 He called for international investigation of this mass killing . He said he would then provide such evidence to the public .
 Oleksandr Yakymenko, the SBU head under Yanukovych, testified in a Russian court concerning the ‘Maidan coup’ in the end of 2016 . The SBU identified by name several Maidan snipers who massacred the police and protesters .
 Klyuyev also stated that Turchynov, Parubiy, and Pashynsky organized the massacre of the police and the protesters 15 and used the Right Sector and leaders of Maidan parties .
 He did not make public the specific evidence in support of his statements . However, he did not say what he said in his statement .
 The government forces on the orders of the Yanukovych government were responsible for the massacre of the protesters . They did not question the official investigation conclusions that the government forces were responsible .
 The Bellingcat organization did not conduct any analysis of the Maidan massacre . It is noteworthy that its founder promised to do it, even though it did not .
 Google news searchers produced no reports of major revelations from these trials and investigations . No evidence of the massacre of the protesters by “snipers’ from the Maidan-controlled buildings.
 It also reported a 17 statement of a unidentified GPU prosecutor that he examined a version that both police and protesters were killed by the same shooters . The statement also reported that a 17-year-old prosecutor examined the version .
 Italian, Israeli, and United States TV documentaries, Macedonian TV, and Russian media showed in 2018-20 testimonies of eight former members of the Georgian military .
 They stated that they were members of the Maidan snipers groups, which included snipers from Georgia, the Baltic States, and Parasiuk-led group in the Hotel Ukraina and the Music Conservatory . They said they were ordered by Maidan leaders and ex-Georgian leaders to
 Ukrainian media reports generally presented the Maidan government and GPU prosecution version of the massacre . Some notable exceptions, with some notable exceptions.
 Russia's media in Russia did not report the Maidan massacre trial and investigations . Some exceptions, with some exceptions, were also not reported .
 The Russian media often relayed statements about this massacre by Yanukovych and his former government members . Yanukovych and ex-government members found refuge in Russia and by self-reported Georgian snipers .
 The absolute majority of the witness testimonies are by direct eyewitnesses . The absolute most of the witnesses are bydirect eyewitnesses.
 Testimonies of indirect witnesses concerning Maidan snipers are primarily by Maidan protesters and politicians and pro-Maidan journalists .
19 by indirect witnesses are accepted in criminal law and trials in the US, Canada, and other Western countries . Such “statements against interest’s against interest are relayed by indirect witness .
 Media interviews of prosecutors, Maidan victims’ lawyers and Berkut lawyers are also examined . Media reports about the Maidan massacre trials and investigations also are examined .
 The official investigation denied existence of snipers in Maidan-controlled buildings and areas . The majority of 72 wounded Maidan protesters testified at the trial and/or the investigation that they were shot by snipers from Maidancontrolled buildings or areas .
 At least 28 wounded protesters testified at the trial . They were shot from the Hotel Ukraina, the Bank Arkada, and Zhovtnevyi Palace, Muzeinyi Lane .
 Borys Kharchuk testified during the trial in September 2016 that he was wounded by a sniper from a Hotel Ukraina window .
 He said that he was shot immediately 20 after he saw two persons in black clothes and black balaclavas in a Hotel Ukraina window . One of them was aiming a rifle, he said .
 Kharchuk demonstrated his own position in the moment of his shooting and locations of his entry and exit wounds at a significant vertical angle . The shooting took place at a vertical angle.
 Volodymyr Venchak says he was wounded in the back from the Hotel Ukraina . He says that he was injured in the front of the hotel .
 Andrii Khalak said in the investigative experiment video that he was shot from the Hotel Ukraina based on his position and his wounds location . Khalak: "I was shot based on my position and my wounds location"
 Ivan Filipovych suggested at the on-site investigative experiment that he was wounded from Zhovtnevyi Palace based on his position and locations and the direction of his entry and exit wounds .
 Petro Ladym testified during the investigation that there was shooting from the Hotel Ukraina . He said he saw snipers in windows of Zhovtnevyi Palace shooting people .
 Ivan Plish was wounded near Zhovtnevyi Palace in the back of his head from the Hotel Ukraina . Plish said he saw 3-5 people with weapons, including an apparent assault rifle, on the roof of the hotel .
 Pavlo Onufriiv testified during the investigation that there were one or two snipers in black uniforms on the roofs of this hotel and Zhovtnevyi Palace and that he was shot by a sniper that might have been located on the hotel roof or the roof of Zhov
 He identified two Maidan-controlled buildings along with Bank Arkada on the map . He also identified a number of undisclosed buildings that he saw snipers at with his binoculars .
 Yuri Slyvka testified at the trial and the investigation that he saw three snipers who shot Maidan protesters from the roof and a window of the Hotel Ukraina .
 Vitali Karpyn stated at the trial and at the investigative experiment 21 that he clearly saw gunshots from the Hotel Ukraina .
 forensic examinations of Venchak's wounds and clothing determined that he was shot in the back from a steep direction . He was filmed from the Hotel Ukraina advancing towards a Berkut barricade .
 Sviatoslav Kolesnikov testified during two investigative experiments and his first interrogation in 2014 that he was wounded from upper floors of the Hotel Ukraina .
 His wounding from the Hotel Ukraina is consistent with his description of his position at the moment of the shooting . His wound in the right shoulder, and its steep direction, are consistent with the description of the shot .
 A video shows Maidan protesters taking cover under this bridge and pointing towards shooting from the upper floors of this hotel at the direction of the bridge . Kolesnikov was wounded on the bridge at about the same time as the incident happened .
 Yuri Kravchuk testified that he was wounded first two times from a sideway direction from the Bank Arkada and not from the Berkut barricade in front of him .
 The bullet did not go through a tree, because he saw down flying in front of his face from a bullet hole in his jacket . He determined this because he was taking cover behind a tree from the Berkut, because the bullet didn't go through the tree .
 A government ballistic expert concluded that Roman Kotliarevsky was shot from a sector ranging from the Hotel Ukraina to Bank Arkada .
 Maidan medic says he was most likely shot from the Bank Arkada based on the steep direction of his wound channel . Maidan medics say he was likely shot based on a steep direction from the bank .
 The moment of his wounding was filmed by CNN from the Hotel Ukraina and used by the media in the West and in Ukraine as evidence that the government forces deliberately targeted even medics .
 A forensic ballistic report found that this medic was shot from the same 7.62x39 caliber weapon, which was used to kill Mykola-Oleh Pankiv. The report was made public during the trial .
 Several wounded protesters also testified about witnessing snipers in the Maidancontrolled Music Conservatory and the Maidan barricades near the stage in the early morning of February 20 .
 Volodymyr Venchak testifies at the trial that he saw two or three persons with weapons on the Music Conservatory roof circa 7:30-8:00 am . A politician on the Maidan stage warned protesters about snipers there .
 Andrushko saw one protester on the Maidan shooting at Berkut from a hunting rifle and another protester there with a Kalashnikov assault rifle or its hunting version .
 The Maidan and the Music Conservatory were often changing positions between the two. They were often moving positions between them .
 The Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine investigation determined based on testimonies and investigative experiments that almost half of protesters were wounded on February 20 from other sectors than the Berkut police and did not charge Berkut with their shooting .
 At least 77 protesters were wounded from the Maidan-controlled buildings or areas . The absolute majority of them also testified concerning snipers in the Maidancontrolled locations .
 The Prosecution and in 2021 the Maidan massacre trial refused to classify Olesia Zhukovska, a Maidan female medic, as a victim in the trial .
 She was turned into a Maidan “icon’ after tweeting that she was dying shortly after she was filmed on the Maidan running to an ambulance with blood on her clothes .
Ukrainian and Western media reported that she was wounded by the Berkut police or 24 government snipers .
 Maidan medic testified as a witness in the Maidan massacre trial in 2021 that she was wounded from direction of the Hotel Ukraina based on her reported entry and exit wounds locations .
 She admitted in an interview with a Ukrainian journalist that she was not wounded . However, she admitted in the interview that she had not been wounded .
 A Maidan activist revealed that the wounding of this Maidan medic was staged by the Maidan SelfDefense leadership and that her surgery conducted shortly before the massacre was misrepresented as her exit wound .
 Maidan activist reportedly revealed that there was an intention to stage a false flag killing of a female protester in order to galvanize public support for the Maidan and blame the government forces .
 The Maidan Self-Defense decided to stage a fake wounding of the female medic by misrepresenting her neck surgery as her wounding . But there was reluctance to kill a woman, the leadership of the Maidan self-Defense said .
 A Maidan protester standing near hear was killed in the same Maidan spot . She was filmed running to the ambulance with blood on her neck .
 Two protesters said they saw that he was shot from the Main Post-Office building . The building was then the Right Sector headquarters .
 The testimonies of the absolute majority of wounded Maidan protesters concerning snipers in Maidan-controlled locations were consistent with testimonies of several prosecution witnesses and relatives of killed protesters at the Maidan massacre trial .
Prosecution witnesses were supposed to provide testimonies supporting the prosecution charges that the Berkut policemen massacre the Maidan protesters . The prosecution witnesses were meant to provide testimony supporting the charges .
 25 testified about snipers in Maidan-controlled locations massacring protesters and the police . However, 25 testified concerning snipers.
 Dmytro Holubnychyi testified at the trial that other Maidan protesters wondered during the massacre whether ""ours at ours" and told him that there were shooters on the Hotel Ukraina .
 Netflix documentary omitted evidence of Maidan snipers . He was filmed as a teenage protester in one of the most widely publicized videos of the Maidan massacre .
Pastushok testified that he and other protesters from Volhynian company were filmed by the BBC running away along with other protesters and the BBC TV crew after shouts about a sniper .
 Pastushok saw someone opening a window in the Hotel Ukraina on the 7-9 floor . He waved at them not to shout about this sniper, aimed his rifle, raised it, and waved his hands giving a similar sign .
 He testified to the government investigation that Oleksandr Khrapachenko was shot from across the Instytutska street . He was then next to him, the left wing of the Hotel Ukraina .
 Pastushok also stated that the protesters were shot at from the Hotel Ukraina when they carried Khrapachenko .
 Poliansky was shot dead by protesters in the Hotel Ukraina . Kulish testified at the investigation that the gunshot that killed him was from the hotel . He testified that protesters shielded them from the HotelUkraina when he was killed .
 Vasyl Aksenyn told another Maidan protester that he most likely was shot from the Hotel Ukraina . His wife testifies at the trial that he told another protester he was shot at the hotel . He is accused of killing a Maidan protesters .
 Viktor Smolensky was shot along with a female medic, who was shot there .
 The Omega commander testified at the trial that his Internal Troops unit of snipers was in its base near Kyiv when he received an order to deploy because the Maidan side used weapons. There were killed policemen and protesters and protesters .
When the Omega snipers opened windows on the third floor of Kabmin Club were shot at, and bullet hit a window frame and walls .
 The Omega commander said that based on the bullet holes in Kabmin Club the shooting at the Omega snipers was likely from the 5-7th floors of the Hotel Ukraina .
 He stated that the Omega snipers saw gunshot flashes from the 5-7th floors of the Hotel Ukraina . He said that the snipers saw shots fired from the hotel .
Gunfire reported from the 5-7th floors of the hotel and the attic of Zhovtnevyi Palace . The hotel and attic of the palace were also targeted .
 The Music Conservatory, the Hotel Ukraina, and attic windows of Zhovtnevyi Palace were among the locations of shooters at the police .
Ukraina TV correspondent testified that one of policemen behind a truck Berkut barricade said that there was shooting at them .
 Policemen said that they noticed shooting from the Hotel Ukraina to the police barricade direction .
 He testified that snipers later arrived in a bus to check whether there was shooting from this hotel . He testified in court that snipers arrived in the bus.
 His video operator testified that he filmed a government sniper targeting a window in Hotel Ukraina on the 6th or 7th floor .
 27 video operator testified during interrogation that police warned them about shooting from Hotel Ukraina .
Ukraina TV video presented these Omega snipers as a death squad which killed the Maidan protesters . It was broadcast by many TV channel as evidence that they massacred protesters .
 The Berkut police and Internal Troops were massacred by Maidan snipers on February 20 . They were not on their own as a group but in a planned action by the Maidan leadership .
 Two vans with about 20 armed men in military-style fatigues arrived to the Music Conservatory right before shooting at the police started from there .
 The Internal Troops intelligence also reported that protesters guarding a barricade near the Conservatory were told to leave shortly before the massacre . Smoke from burning tires was used to cover snipers.
 He testified about reports of Maidan snipers in the Trade Union building, the Hotel Ukraina, and Muzeiny Lane building . He also testified on reports of the Maidan sniper attacks .
 His special forces unit came under fire by snipers from the tall building under reconstruction in the Hrushevsky Street area . He later found evidence of sniper positions there .
 The commander of the SBU Alfa snipers testified that his unit was deployed from an SBU base circa 10:00am because of information that sniper weapons were used on the Maidan . There were both police and protesters killed.
 He and other members of his unit stated at the trial that their order was to act as counter-snipers . They observed the Hotel Ukraina 28 and roofs of buildings .
 UDO snipers testified at the trial that they received an order circa 10:00am to locate a sniper in the Hotel Ukraina . They were deployed to Cabinet of Ministers building around noon .
 The commander of the UDO counter-sniper unit testifies that he was told by his commander that there was shooting from the Hotel Ukraina . He received his order to take 3 snipers, go to Cabmin and determine from which hotel window there was shot .
 His understanding was that someone was shooting at both sides,e., the government forces and Maidan protesters .
 SBU leadership would use its Alfa special unit to neutralize the shooter . His commander told him to determine from which window there was shooting from the hotel .
 The Omega snipers commander also testified that the Security Service of Ukraine and his Omega unit of the Internal Troops were ready to clean out the shooters . Their passage to the Music Conservatory and another building was refused by the Maidan leadership .
 The government units of snipers were deployed to their positions only after the massacre was long underway, that they had orders to locate snipers who shot the police and the protesters . snipers were located in the Maidan-controlled buildings, such as the Hotel Ukraina, Music Conservatory, and Zh
 The commander of the Internal Troops during the Maidan massacre trial said that his observers reported that snipers were shooting at the protesters and the police . He said snipers were shot from top floors of the Hotel Ukraina and the Music Conservatory .
 The SBU Alfa negotiated with Andrii Parubii, then the head of the Maidan Self-Defense, to search for snipers at the Hotel Ukraina . He also stated that the SBu Alfa negotiating with Parubi was not allowed to allow this .
 Ex-president Viktor Yanukovych during his video-link testimony as a witness in the Maidan massacre trial also stated that he received reports about snipers shooting from the top floors of buildings whose entrances were guarded by Maidan forces .
 Many Berkut policemen testified that they or other Berkut servicemen were shot from the Music Conservatory in the early morning of February 20 .
 The testimonies by the absolute majority of the wounded Maidan protesters are consistent with the testimonies of 8 Georgian exmilitary for the Maidan massacre trial . The testimonies are generally consistent with testimonies of eight Georgian ex military for the massacre trial and with their interviews in American, Italian and Israeli TV documentaries
 Three of them testified at the Prosecutor General Office of Belarus on request of the Prosecutor general Office of Ukraine . The case is the case of the killings and wounding of the police during the Maidan massacre .
 The Maidan massacre trial in November 2021 admitted as evidence a testimony of one of these Georgians who confessed of being a member of a group of Maidan 30 snipers .
 Three self-admitted Georgian snipers gave written depositions to Berkut lawyers for the Maidan massacre trial . Two provided notarized letters to the Ukrainian courts and offered to testify via video link from Belarus .
Georgians received orders, weapons, and payments from specific members of the Maidan leadership and former Georgian government leaders and commanders to massacre both protesters and police . They said they and other members of sniper groups from Georgia.
 They stated that they also received shooting instructions from a far-right linked ex-US Army sniper . They said they also got shooting instructions.
 Ex-Georgian military members testified that then saw Georgian, Baltic States, and specific far right Sector-linked Ukrainian snipers shooting from the Music Conservatory and the Hotel Ukraina .
 There were four groups of Georgian snipers on the Maidan with total of 40 members, including themselves . They said that there were four of the four groups.
 One of them stated without revealing his identity in a United States documentary that he shot the protesters from the Hotel Ukraina40 . Another said that the plan involved assassination of Viktor Yanukovych .
 Most of these Georgians revealed their names, passport numbers & border stamps, copies of plane tickets, videos and photos in Ukraine or Georgian military, and other evidence .
 The ex-commander of the special armed Maidan Self-Defense Company was named along with his father as snipers by these Georgian ex-military . Two members of his company admitted in Ukrainian media interviews and one in a BBC interview that they shot the police from the Music Conservatory and
 Another member of this Maidan company confessed to providing a hunting version of a Kalashnikov assault rifle to members of this company to massacre the police and witnessing such shooting .
 He testified that snipers in the Hotel Ukraina massacred the Maidan protesters . He also testified that sniper in the hotel killed the protesters .
 In contrast, there were no such testimonies admitting involvement in the massacre of the Maidan protesters, or getting such specific information from others .
 This includes those charged with the massacre in Ukraine or in absentia and those who were not charged and continued to serve under the new Maidan governments . This includes both those charged in Ukraine and in absenta and those not charged. This also includes those who served under the
 All Berkut policemen, two Omega servicemen, and Kyiv SBU head, who were arrested and charged with the massacre, denied that they massacred the Maidan protesters .
 In contrast, the absolute majority of testimonies of wounded Maidan protesters about being shot are not corroborated by videos, forensic medical examinations, and other evidence .
In the small minority of remaining cases, such evidence is either absent or contradictory . In the small majority of cases, there is no evidence that the evidence is missing .
 Kolesnikov reversed his testimony about being shot from the upper part of the Hotel Ukraina . He backed in his trial testimony prosecution charges that he was wounded by a Berkut policeman on the ground .
 A timestamped video was used by the prosecution as evidence that Kolesnikov and other Maidan protesters were wounded and killed by one of the Berkut policemen being tried .
 Many protesters, such as Yuri Kravchuk, who testified during the trial, still accused the Berkut police in shooting them . Many protesters were wounded from such Maidan-controlled locations as the Bank Arkada or the Hotel Ukraina .
 All Berkut policemen charged with the massacre of protesters were in other locations during the massacre, not in these Maidan-controlled buildings . The government investigation, videos, eyewitness testimonies, and cell phones tracking showed that all Berkut police were not at the scene .
 Oleksandr Huch, the Volhynian company of the Maidan Self-Defense commander, said he thought based on his position that he was shot from the Cabinet of Ministers building .
 The ricochet impact seen in a Norwegian TV video was not shown at the trial . The wound location and steep direction suggest that he was shot from a Muzeinyi Lane building on the left and somewhat in front of him .
 An onsite investigative experiment by the government forensic experts determined that Huch was shot from a sector of fire which included Muzeinyi Lane buildings .46 Similarly, Ivan Halamai claimed that he was wounded from a Berkut barricade .
 The bullet wound is from the top of the Bank Arkada and not from the Berkut barricade on the similar ground level . The bullet wounds are in the video at the time of the shooting, and the steep slope of the bullet in his x-ray in his
 The government investigation and the Maidan massacre trial and the Yanukovych state treason trial did not reveal any evidence of an order or orders to massacre the protesters by then President Yanukovych, his Internal Affairs and SBU chiefs .
 The Prosecutor General of Ukraine and the head of its department in charge of the Maidan massacre investigation said they did not have evidence about involvement of the Russian government and Russian snipers in the massacre .
 The trials and investigations in Ukraine also did not reveal any evidence of the involvement of any other foreign governments and foreign government snipers, including the US, the UK, Georgia, the Baltic States, Poland, and Poland .
 Videos of Berkut on ground near Zhovtnevyi Palace and behind two barricades on Instytutska Street were shown separately or in a compilation of 16 videos, which were shown simultaneously .
 The trial confirmed that specific times of Berkut shooting did not coincide in the synchronized videos of the Maidan massacre . A small number of exceptions were found .
 The exact times of their killing and wounding do not coincide with the times of the Berkut shooting in synchronized videos . This means that it was physically impossible for the BerkUT 35 policemen to shoot the absolute majority of the protesters .
 The prosecution charges stated that about two dozen members on the special Berkut company massacred the Maidan protesters during a brief police advance and retreat .
 All these Berkut policemen were filmed in numerous videos and National Bank security cameras for almost entire time from their deployment to the end of the massacre . All these officers were filmed by National Bank Security cameras .
 Yuri Parashchuk was killed in the back of his head when he faced the Berkut police . A single bullet hole in his helmet in synchronized videos show that he was killed when he was facing police .
 The Berkut policemen charged with their killing could not physically shoot them . This means that the Berkut officers charged with the killing were not physically shot by the police .
 Some videos shown at the Maidan massacre trial revealed Maidan snipers . Some videos were shown during the trial .
 A live broadcast of Espresso TV showed a Maidan protester giving a Kalashnikov-type firearm to another protester at the Maidan barricade . Another protester shot from a hunting rifle in the direction of the police .
 The video showed the police retreating from the Maidan in about 20 minutes afterwards before 9:00am . The video was taken in the early hours of the morning .
 Video shows armed Maidan company members going to this barricade and shooting in the direction of the police . This video matches unbroadcast CNN video which shows the armed special Maidan Company members going into the barricade .
 Unbroadcast segments of the most famous video of the Maidan massacre show two Maidan protesters luring a group of other protesters to advance before they would be massacred .
 One of these two protesters at the trial and one in the media interviews could not explain why they did this . One of the two protesters said he was not sure why he did it .
 The VRT video also includes a protester shouting to the other protesters not to move ahead because there is shooting from the Hotel Ukraina . The group is not allowed to go ahead because of the shooting .
 He warned that they shoot from the hotel all protesters together and that there were gunshots from there . He also said that they shot from a hotel where they were protesting .
 The VRT News video then shows a bullet hitting a tree in the direction of a group of Maidan protesters . The video is then shown by a camera crew in the Maidan protests .
 One of them pointed his hand towards the hotel and shouted about gunshots from the hotel . He asked the shooters there not to shoot and asked them to not shoot .
 Six wounded protesters from this group testified at the Maidan massacre trial . They testified that they or their group were either shot from this hotel and other Maidan37 controlled buildings .
 SBU Alfa snipers and commanders said recoding of their intercepted radio communications of SBU was selectively edited and was made after they were deployed to the Cabinet of Ministers building to locate snipers in the Maidan controlled Hotel Ukraina and other buildings . The trial was held at
 This audio recording was widely publicized in the Ukrainian media after the Maidan massacre as evidence that these government snipers massacred the protesters . The recording is believed to have been made by Ukrainian government snipers .
 Forensic Examinations of forensic medical examinations were made public during the Maidan massacre trial . The absolute majority of protesters were shot on February 20 from side and back directions and from top to bottom directions .
 Forensic evidence shows that the majority of the killed and wounded protesters faced the Berkut police in front of them on the same or similar ground level . Maidan-controlled buildings were generally behind them and on the left and right side .
 bullets do not fly like guided missiles in order to hit the protesters from the directions and height that do not match the locations of the Berkut police . One does not need to be a forensic expert to understand this since bullets don't fly like missiles .
 Forensic medical examinations indicated 40 out of 48 protesters were shot dead from significant vertical angles based on the directions of their wounds . The protesters were charged with the murder of Berkut policemen .
 At least 36 of these protesters were killed when the Berkut policemen were filmed on the same or similar level on the ground .
 protester had nearly horizontal entry and exit wounds, but he was snot sideways . Just one killed protester had almost horizontal entry, exit wounds .
 Another was killed, inter alia, by a handgun bullet behind a wall that made it physically impossible to shoot him from the Berkut positions .
 48 out of 51 wounded protesters, whose wound directions were revealed at the trial, had wounds at significant vertical angles . The shooting on February 20th Berkut policemen were charged with shooting .
 Ivan Bliok was killed from Vepr carbine, a hunting version of a Kalashnikov machine gun . The weapon is a hunting-style version of the AKA .
 Two protesters were killed by expanding hunting bullets, whose calibers did not match calibers of weapons used by the special Berkut company . The company's members were charged with killing these protesters .
 Forensic ballistic examination found bullets extracted from killed protesters, trees, and hotel rooms did not match police database of bullet samples from any 7.62x39 caliber Kalashnikov assault rifles of members of the entire Kyiv Berkut regiment .
 Most of protesters killed on February 1819 were shot with hunting pellets and smoothbore rifles used in hunting . The government investigation determined that most of the protesters killed were shot by hunting pellets .
 The weapons used by the wounded checkpoint attackers in Sloviansk on April 20, 2014 were the same weapons from which two Internal Troops servicemen were killed . Three other policemen were wounded on the Maidan on February 18 .
 The court rulings specifically referred to two Right Sector activists, who were wounded during a Right Sector attack of a separatist checkpoint . Many other Right Sector members are suspects in the investigation in killings and wounding the police on the Maidan .
 The wound locations of the three killed Maidan protesters in the 3D model do not match the wound locations in the model .
 Ihor Dmytriv was shot in the ‘right side surface’ and the “left side surface of the torso’s torso . The entry wound was 20.5cm higher than the exit wound, according to forensic medical examination .
 A Maidan victims’ lawyer visually demonstrated at the trial that these wounds locations of were in the right and left sides .
 medics also show such locations of Dmytriv's wounds with no wounds visible in the front area, contrary to the 3D model . The 3D video shows the wounds in the back of the body .
 Several Maidan protesters and medics pointed to snipers there shortly before and after these three protesters were killed . Several Maidans were killed in Maidan .
 There is not a single person convicted or under arrest for the Maidan massacre of the protesters and the police . It is striking that almost eight years after one of the best documented cases of the mass murder in history.
 The prosecution did not charge anyone for wounding 77 protesters, or almost half of all wounded protesters on February 20 . The investigation determined that they were not shot from the Berkut positions but from other sectors .
 Prosecutor General Office has been headed by Maidan politicians or close allies of the Maidan presidents of Ukraine and President Zelensky . Investigation of the massacre was under control of Maidan government leaders from the start .
 Two factions of main Maidan parties blocked creation of a parliamentary commission concerning Maidan massacre during the Poroshenko presidency .
 The failed investigation, the prosecution, and to a large extent trial are consistent with cover-up and stonewalling of the investigation . The Turchynov, Poroshenko, and Zelensky governments and the investigation by the Prosecutor General Office, the State Bureau of Investigations, and
 The law also prohibited investigation of Maidan participants for such crimes . Such evidence that was already collected had to be destroyed .
 Two out of five Berkut policemen, who were arrested for several years and tried for the Maidan massacre on February 20, were released by the trial judges because of the lack of evidence .
 All Berkut policemen were released and exchanged to Donbas separatists by a Kyiv court on an order of President Zelensky within a several months of the expected verdict .
 A Ukrainian journalist said the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine was involved in transferring the Berkut special company commander from Ukraine . The journalist was a member of the Maidan leadership .
 The GPU investigation denied that there were snipers in Maidan-controlled buildings . The investigation did not investigate them .
 The Berkut policemen on the ground shooting openly from Kalashnikov’s were not snipers by any definition .
 The GPU initially stated in March 2014 that its investigation identified snipers who massacred the Maidan protesters, and seized their weapons, and that foreigners were investigated in the massacre .
 Prosecutor General Office, Security Service of Ukraine, and Ministry of Internal Affairs reversed statements without any rationale offered . In April 2014, they announced that the special Berkut company massacred the Maidan protesters .
 The Prosecutor General Office reversed without any explanations their own previous investigation findings that at least three protesters were killed from the Hotel Ukraina . 10 others were also killed from significant heights and charged the Berkut policemen with their killings .
 The GPU charged an Omega sniper and an Omega machine gunner with killing one protester each . Even though it previously charged and tried the Berkut policemen for killing these two protesters, the GPU tried and tried them for killing them .
 Government forensic examinations presented at the Berkut trial show that it was physically impossible to shoot them from Omega and Berkut positions in front of them . However, testimonies of protesters, who were next to them, and witnesses killings of these two protesters, show that the shooting was
 The courts released both Omega members because of the lack of evidence even before their trials . Both Omega members were released by the courts because of their lack of Evidence .
 The Maidan massacre trial judges refused requests of self-reported Georgian members of Maidan sniper groups to testify by video links from Belarus . The trial judge refused to allow self- reported Georgian members to testify .
 The Prosecution General Office of Ukraine claimed that these Georgians were fake . Maidan victims lawyers called them "actors" and denied that they even visited Ukraine even though they provided their real names and passports .
 Armenian and Belarusian government agencies confirmed identities of some of these Georgians . The names of some Georgians have been confirmed by authorities .
 Nadia Savchenko said she saw people from the armed group that she saw arriving on the Maidan are in the Ukrainian parliament . Savchenko saw as one of Maidan leaders brought the snipers to the Hotel Ukraina and she saw shooting from this hotel .
 A Right Sector sponsor and a leader during the Maidan massacre said he and other Right Sector activists found and photographed three positions of snipers and their exit routes . One of the snipers found there was released by Maidan leaders, he said .
 Several Maidan activists said that they witnessed that some snipers were captured by Maidan protesters . But they said that Maidan leaders evacuated them and then disappeared .
 Davyd Zhvania, a former associate of President Poroshenko and the head of the parliamentary committee during the Maidan, named 45 Maidan leaders he named in 45 videos . The Maidan leader, he said, “arranged the Maida massacre’
 He said that then Maidan opposition leaders had blood on their hands and wanted to seize power in Ukraine . He said the opposition leaders wanted to take over the country .
 The Maidan leaders knew in advance about the Maidan massacre, he said . He said they called their members of the parliament not to go to Maidan so they won’t be killed .
 A Maidan member of the parliament said one of “titushky’s leaders worked for a business of leading Maidan activists and that they knew about the massacre in advance also was not investigated .
 Neo-Nazi C14 leader and members took refuge in the Canadian Embassy shortly before the Maidan massacre . One of its ex-leaders stated that the C 14 leader knew about the massacre in advance .
 Estonian foreign affairs minister told EU foreign affairs chief that both police and protesters were shot by the same “snipers’s’ because their wounds had the same distinctive features . The same concerns a statement of the Estonian Foreign affairs minister telling the EU foreign Affairs chief in
 Two Ukrainian writers quoted a Maidan leader from far-right Svoboda and a deputy head of the parliament from SvOboda . A Western representative before the massacre told them and other Maidan leaders that the Western governments would turn on Yanukovych if casualties among protesters would reach
 Ukrainian media revealed in 2019 that Kyiv prosecutors found that killers of two traffic policemen during the Maidan massacre were among snipers .
 These killers received phone calls from prominent female and male parliament deputies from one 46 of Maidan parties . They killed these policemen during a traffic stop.
 The investigation after these findings was transferred to the police controlled by the same party and completely stalled . The investigation was then transferred to police control by thesame party and stalled .
Former far right activist Tetiana Chornovol was presented as a Maidan hero and a victim .
 She was put under house arrest and then released by the court and the trial has not begun in this case . But she was put on house arrest.
 The GPU investigation failed to determine bullet trajectories with help of forensic ballistic experts . It was ordered to determine if these trajectories were from Maidan-controlled buildings .
 The investigation, with some exceptions, used complex forensic examinations by medics to determine sectors of fire without on-site visits and any measurements and explanations provided .
 Unexplained reversals of testimonies of many wounded protesters concerning snipers in Maidan-controlled buildings and areas at the Maidan massacre trial are consistent with cover-up .
 The same concerns unexplained reversals of forensic examinations of bullets and directions of wounds of protesters . A few weeks before the investigation submitted the case to a court for the trial .
 The new ballistic examinations reversed findings of some 40 pervious forensic ballistic examinations, including computer-based ones . The findings were completely different from those of the previous examinations .
Analysis of the 47 videos of the Berkut police and several killed and wounded protesters shows that Maidan protesters were shot from Maidan-controlled buildings and could not have been physically shot from Berkut positions .
 Key pieces of forensic evidence of the massacre on February 20 disappeared when it was under Maidan opposition or Maidan government control . It was in possession of the Maidan Government investigation without anyone responsible identified and prosecuted .
Almost all shields and helmets of killed and wounded protesters since bullet holes in them or their absence could easily identify locations of the shooters . Such evidence includes almost all shields, helmets of dead and injured protesters .
 Several trees with bullets and/or bullet holes were cut in the Maidan protesters massacre area and in the Berkut barricade areas after the massacre .
 Prosecutor General of Ukraine under Zelensky said investigation of Maidan massacre and other Maidan crimes was sabotaged and was organized in such way that it did not find who ordered these crimes .
 He stated that a part of materials disappeared during this 48 investigation . He said that part of the materials disappeared in this investigation .
 He questioned as to why the Berkut members were imprisoned for four years without a verdict . He questioned why they were charged with the Maidan massacre .
 Videos and their own admissions showed the involvement of Chornovol and far right Maidan activists in this arson attack .
 The Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine investigated his death as a result of a fire and not an arson attack . But until February 2020, the prosecutor general office of Ukraine said his death was not a fire .
 A leader of a Maidan organization and its members were revealed and investigated by the Prosecutor General Office for evacuating and hiding firearms of the special Berkut company charged with the massacre of the protesters on February 20 .
 The landscape, the street, and trees on the site of the massacre would be almost completely changed into a park and a new Maidan massacre museum . The landscape and the street will be transformed into a new museum .
 This would make physically impossible for the investigation to finally conduct on-site investigative experiments to determine bullet trajectories . This would be the first time the investigation has been able to do so .
 Investigations of the massacres of the police and the protesters were separated even though they happened on the same days and in the same places . The massacres of police and protesters were separate even though it happened on same days .
 There were no forensic examinations of bullets extracted from bodies of the police and protesters . No forensic examinations were conducted in spite of various evidence that they were shot by same groups of snipers .
 Its fate became uncertain after the exchange of the five Berkut policemen to separatists by President Zelensky . The five policemen were exchanged with separatists by the president .
 Several attacks by 49 the neo-Nazi C14 and other far right groups disrupted and threatened the trial .
 There is no such evidence of systematic cover-up by the Yanukovych government leaders and Berkut members .
 Yanukovych treason trial revealed evidence that he fled Ukraine following attempts by Maidan forces, including the far right .
 He and his Internal Troops commander volunteered to testify via video links about the massacre at the trial . He was a member of the National Guard who was killed in the attack .
 Two of the Berkuts, who were exchanged to separatists, voluntarily returned from the separatist-controlled Donbas in order to continue to participate in their trial .
 Berkut policemen openly stayed in Ukraine after the Maidan massacre until they were arrested and charged with the mass murder . These actions do not suggest cover-up or stonewalling of the investigation .
 There is also evidence of involvement of the far-right Svoboda or Svobodalinked activist and bot or troll accounts in the cover-up of Maidan massacre perpetrators and evidence .
 Several dozens of identical or nearly identical English-language accounts and pages on all major social media . The author claimed that the author falsified the evidence that Maidan protesters were massacred by the Maidan snipers .
 Such social behavior is also unauthentic compared to typical social media users . Such social behaviour is also not as common as typical social users .
 The text of comments posted by Svyatoslav Gut, a far-right immigrant activist linked to Svoboda, is basically identical to the idiosyncratic text of these social media accounts and online forums and bot and troll comments . Gut posted the comments on his personal Facebook account .
 They call the author the falsifier of the Maidan massacre and ask to Google such phrase . They call him the falsified author and ask for Google such phrases .
 The first name of Svyatoslav Gut, the Chicago location, and age match the aliases, such as Slavw and Slav70 . The age of the creator of these social media accounts and pages and posts in the online forums, the Ukrainian media, and Wikipedia .
 The same person also created or edited hundreds of Wikipedia pages in Ukrainian and English concerning the far-right OUN, the UPA, and Nazi Germany . The person with the same alias used ‘scientific anti-Semitism’ to justify the OUN-led pogrom and
 He describes himself as an immigrant from Lviv . He apparently has bachelor degree in accounting and also a certain background in software .
 Most of the wounded protesters are wounded, including several dozen prosecution and dozens of defense witnesses . Such evidence includes testimonies of the absolute majority of wounded protesters, many prosecution and defense witnesses.
 The Prosecutor General Office investigation found that about half of Maidan protesters were wounded from other locations than the Berkut police positions on the ground .
 Since the investigation and the trial did not reveal any “third force” snipers, this means that Maidan snipers with the involvement of the Maidan leadership perpetrated this massacre . The investigation did not show any � “Third force’s’ involvement
14 self-admitted members of Maidan sniper groups. This is consistent with various evidence, such as videos of snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings and areas .
 Videos presented at the trial confirmed that specific times of shooting of specific protesters in the absolute majority of cases did not coincide with times of shootings by Berkut policemen and directions of their shooting .
 The Berkut policemen, who are charged with the massacre of the protesters, did not massacre at least the absolute majority of killed and wounded Maidan protesters on February 20 . This visual evidence alone shows beyond any doubt that the Berkut police did not kill and wounded the protesters .
 The videos provided evidence that 52 protesters were lured and then massacred by snipers from the Maidan-controlled buildings, such as the Hotel Ukraina .
 Forensic medical examinations determined that the absolute majority of the protesters were shot from steep directions from the sides and back . The majority of those shot were shot at the side and back.
 This is consistent with locations of Maidan-controlled buildings and areas and inconsistent with the locations of the Berkut police on the ground . This is not the same as the location of the Maidan police on ground .
 Forensic examinations of bullet holes suggest that Berkut policemen were mostly shooting above the Maidan protesters . The Hotel Ukraina was the main location of the snipers .
 A small minority of protesters by the Berkut police can't be excluded because of the lack of publicly available data or because of contradictory data .
 Most of the protesters were likely shot by the Maidan snipers, but their killing and wounding suggest most of them were also shot by snipers .
 The trials and investigations have not revealed any evidence that Yanukovych or his law enforcement ministers and commanders ordered the massacre of the Maidan protesters .
 There are indications of stonewalling of the Maidan massacre investigations and the trials of Maidan governments and far right organizations and the cover-up of much of the key evidence .
 The investigation denied presence of any snipers in the Maidancontrolled buildings in spite of the overwhelming evidence . The investigation was carried out despite overwhelming evidence.
 The Maidan massacre investigation and trial were stonewalled, charges against Berkut policemen and later two Omega members were trumped up . Much of the evidence was destroyed in order to cover-up involvement of Maidan leaders and snipers in this mass killing .
 No one was charged with attempted murders of almost half of the wounded protesters on February 20 . No one has been charged with any attempted murders .
 The Maidan massacre was a false flag mass killing with involvement of elements of Maidan leadership and the far right and that it included the massacre of the police . Such revelations corroborate findings of the previous academic studies that this massacre was false flag killing .
 The puzzling misrepresentation of the Maidan massacre, its investigation, and the trial by Western governments and the media requires further research concerning reasons for such misrepresentation, says author .
 The Maidan massacre of the protesters and the police was a false flag operation which involved Maidan snipers and elements of the Maidan leadership . The trials and investigations have major implications for understanding this crucial case of political violence in Ukraine .
 The “Euromaidan’s’ origins of the violent conflict in Ukraine and the conflicts between Russia and Ukraine have major implications for understanding the ‘EurOMaidan.’ The conflict is the most violent in the world and the
 The Maidan massacre trials and investigations show that the narratives promoted by the Ukrainian and Western governments are false . Some notable exceptions the media that the Maidan protesters were massacred by government snipers are false.
 This massacre started an armed conflict in Ukraine that led to the Ukrainian government overthrow . It escalated into the secession and annexation of Crimea by Russia . The civil war in Donbas and Russian military interventions in Crimea and Donbas are among the major conflicts .
 U.S. Hegemony, Proxy Wars, Terrorism and Humanitarian Catastrophes. United States He hegemony, Proxy wars, Terrorism, and Humanitar Catastrohes .
 There was a Maidan protester playing his trumpet during the Maidan massacre .
 He came under live ammunition fire from the snipers in the Maidan-controlled Hotel Ukraina . He was shot in the head with live ammunition .
 The same far right activist under the same alias is also involved in running Facebook and other social media pages denouncing Wiktor Poliszczuk .