 We meet today to mark up two bipartisan resolutions. Pursuant to notice, we meet today for a bipartisan resolution .
 All members may have 5 days to submit statements for the record and any extraneous materials on today’s business that you want to include there .
 As you were all notified yesterday, we intend to consider today’s measures en bloc . We will consider today's measures.
 House Resolution 348 supports the right of the people of Ukraine to freely elect their government and determine their future . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives.
 Mr CiCILLINB (for tumself, Mr SiBES, Mr EnGEL, Mr EErTCH, Mr Lowbnthal.E of Pennsylvania, Mr DesJakivVIS, Mr Israel.E. of Pennsylvania.
 Mr. MoGoveb.n, Mr Btibgess, Mr TCtnztnoeb, of Illinois, Mrs. Bllmbks of Xortli Carolina, Mr Kokita, Mr. Bliimbnaueb, Mr Webbb of Texas
 Ixabtuh and Mr Cabnet submitted the following resolution . It was referred to the Committee on ITircign Affaire RESOLUTION . The resolution supports the right of tlie people of Ukraine to freely eleet their government .
Mr Cicilline of Rhode Island Strike the first clause of the preamble . Offered by Mr Cicillin of Rhode island Strike.
 Mr. Smith of Xew Jersey (for hiinself, Mr. DeutCH, Mrs. Smith)
 "I will be pleased to recognize any member seeking recognition to speak on either of these measures," he says .
 The resolution was introduced by Representative Cicilline, a Ukrainian lawmaker . The resolution is aimed at the people of Ukraine .
 Mr Cicilline, along with Ranking Member Engel and committee members Poe and Lowenthal, traveled to Ukraine .
 Dnipropetrovsk, Ukraine, is the Russian-speaking part of Ukraine . The conflict has been in the region for more than a decade .
 Russia told us that Russia was trying to recruit every skinhead and malcontent and bring them there . And what they told us was that Russia is trying to recruitment every skin head and mal content .
 Those with a Muscovite accent are being held in the brig until the cessation of hostilities . "We are arresting them," says the commander .
 The Russian Army said they are concerned about Russian interlopers . But they said what we are really concerned about is not the Russian forces, they said .
 Dnipropetrovsk, which is on the border of Luhansk, is an anti-tank weapons. If they attack us in the Donetsk region, then we will be able to defend. So what we need are anti- tank weapons, what we want is the
 Russian aggression against Ukraine remains a daily reality along the border region .
 Moscow continues to provide weapons and support to the separatists who control large areas of eastern Ukraine .
 Russian Army feels they can deal with separatists, but they feel their problem is the regular Russian Army that is in that theater .
 The so-called Minsk agreement lays out a series of steps to bring peace to the region . It includes holding local elections in Ukraine . The agreement also lays out plans to hold local elections .
 Free and fair elections are not possible in Luhansk and Donetsk. But they will not be held in those areas of eastern Ukraine that are controlled by Russian-led separatists .
 The resolution urges the administration to expedite assistance for reforms to promote free and fair elections . The resolution condemns efforts by outside forces, especially the Russian Government, from interfering in those elections .
 House Resolution 354, regarding safety and security of Jewish communities in Europe, is passed .
 The horrific loss of life in Paris and Copenhagen attacks highlights the urgent need for European governments to better protect Jewish communities .
 The resolution urges governments in Europe to consider several commonsense steps aimed at improving the safety of Jewish citizens there . It includes training and the law enforcement response to anti-Semitic violence .
Congressman Chris Smith of New Jersey. Smith has long-time commitment to promoting religious freedom around the world .
 I know we are short on time, so I will enter my full statement into the record and issue it to the press . I know it's short, but I will give it to press. I know that we areShort on time. I'll enter his full statement in the record
 I fully support these measures, and am particularly happy that our committee is advancing good bipartisan legislation, as we have done so often . But I fully supports these measures. I am especially happy that my committee once again is advancinggood bipartisan legislation .
 H Res. David Frum: "I thank you for bringing H Res before the committee for markup and for your leadership on human rights issues in general"
 Mr Chairman, violent anti-Semitic attacks between 2013 and 2014 doubled, and in some European countries actually quadrupled . Mr Chairman.
 H Res. focuses on essential actions needed to prevent, mitigate, and respond to deadly anti-Semitic attacks like those in Paris, Copenhagen, and Brussels .
 There are excellent examples of this in the United States, the United Kingdom, and in France . There are also excellent examples in the UK and France .
 The resolution highlights the importance of European governments supporting several key assessments and adjusting their strategies and efforts to combat anti-Semitism .
 European governments developing public awareness and suspicious activity campaigns . It emphasizes the importance of Jewish communities developing baseline safety standards .
 The OSCE stresses relevant training for law enforcement, implementing declarations, decisions, and commitments related to anti-Semitism . European governments have mandated and resourced senior officials to lead their anti-Semitic efforts .
 The resolution affirms support for the mandate of the U.S. Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat Anti-Semitism . The resolution also urges the Secretary of State to continue strong United States reporting on anti-Semitism.
 Res. Res is a blueprint for actions that are critical for the safety and security of Jewish communities in Europe and for our government's engagement with our European allies to combat antiSemitism .
 The specific actions recommended here are based on consultations with leading security experts who work closely with European Jewish communities .
 The bill is cosponsored by 84 Members of Congress, including 23 members of this committee . It is cosponsors by 84 members of Congress .
 Eliot Engel, Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Ted Deutch, Nita Lowey, Kay Granger, Peter Roskam, and Steve Israel are co-chairs of the bipartisan Task Force on Combating anti-Semitism .
 Chairman Royce and Ranking Member Engel support House Resolution 348 and Resolution 348 . Engel is a member of the House of Representatives . Engel and Royce are both members of the Senate .
 House Res. signals strong congressional support for free elections in Ukraine . Ukraine is the only country in Ukraine to hold free elections .
 I thank my many colleagues on the committee who have signed on as cosponsors as well . I thank them for their support . I also thank my colleagues for signing on to the committee .
 The democratic and economic development of Ukraine in the face of Russian aggression remains one of the most vital efforts the U.S. could undertake to combat Russian intransigence .
 The illegal and forceful occupation of Crimea and the ongoing Russian support for separatists in eastern Ukraine are an affront to international law and diplomacy . The illegal occupation and Russian support of separatists in Ukraine are a violation of international law.
 The Minsk II agreement was an historic step toward potentially ending the violence and unrest in the country . The agreement was a historic step to potentially end the violence, unrest in Belarus .
 Ukraine, Russia, the U.S. and European allies are implementing partners to ensure its successful execution . It is now upon the governments of Ukraine,Russia, and the United States .
 A vital part of the agreement will be to hold free and fair elections throughout Ukraine . The Donbas region, controlled by Russianled separatists, is controlled by Russia .
 Ukraine has local elections scheduled for most of the country except some separatist-controlled areas for October 25 . The elections are scheduled to take place in most of Ukraine .
 This resolution demonstrates Congress's unwavering commitment to supporting the right of the people of Ukraine to freely elect their government and determine their future .
 It condemns any Russian attempts to interfere in Ukraine’s elections in any way, including through intimidation or violence .
 During Ukraine’s last elections, these tactics were used to prevent Ukranians from voting in certain regions . Ukraine's last elections were held in Ukraine in October .
 Any actions undermining these elections must be met with swift and certain international condemnation . Any actions undermine these elections should be met by swift andcertain international condemnation.
 At this delicate juncture in Ukraine’s history, it is essential that the U.S. and European allies continue to demonstrate steadfast support for Ukranian territorial integrity, sovereignty, and the right of the Ukranians to participate in a free and fair electoral process .
I thank my colleagues for their support and urge them to support this resolution. Again, I thank my colleague for their help .
 I want to commend you for bringing this legislation before the committee today . I want the legislation to be heard before the panel today .
 Russian aggression continues to violate Ukraine’s political and economic sovereignty . Russian aggression continued to violate the country's political and financial sovereignty .
 If stability and peace is ever to be reestablished in Ukraine, it is vital that the people of Ukraine have the freedom to choose their own representatives, as well as take the necessary steps to ensure that their own future is possible .
 America has a duty to support the Ukranians seeking constitutional reform and free and fair elections . U.S. has to support Ukranian seeking constitutional reforms and free elections .
 This measure recognizes those realities and reasserts our support for the Ukranian people to freely elect their own government . This measure recognises those realities. This measure acknowledges those realities, reasserting our support.
 The ranking member added H Res. to this markup to the list of items .
 This committee has spoken loudly about not only Ukraine, but about Crimea as an integral part of the Ukraine, and that we are not conceding . The committee has been speaking loudly about the Crimea issue .
 The nonrecognition act on the Ukraine has in fact been incorporated into the defense authorization bill. And I am glad to say that the nonrecognitions act on Ukraine has been incorporated in the defense Authorization bill .
 It is vital that we speak firmly and we back it up with sanctions and other measures so that Vladimir Putin never gets the wrong impression about our acquiescence in a violent military action that suWerted the sovereignty of another country .
 The committee continues to speak with one voice and as firmly as possible on a bipartisan basis . I think it is really important this committee continue to talk with one Voice and as strongly as possible.
 I thank Mr Cicilline in particular for his leadership on this resolution, and look forward to voting for it. So I thank him for his Leadership on the resolution, I say .
 Mr Engel, the ranking member, is the chairman of the House of Representatives . Mr Engel is a former member of Congress . He is also a member of the United States' Senate committee .
President Obama says he supports the basic goal of legislation in Ukraine . Obama: "We are upset, and we know the great challenge there that they have"
 We want to end the conflict and upheaval that is going on that is 32 so detrimental to all of the people of Ukraine and destabilizing to Europe . We want the conflict to end and end the upheaval that's going on.
 Russia has been ignoring what started the destabilization of Ukraine in the first place . Russia has also been giving Russia a kick in the pants .
 Yanukovych was president of Ukraine, but fled the country . He was ousted from the country in 2012 .
Ukranian opposition, in coordination and consultation with other foreign powers, created violence, a violent situation that led to the destabilization of an elected government . This whole episode that has destabilized Ukraine started when violence, instigated by internal Ukranians, as well .
 There was huge violence that was caused when he made a major policy decision . There was a huge violence caused by the decision.
 Instead of letting the election take care of it, they had massive, not just demonstrations, but we are talking about massive violence . The election was held in New York City .
 Yanukovych has been trying to attack protesters, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I know that there has been an effort to try to make, oh, no, that was just Yanukovych attacking the demonstrators"
 A group of Ukranians met with a group ofUkranians just a couple nights ago, he says . "What we have was violence against an elected government," he adds .
 Mr Smith was there to see that Yanukovych was elected in a fair election . And Mr Smith said he was there.
 European friends had to collude with forces inside of Ukraine to create a destabilization of an elected government . The Ukraine government has been overthrown by an opposition government .
 Yanukovych fled and the elected government was overthrown, and I opposed that. Well, yes, when Yanukovych fled, he says .
We want to help the Ukranians. We need to make sure that we are on the side of free elections. And yes, we need to call upon — what we have here is to help them, and that we want tohelp them, says the president .
 The Government of Russia has been involved in overthrowing an elected government . But then we condemn the part of outside forces, specifically the government of Russia .
 Either we should leave that out or we should just say “attempts by outside forces’ and leave out this little jab at Russia .
 We are not going to make anything better by continuing to jab Russia, rather than looking at ways we can cooperate to end the conflict in Ukraine . We will not be able to make any better by looking at how we can cooperate with Russia .
 The Minsk agreement, which the chairman already mentioned, is what happened in the Minsk deal .
 Let’s work with them to see how we implement the plan rather than kicking them in the pants. Let‘s work out how to implement it.
I do think the actual goal of this is to try to say we are behind free elections and want Ukraine to come out of it, that certainly is a worthy goal . Well, I am going to be opposing this, but I do think that is the real goal of
 In Russia it will be 33 years old when it is 33 . It will be looked at as a slap in the face .
 "I stand in opposition, and I stand in favor of the spirit of what you are trying to accomplish, but this will not achieve your goal and go in the opposite direction"
 House Resolution 348 highlights the necessity for free and fair elections in Ukraine to regain its civility . House resolution also highlights the need for free elections in order to regain civility in Ukraine .
 House Resolution 354 was passed by House of Representatives on Tuesday . The bill was passed in a vote by House Speaker John Boehner . The vote was held in a special session on Wednesday night .
 Jewish communities in Europe are at risk for safety and security of Jewish communities, says author . "Because I want to add my concern for the safety of Jewish community in Europe"
 The rise of anti-Semitic incidents throughout Europe in recent years is deeply troubling . The rise in anti-Semitism is deeply disturbing .
 In the past 2 years, terrorists have murdered Jews in Belgium, Denmark, France and Belgium .
 Jews, Jewish institutions, synagogues, and schools across Europe have suffered numerous violent attacks . Jews and Jewish institutions have suffered many violent attacks.
 More than 40 percent of Jews in Belgium, France, and Hungary are considering emigration . As a result of this threatening environment, according to polls done by the ADL and other reputable organizations, more than 40% of Jews are considering leaving .
 20 percent of European Jews have experienced at least one incident of anti-Semitic attack or harassment, according to ADL .
Today's events in Europe are not analogous to the 1930s Germany. Fortunately, educated observers believe that today’s events are not similar to those in 1930s.
 Then, the hatred, the persecution and extermination of Jews was state-sponsored . Then, state- sponsored persecution of Jews. Then, hatred and extermination was the hatred of Jews .
Today’s leaders across Europe are working to stem the tide of anti-Semitism . Key European leaders have spoken out against anti-Semitic and have taken concrete actions .
 Europe is a defining moment for Europe, says David Frum . Frum: Europe's history is "a defining moment" for Europe . He says Europe's future is in the future, but Europe is "in the future"
 Our European partners’s ability to confront anti-Semitism will ultimately impact the very essence of the character of their nations, says David Frum .
 French PM: If Jews flee in large numbers, the soul of the French Republic is at risk . France's prime minister says if Jews flee, the country's "soul of theFrench Republic"
 We must support European governments, law enforcement agencies, and other entities to bolster Jewish security and preparedness . We must tighten communications with Jewish communities, and combat violent extremism broadly with counterradicalization .
 European nations must fulfill the principles of democracy, human dignity, openness, and pluralism, says David Frum . Europe's role in helping Europe stem the rising tide of anti-Semitism, he says . Frum says .
 Mr Rohrabacher says he sees this completely different. I appreciate the words of his friend from California, Mr Roh Rabacher, but I see it completely different .
 The Russian bear invaded Georgia, gobbled up one-third of the territory, and it is still in Georgia . The bear is now in Georgia.
 The bear went into Crimea, took it, claimed it as its own, and then went into eastern Ukraine, where it is now . The bear is still hungry for more land, still on the move, and is now in Ukraine .
 Russia now is in Syria, based on some faulty excuse, according to some reports . Russia is now in Syria.
 The Ukranians will decide what their government is going to be, not the Russians . This resolution says the Ukranian government is not the Russian .
 Putin said that Ukraine should decide about Ukraine, not him . Putin said, "The Napoleon of Siberia, Ukraine should choose not him"
 The U.S. supports Ukraine and the Ukranians in their quest to be rid of the invaders from Russia . "It is a good thing that the United States, a country that believes in self-determination and democracy, support the Ukraine," she says .
 I think we ought to do more for Ukraine than the U.S. has done, says John Sutter . Sutter says we should do more than the United States has done .
 Russia should send them meals ready to eat, we ought to help them defend their own sovereignty against Russia, which is another issue .
 America stands for democracy and self-determination even for Ukranians, says U.S. president .
I'm glad I am a cosponsor, and I appreciate the chair and ranking member bringing this up before the committee for a vote . So I totally support it, I am glad I'm a csponsor, I'm sure I am. So I'm glad
 I disagree with a portion of what Dana Rohrabacher had to say for reasons everybody else has already expressed . "I disagree with some of what he had to says for reasons everyone else has said," says John Sutter .
 He is right on the history, and that is a democratic elected government reneged on a giant promise . Instead of distributing campaign leaflets, there was a regime-threatening presence of large numbers of people .
 1 million people will demand extraconstitutional governmental changes each time politicians renege on a promise . Woe be to our state and Federal Governments if 1million people want changes .
 There is one part of the resolution that I think we can all agree on, and it may mean more if read in an American context . The resolution is part of a resolution that we can agree on .
 We say we strongly support the right of the people of Ukraine to freely elect their government . We say they strongly support their right to free elections .
 People are free to elect their own governor in the U.S. Federal system .
 Ukraine has been a model for the Ukraine since it was formed in the 1990s . Ukraine has a history of violence, but it has not yet been seen as a model in the country . Ukraine is a country that has suffered from violence since then .
 Americans say in a resolution “free to elect their own government,” most ordinary 35 Americans would think that would include electing your own governor .
I understand they are going to have their election and they have not agreed to permit their governors to be elected . So I understand they're going to be election. I also understand that they are not allowed to vote for their governors .
 Some in Kiev think that the local governor should be appointed . But there are certainly some in Kiev who think that it should be .
 Ukranian friends, especially in the country with such regional differences, have urged their friends to join them . "Our country has regional differences," she says .
 I will reclaim my time because I want to talk about the anti-Semitism resolution . I will reclaimed my time. I will talk about anti-Semitic resolution. I'll reclaim his time because of the resolution.
 We would have more credibility talking to the world about anti-Semitism if it wasn’t so prevalent on at least a few campuses .
 On some campuses, federally funded in large part, you are told that you are not qualified to serve in student government . Israel should be abolished and the Middle East should be ethnically cleansed of Jews .
 Title VI requires that those on campus not face anti-Semitism. Now, we do have a civil rights law, and Title VI must require that they not faceAnti-Semitism . We do have an anti-Semitic law, but Title VI does not require it .
 For anti-Semitism to be fought, you need a definition of anti-Semitic. But for anti-Jewish groups to be fighting, it needs to be defined .
When we criticize other countries for allowing anti-Semitic behavior, that is the definition we use . We use that definition when we criticize others for letting anti-Semitism.
 The U.S. Department of Education should not allow anti-Semitic behavior, he says . He says it undercuts our foreign policy when we tell other countries this is the definition of anti-Semitism .
 The U.S. Department of Education needs to enforce the law, he says . "For us to have any credibility in the world on this issue, we need to enforce it," he says.
 Mr Trott. Hearing no further requests for recognition, he says, "Oh, oh,Mr Trott"
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Engel, for bringing these two resolutions forward . Thank you, Mr Chairman and ranking Member Engel.
 Russia is irritated by this resolution, but I suspect they will be just largely amused . And I hope that Russia will be irritated by the resolution .
 Jewish safety and security is necessary, says Jewish leader . He says calling attention to the problem of Jewish safety is necessary .
I just want to go on the record as also strongly supporting H Res. 4.4.4 . And I just want the record to be a record-holder .
 The question occurs on the items considered en bloc . Hearing no further requests, the question is not answered .
 In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and the measures considered en bloc are agreed to . The Chair has said the measures are not needed to be agreed to.
 Staff is directed to make any technical and conforming changes . Staff is ordered to change any technical or conforming change .
 The Chair is authorized to seek House consideration of those measures under suspension of the rules . Also, without objection, the Chair is allowed to seek the House consideration.
 I thank Ranking Member Engel and all of our committee members for their contributions and assistance to today’s markup .
 Res. Res. 4, Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives regarding the safety and security of Jewish communities in Europe . Res.4, Expresses the sense. of the Congress regarding the security of the Jewish communities .
 Chairman The Commitlec on Foreign Affairs seeks to make Us facilities accessible to persons with disahilities .
 If you are in need of special accommodations, please call 202/225-5021 at least four business in Ktiivtvice ^ the event .
Commitlee malerials in alterna/ive formafs and assisHve lislening devices) wtzj’ he directed to the Committee .
 Doug Auderson, Creneral 40 House Committee on Foreign Affairs Fin. Fin.
 I Committee Markup Present MEltBER X Edward R Royce, CA X Christopher H Smith, NJ Tleana Ros-Lehtmen, FL X Dana Rohrabacher, CAX Steve Chabot, OH Joe Wilson, SC Michael T McCaul, TX X Ted
FL X Curt Clawson. CA Randy Weber, TX Scott Periy, PA Ron DeSantis, FL Mark Meadows, NC X TedYoho. FL X Curt Clincson. FLX Curt Clercson is a former member of the Florida State Department
 FL Scott, DesJarlais, Reid Ribble, Dave Trott, Ml Lee Zeldin, Dan Donovan, X Eliot L, Engel, NY X Brad Sherman, CA GregoiyW Meeks, NY Albio Sires .
 NJ X Gerald E Connolly, VA Theodore E DeuLch, FL Brian Higgins, NY Karen Bass, CA William Keating, MA X David Cicilline, RT Alan Grayson, FL Ami Bera, CA Alan S Lowenlhd.
 The items considered en bloc were agreed to by voice vote, and were ordered favorably reported by unanimous consent . The items were approved by unanimous vote .
 The Chair was authorized to seek House consideration of either of the measures agreed to under suspension of the rules . By unanimous consent, the Chair wasauthorized to seek the House consideration .
 It’s good, as always, to see our committee w'orking together to advance legislation and get it to the House floor . It's good to see the committee w’orking togetha’ to advance bills and get them to the
 H Res.8.8 is a new measure to be introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives . It will be the first time the measure has been passed in the House of Congress .
 Over the past year, we’ve spoken a lot about Ukraine in this committee. Over the last year, the committee has spoken about Ukraine .
 We want Ukraine's territorial integrity to ber^tored, and w’e w'ant to deter Russia from further aggression . We want to see a successful democratic transition .
 Tliis measure again signals the support of the United Slates for the people of Ukraine to chart their own future . Tliiis measure signals support for the U.S. Slates .
 The ceasefire in Ukraine finally seems to be holding. We all welcome the news that the ceasefire is holding .
 All of Ukraine's citizens will not have their voices heard. First of all, while the upcoming elections are important, all of Ukraine’s citizens will be heard .
 Only areas under Kyiv’s control will be casting ballots . Russia has a history of involving itself in Uki-aine's elections .
 We’re hopeful that President Putin will abide by his commitment not to interfere with this vote .
 We should have no illusions that it will deter President Putin’s aggrere.ssian. And we should not be worried about it.
 Minsk is preparing to do more if this crisis flares up again, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 H.Res.4 is a lead cosponsor of the measure . "I'm glad that we’re taking up H.res.4, and I’m proud to be a leadcosponsor," he says .
 The resolution calls on governments to do more to get at the root causes of anti-Semitism . It also urges stronger partnerships with governments and communities to prepare against violence .
Anti-Semitism has continued smoldering through the centuries . But as we all know, anti-Semitic anti-Semitism is still alive .
 Week after week, we hear reports of new anti-Semitic attacks . The Babi Yar Holocaust site in Kyiv was vandalized . The Great Synagogue in Copenhagen was targeted .
 We’d be foolish to dismiss this surge in anii-Semiiism as the work of a few violent, fringe, individuals .
 In countries like Hungary and Greece, we see anii-Semillc elements starting to work their way into political parties and governing bodies .
 It wasn't even a century ago that we heard thi.s canary in the coal mine. It wasn’t even a hundred years ago.
 InMiion to the darkest chapter in human history. And you can draw a straight line from early indifference to early indifference and inMiion .
 The lessons of the Holocaust are seared in our collective consciousness . The lessons are searing in the collective consciousness of people .
 lessons are tellings to throw water on this fire before it bums out of control .
 We need grewer vigilance by law enforcement when Jewish communities in Europe are under threat . We need growner vigilance.
We also need greater leadership from officials by speaking out against anti-Semitism . We also need to speak out against the anti-Semitic movement .
 We need stronger partnerships with Jewish communities to help them develop their own safety responses, community policing techniques, and information-sharing with government agencies . We need strong partnerships.
 We need to foster cultures that respect diversity and don’t ostracize minority groups. And we need to promote diversity, not ostracizing minority groups .
 This resolution encourages efforts to combat the scourge of anti-Semitism . The resolution encourages those efforts .