Putin is preparing a large-scale invasion of Ukraine, but in Kiev, this threat is underestimated . Putin is preparing to invade Ukraine, according to a report .
 Kyiv will almost certainly not resume in 2018 control over areas of the Donbas, which are now under control of Russia .
 Russia handed over $ 1 billion to Yanukovych for rejection of association with EU ex-deputy of the State Duma .
Ukraine's accession to NATO to be considered based on country's defense reform progress . Ukraine's access to NATO is based on the country's Defense reform progress.
 Yanukovych's son financed the formation of ""DNR"" and ""LNR"" ex-deputy of the State Duma . Yanukovych's sons were also involved in the formation.
 The Russian Federation has placed a very powerful military potential in the occupied Crimean territory . The Russian government has placed the Russian Federation in the territory .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin can organize a large-scale invasion of Ukraine, he says . Putin can also organize an invasion of the country, he adds .
 He added that while the Russian army is not yet ready for the invasion, the army is still not ready for invasion .
 In other areas, they build new lines to the old warehouses to be able to pull out all their old armaments . In some areas, new lines are being built to help pull out old arms .
 The colonel assumes that the invasion may not occur, since Putin is very unpredictable . The colonel believes that Putin may not be able to invade the country .
 The Russian Federation will continue its military, political, political and economic campaign of destabilization against Ukraine . The Russian government will continue to use its military and economic tools to destabilize Ukraine .
 The report also says that the conflict in the Donbas will continue in its present form . The offensive of each of the parties is unlikely to continue .
 Russia can carry out a large-scale invasion of Ukraine both from Belarus and the sea through Odesa . Russia can also carry out an invasion of the sea from Belarus .
 "If you lose Kyiv, it will be another game, is not it?" he said . "Of course, if you lost Kyiv," he said.
 Russia is not opposed to a UN peacekeeping mission throughout the territory of the occupied Donbas . Russia intends to abandon the conflict and intends to leave the conflict .
 The process of coordinating the peacekeeping mission in the Donbas came at the stage of determining the technical details . According to him, the process is now in the process.
 At the same time, he focuses on the number of peacekeepers, which may indicate their placement throughout the Donbas .
 The Russian Federation does not rule out the possibility of deploying a UN peacekeeping mission across the entire Donbass, including the Russian-Ukrainian border .
 The proposed amount of assistance to Ukraine's security has been increased by $50 million . It is noted that compared to the budget request for 2018, the proposed amount has been increase by $ 50 million .
 The final volumes of assistance to Ukraine will be known already after the completion of the entire process of passing the document . The document is now at an early stage, the Ukrainian Embassy in the United States said .
 John McCain believes providing Ukraine with anti-tank missile systems Javelin will contribute to creating stable security conditions in the region . McCain is chair of the United States Senate Committee on Armed Forces .
 The task was to financially interest representatives of the "family" of Yanukovych, says Ponomariov .
Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych's cousins, through his son Alexander, were transferred $1 billion from the Kremlin as a result of bonds transactions .
 Russian intelligence agencies and government agencies can strengthen subversive cybercrime against the US, Western countries, and directly against Ukraine . During the next year, Russia can strengthen its cybercrime.
 Such a forecast was made in a report on Tuesday by Director of National Intelligence Den Coats, reports Censor.NET .
 The United States expects that Russian intelligence services will continue to test the strength of the vital infrastructure of the United States and allies . In addition, the U.S. expects that Russia's intelligence services would continue to tests the strength.
 Coats said Russia will continue to use elections and other democratic processes in the United States and the West as an opportunity to undermine democracy .
 The document is aimed at promoting active cooperation between Ukraine and the U.S. in the field of cybersecurity in the face of Russian hybrid aggression . It provides assistance to Ukraine in improving the strategy of cybersecurity .
 Director's sister hopes that he will return to Ukraine in the framework of the exchange of prisoners . The director's sister says he hopes that the exchange will take place .
 "A very heavy call came out, although the connection lasted only three minutes,"Kaplan wrote . "Avery heavy call comes out, but the connection was short," Kaplan said .
 Labitnangi is located on the northern polar circle on the left bank of the river Ob for 2663 thousand kilometers from Kyiv and 3075 kilometers from Simferopol .
 Ukraine's NATO membership will be considered after the country implements the defense reform . Ukraine's defense reform is the country's first major defense reform to be considered .
 NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg told a press conference in Brussels on Wednesday .
 Ukraine has said its focus now is on reform, and then based on the progress they're making on reform . The issue of membership will be assessed based on progress Ukraine is making, he said .
 NATO chief: "We'll continue to strengthen our partnership with Ukraine" NATO chief said. "We will continue to work with Ukraine," he said .
Former president says he was made "to bring" money to the president . "Let's do something useful," he says .
 Yanukovych remains a president, the country does not go to the EU, and remains in the Russian sphere of influence . The country is not going to NATO, but is in Russia's sphere of Influence .
 Ponomariov: "This was precisely the result of the actions of the president, which he himself shook with his own hands. And they said that this was precisely a result of his actions"
 Yanukovych and his cousins received from Russia $1 billion for refusing to sign an agreement with the European Union . Ponomariov said during a questioning in court that Yanukovych received $1billion from Russia .
 Mayor of Odesa Hennadii Trukhanov arrived at Boryspil airport from Warsaw this morning .
 A journalist for Skhemy project Natalie Sedletska wrote on social media, Censor.NET .
 Last time I saw him in Davos, where he came to meet with investors, he met with investors . By the way, last time he saw him, he was in the city of Davos .
 Ukraine House Davos organizers "did not let him into their office," he wrote on social media .
 An-148 in Moscow region crashed due to mistakes of the crew during flight preparation and in a freelance situation .
 A preliminary analysis of parametric information showed that during the entire flight that ended in an accident, the heating of all three receivers of full pressure on the AN-148 was in the off state .
 The stage lasted about 10 seconds, then stopped . Join a single team at this stage at the stage .
After about 50 seconds, at an altitude of about 2000 meters, this one-time team was registered again . The speed from the MVP3 was larger and continued to increase, while the speed from MVP1 continued to decrease .
 The crew shut off the autopilot after the second appearance of the specified one-time command .
 The speed reading from the MVP1 continued to fall and after 34 seconds after the autopilot off, they began to equal 0.1 . After 34 seconds, the speed reading began to fall again .
 At the time of the collision with the ground, the pitch angle of the dive was about 30 degrees . The plane began to develop a right bank, which reached 25 degrees .
 An-148 crashed on February 11 in Ramenskoye area of Moscow Region after leaving Domodedovo to Orsk .
 Yulia Tymoshenko resorted to statistical manipulation during an interview with one of the Ukrainian TV channels . Batkivshchyna leader YuliaTymoshenko used statistical manipulation to make an interview .
 A video recording on which Tymoshenko voices the wrong figures is published online . According to Tsensor.NET, a video recording of theoshenko's speech is posted online .
 The politician reported a substantial increase in the national debt . He said that it had occurred for four years .
 At the same time, Tymoshenko held a printed chart in her hands . Such an increase took place for 10 years in the period from 2008 to 2018 .
 Russia concentrated on the occupied Crimean territory a very powerful military potential . Russia concentrates on the territory.
 NSDC Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov Hromadske answers question about risk Russia could attack from Crimea to Ukraine .
 In the Crimean place particular offensive powerful, strategic aircraft, missiles that can carry and use nuclear weapons . In the Crimea placed particular powerful and strategic aircraft.
 He believes Ukraine should be ready to repulse the occupier in all directions . He believes that Ukraine should have been prepared for the occupation .
"We must be able and willing to fight back in all directions, from south to north," says Turchinov .
Anti-diversion training took place at the Angarsk range in Crimea in January .
 The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine officially announced on February 20, 2014, the beginning of the temporary occupation of the Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia . The Rada was officially announced by the Ukrainian government in February .
 Key international organizations, including the General Assembly of the United Nations, condemned the actions of Russia . The annexation and occupation of Crimea is illegal .
 Ukraine's parliament recognized the State Duma of Russia illegitimate for holding Crimea's elections in 2016 . The Crimea vote was held in Crimea in March 2016 .
 Men's and women's curling tournaments started in Phoenchan at the 2018 Winter Olympics . The men's and woman's tournaments started at the 2014 Winter Olympics.
 The Russian team suffered a devastating defeat from the UK with a score of 3:10 . According to the "Apostrophe" in the first round, the Russian team served in the tournament .
 The game started with a good ending performed by the British who earned three points . The game was played by a British player who earned two points .
 One point was taken by Russians, but in the next two gigs three more stones were lost . Then one point was also taken by Russian, but three more were lost.
 The Russians recognized the victory of the rivals for three decades until the end of the match . After that, the Russians, not believing in their strength, recognized the win for decades .