 Editor-in-Chief Team Charles Lyons will Pegram Ruhley Michaelides Associate Editor Team Julianne Weidman George Gorokhov Jason Wolf Submissions Director Team Joshua Norris John Thompson Alison Keefner Faculty Advisor Dr. Dr. John Thompson John Thompson.
 Analyses should be logical, with a coherent flow and clear sense of purpose, says John Sutter . Sutter: Analyses must be logical and have a coherent Flow and clear purpose .
 Too many problems with the written presentation of a work may disqualify it even if the argument or subject is compelling . Authors of accepted papers agree to allow the editorial board to engage in editing of the manuscript for style .
 Authors will be given the right of final review of their manuscript . Authors should expect to be in regular correspondence with the journal as their manuscript proceeds through each stage on its way to final publication .
 All submissions must be double spaced, 12 point font in Times New Roman . All submissions are double spaced and 12 point fonts .
 Pages should be numbered in the bottom right corner, have 1 inch margins, with left side alignment, and the title page . Pages should have a title page, with a 1 inch margin, and a 1inch margin .
 The authors’ identifying information should be restricted to the cover page of the book . The authors' identifying information will be restricted.
 The Towson Journal of International Affairs was founded in 1967 . It is the world’s first academic journal to publish undergraduate research in the field of international relations .
 The TJIA publishes mostly undergraduate research . It also features articles by graduate students, faculty, and scholars from around the country .
 This issue begins with an article by Dana Tandilashvili, which examines Russia's annexation of Crimea through the lens of realism .
 The author argues that although the citizens living in Crimea share a similar identity with Russia, it is actually realist theory that best explains Russia's actions .
 Paul Kearney discusses the effectiveness of the Counter Terrorism Committee in combatting terrorism . In the following article, Kearney talks about the impact of the committee on terrorism .
 The CTC is ineffective because Security Council members place their political interests ahead of the goal of fighting terrorism, author says . The author concludes that because United Nations Security Council Members wield the most power .
 The concluding articles provide a better understanding of the rise of ISIS and ways in which their rise can be stopped . The concluding two articles provide an insight into how ISIS's rise could be stopped.
 The author notes that the rise of ISIS can be attributed to disenfranchisement and political instability in Iraq and Syria . The author also notes that ISIS has been blamed for the rise in Syria and Iraq .
 This issue provides provoking and insightful information that examines international issues from different and lesser understood angles . This issue is the latest in a series of international issues that focus on international issues .
 The realist approach states that Russia invaded Ukraine and annexed Crimea for Russia’s own self-interest in gaining more power . The realists state that Russia annexed Crimea and invaded Ukraine to gain more power.
 Many countries view Russia as not trying to work with other nations and wanting to gain power for themselves at all costs . In response, many countries view Russian as not working with other countries .
In contrast, norm-based constructivism holds that shared ideas, expectations, and beliefs about appropriate behavior are what give the world structure and stability . The actions that nations take in the international community are in response to the situation that they are in .
 The constructivist thought is that Russia’s occupation of Crimea is illegal and in violation of international norms and rules . But, nonetheless, it is in response to Russia's shared interest and identity with Crimea and the Russian people living there .
 Theory of classical realism provides an accurate explanation of the reasons behind Russia’s decision to invade Ukraine and annex Crimea . The theory also explains the international response Russia faced due to their actions in the region .
 Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea can be explored and analyzed . Through the theoretical approaches of classical realism and norm-based constructivism, Russia's invasion of Crimea and the reaction from the international community can be analyzed .
 Classical realism and norm-based constructivism do not agree with the reasons behind Russia's presence in the surrounding nations .
 normbased constructivism focuses on social relations that arise among nations based on common norms . Classical realism holds that all nations are self-interested and put themselves above any shared interests with other nations .
Both theories give reasons for Russia’s actions and insight into the reactions of surrounding nations . Russia is working in its own self-interest in order to gain influence over the region, according to the theory .
 Realism throughout Russia’s history, there have been many examples of Russia acting according to the characteristics of realist thought .
 Realism holds that the international system is constructed as a set of independent, autonomous actors with competing interests that interact in an anarchy . Realism is a form of anarchy, says Realism .
 Realism sees the international community as a self-help system . Each actor can only rely on themselves and their own power to ensure their survival .
In the realist theory, classical realism and neorealism differ in their reasoning behind why actors seek power . In the realists, the theory is that actors seek the power of their characters .
 Classical realism holds that the desire for power is human nature . neorealism states that the international system is anarchic and therefore, forces actors to seek power .
 Classical realists such as Hans Morgenthau, Richard Lebow, and Reinhold Niebuhr view states as akin to all human beings . In that states all have an innate desire to dominate others, which many times leads them to fight wars with one another .
 Neorealists believe that the ultimate end goal of nations is survival . The structure of the international system forces states to pursue power since they have no other choice .
 Classical realists hold that having power over an opponent is an end in itself . In contrast, classical realists say that power over a opponent is a end in themselves .
 Morgenthau’s Realism In a “Realist Theory of International Relations,’ he writes that power and survival come above morality and all other interests .
 There is tension between morality and the requirements of successful political action, says political realism . He states that political realism is aware of the moral significance of political action .
 Realism holds that morality is important to a degree, but morality does not come first when making decisions . Realism is important, but it doesn't come first to make decisions .
 National security is the political morality of states to seek national security, says Morgenthau . National security has been the most essential factor for decisionmaking, he says .
 His main point is that interest is defined in terms of power, a key point in classical realist theory . He says interest in power is defined by power, an important point in the theory .
 Human nature has not changed since the classical philosophies of China, India, and Greece . Human nature hasn't changed since classical philosophies.
 As seeking power was the main interest for actors back then, it is the same today because it is human nature to seek power and aim to dominate others .
 Classical Realism realists such as Richard Lebow see classical realism as a contemporary theory in international relations .
 Discipline and Diversity, Lebow states that classical realism is concerned with questions of order, justice, and change at domestic, regional, and international levels .
 It stresses the similarities, instead of the differences, between domestic and international politics . It emphasizes the importance of ethics and community in promoting stability .
 This approach recognizes that communal bonds are fragile and easily undermined by the pursuit of advantage and power by individuals and states . This approach recognize that communal bond is fragile and could be undermined by pursuit of power and advantage .
 The international arena remains a self-help system where states look for opportunities to take advantage of others and survival depends on state's material capabilities .
 Critics of the Realist View in "The Realist Critique and the Limits of Realism" Edward Hallett Carr writes that politics are made up of two elements, utopia and reality, which are separate .
 There is no greater barrier to clear political thinking than failure to distinguish between ideals, which are utopia, and reality .
For Carr, ideas, purpose and interest form a group that is held together by reason that acts as the focus of the actions that states take . For Carr, idea, purpose, and interest are held together.
 Realism can offer nothing but a struggle for power which makes any kind of international society impossible . Realism is a struggle to make any sort of world society impossible, says the author .
 With classical realism, there is no room for emotional appeal because it is an innate desire to seek power . The most important thing is to survive.
 The only way to do so is to gain powerthus, not taking into consideration emotional appeal and moral judgement in relation to the actions taken towards another country .
 constructivist approaches emphasize the impact of ideas in international relations . Constructivism focuses on states using material factors such as power in order to get ahead . Constructivist approaches focus on state's use of material factors.
 Constructivism emerged in the 1980s with an interest in the relationship between immaterial ideas and the physical world . Constructivism says that normative structures shape identity .
 constructivists argue that actors do not all have one goal in mindseeking power and doing anything to achieve it . In contrast to realist thinking, constructivist argues that actors don't all have a goal inmindseeking power .
 Instead, they make choices that bring historically, culturally, and politically distinct realities into being . They make decisions that bring history, cultural, and political realities into be .
International relations is a social construction, one that does not exist independently of human meaning or action . International relations are a social constructions that do not exist independent of human means or action.
 The system of international relations is cooperative is a function of the historical identities of the actors involved in international relations . The system is cooperative, according to the law of the system .
 The theory of constructivism emphasizes how ideas and identities are created and how they are created . The three types of constructivist theories differ in the methods that they use .
 Rule-based constructivism is based on linguistics and definitions of rules and how these rules develop systems that guide and constrain the actions of agents .
 Edward Hallet Carr, “The Realist Critique and the Limits of Realism,’s ed. Ed. Carr: We see 5 of the 5 that he wrote .
 "The Social Construction of Power Politics" is a book by the International Organization . The book is based on the social construction of power politics .
 Social Constructivism shows the effects of social variables on the formation of agents and structures . It is an attempt to explain and predict future international behavior .
 Norm-based constructivism traces the development of international norms . It shows how social systems and structure are norm-based systems that account for the constitution and behavior of agents .
 The ontology of norm-based constructivism is that social relations are embedded in social norms and norms are created when a sufficient number of agents accept and adhere to the norm, or rule of behavior .
Margaret Finnemore and Kathryn Sikkink define norms as a standard of appropriate behavior for actors with a given identity . They say norms are a standard for appropriate behavior.
 The two different types of norms are regulative norms, which order and constrain behavior, and constitutive norms . These norms create new actors, interests, or categories of action .
 Finnemore and Sikkink propose that rules become norms when a large number of agents accept and adhere to them . Finnemores and Sikkskink say rules will become norms in the future .
 Norms are important in the international arena because they regularize behavior and often limit the range of choices that actors can take . Norms can be used to help actors make choices that they can take, such as acting and acting .
 Shared ideas, expectations, and beliefs about appropriate behavior are what give the world structure and order . Shared ideas and expectations are what gives the world Structure and order, says author .
 Norm emergence is persuasion by the norm entrepreneurs to try to convince as many states as possible to embrace the new norm that has been developed .Norm emergence is a new norm for many states.
 The second stage is when norm leaders attempt to socialize other states to become norm followers, allowing the norm to spread through the rest of the population . The second stages are when leaders try to socialise other states.
 norm internalizing occurs and the norm becomes widely accepted and internalized by actors . The norm is widely accepted by actors and is often internalized .
After this cycle, the norm will take on its function of regularizing behavior of actors . After this cycle of actors, it will bring stability and order to actors .
Fierke writes that to construct something is to bring into being an object that would not exist otherwise . Fierke says that to build something that wouldn't exist otherwise would be an object .
 This is in international relations with alliances and international institutions that take specific cultural, historical, and political forms that are a product of human interaction . This is seen in international relationships with alliances.
Unlike traditional theories of international relations, constructivism focuses on the change at the international level, instead of the sameness of states .
 Fierke writes that the constructivist approach focuses on exploring how identities, actions, and human suffering are constructed through interactions among nations . He says that this approach is based on how identities and actions are constructed by nations .
 The questions that arise are how actors engage with one another, how they define themselves and others . This shapes the boundaries of the world within which they act .
 A constructivist would emphasize on how, in a particular context, actors came to define their relationship in negative terms . A realist would highlight the competitive nature of states because of anarchy .
 John Mearsheimer, an offensive realist, says states can never be certain that others will not attack them . In contrast, the realist says every state is self-interested .
 He claims that alliances are fleeting and never dependable in a self-help system . He says that anarchy does not allow for regularized behavior .
 Mearsheimer argues that international institutions have made great progress in parts of the world . He says they are used by states to promote their own interests and push the agenda of the powerful states .
 norm-based constructivism does not directly address the agent structure problem . It assumes that the agent comes first .
 The structure of a social system is created by the norms that are formed when a critical mass of agents accept and adhere to the norm . The structure is formed by the norm that is formed when the social structure is created .
 The agent does not create the structure, the norms create it when they are adhered to by a large number of agents .
 The theories of classical realism and norm-based constructivism have different characteristics that provide explanations of international phenomena . Russia’s Intervention in Crimea and Ukraine are the two theories of the world .
 The conflict that these theories can both be analyzed to explain is Russia’s intervention in Crimea and Ukraine .
 Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2014 was brought on because of a disagreement between the two countries over Crimea . Russia’s invasion of Crimea in 2014 came after a disagreement over Crimea.
 Crimea is located south of the Kherson region in Ukraine and west of the Russian region of Kuba . Crimea has had relations with Russia for centuries .
 The right to control Crimea has been one of the factors adding to the ongoing tension between Russia and Ukraine . In 1954, it was transferred to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and became an autonomous republic within the newly independent Ukraine .
 After Russia’s annexation of Crimea, the tension grew into a full scale conflict between the two States . Russia's invasion of Ukraine led to Russia's annexation of Ukraine .
 In late 2013, Ukrainian President Yanukovich declined to sign a trade and cooperation agreement with the European Union .
 This decision resulted in massive and violent demonstrations in Kiev and other parts of Ukraine . This decision led to massive protests and violence in Kiev .
 President Viktor Yanukovich was removed from office in February of 2014 . An interim government was put in place, which was not recognized by Russia .
 troops started appearing in Crimea and seized control over key military and governmental buildings as well as other strategic facilities in Crimea .
 A classical realist would use this example of Russia’s actions towards Ukraine as Russia takes the 12 John Mearsheimer, ‘Structural Realism,’ ed. ed. The 12 Mearsheims, ’s ‘structural realism’
 Crimea voted to join Russia in March 2014 . In March 2014, the Crimean status referendum asked the people of Crimea whether they wanted to join the country .
 The Supreme Council of Crimea stated that the referendum was in response to their stance that the new interim government in Kiev was illegitimate . A large number of people were against President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Russia supported this referendum and the opinion of the Ukrainians who wanted to join Russia . Russia supports this referendum .
 The Supreme Council of Crimea and Sevastopol City Council declared independence of Crimea from Ukraine . It requested to join Russia after the referendum .
 On March 18, the Russian, Crimean, and Sevastopolian leadership signed the Treaty on the Adoption of the Republic of Crimea to Russia . The Treaty makes Crimea an official part of Russia .
 On March 24, Russian troops seized most of Ukraine’s bases in Crimea . Ukrainian troops were transported from their base in Perevalne, Crimea .
 Russian President, Vladimir Putin, justified his events in Crimea as Russia's moral duty to take care of Russian communities outside of territorial Russia .
 Kiev has violated an agreement, according to which Russia accepted an independent Ukraine, provided it did not go along with anti-Russian policy and did not rally with the West . As Russia sees it, Kiev has violation of an agreement.
 Ukraine's plans to sign a free trade agreement with the European Union would allow for Ukraine's slow integration into Europe's economic and military spaces . Russia was clearly not happy when it heard of Ukraine’s plans .
Following the split of Crimea from Ukraine, pro-Russian demonstrations took place in the Donbass region of Ukraine . The conflict between the separatist forces and the government of Ukraine escalated into an armed conflict .
 The conflict grew with Russian military vehicles crossing the border into the city of Donetsk in Eastern Ukraine .
 There had been reports from the Ukrainian military that intensive movement and equipment from Russia was sent to the separatist controlled parts of eastern Ukraine .
 Russia’s actions in the eastern part of Ukraine gave Ukraine no other choice but to arm itself against the Russian military in its state .
 Ukraine’s historical conflicts between Europe and Russia have left the country divided culturally and politically, resulting in a major identity crisis .
 eastern Ukraine is dominated by those who share a cultural heritage with Russia . Western Ukraine is occupied by those speaking Ukrainian and aligning more with the Ukrainian government and towards Europe .
 countries have condemned the Crimean referendum as a breach of Ukrainian sovereignty . Armenia, Kazakhstan, and Russia, have also condemned the referendum as breach of Ukraine's sovereignty .
 The Mejlis of the Crimean Tartar People, the representative body of the Tartars living in Crimea, announced that they will not take part in the referendum and find it illegitimate . The Tartars live in Crimea .
 Crimean chairman of Crimean Tatar Mejlis charged Russia with continually promoting conflict in Crimea . He said Russia should not pursue policy independent of Russia and towards Western influence .
 A Contribution to the Discussion on Nationalism and Foreign Policy,” Problems of Post-Communism: 88.
 The United National General Assembly resolution declared the referendum invalid and affirmed Ukraine's territorial integrity . The resolution affirmed Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
 All member states of the European Union deemed the separation of Crimea from Ukraine to be unacceptable under international law . They saw the referendum as manipulated by Russia and contrary to Ukrainian law .
 NATO claimed that the referendum was illegal according to the Ukrainian constitution . The constitution states that questions of altering the territory of Ukraine are resolved exclusively by an all-Ukrainian referendum .
Georgia's Foreign Ministry says it does not recognize the referendum because it occurred amid pressure from Russian armed forces . The referendum was in defiance of the universally recognized norms and principles of international law .
 Classical Realist Analysis of the Conflict in Crimea and Ukraine Norm-based constructivist and classical realist theory can be used to analyze the crisis . Each theory gives different reasoning behind why the conflict started, and the implications that it has brought to the nations involved and the international community .
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea would be seen by realists as an assertion of power by Russia . Realists say it is an attempt to increase power in pursuit of self-interest .
 Russia is allowing themselves to get into a conflict with Ukraine for the purpose of bringing Crimea under their wing and increasing their territorial power in the region . Classical realism affirms that states have an innate desire to dominate others .
 Russia's actions align with the view of realist theorist, John Mearsheimer, that great powers seek to expand their military and economic capabilities when the overall benefits outweigh the costs .
 The costs that Russia is facing are dampening its international reputation . Many states are against Russia’s actions, but Russia is gaining more territorial power and expanding its power in the region .
 Russia may continue to suffer economically from the withdrawal of foreign investment and reduced access to the European energy market . But these costs must not outweigh the benefits that Russia gets from having Crimea as a member of its nation .
 Crimea is of considerable value for the Russians because of its strategic location . In addition, Crimea's strategic location is of significant value for Russia .
 Sevastopol, the peninsula’s main city, has a port that gives the Russian fleet direct access to the Black Sea . The Russian fleet can maintain its presence in Eurasia .
 A moral standard of realism is that a state’s primary interest is survival of itself as an Institution of and for its people . A state's primary interest in itself is survival as a state of and its people.
Survival requires power over those other states that may pose a threat. Survival requires power.
 The ultimate moral obligation of the state is to maintain power relative to those that threaten the state’s existence and its citizens .
 Russia has seen the U.S. as a threat and is greatly against Ukraine having relations with the West . Russia has also seen the United States as a threats to Ukraine .
 Russia’s growing insecurity could play a role in why Russia is working to increase its power over surrounding nations . Russia's growing insecurity is the reason for increasing its power in the world .
 A realist would claim that Russia's annexation of Crimea is to further Russia’s interests as a strong 19 Ibid.
 Hans Morgenthau, Classical Realism, and the Moral Construction of Power Politics, were published in the International Organization . The International Organization: 633.633 .
 The realist theory would state that President Putin believes that Western interests are to contain Russia’s influence internationally and use their own power to increase their influence in the world .
 Putin did not want to take the chance of losing Ukraine to the U.S. He said all the strategic benefits come from having Crimea under its wing .
 Russia chose to take charge in Crimea, preserving Russia’s interests in Ukraine and attempting to keep power in the region . Russia has taken charge of Crimea in the past .
 Russia is pursuing power outside of its own country, says the author . The realist notion that states pursue security at all costs may be an explanation as to why Russia is seeking power outside its own nation .
 Classical realist theory would also argue that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine shows their blatant disregard for Ukraine and its people .
 President Putin realizes that Russia holds greater power in comparison to Ukraine and therefore acts upon his power without restriction . Russia holds more power than Ukraine in comparison.
 Niccolo Machiavelli states that international relations are not concerned by issues of morality . Realist theorist says international relations not concerned with morality .
 moral objections are irrelevant and this is proven by Russia choices and disregard for Ukraine’s Concerns . It may hold relative importance between nations of equal power but in terms of superior Russian power over the inferior power of Ukraine, moral objections to the Ukraine are irrelevant .
 The loss of control in Ukraine after the ousting of Yanukovich gave Russia the opportunity to invade a weak Ukraine and exert its influence in the region . Russia sent tanks into the country after Yanukovich's ousting .
 As realists would state, nations can only maintain their independence and power if they are strong enough to deter a foe from invading . The U.S. is the only nation that can maintain its sovereignty and power .
 Russia took the opportunity to invade Ukraine because they knew they were stronger and possessed more power than Ukraine . Russia, acting in its own state interest, took the chance to invade the country .
 Constructivist theory focuses more on cultural and historical relations that Russia has with Ukraine .
 Constructivism's claim that a state’s identity and subsequent actions and interests are shaped by social norms may be used to explain Russia-Ukraine conflict .
 Putin has used the sense of Russian identity in Crimea to justify Russia’s annexation of the peninsula .
 Crimea Province was part of the Russian Republic until it was transferred to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic by Nikita Khrushchev in 1954 . Crimea Province is part of Crimea Province.
 Putin argues that Crimea’s cultural links to Russia are stronger than they are to Ukraine . He says Crimea has emotional attachment to Russia.
 The idea of a strong Russian identity in Crimea may be used to help explain Russia’s interest in reclaiming it .
 Constructivists would look at Russia’s actions as identifying with people living in Crimea and acting according to the historical identities that the people have with one another .
 President Putin has stated that the steps that were taken by the leadership of Crimea were based on the norms of international law and aimed to ensure the interests of the population of its people .
 Russia is stating that they have committed no wrongdoing because their act to allow Crimea to be a part of Russia was a proposal from another independent nation . Russia says they have not committed any wrongdoing .
 Putin said his action was protecting the Russian population from the insurgency that was arising in Ukraine . Putin said the action was to protect Russian population.
 Constructivism affirms that a norm is when a sufficient number of agents accept and adhere to that norm .
 Russia's argument is that Russia is taking into account the expression of the will of the people in Crimea in the referendum of March 2014, adhering to international norms and rules .
 Russia believes it conforms to international law, using its inalienable right to recognize a state and conclude an international treaty with the mutual agreement of the two parties .
 The admission of a foreign state into the Russian Federation shall be affected by mutual agreement of Russia and the interested state, according to the federal constitutional law .
 Russia has used the properties of norm-based constructivism to hold that their claim to Crimea is within the boundaries of international rules . Russia has been using the properties to hold the claim.
 States such as Georgia, the United States, and Ukraine appeal to the fact that Russia’s annexation of Crimea and invasion of Ukraine are against international rules and norms .
 Other states are against Russia's actions in the region, but do not accept Russia’s supposed reasons for doing so .
 Russia is acting in a way that is regarded by most of the world as wrong and illegal, according to Russia . Russia's actions are against the norms of behavior that all nations should abide by to promote stability in the world .
 Constructivism states that the international system is constructed by the rules and norms of those that participate in it . Constructivism says that the system is built on the rules of those who participate in the system .
 Whether the system is cooperative or conflictive is a function of the historical identities of the participant . If the system was cooperative, it would have been a conflictive or cooperative .
 Russia is fueling the growth of a conflictive system by going against the practices that would keep peace and security in the world . Russia is one of the great powers, one of Russia's great powers .
 The nation is showing a negative example to others by its annexation of Crimea and forceful entry into Ukraine . The nation's annexation of the Crimea is a bad example to other nations, according to CNN .
 Russia did not attempt to employ any diplomatic approaches with Ukrainian officials before resorting to occupation . Russia's actions sets a negative precedent of illegitimate intervention, and adds to instability in the international community .
 Classical realism and norm-based constructivism each have characteristics that fit well with the RussianUkrainian crisis .
 Realism states that power is the key force driving decisions, while constructivism states that Russia’s actions are influenced by its relationship with Ukraine and their identification with the Russian people in Ukraine .
 Russia wants power and took the opportunity to expand its influence in Crimea and Ukraine . Classical realism states that, like any state, Russia wants to be more powerful .
 Russia wants to expand its influence in Crimea and Ukraine . Russia wants more power in Ukraine and Crimea .
 Russia wants to gain so much power that it could deter the U.S. from expanding its power across the region . The United States believes it could go against Russia in the future .
 Russia is prompted by its desire to have more relative power than other nations in order to survive . Russia may have an innate desire for power, which is seen throughout Russia's past actions .
 Russia's explanation of Russian actions based on identity is not convincing considering Russia's past history . Russia’s past history gives other reasons for Russia's actions.
 Russia’s invasion of Georgia in 2008 can also be said to have been in response to the threat that the people in South Ossetia were facing from Georgia . In reality there was no severe threat against the people and no threat that was not there before .
 Russia found an opening where Ukraine was weak because of regime changes and took the opportunity to take control . One possible answer is perhaps Russia did so because of the regime changes .
 Moscow identifies with ethnic Russians and Russian speakers in Ukraine and Crimea for support for coercive action in Ukraine . These communities were under no real threat, Moscow says .
 Russia’s reasons of identity with the Russian people in Ukraine and Crimea do not offer significant value for the extreme behavior that Russia took against Ukraine and its people .
 The theories can both be used to explain the reaction that other states have had to Russia’s actions on the international front .
 Many states oppose Russia’s annexation of Crimea and later invasion of Ukraine as illegal and against international norms and rules of behavior .
 Both theories are similar in the sense that they would argue that the actions that Russia has taken are seen by the international community as wrong .
 established Western societal and political norms can help to explain the West’s opposition of Russia’'s annexation of Crimea and its actions .
 The US imposed sanctions on Russia that have increased gas prices in Russia’s cities . The sanctions have dampened Russia's economy .
 No other direct measures have been taken to punish Russia for their actions . Russia has not taken any direct measures to punish them .
 The U.S. did not take any severe measures against Russia . The United States, while strongly against Russia’s position in Ukraine, didn't take any measures .
 Classical realist theorists would argue that this is because it is in the best interest of the United States to not get any more involved than they already are .
 Americans have no desire nor reason to go to war with Russia over Crimea, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Washington did not provide the aid and trade that Ukraine need and the European Union did not have the means to offer Ukraine economic help . The EU did not offer the aid, trade and aid that Ukraine needs .
 The United States says they support Ukraine and politically they do . But the U.S. is not taking the necessary measures to send full support to Ukraine .
 According to realism, the international system is constructed as a set of independent and autonomous actors with competing interests, interacting in an anarchic system .
 Each nation focuses on their own interests, whether or not they have friends who would gain greatly from their support .
 Despite condemnation of Russia for its actions in Ukraine by most of the international community, Russia was not deterred . Such condemnation did not stop Russia's course of action .
 Five years later, Russia threatened the territorial integrity of Ukraine, also a former Soviet Union nation, annexing Crimea and supporting separatists in the Eastern part of the country .
 The West and NATO, along with many other countries condemned Russia because of its role in surrounding nations, did not deter Russia nonetheless .
 The U.S. is not motivated to get involved any more than they already have . As classical realism would hold, all nations are self-interested, all countries areSelf-interested .
 NATO's posture with regard to Russian behavior during the 2008 War was not strong enough to deter Russia from again challenging another smaller and weaker surrounding nation .
 The Ukrainian crisis showed that Russia continued to spread its influence in other nations . Russia was not deterred in 2008, since it continued thinking in its own interest .
 Since 2008, Russia has not stopped from invading other territories . Since 2013, no one can really be certain what course of action Russia will take next .
 A classical realist perspective would suggest that Russia will continue seeking further influence in surrounding nations . A realist view would suggest Russia will seek further influence.
 The question could bring grave implications for the future of the international community as a whole, if Russia does continue to act according to classical realist thought .
 The classical realist theory gives a more accurate analysis of Russia’s behavior and goals . Both theories go in depth in explaining the international phenomena .
 The realist approach focuses on the balance of power that can be seen between the West and Russia . The realists focus on the power balance between the two countries .
 The theory argues that in order for the Russian state to survive, it must invade neighboring states to maximize its influence .
 Russia saw a chance to intervene when there was political instability and took it. Russia saw the chance to intervention when there were political instability .
 Ukraine's decision to consider joining the European Union gave rise to the idea that Ukraine would like to align itself with the West . Ukraine’s decision to considering joining the EU was a response to the country's desire to join the EU .
 Russia can use the reasons of attempting to save the Russian people from instability in Ukraine because of shared identities with the Russians living in Crimea . It is clear that Russia benefitted from its support of Crimea’s position against Ukraine .
 Russia felt threatened and focused on its own survival, focusing on their own survival . Russia feels threatened and focuses on itself as much power as they could .
 Russia would have taken a chance to invade Ukraine, a weaker and less powerful state, like it has done so in the past with Georgia .
 Russia wants to expand its area of influence because it is better for its country and people to do so . This tells us that it is human nature to seek power, Russia wants as much power as it can .
As realist theory holds, Russia did not take into account the suffering that its invasion would bring the Ukrainian nation and its people . Instead, morality was ignored and power was seen as most important .
 Russia is against international norms and rules, but there is more to it to consider . Russia's actions are against international rules and norms, according to experts .
 The world sees that Russia wants to gain influence because the state has done so in the past, for example with Georgia . The world has seen Russia as a state of influence in recent years .
 Russia's main interest is power and influence over others, it is clear . It is clear that Russia’s main interest in Russia is power .
 The fact that states recognize that Russia wants to seek power is evident in the reaction that other states had to Russia’s behavior in the region .
 As realists state that actors focus on their own gains, Russia may see the gains from Crimea as another reason to continue its international agenda .
 Ukrainian military experts have argued that the structure, size and armaments of the Russian forces in the Crimean peninsula indicate Russian long-term planning . If Putin had doubted the Russian ability to gain control over Ukrainian settlements then there would have been no annexation of Crimea in the first place
 Russia knew it would gain more influence and power from its annexation of Crimea, and took the opportunity to receive all the benefits .
 Analysis of the effectiveness of the CTC and the International Regime on Terrorism. Paul Kearney Abstract: This piece analyses CTC from a structural point of view .
 It attempts to show that the CTC is bound by the state-IGO dynamic, and is thus bound its makeup of the Security Council members .
 The analysis further examines whether the CTC has been, or can be in the future, an effective tool in the fight against terrorism, based on its structural design . The analysis also examines whether it can be an effective weapon in the battle against terrorism .
 The paper also analyses the dynamic between counter-terrorism and human rights . The CTC has done and what it can do to ensure the protection of human rights in assessing counter- terrorism operations .
 The paper says political posturing will more often than not supersede efforts to curb terrorism . The paper comes to the conclusion that the CTC is bound by the member states of the Security Council .
 Some of the members of the CTC are the worst violators of human rights, such as the U.S., Russia, and China, when it comes to counter-terrorism operations .
 Counter-Terrorism Committee Introduction Terrorism has plagued mankind since its inception . Terrorism has long been a tool used by the weak against the strong .
 terrorism itself was brought to the forefront of the international stage on September 11th, 2001 .
 The United Nations created the Counter-Terrorism Committee through Resolution 1373 . The Committee was a direct result of the attacks against the US .
 Criminalize the financing of terrorism, freeze without delay any funds related to persons involved in acts of terrorism . deny all forms of financial support for terrorist groups, suppress the provision of safe haven, sustenance or support for terrorists . share information with other governments on any groups practicing or planning terrorist
 Country visits are requested by the CTC and used to monitor and gather data on the progress of implementation efforts as well as to assess the possible needs of member states . Country visits will be used to assess possible needs for member states.
 Technical assistance helps states gain access to available technology and finances to combat terrorism . The United States is seeking help to combat terrorist terrorism .
 Country reports are intensive and thorough analyses of member states’ counter-terrorism efforts . The CTC has chosen not to make these reports public following 2006 .
 Special meetings operate as a means to develop closer ties between member states and relevant international, regional, and sub-regional organizations to further cooperation .
 cooperation is difficult and often times, states do not follow international norms . But as is all too common in the international community, cooperation is hard and sometimes difficult .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee has created a more centralized and proactive international counter-terrorism strategy . The CTC has not succeeded in its attempts to form a more cohesive international regime on terrorism .
 CTC is a product of a phenomenon known as the principal-agent problem . The CTC has a dilemma for the CTC .
 The first, risk sharing, occurs when both parties agree to risk sharing information between them . The first risk sharing occurs when the two parties share information .
 The risk, in this case, is that the principal will have leverage over the agent . The agent has information on the principal and can, potentially, share the information with an outside source .
 In such a situation, the principal will always get the second best result . The principal always gets the secondbest result .
 The third case, adverse selection, is when agents themselves are hidden to the principal . The third cases, when agents are hidden, are when the agent is hidden .
 The moral hazard state best suits the relationship between International Governmental Organizations and individual state actors . The state of the U.S. has a moral hazard problem in mind .
 The agent can hide its actions from the principal, the Counter-Terrorism Committee . The agent, or each state in this case, can hide their actions from each other .
Hidden actions will be further explored, but the essence of the moral hazard is that states are the main actors .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee cannot fully accomplish its stated goals . As a result of the principal-agent problem, the committee can't fully achieve its goals .
 Counter-Terrorism Committee in its current form can only do as much as states are willing to allow it to do . Systemic changes are necessary to create a cohesive international regime on terrorism, says the committee .
First, there will be a discussion of the international regime on terrorism before September 11th . In order to gain historical context, the discussion will be held before 9th .
 The context serves as a basis for comparison between the regime before and after September 11th . The context is used to compare the regime with the previous regime .
 An examination of terrorism and its meaning is necessary to provide a foundation. Second, an examination of terror's meaning is needed to provide foundation .
 The discussion focuses on the relationship between terrorism and human rights, and the dangers of counter-terrorism . The discussion also focuses on human rights.
 The analysis moves to the case studies of the US, Russia, and China for two purposes . The analysis is now focused on the U.S., Russia and China .
 Counter-Terrorism Committee’s attempt to safeguard human rights is further serving to enhance the principal-agent problem . Second, these states have also been notorious violators of human rights.
 There is no official definition of terrorism. To begin the analysis, it is necessary to discuss terrorism itself .
 Amnesty International chair Paul Hoffman perfectly captures the dilemma . “One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter,’6.6 a theme that will be explored throughout the analysis .
 Criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of terror in the general public are in any circumstance unjustifiable . 7 people have been killed in the past seven years .
 Amos Guiora states that terrorism is the killing, injuring, or targeting of innocent civilians by those seeking to advance a political or social cause . He also states that terrorists are targeting innocent civilians .
 Many states view terrorism from different perspectives, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The problem with defining terrorism is that many states view it from different perspective .
 Many western governments have not recognized Chechen terror groups in Russia as terror groups . For example, many western governments are not recognizing Chechen terrorists .
 Steven Pifer, then the deputy assistant secretary of state for European and Eurasian affairs, said the U.S. did not “share the Russian Government assessment that equates the separatist movement with terrorism’s separatist movement .
 Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost 17 VOLUME XLIX Assessment of the Counter Terrorism Committee separatist groups as terrorist groups .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin invited Hamas and Hezbollah, groups recognized as terrorist organizations by the West, to the Kremlin in Moscow . Russia does not share the West's assessment of the two groups, Putin said .
 The example illustrates the issue in identifying and defining terrorism . The example above illustrates how to identify and define terrorism .
 The UN definition is broad so as to create consensus among UN member states . The definition is meant to create a consensus among the world's leaders .
 Such definitions appear to be purely political. One reason that defining terrorism is difficult is that such definitions are not political .
 Virginia Held argues that governments usually define “terrorism’ as a tool used by those who wish to change policies or political systems .
 Held’s government definition appears in sync with the UN definition above, and indeed she notes that international law tends to agree .
 Argentina's military government is causing opponents to “disappear, create fear and disunity among political opposition, Held says . Held notes that such a definition is faulty .
 The example provided above of the West and Russia disagreeing on recognition of terror organizations also suggests that terrorism is defined for political purposes .
 Guiora’s definition does not classify the attacks against the US marine barracks in Lebanon in 1983 or the attack on the USS Cole in 2000 as terrorism as these attacks were against armed forces . Held also notes the attacks were not against armed force .
 The bombings of Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and other bombings targeting mainly civilian populations should be considered terrorism . Held explains that if the targeting of innocent civilians is the only defining characteristic of terrorism, then the bombings of mainly civilian population should be deemed terrorism .
 Held’s argument is where the UN definition of terrorism becomes useful, as it is easy to interpret ‘a group of persons or particular persons,’ as armed forces .
 Counter-Terrorism Committee needs to be willing to create new enforcement mechanisms for harsher penalties on delinquent states . This instance demonstrates where the Counter-terrorism Committee must be willing.
 Terrorism, Counter-Terrorism, and Human Rights Terrorism is a natural antagonist to human rights, democracy, and the rule of law .
 It is the duty of states to protect its citizens from these acts of terrorism that infringe upon human rights . It is also the duty to protect citizens from such acts of terror that infringes on human rights.
 States have an obligation to protect citizens within their jurisdiction and their rights to life and security . States have a duty to protect people within their jurisdictions .
 The Center for Strategic and International Studies published data regarding violence in Chechnya . As an example of the threat terrorism poses to human rights, the study says .
 Governments tend to take a hard line view when combating terrorism, says Held notes . Governments justify counter-terror strategies as having “moral clarity,’ or the moral high ground, he says .
 Reagan’s War on Terror in Latin America in the 1980s killed over 200,000 civilians and displaced millions . It is not considered terrorism because they did not specifically target civilians .
 The United States also faces heavy criticism for its drone program . The U.S. also faces criticism for a drone strike on December 13th, 2013 in Yemen .
 A recent attack on a Doctors Without Borders’ hospital in 2015 killed 30 staff members . The attack will be analyzed in a later section .
 Counter-terrorism and human rights violations will be expanded upon in the case studies of the US, Russia, and China . It is necessary to discuss them in connection with terrorism and human Rights .
 Hoffman argues that the way in which the war is waged threatens human security and the rights listed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . He argues that war threatens human rights and human security .
 He argues that such destruction through counter-terror efforts poses a greater threat to human rights than any terrorist bombings . A failure to uphold universal human rights also undermines international cooperation, he says .
 Counter-Terrorism Committee was to establish a legal framework by which counter-terror operations could be conducted while respecting human rights . In order to solidify the international response to the September 11th attacks, one of the main objectives of the committee was to set up a
 The more powerful countries have taken great liberties with human rights in counter-terror operations . However, as seen by the US’ treatment of prisoners in Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo Bay, the treatment of the Uyghurs by the Chinese government as terrorists .
 FSB agents have been seen carrying out counter-terror operations in Riazan that were very similar to the apartment bombings in September, 1999 which were blamed on Chechen terror groups, causing the Second Chechen War .
 The International Terrorism Regime is difficult to define because of differing perspectives . The International terrorism Regime was created by the U.S.
 The international terrorism regime before September 11th further supports the vague nature of terrorism . The international terror regime before 9/11 further supports terrorism, according to CNN .
 The regime consisted of twelve treaties, mainly concerned with protecting the rights of citizens aboard air and sea craft . The regime consists of 12 treaties .
 These treaties made it illegal for the hijacking of or violent acts aboard such vessels . These treaties also made itillegal for hijacking.
 The UN Charter has no mention of terrorism despite centuries-long existence of terrorism in human history .
 The main purpose of the twelve treaties was not to combat terrorism per se, but to protect citizens in situations without specific jurisdiction . The main reason was to protect people without specific jurisdictions .
 As an example, one could imagine that a German plane is flying over the Atlantic Ocean .
 The plane is piloted by a Frenchman, and its passengers are comprised of Spanish, English, and Americans .
 The treaties were created specifically to condemn and make air and sea craft fall under standardized international norms and jurisdiction . The treaties are designed to condemn air, sea craft and air craft under international norms .
 These treaties received low party rates among UN member states . However, these treaties received lower party rates .
 The U.S. is not nearly as affected by terrorism as Europe as is Europe, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The United States does not have the same level of concern as Europe .
 incidents of terrorism in the U.S. totaled 2,802 since 1970, 25 incidents in Europe totaled 16,006 during the same time period . For example, incidents in the United States.
 The United States saw violence relating to its civil rights movement . Those violent acts pale in comparison to the number of incidents in Europe during the same time period .
 In 1979, Europe saw a climax of just over 1,000 incidents of terrorism . The United States saw fewer than 80 incidents in the same year .
 The terrorists attacked on September 11th, 2001 . Then everything changed when the terrorists attacked .
 The United States was attacked on its own soil, resulting in the deaths of thousands of innocent civilians . The Counter-Terrorism Committee was created by the U.S. government .
 As it was created through a Security Council resolution, the CTC’s goals, as laid out in the introduction, became binding international law .
 The CTC also calls on UN member states to become party to the treaties of the old international regime .
 Since the creation of the CTC, four new treaties have joined the international regime . They have focused on nuclear and environmental terrorism, rather than air and sea craft travel .
Only two of the 13 old regime Security Council Resolutions dealt with terrorism in general terms . Before its creation, only two of 13 old regimes had dealt with terror .
Eleven of the Security Council Resolutions have dealt with terrorism in general terms . Since the creation of the CTC, eleven of twenty Security Council resolutions have been dealt with Terrorism .
 Hilde Haaland Kramer and Steve Yetiv say attacks on September 11th have led to a more centralized CTC . The CTC was created after the September 11 attacks .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee functions as an arm of the Security Council . The Committee Function, Structure, and the Principal-Agent Problem the Counter-terrorism Committee is a committee that functions as a body .
 UN Security Council created to monitor implementation of Resolution 1373 . It called on states to implement the laws stated in the introduction of the law .
 The Security Council is comprised of all 15 members of the Security Council . The design will be explored further when discussing the principal-agent problem .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee and Security Council share their members . It should be noted that although they are separate groups, they are different groups .
 The CTC is an individual organization within the UN . It is solely focused on the improvement of counter-terrorism practices and the observance of human rights .
 The Security Council is the governing body of the UN and creates international law through binding Resolutions . It is the world's governing body.
 The CTC follows the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, created in 2006 .
 This strategy calls for states to tackle conditions that spread terrorism, prevent and combat terrorism, build and help other countries and the UN to develop means to combat terrorism .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee serves three purposes . As mentioned in the introduction, the Counter- Terrorism Committee has three purposes.
 The CTC is meant to strengthen the counter-terror capacity of UN member states . First, the CTC will strengthen the anti-terrorism capacity of the United States .
 The CTC delivers technical assistance to member states trying to adopt the mandates set out by Resolution 1373 . Second, the CTC provides assistance to members of international, regional, and sub regional organizations .
 In 2004 the Security Council passed Resolution 1535, establishing the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate . The CTED functions as the executive arm of the counter-terrorism Committee . Third, the CTC calls upon member states to report their implementation efforts to the C TC .
 The CTC's staff is comprised of legal experts who analyze state-submitted reports to the CTC . They analyze legislation, border and customs control, refugee and migration law, law enforcement mechanisms .
 The ATAO is further split into three geographical subgroups, allowing experts to specialize in specific regions . It is designed to promote cooperation between regional and sub regional organizations and UN member states .
 The CTED, along with the CTC, publishes reports on the responses by UN member states to the implementation of Resolution 1624 . The resolution was built on Resolution 1535 and emphasized the need for cooperation .
 Such vague language regarding both terrorism and counter-terrorism can lead to interpretations that suit political agendas .
 "One man's terrorist is another man’s freedom fighter" becomes relevant, says the author .
 To revisit Russia and Chechnya, the Russian government views Chechens as terror groups . Chechens view Russian government as a terrorist organization due to oppression .
 Western governments support the notion that Chechen groups are rebels rather than terrorists . Russia condemns western intervention and is friendly with western-recognized terrorist organizations .
 Hilde Haaland Kramer and Steve Yetiv argue the Counter-Terrorism Committee has led to greater improvement by the UN in the fight against global terrorism .
 The Security Council used sanctions against terrorism three times in the 1990s . They also note that the United States was the driving force behind such actions .
 IGOs can only do what states are willing to let them do, they say . As asserted earlier, states are the main actors on the international stage .
 The principal can do nothing but follow the agent since it does not have all of the information necessary to act on its own . In accordance with the principal-agent problem, the agent has the information that allows it to act .
 The US has led the moral crusade against terrorism since the attacks on September 11th .
 The Security Council has not used sanctions against terror groups since September 11th and the US deployment in the “war on terror,”38 suggests that the Security Council and the CTC are in fact subject to the interests of its individual and powerful members .
 The Security Council was unable to stop the U.S. from unilaterally invading Iraq . The fact that the Security Council is unable to stopped the United States from unilaterally invasion Iraq is further evidence to such an argument .
 Counter-Terrorism Committee has methods of helping member states implement Resolution 1373 . As previously mentioned, the Counter-terrorism Committee has ways of helping members states implement resolution 1373.
 The decision by the CTC in 2006 to no longer publicly disclose country reports is baffling . It is the opinion of this paper that for an organization meant to further cooperation and facilitate cohesive counter-terrorism strategies, the paper says .
 The CTED also publishes country reports, but since Resolution 1624 was enacted in 2005, member states have either yet to publish a report, or have only published one report . Most of those reports were published in 2006, with only Cuba, Serbia, Uruguay, and Yemen publishing at least
 The agent is able to hide its actions from the principal, while the principal remains powerless without access to the agent’s information .
 These two tools serve as a better way to assess implementation of Resolutions 1373 and 1624 . The two tools are used to assess the implementation of the Resolutions .
 The OIA is a general assessment of the efforts made by UN member states in their attempts to implement and make domestic law concurrent with the previously mentioned Resolutions . The U.N. member states are also trying to implement domestic law.
 It highlights progress and shortfalls, while giving policy recommendations and assesses technical assistance needs . It highlights the shortfalls and gives policy recommendations .
 The DIS is a much more detailed document . It asks five specific questions designed to demonstrate how UN member states intend to implement Resolutions into domestic law .
 Once these reports are compiled, they are sent to the member states for their use . They are then sent to their states for use . Once this report is compiled, it is sent to them for use.
 CTED will keep a running list of all member states, the dates on which the documents were sent to the member state, and the date on which a response from a member state was received .
 The CTED will also keep a list of non-reporting states, updating the list every six months . The list will also be updated every year .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee can invite the permanent representative of a non-reporting state to a meeting, prepare a reminder or follow-up letter, or defer the response deadline .
 The CTC is relatively weak on country reports and holding states accountable, we see . We see how relatively weak it is regarding country reports .
 The CTC can do to punish states that do not follow the revised method is no different than a wag of the finger or a scolding .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee by itself is powerless to bring those out of line with implementation strategies back into line . The committee is powerless.
 The Security Council relies heavily on the Security Council for its binding Resolutions . As previously discussed, the CTC relies on its members to guide its direction, often for political purposes .
 The CTC, as a standalone agency, cannot achieve its desired goals due to its lack of enforcement mechanisms and the vagueness that plagues the task of defining terrorism . CTC has been criticized for not having enough enforcement mechanisms .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee does not have all of the information it needs, as the agents are not willing to share their information, as show .
 The CTC cannot properly enforce Resolutions 1373 and 1624, and are thus unable to act when infringements occur . CTC is unable to enforce the Resolutions .
 Many agents are unwilling to share their hidden information with the principal, and continue to hold the power to drive policy and actions as a result . As shown, many agents are willing to share hidden information.
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee is largely ineffective in enforcement and is subject to the whims of powerful states . The following section will analyze the counter-terrorism strategies, and the human rights violations, of three powerful United Nations Security Council states .
 The United States analysis will discuss the United States policy in the Middle East . It will discuss Abu Ghraib as well as the US’s extensive use of torture and drone strikes .
 Russian analysis will discuss Russia’s strategy against Chechnya and how it uses state terrorism to combat Chechen terrorism . It will also discuss Russia's strategy against the North Caucasus .
 China has purposefully targeted the Uyghur population for terror-related activities, to suppress their Islamic practices, and to safeguard economic interests . Chinese analysis will examine the Chinese government’s fight against the East Turkestan Islamic Movement .
 U.S. has done exactly the opposite, says Paul Hoffman . However, as Hoffman argues, the United States has done the opposite .
 Hoffman notes that the “war on terrorism” refuses to accept that any form of law applies to the way such a ‘war’ wages are paid . Hoffman says the ‘ war on terrorism' doesn’t accept that such a wage is illegal .
 There are no internationally recognized “human rights free zones,’ says Hoffman . There is no loophole or gap between human rights law and humanitarian law that would allow the U.S. to conduct such a brutal war .
 The U.S. classification of the war on terrorism as a "war" allows it to circumvent international human rights laws, Hoffman says .
 Under a non-war circumstance, international law would require the United States and Yemen to capture these men and hold them for trial .
 The United States is at “war,’ it can classify targets as ‘enemy combatants’ and therefore justify its actions on a moral basis . The U.S. says it is protecting its citizens from enemies that would destroy them .
 Hoffman also notes the human rights black hole that is the prison in Guantanamo Bay . Hoffman also says the prison is a human rightsblack hole .
 The prisoners are denied hearings required under Article 5 of the Third Geneva Convention that would determine their status as prisoners of war . However, Hoffman notes that these prisoners were denied the hearings required .
 prisoners are denied international rights to trial, they are also subject to torture . Reports from released detainees suggest that prisoners are subjected to sleep deprivation, humiliation, and other tactics .
 Hoffman notes that such practices are illegal under international human rights norms . Such practices are not allowed under international Human Rights norms .
 The Senate Committee on Intelligence submitted a sweeping, 6,300 page study of the CIA’s post 9/11 counter-terrorism methods .
 Years after its publication, it is still not available to the public . However, years after it was published, it's still not public .
 Senators who viewed the report said it was highly critical of the CIA’s counter-terrorism policies . They condemned the CIA's use of torture and rendition .
 The report argues against the commonly held belief that the CIA’s torture program led to accurate information in the fight against terrorism . The report is based on the findings of the CIA's torture program .
 The CIA routinely provided inaccurate information to the White House, the Justice Department, and Congress . Senator Ron Wyden said the report showed that the CIA routinely gave inaccurate information .
 Wyden's explanation is confirmed by former CIA general counsel Stephen Preston . Preston noted that the CIA’s briefings to Committees included inaccurate information related to the interrogation program .
 The U.S. has consistently defied international human rights norms and laws, justifying its actions as morally right against terrorists . The United States has been criticized for its actions against terrorists in the past .
 Held’s assertion of governments claiming moral high ground and ignoring collateral damage is supported by the case study . Held's assertion of Governments claiming moralHigh ground is supported.
 It imprisons those it can without trials concurrent with Article 5 of the Third Geneva Convention . It kills those it cannot imprison through drone strikes that have a tendency to cause collateral damage, as seen by strike against wedding convoy .
 Drone and airborne strikes have been a much contested issue for the U.S. The United States.
 As mentioned earlier, there was a deadly bombing on a Doctors Without Borders hospital in Afghanistan .
 On September 29th, 2015, the United States carried out a counter-terrorism operation in Kundaz city, attempting to take the city from Taliban .
Air support ended with the bombing of the Doctors Without Borders hospital, leaving 30 staff members dead .
 As a result of the bombing, the military ordered an investigation into the misfire . The military is investigating the incident .
Early take off did not allow for sufficient time to compile a list of no-strike buildings . The hospital included the hospital, which included a hospital in the city .
 The crew also believed it was targeted by a missile, causing the plane to fly eight miles out of its orbit . The plane was also believed to have been targeted by the missile .
 The crew neglected to double-check their target, instead focusing on the largest building, based on physical descriptions of the target building . The GPS eventually was able to realign the proper target after the aircraft regained its orbit .
 The military claims it was only half an hour, but the Doctors Without Borders call logs show a message nearly an hour after the strikes began . The military insists that the firing was stopped .
 The ease with which human error and technical difficulties resulted in the bombing of a hospital, that throws much doubt on the entire U.S. drone program .
 The U.S. must be held accountable for its actions with torture and its drone strike program. The United States must also be held responsible for its drone strikes .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee, as well as the Security Council, must take steps to ensure that the U.S. completes its country reports so that there is greater transparency regarding counter-terrorism . The Security Council must also take steps.
 Such transparency can lead to greater cooperation among member states, sharing of best practices, and more efficient methods for combatting terrorism in Afghanistan and the Pakistani border .
 Any Counter-Terrorism Committee Resolution can be vetoed by the United States . However, such steps will be difficult to take, as any such steps would be difficult.
 The CTC should provide incentives for the U.S. to open up its drone strike and counter-terrorism practices, the CTC says . NATO and other United States allies in their fight against terrorism in the Middle East should pass Resolutions .
 Such a gesture would hopefully allow the U.S. to share more of its counter-terrorism practices with the CTC . The other member states on the Security Council are also involved .
 In 2000, the Russian government installed a pro-Russian government based in Grozny .
 The government was meant to suppress the Chechen separatists and to quell the uprisings . The government had been meant to stop the separatists .
 Pro-Russian government in Grozny has not been successful with its autocratic rule for over a decade . separatist violence persists in the region, as discussed above .
 Ramzan Kadyrov, the longtime President of the Chechen government, has been a controversial figure in Chechnya . He has been known for his brutal repression tactics and his counterterrorism tactics .
 Russia had no clear counterterrorism policy regarding Chechnya at the onset of the Second Chechen War in 1999. Aurelie Campana and Kathia Legare argue that Russia had not clear counterterrorism policies .
 The two-pronged solution was the result of competition among the Kremlin, the FSB, and the military trying to analyze and interpret the conflict through differing perspectives .
 The Kremlin took the lead by offering the solution as a combination of the views given by the other main Federal agencies in the Russian government .
 Both authors contend that the continuing disagreement regarding interpretation of the conflict led to policies that were nowhere near as effective as they should have been . But, both authors contend, that the continued disagreement led to policy that had no clear goal or objective .
 Campana and Legare found their argument on the idea of framing, that the Russian government would use acts of "terrorism" as justification for the oppression of Chechnya .
 Some of the terrorist attacks in the North Caucasus have not been claimed by Chechen groups . Russian government pushed to them by the Russian government .
 Russian government uses repressive state action to counter-terrorize Chechen groups and citizens . There was little public objection to the initiation of the Second 52 Aureile Campana and Kathia Legare .
 The authors say Framing is central to policy-making, agendasetting and problem-solving processes . They say some policies win favor based on the nature of power struggles between security professionals .
 Vladimir Putin is the President of the Federation of the Russian Federation . Putin's counterterrorism policy was the centralization of power in the President, Putin .
 Putin’s administration influenced the discourse of counter-terror dialogue on Chechnya, and shaped the official position .
 Putin's strategy, first as prime minister and again as President, was a stress on the “no-war’s thesis, in other words, that Chechnya was a counterterrorism operation, not a war .
 Putin routinely refers to Chechen separatists as terrorists and criminals to drive home the dangers posed to Russia . Putin wove framing techniques into his vocabulary .
 FSB viewed situation in Chechnya as an international breeding ground for radical Islamic terrorism . Policy was also shaped by the FSB.
 The FSB holds the real power in counter-terror operations, and garnered support for their policy by playing at the fears of those old enough to remember Soviet failure in Afghanistan .
 One of the main tactics used in the Russian counterterrorism strategy was the criminalization of the pro-separatist leadership and the separatist Chechen state in general .
 The policy was designed to undermine the legitimacy of Chechen separatist leaders . Chechen separatists claim connections to criminal syndicates .
 Russian officials would also accuse Chechen separatist leaders of putting themselves before Chechen people in an attempt to turn the Chechen groups and ideals on their leaders .
 Chechen fighters refused to sit at the peace table for negotiation . The policy backfired somewhat, as the criminalization and attempts to delegitimize Chechen leaders led to the refusal to sit on the table .
 In the policy of criminalization, we again see how differing views and differing interpretations created very ambiguous policies and personifications . Chechen separatists viewed such aggressive policy as proof that their plight was real and that their resistance was justified .
 Russia has now moved to a regime-building operation in an attempt to create order through a regime based in Grozny .
 The Russian government installed Akhmad Kadyrov because of his popularity among the Chechen public . The government installed him because he was popular with the public .
 Kadyrov was ‘democratically elected’ in 2003 as President of the Chechen Republic . He was acting as an extension of Kremlin authority in 2003 .
 Kadyrov’s assassination in 2004 and the ascension of his son, Ramzan, to the Presidency signal continuing Chechen distaste for Russian rule . Also signaling continuing Russian dominance over Chechnya and North Caucasus region in general .
 The pro-Kremlin regime and the subsequent attempts to boost its legitimacy by Moscow have led to an informal culture of violence in Chechnya, authors say .
 Violence increased in 2009 from 2008, showing continuing dissatisfaction with Russian rule . Kadyrov regime’s tactics of fear and suppression.
 Currently, the Russians have moved to preventing Chechen extremists from joining the Islamic State .
 The Islamic State has a large following in Russia, with over 2,500 civilians joining the force .
 The Caucasus Emriates Doku Umarov was killed in March 2014 . Both his successors were killed in 2015 . They killed the leader of the proclaimed CaucasusEmriates Emriate Doku United.
 Some groups have pledged support to the Islamic State . But such a strategy has been counter-productive, as the killings have only fractured the Caucasus Emirates .
 The brutal Russian counterterror strategy has been extremely ineffective and counterproductive . The Russian counter terror strategy is extremely ineffective, counterproductive, it has been said .
 The pro-Russian Kadyrov regime has created a stronger sense of national Chechen identity . The regime has also created a strong sense of the Chechen nation's identity .
 Chechen terrorist groups have nationalistic motives, according to the U.S. State Department . Chechen rebel groups will continue with their acts of terrorism, it says. Chechen rebels will resist harder and to continue with terrorism .
 The above case study is another example of Held’s description of governments taking the moral high ground and using any means necessary to combat terrorism .
 The Russian government has egregiously violated human rights in its war with Chechen terror groups . The government has been accused of human rights violations in the past .
 Russian special agents have been caught setting up explosives similar to those set off in September 1999 . As previously stated, Russian special agent has been caught.
 Russian and Chechen forces have been used to justify further brutal oppression of the Chechen people . These operations have been justified by the use of these operations to justify more brutal oppression . The conflict has escalated into an escalation of the conflict.
 Russia's status as a permanent member of the Security Council again allows violations to continue without tangible punishments . Russia’s status as an official in the Council allows these violations to remain without tangible punishment .
 The two Chechen wars show that traditional military confrontation does not work against guerilla tactics . Even if Russia managed to subdue the region for a period of time, it would struggle to maintain control .
 Total Chechen independence would see Russia lose a key port on the Caspian Sea . But Russia cannot ignore the atrocities that the Chechens have committed .
 A stalemate should be observed and both sides should sit at the table and negotiate for the time being . For now, a stalemate is observed .
 Observe what would surely be a very tense peace agreement for a few years, and then just respond to how that peace is observed . Observe that would be very tense, and just respond.
 Russia should re-occupy Chechnya, however, it would be a mistake for Russia to initiate a Third Chechen War .
 Russia would be wise to observe the Chechens and react to Chechen activities, says Russian official . Russia would have to be careful to observe Chechens.
 Counter-Terrorism Committee should call on its members to levy further sanctions against Russia . Russia should change its policy towards the Chechens, according to the committee .
 China has a long history of human rights violations, coming most notably in the form of Tienamann Square .
 The analysis will focus on violations of human rights during counter-terrorism efforts . For the purposes of this paper, the analysis will be focused on human rights violations .
 Christopher Cunningham argues the Chinese government has exaggerated the threat posed by the ETIM to justify the oppression of the Uyghurs for political, economic, and strategic interest . The ETIM has been accused of using the threat to justify oppression for political and economic reasons .
 The Uyghur have long resisted Chinese attempts at assimilation . They view the Chinese government as one that is oppressive and restrictive of its religion and culture .
 Ethnic leaders claim that the Chinese government has secretly detained and executed thousands of Uyghurs . Ethnic leaders say that the government has secretly detained thousands of people .
 The conflict between the Chinese government and the ETIM is similar to the RussianChechen conflict, albeit less bloody . The conflict has been likened to that of the Russian Chechen conflict .
 The Uyghurs are a Muslim, Turkick-speaking group of people residing in Central Asia . The majority living in the Xinjiang UYghur Autononmous Region in western China .
 Communist China has a history of suppressing the Islamic practices of this group, which has led to feelings of resentment by the Uyghurs . Similar to the Chechen-Russian dynamic.
 The Chinese felt that increase economic and political liberalization of the region would lead to separatist motives . After the death of Mao Tse Tung, the Chinese felt the increase of economic liberalization in the region was to blame .
 The Chinese government enacted “Strike Hard,” campaigns that were officially designated to fight crime by accelerating arrests and trials . Increases in ethnic violence in the region in the early 1990s exacerbated these fears .
 These campaigns were aimed at all criminals throughout China, but in Xinjiang they specifically targeted the Uyghur separatists .
 The Chinese immediately reframed their rhetoric against the Uyghur and the ETIM . They claimed they were radical jihadists and pushing for the U.S. and western support .
 China also wanted greater military power given to the then-Shanghai Five, most likely to help combat the growing tide of radical Islamic terrorism . China also wants more military power for the next five years .
 The escalation by the Chinese against the Uyghur separatists and the ETIM is not related to terrorism, but rather to economic and strategic interests, says Cunningham . Cunningham argues that the escalation is not linked to terrorism .
 The Xinjiang region borders Mongolia, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan and KyrgyZstan . It also borders Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Indian-controlled Kashmir .
 It is rich in natural resources, such as oil and natural gas reserves . It is also rich in oil, natural gas and oil reserves .
80 percent of China’s reserves in gold, jade, and other precious metals are in Xinjian region . Cunningham also notes that eighty percent of the country's reserves are in China .
 China recently passed a “landmark law’s’ to battle terrorism domestically and internationally .
 China’s first anti-terrorism law went into effect on January 1st . It will require tech companies hand over encryption keys on demand to security agencies .
 The law also allows the People’s Liberation Army to be involved in counter-terrorism operations overseas . It also allows that approval is given by the Central Military Commission .
 President Obama has expressed concerns over the reach of the new law . Critics say it will threaten freedom of expression and intellectual property rights .
 The law comes as tensions with the Xinjiang region rise . There are “heightened concerns’ of violence in the region and reports of radical Uyghurs flocking to Syria to fight for the Islamic State .
 violence in the Xinjiang and East Turkestan regions has been high, with high numbers of Uyghurs .
 The Uyghur Human Rights Project states that the number of deaths in 2014 doubled that of 2013 . The number of people who died in 2014 has doubled from 2013 .
 The report notes that “in a troubling number of incidents, police killed all alleged ‘perpetrators,’’ It further suggests that China is leading a state policy of oppression against the Uyghurs .
 The above case study details an interesting point regarding Chinese counter-terrorism . The study also details a point regarding China's anti-terrorism.
 The Chinese are more concerned with the political and economic interests and ramifications of counter-terrorism strategies than with the protection of human rights and its citizens, says Cunningham . Cunningham’s argument suggests that the Chinese are less concerned with political interests than with human rights .
 Uyghur Human Rights Project says oppression and violence against the UYghurs is on the rise . The new anti-terrorism law does not appear to be stopping soon with the new law .
 Violence and oppression against the Uyghurs will increase as more of their people join forces with the Islamic State .
 Held’s argument is again seen as China uses moral justification by condemning the separatists as terrorists and justifying their oppression of the ethnic group .
 China’s powerful economic status and its permanent membership on the Security Council make it difficult to create tangible punishments against it regarding human rights violations . China's economic status makes it difficult for the country to make a tangible punishment against it .
 President Obama has given his reservations about the new anti-terrorism law to Chinese President Ji Xinping . Obama has also given his concerns about the law to the Chinese President .
 New law could be used to relax some of the freedom of expression and intellectual property rights concerns . However, the new law could also be used for the US’s advantage .
 If the U.S. can allow the Chinese military to join in counter-terrorism exercises, it could possibly allow for a growth in relations .
 It would be very difficult to get the Chinese to loosen restrictions on freedom of expression in general, let alone over terrorism concerns .
 The U.S. and Counter-Terrorism Committee have to bide their time by allowing the Chinese to be involved in these international operations in order to gain trust and faith .
 The Counter-Terrorism Committee has centralized the fight against international terrorism within the UN . But it cannot bring about tangible results due to the power and subsequent violations of its member states, says the paper .
 The CTC has no real enforcement or punishment capabilities, according to studies of US, Russia, and China .
 The principal-agent problem explored in this paper is too much of a factor against the Counter-Terrorism Committee .
 The agents are hiding their actions and policies from the principal . They seem unwilling to share with the principal any time soon .
This means that the principal cannot properly enforce its goals and ideals . This means that he can't properly enforce his goals or ideals. This means he is not able to enforce his ideals .
 The Security Council relies on the Security Council for binding Resolutions, sanctions, and punishments . The CTC cannot succeed in full implementation of Resolutions 1373 and 1624 .
 The broad and vague nature of terrorism and counter-terrorism allows states to justify actions that skirt human rights violations without consequences . States, especially powerful ones, can justify such actions without consequences.
 Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost Kramer, Hilde Haaland and Steve Yetiv are among the top three people on the list .
 The U.S. has been unable to achieve a complete victory for three main reasons . With the rise of the Islamic State, the United States has been able to achieve the complete victory .
 Obama administration has made it clear that any form of intervention hinges on multilateral support . The Obama administration is making it clear.
 President Obama was elected on ending the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . He was elected to end the conflict in Syria, which makes the U.S. involvement in the Syrian conflict unlikely .
 Last, American war weariness currently exists and further hinders a complete victory. Last, U.S. war wearier currently exists, says the author .
 To overcome hindrances, the United States should rely on and continue to provide support to local forces . The U.S. should continue to support local forces.
 Iraqi and Kurdish forces have demonstrated that they can be victorious . Iraqi and Kurd forces have shown they can win in Iraq and Kurdistan .
 What is known today as the Islamic State has several names . The Islamic State is known as "the Islamic State"
 The Islamic State and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria all refer to the same organization . The group is based in Syria, Iraq and the Levant .
 The main goals of the group are to create a caliphate, kill all infidels, and institute worldwide Sharia law . The group's main goals are to establish a caliphate and create a world of Sharia law.
 ISIS has conquered large swaths of land and valuable resources from the Iraqi and Syrian governments . ISIS is in fundamental opposition to U.S. interests in the region .
 The U.S. cannot achieve a complete victory in its current political situation, says CNN's John Sutter . The United States is in a political situation that cannot be resolved, he says .
 President Obama relies on widespread international approval for military intervention . His limited options of drone strikes and airstrikes have restricted success and posed risk .
 Second, intense partisanship and inactivity plague congressional politics, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Last, after two wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, America is hampered by war weariness . U.S. has been hampered by wars in both countries .
 To overcome barriers, the United States should continue airstrikes and continue with U.S. advisors embedded with Iraqi forces .
 This policy outcome will not only advance U.S. interests in the region, but also overcome political barriers . This policy will help the United States in the Middle East .
 Background ISIS has its roots in the insurgency against the U.S. occupation of Iraq .
 Abu Musab al-Zarqawi was given permission by Osama bin Laden to start an Iraqi based branch of al-Qaeda . Al-Qaeda was given the permission to start a branch in Iraq .
 Al-Zarqawi then created the group’s infamous reputation for its brutality . The group's infamous reputation was created by the group .
 Videotaped beheadings did not start two years ago under Baghdadi, as that horrific practice began under Al-Zarqawi .
 The terrorist group has used a doomsday propaganda strategy to attract foreign recruits and legitimize its actions towards its end goal . Since then, the terrorist group's actions have been aimed at attracting foreign recruits .
 Isis seeks to create a “pure’ Sunni Islamist state governed by a brutal interpretation of sharia . It wants to obliterate the political borders of the Middle East that were created by Western powers in the twentieth century .
 The group has refrained from terrorist attacks in the West that would imitate 9/11 . For the most part, the group hasrefrained from such attacks .
 The comparison to 9/11 is important because attacks on a large and lethal scale have rallied the American people .
 The Paris attack and smaller attacks have garnered sympathy from the U.S. public . But such attacks have yet to garner support for a committed response .
 ISIS’s high level of military sophistication has been instrumental in the feats the group has had . ISIS has had the highest level of sophistication in the group's history .
 ISIS has enjoyed great success by capitalizing on a weak, corrupt Iraqi central government and a stagnant civil war in Syria . ISIS has also capitalized on a poor, corrupt central government in Iraq .
 There are many different factions in the Syrian Civil War that have different goals and have different foreign support . There are different factions within the Syrian civil war that are trying to win the war .
 Vladimir Putin has targeted Syrian rebels and U.S. backed Syrian groups . Russia has not only declared their support for the Assad regime, but has also targeted rebels .
 The insertion of Russian support is important because there are differing views within the U.S. government on how to counter Russian aggression .
 ISIS too has had success, such as capturing long previously disputed cities such as Raqqa and Mosul, Iraq’s second largest city .
 ISIS has proved to be a competent opponent to ISIS, according to experts . In current attempts to intervene against the Islamic State, ISIS has proven to be competent opponent .
Militants have gained experience fighting both the U.S. and Iraqi Security Forces since the coalition invasion in 2003 . These militants have fought both the United States and Iraqi security forces since 2003 .
 ISIS should not be underestimated as a loose band of militants when discussing how to combat the terrorist group militarily . ISIS is a loose group of militants who have been fighting for years .
 "Middle East Policy 21" is the Middle East Policy of the year .
 A military defeat of ISIS is already a challenge, but a complete victory would be even more difficult . A complete victory of ISIS would be more difficult than ever .
 "Complete victory against ISIS" is more than just a military victory, says CNN's John Sutter . "What Victory Looks Like" looks like is the result of a battle against ISIS .
 A defeat of ISIS decreases their stranglehold over their captured area, and decreases their membership and recruitment numbers . A defeat reduces their strangledhold over the captured area .
 Eventually a complete defeat will allow for a peaceful democratic solution in Iraq, and the recognition of an independent Kurdistan . A complete defeat in Iraq will allow a peaceful solution, according to a report .
 If the U.S. continues to rely on airstrikes, bombing the enemy into submission will not lead to a complete defeat .
 A complete victory over ISIS will also decrease the number of marginalized Muslims from across the world flocking to the supposed caliphate . The United States first needs to win militarily against these ‘incredible fighters’
 A complete victory eliminates its claims as a legitimate state and decimates its influence worldwide . A complete win eliminates its claim of legitimacy and decimate its influence globally .
 The founding of a U.S. or coalition desired government would just reiterate the same mistakes that led to ISIS’s success .
 Hashim gives this idea credence and adds that the suppression of the Sunni population led to the foundation of the terrorist group . Hashim adds that suppression of Sunni population leads to the group's foundation .
Military factors play the largest role in scoring a complete victory . Political factors play a large part in scoring the victory .
 The deciding factor of the 2008 Presidential election has an influence on President Obama’s resolve in intervention . For example, the deciding factor in the 2008 presidential election has a role in Obama's intervention .
 The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan had a profound impact on the 2008 presidential election . The First Roadblock to Victory is the First Roadblocks to Victory .
 McCain and soon-to-be President Obama attempted to distance themselves from the president . McCain and Obama have described themselves as a war monger .
 Then-Senator Barack Obama campaigned on an end and withdrawal from both Iraq and Afghanistan . Obama set the tone of a peaceful and less internationally assertive administration .
 In 2011, 75% of respondents to a Gallup poll approved of President Obama’s decision to withdraw almost all troops from Iraq . Then in 2011, the poll found that 75% approved of Obama's decision to pull out all troops .
 These polls reflect the American public’s desire for a peaceful president, rather than a belligerent one .
Ending the war in Iraq demonstrates a less war prone Obama administration .
 The Obama administration has approved a dramatic increase in drone strikes . It is the administration's alternative to putting boots on the ground .
 President Obama championed an end to the war in Iraq to reflect the 60% of Gallup respondents who believed Iraq was a mistake .
 In combating ISIS, the Obama administration is less likely to start an all-out ground war .
 President Obama demonstrates this trend in the 2015 “National Security Strategy’s document . The 2015 document was released on Friday .
 Airstrikes and drones have limitations and vary in effectiveness . Airstrike and drones strikes have limited effectiveness and limited effectiveness .
 These withdrawals are attempts to dodge the airstrikes, Meek says . Meek describes the withdrawals as attempts to avoid airstrikes .
 An effective campaign using ground troops takes time and just an air war does not seem to produce best results .
 President Obama relies on drone strikes and airstrikes to support regional allies to combat ISIS . He also relies on airstrikes to serve as an alternative to sending ground troops .
 Ground troops are doubtful because of the current administration's reliance on multilateralism . Ground troops as a method of defeating ISIS are also doubtful, according to CNN .
 President Obama has advocated for a multilateral approach for intervention . Unlike President George W Bush, Obama has pushed for multilateral intervention .
 The February 2015 National Security Strategy outlines just that when it claims, ‘Our closest partners and allies will remain the cornerstone of our international engagement.’
 Donnette Murray, author of "Military action but not as we know it," writes that multilateralism is an essential piece of what she calls the Obama Doctrine .
 The Obama Doctrine states that the U.S. will only intervene in internationally-accepted cases, such as in Libya .
 The UN Security Council passed Resolution 1973 and granted the U.S. and international community to intervene in Libya .
 Multilateral intervention in Syria, on the other hand, was vetoed by Russia and China and therefore did not lead to U.S. intervention as in Libya .
 The intervention in Libya and not in Syria demonstrates the Obama administration’s reliance on international legitimacy .
 President Obama and President George W Bush's dependence illustrates the difference between them . President Obama's dependence on George W. Bush shows the difference.
 Peter Hays Gries would attribute the multilateral threshold to the partisan divide between liberals and conservatives . He would attribute this to the political divide between conservatives and liberals .
 Liberals tend to favor multilateralism, as Gries concludes, while conservatives generally favor unilateralism . Liberals, however, tend to prefer multilateralistism, Gries says .
 U.S. intervention led by a liberal against ISIS hinges on multilateral support, Gries says .
In combatting ISIS, a multilateral approach is time consuming and not guaranteed to happen . In combating ISIS, in combatting the terrorist group, the U.S. should take a different approach .
 In the wake of U.S.-Russian tension over Ukraine, it is unlikely that Russia will change its veto against combatting ISIS, which complicates any United States response . It is likely that Russia won't change its decision to fight ISIS .
 Gries’ explanation of the liberal/conservative divide is applicable, he says . Therefore, applying Gries' explanation is applicable .
 If a liberal wins the 2016 presidential election, most of the above explanations still apply . The 2016 election will be held in 2016 .
 Gries is not applicable, but the limitations of airstrikes and drone strikes do not change . If a conservative wins the Presidential election, Gries will not be able to change the rules .
 A conservative president will still have to battle with a very partisan Congress in order to combat the Islamic State .
 How Ideology Divides Liberals and Conservatives over Foreign Affairs, 11.2.5.5 .
 The 113th Congress was the least productive congress in the totality of congressional history . The 113rd Congress was also the most productive Congress in the history of Congress .
 Republicans have gained more seats in the House and have taken control of the Senate . The Obama administration and Congress are less likely to legislate, Waldman says .
 It is unlikely that the Democratic President will sign any bill involving ISIS passed by Republican controlled Congress into law .
 Gries helps explain the reasoning behind this partisan divide . Gries also explains the reason behind this political divide .
 Gries writes that conservatives and liberals hold completely opposite views on foreign policy . Gries: Conservatives and liberals have very different views on the foreign policy.
 Bills may pass through the House, but Republicans do not have enough votes to end a filibuster . Democrats choose to start one in the Senate in the event that Democrats choose.
Deep partisan divides over foreign policy make combating ISIS a challenge, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The intense partisanship leads to instances where Congress attempts to limit the President’s powers .
 Congress passed the War Powers Resolution in response to President Johnson's and President Nixon's wide authority in the Vietnam War .
 The War Powers Resolution states that the President can deploy troops for 60 days and then must withdraw the troops if Congress has not declared war or authorized an extension of the troop deployment .
 Congressional attempts to exert the War Powers Act are political maneuvers to limit executive powers in using military force . Congress is trying to limit the use of military force in the war .
 The debate around the War Powers Resolution jeopardizes the success of military intervention .
 President Obama considered military intervention in Syria but was stonewalled when he was told Congress would consider invoking the War Powers Resolution . Eric Jensen states that, in regard to Syria, President Obama considers military intervention .
 Congressional efforts to curb the ISIS are also hindered by ISIS’s tactics. In addition to the War Powers Resolution, Congress is also hampered by ISIS's tactics .
 Whenever American soil is attacked, it is the modus operandi for both parties to put aside partisan politics . Whenever U.S. soil is attack, it's a modusOperandi.
 George C. Herring states that after 9/11, the Bush administration wished to invade Afghanistan, and Iraq .
 A partisan Congress offered “scattered opposition’ to an unclear invasion of Iraq . Iraq did not attack the U.S. Though Iraq didn't attack the United States, a partisan Congress offers ‘scatteredOpposition” to the invasion .
 The example of Congressional support is further exemplified with the support for authorization of force against those responsible for 9/11 .
 There has not been a large scale attack in the U.S. In addition, the group has executed Americans, but in their conquered territory .
 Even after the horrific attack in Paris, there has not been much of a change in anti-ISIS strategy .
 If there was an attack planned on U.S. soil, then the result may be different . If there is an attack on United States soil, it could be different.
 In one of the most recent sympathizer attacks, the connection between ISIS and the sympathizers is not completely clear .
 As of now, Congressional authority for the use of force is difficult to obtain because of the terrorist group’s tactics and the lack of a central and agreed upon U.S. grand strategy .
 Grand strategy is determined by national interests, which are ideologically driven . National interests are driven by ideology .
 When Republicans and Democrats are dichotomously opposed in foreign affairs, establishing a consistent and cohesive strategy is nearly impossible .
 Iranian aid to Iraqi security forces complicates the formation of a U.S. grand strategy. To make matters worse, Iran's aid to Iraq complicates U.N. grand Strategy, says Obama .
 Gries explains that conservatives’ strong feelings towards Israel causes conservatives to want a tougher stance towards Iran . Gries says that conservatives want tougher stance on Iran .
 The battle between these two parties over Iran complicates U.S. grand strategy in intervention and hinders aid to Iraqi forces . The battle has been dubbed the "Iran-Iraq war"
 The last and one of the most influential factors in congressional anti-ISIS efforts is reelection politics, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The most influential factor in anti- ISIS efforts are reelection politics .
 Reelection, additionally, is partly the cause of the increase in Congressional partisanship . Reelection is also partly the reason for the increase.
 Senators and Congressmen do not want to risk not winning reelection by voting for sending ground troops . Senators and congressmen don't want to win reelection.
 Only 40% of Americans approve of ground troops being used in attempts to defeat the group . However, only 40% approve of using ground troops in an attempt to defeat them .
 Congress has little electoral benefits to gain by authorizing ground troops . Congress has no electoral benefits for authorizing ground forces .
 Members of Congress have to face electoral consequences for sending ground troops to Congress .
When Americans vote, they are more likely to vote by party than by individual candidate . Jeffery Grynavski identifies that when Americans vote.
 parties will primarily remain cohesive in voting so that the party not associated with the unpopular war will win reelection . Hence, parties will mostly remain cohesive.
 The 2006 midterm elections demonstrated the disapproval for the war in Iraq and attached that disapproval to the republicans up for reelection .
 Congressmen would be less likely to approve the use of ground troops because of the electoral risk that would entail . Congressmen are aware of this trend and would be more likely to vote against it .
 The U.S. has been engaged in numerous conflicts over the last decade and a half . The United States has been involved in many conflicts .
 The War in Iraq and the War in Afghanistan are the two largest conflicts within that decade and a half . The War is the two biggest conflicts within the decade and half .
 The costs of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan played a crucial part in the 2008 Presidential election . The cost of the war was a key factor in the election.
 51% of respondents in August 2008 said the war in Iraq was going moderately poor to extremely poor . In 2008, 60% said that invading Iraq was a mistake .
 Barack Obama campaigned on peace and steady withdrawals from both Iraq and Afghanistan . This belief carried into the elections when the voters elected Barack Obama .
 McCain voted for the authorization of force in Iraq and appeared to have endorsed extending the occupation . McCain voted to extend the occupation in Iraq .
 When American war weariness impacts policy, politicians create bad wartime policies . When American War weariness affects policy, politics create bad war policies, politicians make bad war decisions .
In wartime, U.S. public opinion drives the strategy, the war’s successes, and the eventual withdrawal in every conflict . In wartime, United States public opinion drive the strategy.
 Over time in any military intervention, the U.S. public grows tired of causalities and will eventually vote in favor of anti-war candidates .
 The result of any rushed military intervention against ISIS is foretold by two previous instances . The result is not known by the military .
 In 1969, 58% of people polled said that sending troops to Vietnam was a mistake .
 President Nixon knew that South Vietnamese Armed Forces had a lackluster performance record under Vietnamization . Nixon still continued with the withdrawal process to appease the American public .
 The withdrawal from Iraq is a second example of public opinion driving poor political decisions . The withdrawal of Iraq is an example of bad political decisions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Political Science Quarterly 122, no. 1-24. The 2006 Midterm Congressional Elections . The 2006 midterm Congressional elections were held in Washington .
After years of U.S. forces training Iraqi forces, the Iraqis were not prepared to handle the secretarial violence .
 Public policy often leads to rushed and most likely failed interventions . These repeated incidents indicate that when public opinion is not overwhelmingly for military force, then public policy leads to rush .
 Airstrikes by the United States and other countries against ISIS have already begun to decrease enemy numbers and constrain the caliphate’s area of operations .
 Coalition airstrikes have put a huge dent into the Islamic State’s oil revenue . U.S. airstrikes have been led by the United States .
 The current administration’s reliance on airstrikes is a two-fold benefit, according to the White House .
 Disrupting the oil chain that ISIS depends on for financing its caliphate is a nice accomplishment . It puts a strain on the state’s budget.
 The option that produces the best results is to accompany the airstrikes with wellsupplied and firmly backed local forces . The option is to follow up with well-supplied local forces and well-backed local forces.
 Iraqi forces, with the help of U.S. military advisors, recaptured Ramadi . Ramadi was captured by Iraqi forces .
 Iraqi forces have shown that they are up to the task with the capture of Ramadi and advances into previously controlled parts of Islamic State .
 High ranking Iraqi generals have been quoted in saying that all that is needed is continuing airstrikes and some Western troops to advise the Iraqi and Peshmerga forces in their fight against the Islamic State .
 generals have said that the presence of a lot of Western troops would hurt the fight . Furthermore, these generals said that a few Western troops could hurt the battle .
 Dexter Filkins and David Kil details the inadequacy of United States occupations . To further exasperate why no large U.S. deployment is needed, they say .
 David Kilcullen writes that for an effective counterinsurgency policy, higher causalities are a necessary . He says troops have to be willing to be vulnerable and welcoming to the local populace .
 American commanders tend to overuse extreme firepower. Another aspect is that to prevent U.S. casualties.
 His counterinsurgency tactics were drastic and often caused more problems than the one he was attempting to fix . While the book describes his leadership as effective, his tactics were often drastic .
 In response, Sassaman ordered several large airstrikes to take out the insurgents . Sassaman also ordered several larger airstrikes .
 The U.S. military occupation should not be the answer, says the author of the book . The author says the Obama administration and partisan Congress can overcome their differences .
 Continued airstrikes, military advisors, and an increase in U.S. support for Iraqi and Peshmerga forces could make Ramadi the beginning of an end to the Islamic State .
 The first is a battle between the Obama administration and a Republican-led Congress . The second is a partisan battle members of Congress that causes little to no law making .
 The reliance on the Iraqi military and the Peshmerga forces sidesteps both political barriers and war weariness in the American public today .
 continuing airstrikes and sending advisors is the optimum route to heed . Also sending advisors, accompanied with support for the Peshmerga and Iraqi military is the best way to heed.
 The terrorist threat posed by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria/Sham was unanticipated by many .
 This paper argues that ISIS’ rise, growth and stability are largely a result of disenfranchisement in Iraq and Syria and financial stability . It argues that the rise of ISIS is largely due to a lack of financial stability in the region .
 ISIS, or another organization similar to ISIS, was nearly inevitable, according to experts . However, examination of the history and social conditions in Syria and Iraq demonstrate that the expansion of ISIS was almost inevitable, they say .
 ISIS was able to initially gain support by capitalizing on disenfranchisement. This paper provides an overview of ISIS’ rise by examining how the organization initially gained support .
 This paper will also examine how ISIS has been able to financially support itself . It will also explain the growth and stability of ISIS by examining how the organization has grown .
 The main goal of the polyonomous terrorist group is to establish a caliphate by gaining control of areas in Iraq and Syria . The Islamic State of Iraq and Ash Sham is to become a caliphate .
 The organization controls various areas under Sharia law, which covers both religious life and nonreligious life . The organization also controls other areas under the law .
 Laws require women to be covered in full veil or niqab, and ban music in school . These laws include separating boys and girls in school and banning music .
 ISIS controls several wilayats, or regions, in Iraq and Syria, including Diyala, Baghdad, Kirkuk, Salahuddin, Anbar, and Ninewa divisions .
 The group has a cabinet of advisors and two deputies . It has a leader and this leader has a Cabinet of advisors .
 ISIS also places governors in charge of different areas under its control . ISIS also place governors in control of various areas.
 Overall, the organization’s organizational structure strongly resembles the structure of a state and shows ISIS’ ambitions to become a state . Overall, ISIS's organizational structure is similar to a state, according to the organization .
 The following graphic further illustrates ISIS’s organizational structure . The ISIS organization was created by ISIS.
 Bakr al-Baghdadi was formerly the general supervisor of the Sharia Committees for the Wilayats . He was also the head of the Islamic Council of Islamic State of Iraq .
B Bakr al-Baghdadi proved to be more extreme, ambitious, and disloyal than his predecessor . With his eyes set on expanding ISI into Syria, he was more extreme and ambitious .
 Bakr al-Baghdadi’s disloyalty to Al Qaeda arose when he announced the absorption of an Al-Qaeda affiliate in Syria .
 In April 2013, Bakr al-Baghdadi declared that ISI absorbed the Syrian militant group Jabhat al Nusra li Ahl al Sham and that this signaled the birth of a new group that spanned across Syria and Iraq .
 On June 30, 2014, ISIS announced the creation of a Caliphate, an Islamic State . The Caliphate was created by ISIS .
 Bakr al-Baghdadi changed his name to Caliph Ibrahim and the name of ISIS was changed to the Islamic State . After the announcement, Baghdadi's name was changed. The name was also changed to ISIS .
 ISIS’ ability to be successful in Syria is largely due to the Syrian civil war . ISIS is largely responsible for the success of ISIS in Syria .
 The Syrian civil war started because many Syrians have been suffering from disenfranchisement . Many Syrians are suffering from a lack of access to freedom .
 Much of Syria’s problems have risen from the corruption so prevalent in Syria .
 Syria’s CPI when calculated on a scale of zero to 10 scored less than 3. Between 2003 and 2011, the CPI was less than three times the average .
 The living conditions of Syrians were exasperated when a drought in Syria forced farmers to look for work in the city of Damascus .
 Many farmers were unable to make an adequate living in the city . Many of these farmers were not able to make a adequate living .
 In fact, it is estimated that two to three million of Syria’s ten million rural citizens were sent into extreme poverty .
 The poor standards of living in Syria caused by corruption combined with Syria’s drought made for a frustrated and disenfranchised population .
 Syrians protested the government’s failure to help them in 2011 . Later in 2011, Syrians protested against the government's failure.
 As a result, riots broke out throughout the country and the Syrian civil war began . The Syrian Civil war began in 2011 .
 AQI saw the unrest in Syria as an opportunity to grow their organization . AQI sees the unrest as a chance to grow its organization .
This organization would be able to offer employment to people in dire need of a job . It would give them an opportunity to fight against an oppressive regime . This organization would also offer employment.
 Al Nusra rejected the claim and appealed to al Qaeda Central for judgement . However, al Nusra refused the claim .
 Al Qaeda Central ordered that Bakr al-Baghdadi limit his operations to Iraq . Golani, the leader of al Nusra, was in charge of al Qaeda operations in Syria .
 After ISIS’ disavowement, Bakr al-Baghdadi began establishing his organization in Syria .
 ISIS attracted recruits from al Nusra and several other Syrian rebel groups . During this time, ISIS attracted recruiters from other Syrian rebels .
 Much of the support ISIS has gained in Iraq started from policies instituted by US diplomat Paul Bremer .
 The first was to outlaw Saddam Hussein’s Ba’ath party, which mostly consisted of Sunnis, from government positions .
 Many people in Iraq were Ba’athists only because it was a requirement for political office . Many people were Ba'athists because of political office requirements .
 The outlawing of Ba’athists led to the loss of jobs for 85,000 to 100,000 people, according to reports .
 The decision to disband Iraq’s army and intelligence services led to 700,000 Iraqi military personnel and police officers losing employment .
 Many people began to work for terrorist organizations to provide money for their families . Many of these people began working for terrorist groups to provide cash for their family .
 In order to combat the security problems in Iraq, the U.S. military began to support the Sahwa .
 The movement was formalized in 2006 when the al-Anbar Salvation Council was created . The movement is based in the town of Anbar, in the north of the city .
 The al-Anbar Salvation Council was an alliance of clans, led by Abd al-Sattar al-Rishawi . It provided help to the Iraqi government and U.S. military .
 The Sahwa movement first consisted of mostly Sunni Arab tribes that had been in conflict with Al Qaeda . Al Qaeda’s extreme violence and the organization’'s targeted killings of tribal leaders .
 The Sahwa later grew to include Sunni Arab fighters, some of whom were former insurgents . Some of the fighters were former insurgent fighters .
 The U.S. provided tribes that were part of the Sahwa with arms and financial resources to fight al Qaeda . The United States provided tribes with arms, financial resources.
 In the process, these tribes and their leaders gained authority in several areas of Iraq . The tribes gained power in several parts of Iraq.
Members of the Sahwa movement faced many retaliatory attacks from Al Qaeda . When the U.S. began to withdraw from areas of Iraq, members faced many retaliation attacks .
 Many Sahwa members returned to Al Qaeda's ranks after retaliatory attacks combined with intimidations and threats convinced many to return to the ranks .
 Nouri al-Maliki became prime minister when the U.S. left Iraq .
 Maliki drew on provisions instituted by Bremer to reinforce his power . Maliki draws on the provisions instituted to reinforce the power of Maliki .
Maliki used Bremer’s policies to bar prominent Sunnis from political office . For example, Maliki used his policies tobar prominentSunnis from politics .
 Maliki responded to these riots by further repressing the Sunni population . Maliki also responded to the riots by repressing the Sunni populations .
 Maliki also used Shiite backed militias supported by Iran to stop riots, which further angered the Sunni population . Maliki used Shiite backing militias backed by Iran.
 These militias are accused of committing mass rape and sectarian reprisals against the Sunni population . These militias were accused of mass rape.
 As a result of the Sunnis’ history of being oppressed in Iraq, many Sunnis now support ISIS . ISIS is not in short supply of either.
ISIS would not be able to function as it currently does. Without the money to cover these costs, ISIS would be unable to operate as it does .
 Most of ISIS' revenue comes from local criminal and terrorist activities, according to the US Treasury's Undersecretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence .
 In 2014, the US Department of Treasury estimated that ISIS received at least $20 million in ransoms alone .
 ISIS' revenue streams include oil, extortion, the sale of stolen antiquities, and kidnappings . ISIS is known for its use of oil and extortion .
 Much of ISIS’ funds come from illegally controlling oil fields in Iraq and Syria .
 ISIS earned around $1 million per day from the sale of oil in 2014, it was estimated . It was estimated that ISIS earned about $1million per day.
 Syrian government also made arrangement with ISIS to purchase oil from fields and refineries that were previously under Syrian control .
 ISIS has been self-sufficient since the fall of the Islamic State of Iraq . The group has been in control of the oil industry for years . The oil industry has allowed ISIS to be self-sustaining .
 It is estimated that the organization receives United States $200 million from the selling of artifacts . The organization receives $200m from the sale of artifacts.
22 ISIS also uses local residents to obtain artifacts from ancient sites . In addition to ISIS members selling these artifacts, 22 ISIS members also sell these artifacts .
 The organization issues permits to local citizens to search for artifacts in ancient sites . The organization does this by issuing permits to locals to look for artifacts .
 ISIS charges a percentage of the money citizens receive from selling artifacts . ISIS then charges a Percentage of money citizens get from selling items .
 ISIS’ victims come from countries around the world, including France and the United States .
 These victims are often people, such as journalists, that travelled to ISIS controlled areas .
 France has actually paid $14 million in ransoms for kidnapped journalists . France has paid a total of $15 million to kidnap journalists .
 American hostages beheaded while French hostages have been spared . This has led to American hostages being beheaded and French hostages being spared . The U.S. has been beheaded by American hostages in recent weeks .
 The U.S. government has explained that a no-concessions policy lowers the amount of kidnappings by removing the incentive to holding hostages .
 ISIS has kidnapped women and children and forced them into sexual slavery . ISIS has also kidnapped women, children and kidnapped them into sex slavery .
 Amnesty International reports that ISIS abducted many people from the Yezidi minority group . The group is a minority group in the region .
 The Yezidi minority group makes up the majority of people in ISIS’ slave trade .
 The Case of Islamic State in Iraq and Syria was published April 7, 2016, .
ISIS’ ability to capitalize on disenfranchisement and the organization’s lucrative revenue streams have led to the organization growing more powerful . ISIS’ inability to capitalize. ISIS has led to its ability to take advantage of disenfranchisements .
 The organization was financing its activities by gaining funds from various revenue streams, including the sale of oil, extortion, and kidnappings .
 ISIS’ revenue streams have allowed the organization to finance its costs which include maintaining and administrating territory30 and paying recruits .
 Without financing, the organization could not maintain its current structure . Without financing these costs, it could not keep the organization's current structure.
In theory, it can cost up to billions of dollars to maintain and administrate territory . In theory, the cost could be as much as $1 billion .
 ISIS must have a large amount of funds to maintain and administrate territory . Forr ISIS to maintain its territory, the organization must have large amounts of funds .
Without these funds the organization would not be able to hold onto territory . Without these funds, the organization could not hold on territory .
 The amount of people supporting ISIS and employed by ISIS would likely decrease if ISIS stopped paying its personnel . As a result, the number of people support ISIS and ISIS would probably decrease .
 The disenfranchisement in Iraq and Syria and ISIS’ financing activities are significant problems that must be addressed, says the U.S. government .
 If ISIS receives less funds, then it would not be able to maintain its current costs . ISIS could become less powerful or dissolving, which could lead to ISIS becoming less powerful .
 ISIS may rise by taking advantage of the disenfranchisement in Iraq and Syria . ISIS is not addressed when ISIS loses power, then another organization that is similar to ISIS could rise .
 Further research should explore how to best address disenfranchisement in Iraq and Syria, while effectively degrading ISIS’ financial strength, according to experts .
 The disenfranchisement in Iraq and Syria and the potential funds available from local criminal and terrorist activities could have led to the rise of any violent organization that saw the chance to take advantage of the situations in Iraq, Syria .
 ISIS gained the benefits, power and influence of Iraq and Syria, according to the group . ISIS has taken advantage of the situations in Iraq, Syria and Iraq .
 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism is based on the study of terrorism .