 Ukraine's acting President Oleksandr Turchynov may have been dissembling when he stated that Kiev had lost control of the country’s rust-belt eastern region .
 At first glance eastern Ukraine does indeed still appear to be as much in the hands of pro-Russian forces as at any time in the past few weeks .
 Anti-Ukrainian militias still occupy buildings in several cities, including Luhansk and Donetsk, the largest in the Donbas .
 separatists held poorly planned referenda in Luhansk and Donetsk provinces under unfair and unfree circumstances . On May 11, separatists held ill-planned referenda on May 11 .
 Russia declared independence and asked Russia to annex their regions . Despite an absurdly low turnout, they immediately claimed victory .
 The situation is less favorable for the militants and their sponsors in the Kremlin, says the Kremlin .
 Ukraine's security forces launched a large-scale ‘anti-terrorist operation’ in Ukraine . Ukraine’s security forces engaged pro-Russian extremists in firefights .
 The Kiev units dismantled guard posts and recaptured buildings in some of the more than 10 Ukrainian cities where militants have tried to assert control .
 Ukraine is continuing its offensive, nibbling away at areas controlled by militants . Ukraine is imposing significant casualties on its forces .
 Ukraine’s armed forces decimated by four years of former President Viktor Yanukovych's intentional neglect . Pro-Russian rebels have performed well in the counterterrorism offensive .
Fighting has improved Ukrainian morale, according to the Ukrainian government . It has also provided Ukrainians with combat experience .
 The militants, who appeared to be on a roll until late April, are clearly not unstoppable . The militants are not unstoppable.
 The pro-Putin commandos are isolated from the people they claim to represent and have no endgame short of annexation of the Donbas by Russia .
 Vladimir Putin has remained silent about the ballots and their implications . In turn, their predicament has placed Vladimir Putin in a difficult position .
 The militants have shown they are adept at seizing buildings, kidnapping opponents, terrorizing the population, instigating pogroms and making bold statements . The militants are also adept at kidnapping and kidnapping opponents .
 Putin has to decide on the militants’ request to annex Luhansk and Donetsk provinces . Meanwhile, Putin is considering whether to annex the provinces .
 Russian troops sent to “liberate’ the Donbas could not be justified with appeals to putative popular will . Given the farcical nature of the referenda and the militants’ terrorism, sending Russian troops to ‘liberate the Don Bas
 Putin invoked a nonexistent historical “Russianness’s” and pointed to the jubilant crowds greeting his invading troops . Putin happily thumbed his nose at international law and annexed Crimea .
 The human rights council said the turnout for the Crimean referendum was only 30 percent, or one-third of what Putin claimed . Putin must now have qualms about using another set of sham referenda to invade Ukraine .
 Any Russian invasion would likely be met with firm resistance by Ukrainian forces and possibly debilitating Western sanctions .
 Most Donbas residents have no desire to join Russia, according to public opinion polls . Most residents in Donbas are not interested in joining Russia .
 Putin knows he cannot sit idly by and watch his commandos in eastern Ukraine suffer defeat and lose popular support . At the same time, Putin knows that he can't sit idle by.
 Some militants are Russian intelligence agents with explicit orders to sow unrest . Some of the militants are Russia's most powerful intelligence agents .
 Many others, with origins in Ukraine, believe that Putin is their savior .
Putin risks losing the exalted status he enjoys among his commandos in eastern Ukraine . By acting wisely and avoiding war, Putin risks losing his exalted status in Ukraine .
 Kiev’s options may have turned in Kiev's favor, but the tide may not have turned the tide in the city's favor . Kiev's options remain unclear .
 Expect the government to pursue a divide-and-conquer policy premised on divisions among militants . Expect a wide range of sticks and carrots at its disposal .
 In Donetsk and Luhansk, some want independent republics; others want Putin to invade . Some want independence from Russia, others want an independent republic .
 Many militants want greater autonomy or a better life in Ukraine . Many militants, together with most Donbas residents, want more autonomy .
 Some are criminals on the payroll of local elites, Moscow, Donbas oligarchs and Yanukovych . Some of them are criminals.
 Two cities in Donetsk province, Slovyansk and Kramatorsk, are under partial control of Russian-trained extremists . Russian intelligence agents and Russian Spetsnaz Special Forces are also in control .
 Rebels in Luhansk and Donetsk appear to be divided between a more radical ‘street’ and a more moderate cohort that occupies buildings .
 Even the building occupiers in both cities are split between radicals and moderates . Even building occupers in both city are split.
 Kiev should try to separate locals with legitimate grievances from Russian agents, pro-Russian extremists and paid criminals . Kiev should separate the locals from the Russian agents.
 It can initiate negotiations with the former while continuing its anti-militant operations against the latter . It can start negotiations with former. It can also continue anti-Militants operations against them .
 Kiev can then offer more moderate elements among the militants concessions on self-rule, language and referenda . Kiev can also offer the more moderate parts of the militants.
Eastern Ukrainians, together with all Ukrainians, want to run their own affairs . No one really knows what that means, except that eastern Ukrainians, along with all other Ukrainians, wants to run themselves .
 Kiev is already committed to a radical “decentralization of authority’s” of authority . Kiev is also committed to the call for greater self-rule .
 Kiev frame the administrative reforms just as residents of the Donbas want them to be called — federalization . It’s imperative that Kiev frame them just as Residents want them called —Federalization .
 Many in eastern Ukraine want Russian to become a second state language . Many in east Ukraine want Russia to be a second language .
 First, Russian can be the second state language of any province that demands it . First, Russia can be a second statelanguage of any provincial province that needs it .
 Ukraine's commitment to language equality would entail that all state employees in all of Ukraine demonstrate fluency in both Ukrainian and Russian . Second, Ukraine’s genuine commitment tolanguage equality would mean that all of its state employees demonstrated fluency .
 Kiev should accede and let provinces decide how much decentralization they want, let them decide what they want . Kiev should be able to accede.
 Kiev has shown that it can conduct successful anti-terrorist operations . The militants are isolated, Putin may be in a pickle and Kiev has showed it can do it .
 Corruption, instability, subversion and economic collapse in the Donbas would then radiate in all directions, producing a disaster for the rest of Ukraine, for the wider region and for Russia .