 The Luhansk and Donetsk People's Republics are controlled by Kremlin-backed separatists and Russian military personnel . The humanitarian situation is quickly becoming dire .
 President Poroshenko has passed a decree to withdraw state support to inhabitants of these regions . The decree has caused some significant controversy .
 Oleksandr Lukyanchenko gave a long television interview last week that perhaps deserved more attention than it received . The long-time mayor of Donetsk, Donetsk, has been mayor for more than a decade .
 Having been forced to flee from Donetsk for refusing to co-operate with the separatists, he is now believed to be in Kyiv .
 He makes it clear that the armed conflict in Donbas should be called a war, not an anti-terrorist operation . He also says that the conflict in the region should be a war.
 The Russians are now delivering hundreds of pieces of weaponry, but we still continue to say that an anti-terrorist operation is ongoing . The Russian government is still delivering weapons, but it says it is still working against terrorists .
Ukrainian man says people in his city never wanted to detach from Ukraine . He openly stated that people in the area, in his town, never wanted, and do not want to detach .
 He suggested that if more resistance had been offered by Ukrainian forces initially during the Crimea take-over, then a similar situation may not have arose in Donbas .
 Kyiv has financially cut off the occupied territories in the East . He suggests cash could be transferred to individuals bank accounts electronically . People could still purchase provisions with debit cards in the still reasonably well stocked food outlets .
 He claims that Donbas citizens are fully entitled to pensions, having contributed to state schemes for years . He says Donbas residents are entitled to state pensions .
 He claims up to 50% of industrial capability is now destroyed . He claims many of the brightest and best amongst the population have left . He says the best and best in the world have left.
 There is a growing feeling of 'shadenfreude' among some Ukrainians who consider it may be better to ditch the troublesome Donbas for good . It is difficult not to have some sympathy with those that are left in Donbas, but I think that despite bold pronounce
 Six months ago many ran through squares in Donbas and Luhansk oblasts and plundered supermarkets, allegedly by Rinat Akhmetov's warehouses . In one article article, author Vasyl Rybnikov describes how many ran into squares and waved flags .
 Humanitarian aid from Putin has been stolen by those supposedly defending the people from 'genocidal nazi junta' The future looks grim indeed.
 Donbas which was considered to be carrying the whole of the Ukrainian economy on its back is now not even capable of feeding itself . Donbas was considered by locals to be carry the entire Ukrainian economy.
I blame them totally for all that is going on in Donbas and Luhansk in general . I blame them completely for all of the problems in the region .
 They provoked everything, wound up the people, and when they lost control over them they fled, leaving everyone to their fate . They left the people to their own fate .
 The DNR leadership have promised some social payments will be made to the needy on December 1 . But no-one is holding their breath on this .
 Okean Elzy was at the forefront of last winter's Euromaidan demonstrations in Kyiv . Elzy, who have been popular across the CIS for many years, has been popular with CIS countries .
 Their concerts have been fantastically well received all over Ukraine since then . They have been well received in Ukraine since they began .
 Akunin says he was very jealous of the audience of Ukrainians in London . Akunin, Russian-speaking, says they lustily sang Ukraine's nation anthem together with the band .
 This was honest, unashamed patriotism pride and joy of being a Ukrainian citizen, and even more so, taking place in London, and not in Kyiv . This was an honest,unashamed patriotic pride, and it was taking place.
 Akunin concludes he finally now 'gets it' what being a Ukrainian really is about . Akunin says he finally 'gets' what he really isAbout .
 Putin and Yanukovych have unwittingly created great unstoppable national revival across that country . Putin, Yanukovych and Yanukovych created great national revival, says one observer .
 In the Russian Federation, the many differing lesser ethnic minorities experience discomfort, maybe a frisson of fear .
Russophone Ukrainians shout 'Slava Ukraini' just as sincerely as their Ukrainophone friends . They are proud of being Ukrainian .
 Akunin feels bitter that Russians are not the same as these liberated Ukrainians . Akunin says he is not happy with the situation.
 President Petro Poroshenko has compared the Holodomor of 1932-33 with the current war in eastern Ukraine . The war is a continuation of imperial genocide against the Ukrainian people, he says .
 President Poroshenko's decree withdrawing state services and aid to separatist-controlled territories at a time of extreme hardship for residents living there has caused much discussion .
 Many consider it to be a callous and inhumane act in Holodomor . The spectre of the country still hangs heavy in the country .
 The occupiers are responsible for the administration all aspects of life there. As such, the occupiers have been responsible for everything there .
 Putin claimed yesterday that Russia continued to pay welfare payments in Chechnya even during the wars that took place in that region .
 Chechnya was not invaded by any foreign power so responsibility for order, and welfare, remained with the Russian Federation . Such comparison is false, but it is not true .
In larger inhabited centres, some relief is being provided by charitable organisations . Rinat Akhmetov's personal relief fund is helping to provide relief in Donbas .
 In Donetsk itself, life is becoming more bearable in August/September, according to some accounts . Some accounts say that in August and September, life in the Donetsk area is becoming bearable .
 Those that can travel from occupied territories to Ukraine-proper can register there for social assistance . But for the immobile and infirm this is impossible for those that can't travel .
 Ukraine is willing to provide any humanitarian aid required to these regions, but this cannot be in the form of cash . Deputy head of president Poroshenko's Administration, Valeriy Chaliy, has stated that Ukraine will provide any aid required .
There is evidence that such money has been 'skimmed off' by separatists into Russian bank accounts . There is evidence such money is being 'skimming off'
 The worsening situation and Poroshenko's decree has prompted savers to hit bank ATM machines hard in Donetsk .
 Some consider it a gamble and will cause residents of separatist-controlled regions to hate the Kyiv authorities even more . Some consider this is a gamble.
 As humanitarian conditions deteriorate further these residents have no-one else to turn to but to the DNR and LNR thugs who control every aspect of their lives .
 There are signs this is already happening. They will be the ones who will inevitably feel that ire of desperate residents, and there are signs they are already happening .
 During the first half of the day citizens began spontaneously organized a meeting in Sverdlovsk. November 17 .
 The gates of the military recruiting office where militants are billeted had blue and yellow paint poured on them .
 The militants are trying to quell the unrest, witnesses reported hearing gunfire . The militants have been fighting the government for months .
Despite the presence of armed militants more people arrived in the square in front of the executive committee building . But despite the presence, more people arrive in the area .
 Luhansk and Donetsk oblast residents react to their dire circumstances in the weeks and months to come will be a significant factor in this Russo-Ukrainian hybrid war . The conflict is expected to be a major factor in the coming months of the conflict .
 Putin always has the option of invading under the pretext of alleviating a humanitarian disaster that DNR and LNR will have been, to a large degree, responsible for, Putin says .
 Independent journalists confirm large quantities of heavy military hardware have entered, and have been brazenly moving around separatist controlled areas of Eastern Ukraine .
 New round of escalation in Donbas region is merely an attempt to repeat the events of last August . Russia also hugely ramped up military presence to force Kyiv to negotiate with militant separatists .
 A ceasefire agreement was signed in Minsk on September 5 . Ukrainian forces' heavy losses in Ilovaisk, Novoazovsk, and the shelling of Mariupol were also part of the agreement .
 Neither the separatists nor Russia had any intention to adhere to their side of the deal, and have not done so . But neither the separatists or Russia had an intention to comply with the deal .
 The current escalation is similar to these events at the end of August and beginning of September . The difference is the difference being the separatist signatories of the Minsk agreement .
 Ukrainian side has not recognised pseudo-elections held recently in occupied enclaves . If former president Kuchma or any other authorised person sits at the table with so-called ""DNR and LNR negotiators"" this would legalise their status .
 The Kremlin needs to show Russians, and the rest of outside world, that Kyiv agrees the conflict in eastern Ukraine is of a purely domestic nature . After the armed conflict one side is negotiating with the other on equal terms .
 DNR leader claims such a Minsk-2 meeting could take place in a couple of weeks . There has not been any hint of any such meeting being arranged by the Ukrainian side .
 Minsk-1 was seen by many as a humiliation and was the main reason Poroshenko's Bloc fared worse than expected in parliamentary elections .
 A freshly-elected parliament is due to start work at the start of December . Any cave-in by Poroshenko will result in major ructions in the new Verkhovna Rada .
 Any more military pressure from the separatist/Russian side will also reduce the likelihood of any Minsk 2 meeting .
 LEvko thinks Putin is deliberately and arrogantly sending unmarked heavy military equipment into eastern Ukraine in order to humiliate Ukraine and the Western community who desperately want a peaceful resolution to the conflict .
 The Kremlin may be settling in for a very long geopolitical struggle with the West, with plans to apply maximum pressure on Kiev and the West .
 The vote in Ukraine's separatist republics will not be recognized by the West .
 Moscow has given every indication that it will recognize them. From the point of view of the leaders of the self-proclaimed "DNR" and "LNR" This may be irrelevant, because Moscow has shown every indication it willrecognize them .
 In theory, this will allow Moscow to more publicly deal with the separatists as a government separate from Ukraine .
 Reports on the ground showed long lines of people and in interviews, many were less enchanted with separatist leaders than bitterly angry with Ukraine's leadership .
 The war in eastern Ukraine has taken a heavy toll . Many in Donetsk and Luhansk blame Ukraine for the conflict .
Reports that Russian military personnel and equipment are again entering Ukraine in large numbers may mean something altogether different . However, reports that Russian troops and equipment may be entering Ukraine may be different .
 Separatist leaders have said they plan to reclaim lost territories and also the important port city of Mariupol . Separatists say they will also reclaim the city of Marupol, a key port city .
Russia appears to be testing the West again. It is not just about land -areas currently in Ukrainian control . It has resources that may be necessary to maintain viable services.
 The vote today was a clear violation of the Minsk agreement, signed by Russia . It stipulated that early elections in separatist-controlled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk would have to take place under Ukrainian law .
 Mariupol will be under serious threat of attack. Unless there is a very firm and concerted response from EU leaders who have been ignored yet again .
 At hustings it was predominantly the middle-aged and elderly who were in attendance . At husting it was mainly the middle age and elderly .
 A huge number of young people have left Donbas, probably for ever, says John Sutter . Sutter: "My guess is a huge number"