 Two of the candidates in the highly contested Presidential elections in Ukraine next year presented their ideas for the future at the annual YES conference .
 Yulia Tymoshenko and Anatoliy Hrytsenko face major obstacles in presenting themselves as credible presidential candidates to Ukrainian voters and western experts .
 Hrytsenko hung around the outside coffee area, but few came up to talk to him . It was noticeable afterwards that he didn't talk to anyone .
 Both candidates are campaigning for a third time for the presidency . Both candidates cannot therefore present themselves as new faces in Ukrainian politics .
 Tymoshenko has been a public political figure since 1996 . This is especially the case for theoshenko .
 She spread the misconception that it had provided security guarantees when in fact these were security assurances . She continued to spread the misconceptions .
 Tymoshenko quoted the well-known book Why Nations Fail by Daron Acemoglu and James A Robinson . But it was clear she had not read it when she said that the authors stress the importance of “efficient and good ruling authorities,’s not the main argument
 Tymoshenko was asked about her high negative ratings she gave the odd reply that no candidate or party ever had 100% support .
 Both candidates had little to say about corruption and rule of law . Both candidates, Tymoshenko in particular, had no say on corruption and law .
 Neither of them mentioned reforms they had supported in the last four years, giving the impression that the reforms have not brought about any benefit .
 Both candidates were very critical, but neither of them used the opportunity offered by the conference to present concrete policy alternatives .
 The Crimea and occupied Donbas have been in Crimea for more than a decade . They are demanding the return of the Crimea and occupy Donbas .
 They claimed to have plans to accomplish this and achieve peace on Ukrainian terms . They did not elaborate what those plans might be .
 No Ukrainian presidential candidate can bring peace to Donbas – only Russian President Vladimir Putin can end the occupation and war . No Ukrainian president can end war and occupation .
 He was referring to the public perception that she is willing to make concessions to Russian demands . He said that she was willing to give concessions to Russia .
 Tymoshenko, like all populists, cannot admit she did anything wrong and called this fake news and pre-election fakes, a favourite tactic of President Donald Trump .
 Ukraine stopped importing Russian gas in 2014-2016 . Ukraine paid the highest price for gas in Europe until 2014- 2016 .
 In a poll this month, Ukrainian voters were asked who Russia would like to see as the next Ukrainian president . Yuriy Boyko, 37. per cent responded Vadym Rabinovych and 28 per cent indicated Tymoshenko .
 Tymoshenko rebutted by claiming that her imprisonment in 2011-2014 was proof she was not pro-Russian . This was alluded to by Sackur .
 Russia and Donetsk clan had eliminated their own pro-Russian people to gain or maintain power . But Russia and the Donetsk clan were eliminated by the Donetsk family .
 Vox Ukraine reports that Tymoshenko has led their ranking as the biggest liar in Ukrainian politics since it was created in Autumn 2017 . Vox Ukraine says that Tyloshenko has lead their ranking of the largest liar in Ukraine .
 In that year the level of truth in her statements was a remarkable nine per cent . In the last year, it rose to a still tiny 20 per cent in the year .
 Over 80 per cent of Tymoshenko’s statements are critical and she often uses statistics which are manipulated so that they do not say what was intended .
 Tymoshenko’s speech was criticized inside the hall and outside during coffee breaks and lunch .
 The question was a response to Tymoshenko’s claim that she favours a path of reforms . She said her ‘new economic course’ was only possible if the system was reformed .
 There is a major contradiction in Batkivshchyna proclaiming a new course of reforms, while criticising Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Petro Poroshenko .
 Tymoshenko launched a ferocious counter-attack against Sackur on Facebook which will likely be counter-productive .
 The influential think tank Vox Ukraine ranks Batkivshchyna as the worst performing of five pro-western factions in their support for reforms . Tymoshenko cannot remove or whitewash the fact that the influential Think tank VoxUkraine ranks BatKivshChyna as a worst
Batkivshchyna criticises President Petro Poroshenko when his faction is ranked by Vox Ukraine in second place for its support for reforms . BatkivShchyna in fifth place. Vox Ukraine ranked second for support for reform and Batkvshhyna in fourth place
 Batkivshchyna does not vote for the reforms required under the Association Agreement with the European Union . The second is that Tymoshenko’s billboards claim to support EU membership .
 Hrytsenko was unwise not to make his speech in Ukrainian, as his English is heavily accented .
 His delivery was “staid’ and “very technical with no charisma’s, according to the Kyiv Post . The delivery was "staid" and ‘very technical’ with “no charisma”
 Hrytsenko did not speak about national security, which is odd for a former defence minister and supposed expert .
 Sackur asked Hrytsenko if his lack of discussion about national security was because of his poor record as minister of defence . Sackur said he had a poor record of being a minister of defense .
 Hrytsenko replied that he was “proud of this record’ and dismissed criticisms as fake news . He said he is ‘proud’ of the record.
 In 2014, Poroshenko offered Hrytsenko the posts of defence minister and secretary of the national security and defence council . He turned down both posts .
 Hrytsenko has never travelled to the Donbas front lines . Like Tymoshenko, Hrytenko has not travelled to Donbas .
 Hrytsenko offered no clarity when he replied that there was no contradiction between the two . He said he was not sure if there was a contradiction between them .
 Viktor Baloga was appointed as the head of Hrytsenko's election campaign . Baloga's appointment showed his desperation in finding organisational support . The appointment of Baloga shows his desperation to find organisation support .
 Baloga's appointment would sharpen Hrytsenko's differences with Tymoshenko . Baloga ran the anti-Tymoshenko campaign when he was Viktor Yushchenko’s chief of staff .
 Sackur asked Hrytsenko if he admired authoritarians, to which he replied that Margaret Thatcher and De Gaulle had left their countries in good shape .
 Sackur did not ask Hrytsenko why he also praised Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet in a recent interview . It is a pity Sackur didn't ask why he praised Pinochet .
 Tymoshenko attacks the IMF, her party has the worst record of the five “pro-European” factions in voting for reforms . She leads the attacks on pension, health and land reforms .
 Hrytsenko’s support for a presidential system would return Ukraine to the Leonid Kuchma and Viktor Yanukovych eras . The former president's support for the presidential system is expected to return to the Kuchmma era .
 Of the 27 post-communist states, those with successful democracies are parliamentary systems . Those with presidential systems are autocracies and kleptocracies .
 A President Hrytsenko would be a recipe for political turmoil and instability as the parliamentary coalition, and hence the government, would be anti-presidential .
 Hrytsenko would then be tempted to rely on the SBU and military which are under presidential control . But would likely be thwarted by the government, which controls the interior ministry .
 Tymoshenko and Hrytsenko had a great opportunity to deliver professional speeches with clear cut criticisms and alternative policies that would have shown them to be European politicians .
Ukrainian politicians failed and instead showed themselves to be part of Ukraine's past, as populists with no policies, and potential threats to Ukraine’s democracy . They both failed to show themselves as part of the past, and were not pro-European .