James Clay Moltz Second Reader: Tristan James Mabry Approved for public release . James Clay Molz Second Readers: Tristan James MoltZ Second Reader .
 Following its invasion of Ukraine, Russia has executed an information campaign that could fundamentally change its role on the international scene . Russia's information campaign could fundamentally changed its role in the world .
 Vladimir Putin has orchestrated a narrative painting ethnic Russians throughout Moscow’s near-abroad as victims of the West . He claims he wants to dictate immoral social practices and policies of political domination against Slavic civilization .
 The thesis addresses whether Russia is winning the propaganda war, and if so, where it has managed to claim victories . Ultimately, this thesis addresses how Russia has won the war, if so .
 Putin's attempts to coopt populations in Russia’s near-abroad and in Europe have yielded varying degrees of success, but largely limited to former Soviet bloc republics .
 By analyzing six countries across two different regions, this thesis highlights the sources of Putin’s influence as well as areas of weakness .
 The report suggests policies for uniting and strengthening the fight against the Kremlin’s information war . It suggests education, tightening of access to Western media outlets, and counter-measures based on fact-checked narratives .
 Following its invasion of Ukraine, Russia has executed an information campaign that could fundamentally change its role on the international scene . The U.S. Department of National Security Affairs chair says Russia's information campaign could fundamentally changed its role.
 By analyzing six countries across two different regions, this thesis highlights the sources of Putin’s influence as well as areas of weakness .
 RUSSIA’s PROPAGANDA EFFECTIVENESS in the NEARABROAD . The UKRAINIAN CRISIS in BRIEF is 21 .
 Belarus and Russia’s Relations. Russia's Relations with Belarus are at a high level .
 Public Opinion in Belarus on Ukraine Crisis ......................... 25 3.25 3. 25.25.25 . 25 . 25.
 Policy Implications for Belarus. 27 4.27 4.28 4.26 .
 Kazakhstan and Russia’s Relations. Russia's relations between the two countries have been strained for years .
 Public Opinion in Kazakhstan on Ukraine Crisis. 31 6.31 6.
 Policy Implications for Kazakhstan. 34 7.3% of Kazakhstan's population are under-represented .
 Latvia and Russia’s Relations. Russia's Relations with Latvia are currently at a low level .
 Public Opinion in Latvia on Ukraine Crisis ..............................36 9.9.7.7 .
41. A FRANCE, GERMANy, and FINLAND are the top three countries in the world .
 Franco-Russian Relations. Relations between Russia and the U.S. have been strained for years .
 Public Opinion in France on Ukraine Crisis .........................45 3.3.5. 5.4.5 . 5.6.4 . 3.5%. 5.7.5% of France's opinion on the Ukraine crisis .
 Policy Implications for France are 4.4.48 .
German-Russian Relations. German-Russian relations are currently at 5.51 .
 Public Opinion in Germany on Ukraine Crisis is 6.55.55 .
 Policy Implications for Germany: Germany's economic growth in the past decade . Germany's economy is the world's biggest economy .
 Finno-Russian Relations ..............................................................61 8.61.61 8 .61.
 Public Opinion in Finland on Ukraine Crisis .........................64 9.9.8.8 . 8.9 .
 Clay Moltz, for his guidance, patience, and continued support throughout this challenging process. Clay is known for his advice, patience and support .
 Tristan Mabry taught his course on Media and War, which served as the inspiration for this thesis topic . He is known for his work on media and War .
 I would like to express my deepest appreciation for my family’s unwavering support and belief in me . I would also express his deepest appreciation.
 Putin relied heavily on the media to infiltrate and try to sway foreign opinion in defense of his transgressions . In an attempt to justify his actions to external audiences, Putin used the media as a way to sway his views .
 Whether or not the rest of the world bought into the party line has yet to be answered .
 The research will evaluate six case studies ranging from former Soviet states in the so-called near-abroad to critical partners in Europe .
 The thesis will set out to test the effectiveness of Putin’s propaganda campaign . It will seek to determine its long-term sustainability in various groups of countries critical to Russia's resurgence .
 Putin's propaganda campaign has been studied and researched extensively, generally examining its impact on European and Western countries . Putin’s propaganda campaign was studied and studied extensively .
 Russia’s influence may extend to countries in Russia's near-abroad and Europe . The scope of research can start to surmise just how far-reaching the tentacles of Russia may extend .
 It might also be interesting to gain a different perspective on the matter . It may also beinteresting to gain an alternative perspective on how to speak to those that may not be heard .
 The answer to the question of whether Putin is winning the propaganda war can provide a more comprehensive and thorough response . By exploring these linguistically, culturally, and ethnically diverse regions, the answer can be more comprehensive .
 By understanding the tools and methods Putin uses in his information campaign, the international community would gain insight into Russia’s duplicitous techniques .
 A former KGB officer, Putin has been well-trained in the 1 art of nefarious operations . He has been known for his work as a KGB officer .
 As the master strategist, he is the man pulling all the strings, manipulating and spreading false news . He is also a man pulling the strings and manipulating, manipulating, spreading false information .
 investigating various geographic locations can help determine whether some of the regime’s tactics are more effective in a specific region .
 countries that are more likely to be targeted by Putin’s propaganda can take a proactive stance in countering such measures .
 Putin’s use of soft power can pose a serious risk to nation-states falling prey to non-conventional warfare, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Putin's use ofsoft power can threaten to destabilize their economy or undermine their political elite .
 states can work collaboratively to enforce rules where offenses are addressed and the transgressors are punished . By concentrating efforts on combating Russian propaganda.
 Putin's level of influence abroad is evaluated by CNN's investigation . The regime is struggling to re-establish its role as superpower, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Leaders who rely on the mass media for instrumental purposes are a cause for concern, says LITERATURE .
 Putin is a prime example of a politician abusing his power in office, says CNN's John Sutter . He says Putin is manipulating a branch held to be an extension of government itself .
 Putin's unscrupulousness is a threat to the U.S. and other democracies, he says . He says he must first establish the parameters of propaganda under which this thesis will operate .
 I will attempt to define the term and provide a discourse for how to spot it . Here, I will try to define it and provide discourse for what it means .
 I will simultaneously draw parallels based on this definition of propaganda to Putin’s use of it . I will also draw parallels to Putin's use of propaganda .
 Russia's version of hybrid warfare is a hybrid warfare, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter will examine the effectiveness of Putin's policies to execute those measures . Then, he will explore how propaganda relates to Russia’s version of hybrids .
 There are a number of variations categorizing propaganda and propaganda . There are many different types of propaganda .
 2 sociological propaganda, propaganda of agitation and propaganda of integration, vertical and horizontal propaganda, and rational and irrational propaganda . Garth S Jowett and Victoria O’Donnell.
 I will not be addressing any specific category in my thesis for it is outside the scope of my research . I will be addressing no one specific category of research .
 The list of definitions for propaganda is exhaustive, but I will be focusing on propaganda in its most traditional sense .
 Readings in Propaganda and Persuasion: New and Classic Essays, ed. Critical Foundations .
 There is also a clear distinction made as to what propaganda is not, a few slogans, a random radio broadcast, or a single group chat .
True propaganda must be continuous and lasting over a protracted period of time. Conversely, true propaganda must not be continuous .
 The individual will be bombarded with daily reminders of the propaganda’s message through news feeds and articles .
 The continuous onslaught of propaganda and its repetition guarantees that the individual is both convinced and compliant, ultimately rendering him incapable of resistance . The continuous barrage of propaganda guarantees that he is both convincing and compliant .
 I will reference Ellul’s explanation as the baseline for what constitutes propaganda . Ellul's explanation will be used as a baseline for propaganda .
 Ellul asserts that propaganda submits to science by using methods, tried and tested, to render the propagandee incapable of using his own judgement . Through his definition, Ellul says that propagandaSubmits toscience by using techniques, trying and tested .
 It is, hence, “a modern technique that utilizes elements of psychology and sociology. It is also a modern technique. It uses elements of Psychology and sociology, as well as psychology .
 Ellul offers an example of Pavlov's theory of the conditioned reflex to highlight the fact that Stalin’s use of propaganda was rooted in this philosophy . Ellul: Stalin's uses of propaganda were rooted in the philosophy .
 It would not be hard to imagine someone like Putin, a former KGB officer, being well-versed in or at least familiar with such tactics .
 It touches an individual by identifying what he has in common with others through shared passions, goals, beliefs, and so on . In other words, it touches a person by identifying his shared passions and goals .
 The power of propaganda lies in its ability to empower an audience by connecting with every individual in that group . The power is in the ability to connect with each individual in a group.
 modern propaganda works well when it can exploit the assembly of a group while simultaneously taking advantage of the individual’s need for self-assertion within that group .
Mass media has been able to reach both the crowd and the individual within that crowd . This process has arguably been one of the greatest achievements for the disbursement of mass media .
 Through the spread of television, radio, social media, and the Internet, individuals across the world are moved by similar causes, respond to related stimuli, experience the same emotions, and endorse the same narratives .
 Putin has managed to capitalize on these elements, using mass media to achieve specific political objectives . Putin has used mass media as a political tool to achieve his objectives .
 Putin's propaganda is a reaction to his perception that the Western-dominated media and Internet are presenting anti-Russian narratives that need to be actively combatted .
 Another element critical to propaganda is its need to either rewrite history entirely or present a revisionist view of history . Another elementcritical to propaganda.
 Putin claims to be supporting the interests of all Russophones, hence his intervention in Ukraine .
 Iranian and Russian Versions of ‘Little Green Men,’ in NATO’s Responses to Hybrid Threats, ed.
In order for propaganda to be successful it must espouse unanimity, eradicating any external voice, or marginalizing opposing groups to prevent them from gaining support .
 propaganda must function as an administrative organization, whereby it exerts physical influence on the individual . This brings me to his next point, he says .
In order for propaganda to be effectual, its operability is limited to the confines of a state. Within his context, in order to be Effectual, it's limited to a state's context .
 The Characteristics of Propaganda was written in the 1960s, long before the advent of the Internet . Ellul's prescribed restrictions on propaganda’s efficacy need to be caveated with the fact that it was written long before Internet .
 The challenge is to take his constraints and apply them to the Kremlin’s transmission of propaganda abroad . The challenge will be to determine the efficacy of Putin’'s campaign .
 Propaganda must be able to respond to some sort of need, whether it is material or psychological .
 Undecideds are especially susceptible to outside influences and usually conform to public behaviors . It is in the best interest of the propagandist to rein them in, bringing them under control, and forcing them to act .
 propaganda is effective when it can appeal to the collective interests of a crowd . With this in mind, propaganda iseffective when it is effective .
 It has the uncanny ability to integrate, striking at the core of an individual’s need to feel included . It has been described as ‘unusual’
 An overly active crowd will consist of individuals ready to adopt ideas and mobilize bodies . As a result of the propaganda they are fed, they will be mobilized .
 The Undecided could be particularly important to the public opinion surveys conducted in the various countries . It could easily fall prey to Putin’s propaganda machine .
 Ellul argues that public opinion alone is an ineffectual way to gauge propaganda . Ellul also argues that the public opinion is a way of gauging propaganda .
 propaganda is only concerned with action, mobilizing individuals to act is paramount. The reason is that simply asking an individual what he thinks has no bearing on how he will act or behave is paramount .
 Public opinion leaves the individual a passive observer, who may or may not choose to participate in a future action . Public opinion, therefore, leaves the person a passive spectator, who might not participate in future action.
 To combat an individual from becoming a mere spectator, the author says . To combat a person from being a spectator, he says .
 If propaganda relies on current news, then timeliness is of the utmost importance, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Allowing time for individual reflection would be a mistake for the propagandist, says the author .
 Those deemed "current-events men" are especially at risk of falling victim to propaganda . Those deemed “current- events men’s” are especially vulnerable to propaganda.
 They have a hard time separating fact from fiction and are less concerned with receiving accurate information . Because they are fully engrossed in the day-to-day occurrences, they have a harder time separating reality from fiction .
 According to Ellul, it is a psychological weakness that puts these men and women in jeopardy . Ellul says it is the psychological weakness of men and woman .
 Putin has done a very good job of capitalizing on the vulnerabilities of such individuals, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Using TV broadcasts such as Russia Today, he targets people immersed in current affairs . The strategy is aimed at those relying on a single source for information .
 The rise of communications media in the form of advertising and public relations was a well-documented success, especially during World War I and II . Such tools were deemed essential to winning the wars .
 Even today, its methods are used by those in the most powerful positions . The methods are still being used today, even today .
 Many parallels can be drawn between the Soviet regime's use of propaganda and Putin's tactful manipulations . There are many parallels, in fact, with Putin's tactics .
 Lenin relied heavily on propaganda to redirect his power away from the tsars . During the Bolshevik Revolution, Lenin relied on propaganda.
 His use of symbols, icons, and posters to spread his message were very effective in indoctrinating and persuading the masses and even many intellectuals . He was also successful in persuading many intellectuals both at home and abroad .
 Lenin’s successors used propaganda to wage an ideological war against capitalism in the name of a worldwide class uprising and more prosaic strategies for domestic governance .
 Putin has managed to bolster his standings by supplying his audience with a scapegoat . The West and the U.S. are responsible for the social and economic turmoil plaguing his country .
 The U.S. and EU implemented economic sanctions in response to Putin’s annexation of Crimea . Putin used the restrictions as an opportunity to further his narrative .
 Putin shifts blame onto Western counterparts for any economic slump his country sustained . Some economists argue Russia was already heading towards a recession even before the situation in Ukraine .
 His centralized control of the media ensures he is the one dictating the message’s content, relying on propaganda to help shape the narrative . He is one of the most powerful media figures in the world .
 Radio and print media for Lenin was what the news media and Internet are to Putin . The Russian leader was known for his use of the Internet and radio .
 Some would argue that advertising and public relations, though relatively benign examples with generally positive associations, are still effective methods of influencing the public, and can, therefore, be classified as propaganda .
 Putin's regime is used in the negative sense. However, when referencing Putin’s regime, I strictly focus on its use in a negative sense .
 In authoritarian regimes, for example, propaganda can produce indirect incitement . In authoritarian countries, propaganda is often used to create an atmosphere .
 Putin’s dependence on non-conventional or “hybrid warfare during the 2014, 48 Ibid., 117.9 .
 hybrid warfare is a term generally used by U.S. and European military analysts, as opposed to Russia’s arguably more ambiguous terminology “non-linear’ war.”
 The semantics of terminology is often used to refer to different end states . Both parties intend to achieve similar end states, says the author .
 Any references made to “hybrid warfare, “non-linear” warfare, or non-conventional warfare are meant to address the same concept and will be used interchangeably .
 Russian Chief of Staff Valery Gerasimov drafted the prerequisites for engaging in “non-linear warfare’s” warfare designed to achieve political victory . In January 2013, Gerasimov, the Russian chief of Staff, drafted a pre-
 The annexation of Crimea is critical to Putin’s justification for the annexation of the Crimea . The annexation is also critical to the Russian government's justification for its annexation .
 Diego Ruiz Palmer designates Putin's active support of pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine’s Donbass region and his illegal annexation of Crimea as hybrid warfare .
 hybrid war closes the gap between the conventional elements of hard power and the absence of force through the use of soft power . The asymmetric style of war so often exercised by the Russian regime.
Minimal risk and marginal losses for increased reward are factors Putin will readily accept . Minimal risk, marginal losses are factors that Putin will accept .
 Russia’s Hybrid Warfare, Revolutions in Military Affairs, and Cold War Comparisons, are among NATO's Responses to Hybrid Threats, ed.com .
 Putin relies on an old Bolshevik tool known as “Agit Prop,” an abbreviation for “agitation and propaganda,’s designed to influence and mobilize a specific audience .
 Russia published yet another version of its military doctrine in December 2014 . Another example of Putin’s recycled ideas came on December 26, 2014 .
 The "nefarious nature of the West" has been promulgated over numerous Russian communication networks and platforms, including Russian military code . It's unusual for the West to incorporate it into military code.
 Russia's role in neighboring crises and the emergence of internal social unrest is the result of the West's attempts to undermine Moscow’s political standing . The doctrine provides the kind of overt propaganda Putin has continuously employed .
 Putin’s use of military doctrine to spell out strategies for countering subversive information and communication technologies appears to be a manifestation of the exact same tactics he used in Ukraine .
 Russia has very successfully used hybrid elements of war in Crimea and eastern Ukraine to bring to heel those sovereign states it still considers part of its sphere of influence. Polina Sinovets and Bettina Renz conclude that Russia has used hybrid element of war.
 Russia’s Hybrid Warfare, Revolutions in Military Affairs, and Cold War Comparisons,’ 64, is the author of Russia's Hybrid Warfare .
 NATO’s Responses to Hybrid Threats, ed.com: Threat Perceptions, Capabilities and Ambitions .
 Putin has grown quite fond of information warfare, utilizing cyber, media, and ‘shock pictures’ as a means of brainwashing his own population . Putin has also used cyber and media to brainwash his population, attracting sympathizers abroad .
 He has invested over $1. billion annually in the country’s disinformation campaign both at home and abroad .
 Russia spends as much as $136 million per year on campaigns reaching its viewers abroad . Some estimates have shown that Russia spends up to $136million a year on its campaigns .
 Putin has total control over the media, having total control of the media provides the domestic support for Putin’s political agenda . Putin's political agenda is supported by the media.
 As of July 2014, Putin had garnered an 83% approval rating from the Russian population, a 19% increase since December 2013 .
 He launched a full-fledged information campaign even before there were boots on ground . He launched the 68-year-old's campaign before boots were on the ground .
 He needed RT, social media, and internet to act as vehicles softening the true intent of his rhetoric, he said . He said he needed RT and social media to act.
 The Euromaidan protestors were called “fascists,’ by Ukrainians . The first component entailed rhetoric resembling WWII, which called the protestors “Fascists’s,” thereby reawakening some public sentiments that Ukrainians aided the Nazis .
 Only after the battle for Donetsk Airport, which occurred on May 26, did Putin’s narrative shift .
 There was no other way to account for Russia’s sustained paratrooper casualties except to once again falsify information .
 Soldiers were fighting for freedom in Ukraine while on vacation without their supervisor's or commander's knowledge . Now, these soldiers were “volunteers’s” fighting for free in Ukraine .
 Even Russian family members who lost their children in the conflict were forced to abide by the “vacation’s narrative, according to a Russian Facebook group, “Gruz 200,” responsible for tracking casualties .
 Popular leaders like Aleksander Zakharchenko, prime minister of the Donetsk People's Republic, further reinforced the Kremlin's narrative .
 NATO’s Responses to Hybrid Threats, ed. Waging War below the Radar of Traditional Collective Defence,’.
 The media continuously ran unverified stories of Russians providing aid, pledges of escape routes for innocent civilians being entrapped by Ukrainian forces .
 Putin attempted to further his agenda through his call for a Novorossiya . The Russian leader called for Russia's first ever Russian president to be in power .
 Imperial Russia once conquered from the Ottomans in the 18th century . He has often alluded to this concept as a means for uniting those linguistically and ethnically Russian .
 Geographically, the regions of “Donetsk, Luhansk, Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhia, Odessa, Mykolaiv, Kharkiv and Kherson’s regions would provide a direct link to Crimea .
 NATO's Responses to Hybrid Threats, ed. The Case of Estonia,” in NATO’s Response to Hybrid threats, is published in the NATO's Response to hybrid Threats .
 Waging War below the Radar of Traditional Collective Defence,’s 126. 14 effectively truncates nearly a third of Ukraine’'s territory through the simple use of his words .
 Putin has also managed to validate his actions through the use of “democratic institutions’s” institutions . Putin has managed tovalidate his actions by using ‘democratic institutions'
 In so doing, he underlines supposed U.S. and European hypocrisies .
 This use of legalistic propaganda, as Hall Gardner calls it, was evident in the legal justification Putin gave for annexing Crimea .
 Not all of Russia's internal players view Putin's actions in Ukraine favorably, not all of them say .
Non-state owned stations, like TV Dozhd, were relegated to internet-access only . However, non-stateowned stations, such as DozhD, were also relegated to Internet-access .
Kennan Institute Director Matthew Rojansky argues Putin's media campaign has been ineffective . Other critics argue that Putin’s media campaign is ineffective .
 Russia is painted as the great defender of its people from foreign encroachments and the liberator of Europe during the Great War . He claims Putin’s political survival depends on a resurgence of state nationalism .
 Rojansky presumes that the content of Putin’s narrative is so far-fetched that it's so farfetched . He says the conspiracy theories that the CIA backed the Euromaidan protests or that Ukrainian nationalism is threatening to ethnic Russians.
 Still others, like analyst Adam Garfinkle, contend that the influence of 89 percent of the world's population can be seen .
 NATO’s Responses to Hybrid Threats, ed. NATO, Russia and the Crisis in Ukraine, are among the top three NATO nations .
 He argues that the majority of the Kremlin's vested interests lie in its near-abroad .
 The connections to these regions are rooted in shared history, culture, and energy-based geopolitics . The Kremlin has far more leverage in influencing these particular countries than elsewhere .
 NATO and the Russian sphere of influence. These factors have essentially re-created another frozen conflict, drawing a hard line between NATO and Russia .
 Conflicts, such as those in Ukraine, are designed to keep Moscow's European neighbors at bay . But in actuality, they are of little consequence to Russia itself .
 Russia once claimed that Moscow is still a credible threat to former Soviet republics and Warsaw Pact members . Putin's aggressive actions lie the need to keep his Western enemies out in the periphery of those lands .
 Putin directed the media to influence the general public both at home and abroad in justification of his actions . The circumstances surrounding and immediately after the conflict meant Putin directed his actions to the media .
 His invasion of Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea set off a chain reaction of varied responses from the international community .
 Russia and some of its counterparts supported the justness of the engagements . While primarily Western countries condemned Russia’s belligerency, some of their counterparts supported it .
 The more likely it is to be subjected to Putin’s dubious content and biased media. I hypothesize that the closer in proximity a state is to the Russian Federation or given its shared past .
I will specifically address my hypothesis as it applies to each of the six aforementioned countries . I will specifically focus on the six countries . The hypothesis is based on each country.
 Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Latvia are subjected to the Kremlin’s propaganda campaign .
 Putin's call for a Russian Federation whereby the integrity of ethnic Russian populations is upheld has been at the forefront of the state's undertakings . Putin’s call for the Russian Federation has been in the forefront.
The intimidation factor is all too familiar for countries formerly under Soviet rule . The intimidation factor has become too familiar.
 territories bordering Russia seem most likely to be targeted by Putin's statements .
 Belarus and Kazakhstan have remained loyal to their Soviet origins . While all three countries border Russia, I theorize that all three border Russia .
 Latvia has gravitated towards its NATO allies, growing increasingly fearful of Russia’s looming presence . Latvia, however, has gravitates towards its allies.
 In Europe, Germany, France, and Finland, have started to experience firsthand the impact Russia's propaganda campaign has had on each country's state of affairs .
 Germany and France took a rather hardline approach to Russia’s recent offensive actions against another sovereign state . The two countries are concerned that such aggression was cause for concern .
 Following Russia’s annexation of Crimea, the West imposed economic sanctions on Moscow .
 Putin still has a vested interest in ensuring European policies only span so far . Much of the Russian elite’s wealth is tied up in western banks .
 Putin has made an effort to align with various right-wing populist parties . Putin has remained open to exchange with the Kremlin .
 Finland has previously adopted a state of policy neutrality in dealing with Russia . Finland has been thrust into a critical position of uncertainty in the country .
 Russia has actively engaged with Russia on matters of economic development . It relies on a partnership of mutual growth and prosperity . Russia has also been engaged with the U.S.
 Finland is at times part of the Russian empire and suffering invasion during WWII, and a shared border along its eastern front with Russia . Finland has become susceptible to Putin’s information war .
 Analyzing the public opinion within former Soviet countries and European countries, the results will set out to reveal which states remain friendly and even sympathetic to Putin's Russia .
 I have chosen to focus on the post-invasion “legitimization’s attempts by Russia and foreign reactions in the aftermath of the Ukrainian crisis . I have been focusing on Russia's attempts to ‘legitimize’ the Ukraine crisis .
 The EU and the U.S. imposed on Moscow have had significant impacts, resulting in secondary and tertiary foreign policy changes within certain territories . The subsequent sanctions have had a significant impact on the Russian economy .
 The aim is to provide the reader with a wide variety of public opinion polls and reactions on Russia . By expanding the scope of the research to six countries contained within two particular regions, the intent is to give the reader a wide range of opinions .
 Russia’s aggressive behavior towards Ukraine has had on these nation-states and their respective populations. Ultimately, I am going to analyze the implications that Russia's aggressive behavior has had.
 A twopart case study will be conducted in which six countries will be evaluated . It will be critical to maintain structural congruency, says author .
 The goal is to establish an outline whereby the background/history, interstate relations, public opinion, and policy implications remain constant regardless of the country being analyzed . The goal of each nation-states is to create an outline for each of the nations .
 A framework that will be most beneficial in assessing the effectiveness of Russia’s media war. Based on this logic, I have a devised a framework for assessing the effects of Russia's media war .
 I will first provide a brief overview of the current conflict that has transpired . I will also give a brief glimpse of the aftermath of the conflict .
 Next, I will explore Russia’s propaganda campaign and how Putin has managed to consolidate the mass 18 media, successfully launching his information war .
 Each region will have a dedicated chapter, in which all three countries are surveyed . All three countries will be surveyed .
 Every country will have individual subheadings that examine its relationship with Russia, its public opinion on the Ukrainian conflict, and its policy implications .
 Such a plan will serve best to answer the question of whether Russia is winning its propaganda war following its 2014 invasion of Ukraine .
 In November 2013, Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych faced two options that would prevent his country from spiraling into an economic decline .
 He could either move closer toward cooperation with the EU, enhancing integration and promoting trade, or align closer to Russian President, Vladimir Putin .
 Yanukovych chose to take a $15 billion loan from Moscow, while simultaneously entertaining the prospect of joining the Russia-dominated Eurasian Union, alongside Belarus and Kazakhstan . Yanukovych chose the latter, deciding to take an $15billion loan.
 The perceived disregard for Ukraine’s best interests sparked anger and mass protests from the Ukrainian populace .
 Citizens felt betrayed by their government, many of whom wanted to move closer towards European integration . Many of whom felt betrayed.
 Thousands gathered on Kyiv’s Independence Square to air their grievances .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia and opposition coalition forces agreed to hold an election in May 2014 . Yanukovych later fled toRussia and opposition forces agreed.
 Crimea, which had previously enjoyed considerable autonomy under Ukraine, was officially ceded to Russia . Crimea was previously enjoying considerable autonomy in Ukraine .
 The EU and the U.S. denounced Russia’s annexation of Crimea as illegal, calling the referendum a sham . The EU issued sanctions against Russia and those administrators connected to Crimea .
 The EU’s bans targeted 33 high-ranking Russians and Ukrainians, while the United States focused on a number of politicians . Bank Rossiya housed the monetary assets of elite officials .
 Russia responded in kind, launching counter-sanctions on certain U.S. officials . Russia has been criticized by the United States for its actions in the past .
 The EU and the U.S. pledged $16 billion to help sustain Ukraine's failing economy during this period .
 The downing of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17, for example, sparked much controversy because it was shot down near the rebel controlled region of Grabove .
 By September, pro-Russian rebels and Ukrainian leaders agreed to a ceasefire, signing a truce in Minsk . The ceasefire was signed by Ukrainian and Russian leaders .
 In November, separatists held elections in Eastern Ukraine, which were criticized by the newly elected President .
 Minsk II agreement promised a complete ceasefire and long term plan for addressing future political concerns . The first attempt to achieve a lasting truce failed .
 Russia's overt actions in Ukraine have sparked much debate as to whether Russia's actions are part of Moscow's narrative for a greater Russian state or Novorossiya .
 Putin's call for uniting those linguistically and ethnically Russian potentially gives him the freedom to invade other sovereign states who were once under Russia's protectorate .
 His promotion of Russian irredentism puts former Soviet republics at risk. Undeniably, his promotion of Russia's irredENTism puts them at risk, he says .
 Putin’s claims cannot be easily dismissed given the annexation of Crimea and support of pro-Russian forces in eastern Ukraine .
 This chapter will examine how the general public views Russia following its aggressive behavior in Ukraine . This chapter includes Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Latvia, and Belarus .
Public opinion in Russia has changed since Russia’s invasion, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Russia's relations with each of these countries have changed since the invasion .
 The results of public opinion surveys have implications in how they begin to shape the future foreign policy of these individual states .
 Belarus's relations with Russia have long remained one of the closest dating back to the Soviet era . Belarus and Russia’s Relations Belarus have long been one of Russia's closest .
 The two countries share strategic, economic, and sociocultural ties that seem to foster more cooperation than on divisiveness .
 Lukashenko understands what could be at stake for his own country given recent events in Ukraine . While he might be a friend of Putin's, he also understands what may be at risk for his country .
 Belarus and Russia continue to work closely in the strategic military sense . Russia and Belarus work closely together in the military sense.
 Russia used Belarus to stage troops, conduct military exercises, and establish support facilities . Even when Belarus was part of the U.S.R., Russia used this neighboring territory to stage military exercises .
 Belarus was pegged as one of the main hubs in Europe for early-warning radar and maintained the capability to transmit long-range naval communications . Belarus is one of Europe's main hubs for radar .
Russia did not work particularly hard to ensure its military needs were met following the collapse of the Soviet Union . Russia did not do much to ensure military needs are met after the collapse .
 Belarus provides the physical infrastructure to house military supplies and guarantees Russia mutual cooperation should conflicts arise in exchange for lowered energy costs .
 Belarus relies on its rapport with Russia to solidify trade deals with the Kremlin . Lukashenko has pushed back on several occasions, such as when he refused to let Russia host its air base within Belarus .
 Belarusians prefer to converse in Russian over their own language . Many Belarusians still prefer toconverse in their own languages .
 Belarusians remain strongly connected to their Soviet past, especially the older generation for whom the time of old provided a sense of security, stability and predictability .
 Belarus's nationalistic pride could be exploited and manipulated to suit the Russian agenda . Belarus is a country with a poor reputation and a poor economy .
 Russia’s invasion of Ukraine served as a wake-up call to Lukashenko, raising concerns that Belarus could be a follow-on target . Nevertheless, Russia's invasion of the Ukraine served a wake up call to Belarus .
 The conflict in Ukraine may have generated some tension among Belarusians . It failed to bring about any significant changes to the state’s relations with Moscow .
 Since Belarus borders Ukraine, Russia’s invasion did spark visceral reactions among citizens who felt for Ukrainian brethren .
 Others made their opinions heard by chanting their praises of Russia’s actions . Others chanted their opinions of Russia's actions .
 In the country's capital of Minsk, some took to the streets shouting, ‘We support the recognition of Novorossiya’ Others vandalized cars with Russian license plates .
 A closer look at Russia’s actions in Ukraine from the point of view of Belarusians is in order . A closerLook at Russia's actions in the Ukraine from a closer look in order.
 A highly regarded think tank originally based out of Belarus, the Independent Institute of Socio-Economic and Political Studies or IISEPS, has conducted various research and polling within the region for the past twenty-five years .
 They have gained popularity for their unbiased and open methods to public opinion research . They are known for their open methods and unbiased methods .
 Answers to the poll conducted in September revealed that their opinions on these issues really had not changed much over the quarter .
 Nearly 50% of individuals said yes when asked whether they agree with labeling Ukraine's new government as “fascist’s new government.’
 The number increased between June and September . The number of people killed in the U.S. has increased slightly since June .
 Belarusians' willingness to brand Ukraine's new officials ‘fascists’ represents a tactic reflective of the Russian media . Belarusians are willing to brand Ukrainian officials “fascist’s” as ‘Fascists.’
 Moscow has evidently launched a very successful propaganda campaign in Belarus . With such rhetoric engrained into the minds of Belarusians, Moscow has apparently launched avery successful campaign .
 Belarus may yet be on the fence. Strongly held convictions justifying Russia’s actions aside, Belarus might yet be in the fence .
 While many are sympathetic to the Russian cause, it does not mean that they agree with every aspect of Russia’s invasion .
Nearly 54% strongly opposed Russia sending in troops to assist armed protestors in the Donbass region . For example, nearly 54% of Russians oppose Russia sending troops to help armed protestors .
 Belarusians are not personally willing to fight for the cause in Ukraine . Belarusians do not personally want to fight in Ukraine.
An overwhelming 76.9% felt negatively about the idea of Belarusians taking up arms in the east of Ukraine .
 The need for self-preservation turns out to be a stronger factor than ideology . The need to be self-Preservation is stronger than ideology.
 Belarus's domestic affairs in relation to its economy have superseded concerns over Ukraine . It seems as though Belarus’s domestic affairs has superseded Ukraine concerns .
 The bottom line is that most Belarusians are driven by economic factors when evaluating certain aspects of the Ukrainian conflict . Most Belarusians believe that economic factors are the reason for the conflict .
 Belarus will continue its partnership with Russia . Nearly 75% of Belarus’s investment comes from Russia, and its economies are closely integrated .
 51.5% of Belarusians said it did not change their opinion of Russia . 24.3% said it became worse, and 21.9% say it became better . Contrasting these percentages with those on the EU revealed astonishing results .
 42.4% of Belarusians said their attitude towards the EU did not change . Only 5.6% said it became better following events in Ukraine . 47% confessed it became worse after the events .
 After events in Ukraine unfolded, the percentage of those both for and against Russia were nearly equal . The percentage of the two sides were almost equal .
Nearly eight times as many Belarusians looked negatively upon the EU than those who favored it in the aftermath of the crisis . Nearly eight times more Belarusians favored the EU after the crisis than the aftermath .
 Belarus is still very much aligned with its Russian counterpart . As the results demonstrate, Belarus is very much aligning with Russia .
 Russia’s invasion of Ukraine had a significant psychological impact on the leaders of Belarus, specifically President Lukashenko .
 Lukashenko wanted to remain supportive of his eastern ally, despite Russia's aggressive actions . He felt the need to distance relations with President Putin .
 Belarus sought improved relations with the West. Reeling from the immediate effects of the sanctions imposed by the EU and U.S. on Russia, Belarus sought improvement .
9 Lukashenko’s softening of restrictions curried him just enough favor with the West, whereby he could more readily play both sides off each other .8 Recognizing that political changes contributed to the instability in Ukraine, however, he remained sole executor of all areas concerning
 Belarus is currently in a prime position both politically and economically . As a result, Belarus is in a political and economically prime position .
 Russia, Ukraine, Germany, and France have hosted a number of negotiations with members from the Minsk Agreement . France, Russia and Ukraine have also hosted talks with members of Russia, Germany and France .
 Belarus has softened its stance on the West, thereby creating a more balanced foreign policy . Working with Western leaders, Belarus has worked with the West.
 Belarus’s status as middleman, as part of the Ukrainian crisis, has in effect benefited and boosted its economy . Belarus's status as a middleman has helped its economy and its economy.
 The conflict in Ukraine has forced Belarus to take a necessary step back and assess the situation . In any regard, the conflict has caused Belarus to step back .
 Belarusians have spoken and while a majority still favor ties with Russia, the growing force of the minority cannot be ignored . Belarusians are in the majority of Belarusians, but the majority still support Russia .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine have affected matters at home. Perhaps an even greater concern is the extent to which Russia's actions have affected Matters at home .
 The charade of unity will most likely persist until Belarus’s economic pockets become empty .
 Kazakhstan has long been regarded as one of Russia's most supportive partners . Kazakhstan and Russia’s Relations Kazakhstan have long been considered one of the most supportive partner .
For the most part, Russia’s invasion into Ukrainian territory did not do much to change Kazakhstan's perceptions of its bordering neighbor . For the most parts, Russia's invasion into Ukraine did not change the country's perceptions .
39% of Russians identified Kazakhstan as their state's closest ally . In fact, 39% responded Kazakhstan .
 Kazakhstan has a large percentage of its own citizens in the country . The country's relationship with Kazakhstan seems to align nicely with the reciprocated narrative .
 Kazakhstan and Russia have a history of mutual relations, also dating back to the Soviet period . Kazakhstan, Russia have been in contact for decades .
 In 1991, both countries became signatories of the declaration forming the Commonwealth of Independent States . The declaration came shortly after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Recognizing the independence and sovereignty of each formerly Soviet country paved the way for enhanced economic and political interactions . Recognizing each country's sovereignty and sovereignty led to enhanced economic, political and political interaction .
 Kazakhstan's President Nazarbayev and Russia's President Putin share close ties . Some might argue that theirs is a marriage of necessity .
 Kazakhstan's Nazarbayev wanted more influence over migration policies . The reluctance to join came from Kazakhstan’s Nazar Bayev, who specifically wanted more control over migration .
 Russia may be willing to sacrifice its economic prosperity for the sake of its geopolitical cause . Others within the EAEU may not be so ready to oblige .
 The impact of Russia's dwindling economy has already been felt in Central Asia, says Robert Manning .
 Central Asia has been particularly hard hit because they supply a majority of Russia’s labor force and may now experience a difficult time feeding their families .
 Putin has blamed the Ukraine crisis on the inability of its government to properly manage the country’s economic development . Critics believe its allies will begin to look westward .
 Kazakhstan has publicly recognized the referendum on Crimea, thereby legitimizing Russia’s forceful annexation of the territory . Kazakhstan has also publicly recognized Crimea's referendum .
 The Quarterly Journal XIV, no. 17. A View from Central Asia,” Connections: The quarterly Journal XIV,. No. 17 .
 Many Kazakhstan's citizens still prefer to speak Russian . Moscow has found its in via mass media .
 Public Opinion in Kazakhstan on Ukraine Crisis Writer Valeriya Melnichuk travelled to Kazakhstan three times over the course of 2014 . MelnICHuk travelled three times to see public discussions, reading and reading .
 Her insight and first-hand experience is invaluable in contributing to the overall analysis of the general public’s views on Russia and the Ukraine crisis .
 Melnichuk's conclusions would suggest that Nazarbayev's and Putin’s relationship is secure, at least for the time being .
 Our fathers and grandfathers (Russian, Ukrainian, Kazakh, in other words, Soviet) fought against fascists .
 The information they are being fed is so biased and openly pro-Russian that it is no wonder they share publicly held views that are in line with Russia's propagandist speak .
 Study found that Kazakhs who received their information via news channels on television reacted positively to Russia’s annexation of Crimea .
 Kazakhstan's populace has effectively been indoctrinated, and their views are a direct representation of Moscow’s anti-Western stance . Kazakhstan's population has been effectively indoctrinated.
 Interviewee Erlan Karin claims Kazakhstan's public opinion on Russia's actions in Ukraine and Crimea was a bag of mixed reactions .
 One part of the country sympathized with Russia and understood its reasoning for taking decisive military action . Another part understood the reasoning for the military action.
Young people vehemently deplored Moscow and praised participants of the Euromaidan . Another part of the country, those actively engaged in social networks and mainly young people, vehemently condemned Moscow .
 Most people stayed neutral on the matter, neither endorsing nor rejecting Russia’s actions . The majority of people who stayed neutral were not endorsing or rejecting Russia.
 Karin, a Kazakh by birth, personally felt that events in Ukraine dismantled the legal and collective security institutions . The institutions were originally designed to protect former Soviet bloc countries .
 The whole premise of the CIS has now been undermined . Kazakhstan’s youth is the main reason why the CIS is in trouble .
 A survey specifically targeting the younger population of Kazakhstan was conducted to gauge their political values and identification to the Russian Federation .
35.8% of respondents could be described as possessing right-wing views, upholding liberal ideas and relying on themselves or family rather than state institutions for support . A majority maintained that the political and worldly views they shared were only to some extent or very little of those expressed by their parents
 Kazakhstan may seek to establish even better relations with the West . The country is still trying to find its place in the sun .
There is still a chance that the liberalization of various political institutions will occur, but likely not until Nazarbayev is gone . Reform is key to democratization and with younger generations being the beacon of hope for their country, there is still an opportunity to change
 The youth of Kazakhstan have differing opinions from the older generations . It could also suggest a change in the future .
 The shift in the mentality of younger generations could help solidify the state’s progressive movement . The shift could also be seen as a need to distance themselves from their Russian counterpart once and for all .
 The second part of the survey revealed that the younger generation does not feel politically or emotionally beholden to Russia . Many of them grew up in an independent Kazakhstan .
 74.9% of young Kazakhs were interested in current events in Russia . Results found that a total of 74.8% of Kazakhs are interested in the current events .
 72% of respondents felt Kazakhstan should continue to develop a closer relationship with its neighbor to the North . In that sense, it seems logical that 72% felt that Kazakhstan should remain close to its neighbor .
 Kazakhstan should model to achieve the highest rates of state success, according to a survey . The answers differed significantly between those living in Astana and elsewhere within the country .
 Of those living in the capital, 38.5% felt that the U.S. was the best example for Kazakhstan to follow . 46.7% of people in Kazakhstan felt that Russia should be their prime model .
 Kazakhstan will continue to foster its relationship with its strategic partner, Russia . At this point in time, there is little reason to doubt that Kazakhstan will remain with Russia .
 There is still an overwhelming amount of support for Russia as a whole, according to CNN.com .
 Kazakhs more often converse in Russian than in their native tongue . There will undoubtedly remain ties to that particular country regardless of its alleged transgressions .
Young people support their President, government, and Kazakhstan's current foreign policy . Others argue that Russia jeopardized relations with Kazakhstan when one of Putin's statements caused quite the stir . Overall, young people support the President and government .
 His August 2014 declaration about Kazakhstan’s statehood deeply wounded the people of Kazakhstan . He said Kazakhstan's statehood was deeply wounded.
 Putin exclaimed that President Nazarbayev achieved what no other could or had—creating a unified state of Kazakhstan . In his arrogance, Putin exclaimed.
 Putin's blunder was evident in the Kazakhs overwhelming response. While complimentary of the Kazakh president, Putin’s blunder is evident in Kazakhs response .
 Consensus that Kazakhstan should continue its relations with Russia is a testament to its modus operandi . Russia's view of Ukraine in Ukraine through the Kremlin's lens is the same as Kazakhstan's .
 Kazakhstan is not prepared to surrender total control to its northern neighbor, instead relying on the West and China to counterbalance Russia’s looming presence .
Given Russia’s track record and its recent use of hard power, it is safe to say that those in the Central Asian countries have a reason to be concerned .
 Latvia has become increasingly wary of Russia as a formidable threat after Ukraine crisis . Latvia and Russia’s Relations have been strained since the Ukraine crisis in Ukraine .
 The long-standing and open distrust of its eastern Slavic neighbor has continued to be a pervasive theme among Latvia’s people . 26% of Latvia's people are ethnic Russians .
 23% of Russians asked them to identify which countries are seen as most unfriendly toward Russia . Latvia is a fifth place finish out of the 30 countries polled .
 46% of Latvians had an unfavorable view of Russians, while 41% viewed Russia favorably given its behavior . 13% could not answer .
 events in Ukraine may have exacerbated Latvia's outcry over Russia’s transgressions . In any case, events in the Ukraine may has exacerbated Latvia”s outcry .
 There were fears that Russia might use its intervention in the region as a carte blanche to flex its military power in Latvia .
 Latvia has had a long-standing reputation as being the weakest link in the Baltic region . Not to mention, Latvia has also had a reputation as a weak link in Europe .
 Latvia remains home to a sizable ethnic Russian minority. Such concerns were heightened by the fact that Latvia is home to an ethnic Russian majority .
 It is estimated that roughly 26% of the country is ethnically Russian, while 38% of its residents converse strictly in Russian .
 The idea that Moscow would use similar ethno-centric appeals as a justification to intervene became an increasingly plausible threat to Latvian citizens after Russia's offensive in Ukraine .
Latvian suspicions were almost confirmed when Russia made several overt attempts to push territorial boundaries . Latvian suspicion was almost confirmed during the course of 2014 .
 Russian military airplanes and warships came dangerously close to Latvian airspace and waters, raising alert levels to the Kremlin’s next possible target .
 There has been widespread belief that the Latvian media is a pawn of Russian propaganda . Later that year, NATO reciprocated and pledged full support to all the Baltic states .
 Russia has already launched its information campaign within Latvia . It has already bombarded Latvian television broadcasting agencies with "fake news" to rally its cause .
 Latvia's main aim is to incite doubt of Latvia’s legitimacy as a prospering state . Latvia is a member of Latvia, but it is also known as Latvia .
 Russia can do so effectively, while winning over the hearts and minds of Latvians, then it can begin its next step of calculatingly polarizing Latvia’s people . If Russia can win over Latvian people, it can also win over them,
 They sow doubt, insecurity, fear, distrust about leaders, the country’s ability to survive and our own abilities . They sow doubts, insecurity and fear about leaders. They sow fear and insecurity, they say .
 Latvia’s National Electronic Mass Media Council took steps to suspend the Russian channel Rossiya RTR for presenting information in a way that portrayed the use of military force against a sovereign country as warranted .
 Latvia’s public opinion surveys expressing discontent for the Kremlin are manifested in outward disdain for Latvian government officials . Latvia's public opinion survey shows public discontent with the Kremlin .
 Latvia’s government approval rating is at an all-time low because of the belief that many of the parties forming the current coalition are loyal to Russia . Latvia's approval rating has been at a low for years .
There is a genuine public fear that if an election in the Saeima were held today, the leading party Harmony could win . It is a worry considering its notorious ties to Russia and blatant anti-NATO rhetoric .
Latvijas Fakti, out of 1,002 Latvian citizens polled, 18.7% said they would vote for Harmony in an upcoming election .
 The leftist political party seems to be a crowd favorite among some . Other assessments have shown that Harmony’s popularity has eroded in recent years among ethnic Latvians .
 Latvia’s largest opposition group, the pro-Russian party Harmony, only managed to secure a single seat in the EP . The social-democratic force was expecting at minimum three seats .
 Latvia’s other Russian-leaning party, the Russian Union of Latvia, acquired one seat, while the breakdown of remaining EP seats upheld status quo . Latvia's other Russia-leaning Party, the Russians, acquired the one seat .
 Latvia's population turned to its Western counterparts after Russia's actions in Ukraine . Harmony began to distance itself from Putin's administration, turning to Western counterparts .
There is growing concern that Harmony, with the help of the Kremlin, could actually come out victorious . The evidence seems to suggest that any attempts for Russia to try and exploit ethnic differences would only fuel distrust among Latvia’s population .
Latvian fears over Russia’s impending efforts to reassert its dominance over the former Soviet satellite state .
 It also begs the question as to whether this polling forebodes future election results . It also asks whether it forebode future elections.
 Such bold statements suggest a nostalgic return to the former Soviet, Cold War era . Such bold statement suggests a nostalgic returns to the Soviet era .
 The invasion of Ukraine has validated Putin’s claims, signaling to the rest of the world his willingness to reclaim that which was once theirs .
 Analyzing the data provided by the public opinion polls within each of these three countries reveals some interesting commonalities .
 The Russian mass media is pervasive in their regions. They contain sizable ethnic Russian minorities . Current government officials are allied to the Kremlin .
 These shared traits seem to have had a significant impact on the general public’s outlook on Russia .
 Belarus and Kazakhstan approve of Russia’s actions in Ukraine . The root of their endorsement differs .
 Belarus is driven by economic factors, and as long as Russia continues to line its pockets, the financial profits they stand to gain are positive .
 Kazakhstan is especially rife with the continuous bombardment of Russian media sources broadcasting their biased perspective . Kazakhstan has effectively debilitated its citizenry from holding opposing viewpoints.
Latvians have been most outspoken about their disdain for Russia and its illegal operations in Ukraine . Latvians are most outspoken on the issue.
There are concerns for the growing support of the pro-Russian political party, Harmony . However, there are also concerns for growing support for the party .
 Harmony stands a chance of winning the upcoming 2018 parliamentary elections . With the help of the Kremlin, Harmony is expected to win .
 Belarus and Kazakhstan will continue to stay the course in their partnership with Russia . Latvia faces unchartered waters if its political fate is to be realized .
 To add credibility to their narrative, European stations deemed independent have been bought out by local oligarchs whose sympathies lie with Moscow .
 Russian media channels like RT and Sputnik have marketed themselves as proRussian, anti-Western networks making their way into European households . The broadcasted stories often detail accounts of widespread corruption and depravity.
Western news agencies model themselves after Western news agencies, protected by liberal democratic values of free speech and the unregulated flow of information on the internet .
 The group's intended audience is broad, they say . The group is focused on groups with a specific political agenda .
 pro-Russian groups within Europe are partial to the Kremlin's explanation of events in Ukraine . They oppose an EU-dominated Europe, and share a penchant for authoritarianism .
 Western leaders threatened Russia with more aggressive sanctions if Minsk II was not upheld . Ukraine and pro-Russian rebels have resumed fighting between Ukrainians and rebels .
 The accord also reflected France and Germany's distaste for Russia’s proposal of a Novorossiya .
 Moscow had no choice but to drop the concept entirely by May 2015 . Faced with the possibility of spiraling further into an economic depression, Moscow decided to drop it .
 Europe and Russia engaged in annual trade worth upwards of $450 billion in 2013 . Europe’s officials were not ready to forgo .
 Europe imports much of its energy from Russia, which is a major source of energy . Cutting Moscow off from Western banking systems would not have been agreeable course of action for Europe .
 As it was, the value of the ruble had deflated, resulting in an estimated capital loss of $130 billion . The ruble's value was estimated to be $130billion .
 Given what was at stake, warnings of additional sanctions were summarily dismissed by Russian bureaucrats .
 Europe became a convenient target of Russia’s propaganda. While Putin's information operations surrounding Ukraine and Crimea were on full throttle, Europe became an easy target .
 The conflict resulted in a political fallout between Russia and many of the European countries that once shared amicable exchanges . Russia and Europe once shared an amicable exchange .
 Russia’s subsequent meddling in the 2017 elections in Europe were also a factor in souring European views . Russia's meddling in 2017 elections also contributed to souring EU views, says CNN .
 This chapter will begin by examining France, Germany, and Finland’s relations with Russia .
 ProQuest. 43 opinion within these respective states has been affected. Caught between East and West/Kundnani Replies .
 The findings will then illustrate the current policy implications the 2014 crisis may have on these territories, based on the reach of Russia's propaganda campaign .
 France had to change its course after the disintegration of the Soviet Union . France had lost its public enemy number one .
 The immediate end of the Cold War brought over a decade-long era of rapprochement between Russia and the West . Russia and West have been at odds for decades .
 French President Francois Mitterrand and Russian President Boris Yeltsin signed the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation in February 1992 .
 The agreement detailed the extent of bilateral relations on matters surrounding nonproliferation, energy, economic growth, security cooperation and foreign policy decisions .
 France pledged to support Russia’s integration into trade organizations for which it qualified . France also pledged to help Russia's integration into its trade organizations .
 France recognized Russia with “most favored nation status,’ granting it a hefty loan . Russia was recognized with ‘most favored country status’
 The French populace of today are more concerned with the Kremlin's abuses of human rights and its autocratic style of rule than with maintaining their economic relationship . Since the treaty’s commencement, France and Russia have traditionally upheld good relations until Russia's invasion of Ukraine .
 Nevertheless, among certain sectors, the need to conduct business with one another remains strong .
 France temporarily suspended a deal it had struck under former President Sarkozy on the sale of Mistral-class, amphibious warships to Russia .
 Hollande's opponents berated the president for being a pawn of the United States . The termination of the deal, involving two force-projection warships reportedly worth $1. billion, brought an onslaught of criticism from Hollande’s opponents .
 The French government’s relationship with Russia became a rather uncomfortable display of failed brinkmanship, which was hyped in French media .
 Public Opinion in France on Ukraine Crisis Events in Ukraine shed light on some of the public opinion circulating within Europe regarding the conflict and its aftermath .
 Some hard questions were being asked, and the responses were equally enlightening . The questions were also enlightening.
 Russian Analytical Digest 130, July 1, 2013, 2.2. A Strained Political Relationship,’s political relationship .
51% of French people surveyed agreed that Russia was a major threat to other countries . 51% of people surveyed agree that Russia is a big threat to others .
 63% of younger French were convinced of Russia’s status as a formidable danger . Of those respondents, 63% said Russia was a formidable threat .
 Only 44% of the French blamed Russia for the violence in eastern Ukraine . 30% felt culpability lay with the pro-Russian separatists .
 53% of the French surveyed were opposed, while 47% were in favor . 53% were opposed to NATO countries coming to rescue their allies .
 Ukraine has never officially been an ally of NATO in the first place . This is significant considering that Ukraine has not officially been a NATO ally in the past .
 If there is such a divide on military assistance to states that are official members of NATO, it is not unrealistic to expect that reservations about military intervention would also exist .
 A 59% French opposition to supplying Ukraine with arms is consistent apropos the aforementioned logic . France, as a NATO country, should do in response to Russia's actions .
 Roughly 67% of those surveyed agreed that providing financial aid to Ukraine would be the most appropriate response to the country's crisis .
 Those on the left of the political spectrum were more supportive than those on the right . More surprising was that those on left were more support for those on right .
There was greater support for Ukraine joining a military alliance than there was for it to join the EU . The latter was likely seen as imposing more costs on the French .
Pro-Russian supporters seem to have taken a strong liking to Mr Putin . Perhaps a more reliable network of pro-Russia supporters came from those on the political fringes .
 France’s Marine Le Pen of the far-right Front Nationale leads a 39-member group called the Europe of Nations and Freedoms party, represented by eight European countries .
 The group has taken a particularly strong stance in support of the Kremlin and its recent political escapades .
 RT was leading the charge, broadcasting pro-Russian messages throughout Europe . RT was using an array of media platforms, including RT, to broadcast messages .
 Russia was the new counterbalance to America’s hegemony in Europe, says CNN's John Sutter . The narrative loud and clear: Russia was new counter balance to U.S. dominance in Europe .
 Putin also provided a restoration of moral and Christian values to combat the liberal and homosexual epidemic that plagued the West . French supporters of the Kremlin say Putin has restored moral andChristian values .
 Putin supports an alliance with the very groups he publicly demonizes, categorizing the whole of the Western world as one big cluster of fascists .
 Putin’s bromance with leading members of right-wing populist groups endures . The corollary is whether such relations are sustainable and at what cost .
 The parties indeed have a following, but even with the Kremlin's subsidies, achieving political dominance has proved difficult .
 In March 2017, Le Pen met with Putin in Moscow, supposedly to discuss France and Russia's united effort in combatting Islamist terrorism . Putin also took the interaction as an opportunity to assure the public that he had no intention of meddling in the upcoming French election .
 Putin was accused of interfering in the 2016 U.S. presidential election . Putin was not successful in pulling the wool over French eyes .
 Le Pen, eyeing the Presidency, lost out in the 2017 presidential election to Emmanuel Macron . Macron is a centrist opponent to Le Pen .
 His victory signaled that France was not willing to capitulate to far-right messages provoked by fear and intimidation . His victory signals that France is not willingto capitulate.
 Putin's alliance with Le Pen was a long-planned strategy that simply failed to influence future European affairs . Putin’s alliance with the French government was a short-term strategy that just failed.
 A Europe with leading politicians keen to appease Russia would have given Putin the carte blanche he needed to conduct future acts of aggression .
 At least for now, French are safe from an anti-European, pro-Russian head of state who could lead their country into a foreign policy reversion .
 As exchanges or initiatives between East and West during times of friction could be misconstrued or undermined, transparency and open communication are key to combat Putin’s narrative .
 RT recently launched its newest station in France . But this undertaking may become increasingly difficult as RT has launched its new station .
 RT has yet to hit mainstream levels of media in France . RT has acquired a following of hundreds of thousands, but has not yet hit mainstream media .
 The program is designed to promote joint ventures, integration, and increased communication between the two states . The true intentions of the initiative remain curious .
 Putin hopes a more positive public image will stimulate Europe to reconsider its sanctions policy .
 A couple of Russian board members on the project have been personal targets of the sanctions . A spokesman from Macron's office has reassured the public of Trianon Dialogue’s aims .
 Macron felt the time was right “to encourage Franco-Russian economic relations’ in spite of the sides’ currently limited trade and the ensuing Russian embargo of EU foods and products .
 Germany's relationship with Russia since the collapse of the Soviet Union has been an interesting one, to the say the least .
Gerhard Schröder adopted a very favorable policy towards Russia . He, along with his successor, Gerhard Schrøder, adopted avery favorable policy toward Russia .
 Moscow had to modernize both economically and politically. This approach stemmed from a conviction that in order for Moscow to progress, it had to be modernized .
 Most German politicians have been well aware of the long-standing social, political, and economic overlap between the two nations . They have strived to honor and preserve those shared ties for over two decades .
 Merkel was raised in East Germany and speaks fluent Russian . She has never overplayed her relationship with Putin .
 Moscow needed a way to reassert its strength in bilateral discussions, as well as to play an active role in Germany's policy towards Russia . Her stoic approach became more critical following Putin's subsequent actions in Ukraine/Crimea .
 Germany is critical to Russia’s position in Europe, says Bobo Lo . Lo says it can impede the U.S. from becoming the dominant influence on Europe .
 Former politicians are perceived to be in collusion with the Russians . This has created a network of business alliances, whereby former politicians are believed to be involved .
 Ex-Chancellor Gerhard Schröder is a prime example of the former Chancellor . He now sits on the board of supervisors and even as chairman at Nord Stream .
 Both organizations serve as a cover to facilitate business transactions and encourage exclusive discourse . In actuality, both organizations are used as cover for business transactions .
 Mathias Platzeck, a former SPD Chairman, took over as director of the German-Russian Forum . He is a former member of the SPD and former SPD chairman . He has been in charge of the Forum since 2007 .
 The crisis in Ukraine woke German officials to the realities of Putin’s far-reaching influence .
By 2014, Merkel took a hard line against Putin, sending a clear message that his days of cozying up to former political leaders was over . By 2014, the German leader had taken a hardline against Putin .
 She saw Putin for who he was, a KGB officer at heart, and she was not about to be deceived . She saw him as a KGB Officer at heart .
 Merkel warned Putin of the fate that awaited Russia should he choose not to comply with the conditions set forth by the West . In April, Merkel warned him to pull back or risk financial consequences .
Caught between East and West/Kundnani Replies, 174. 53 worse on Russia’s end .
 Merkel also emphasized that she had the full backing of proRussian businesses to move forward with the measures . The measures effectively strip Putin of one of his main support hubs .
 Merkel was extremely successful in rounding up the German business lobby . 6,000 firms employing 300,000 people who relied on yearly trade with Russia .
 The sacrifices that Germany had to make gave her the political leverage she needed to convince her fellow European countrymen to do the same . Germany's sacrifices gave her political leverage.
 All member states of the EU agreed to implement three rounds of sanctions on Putin’s cronies in March 2014 . By a unanimous vote, all member states agreed to impose three rounds.
 Politbarometer’s public opinion survey conducted on behalf of German Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen television . citizens defended her resolve, which garnered public support .
 Germany's image as Russia's biggest advocate defined its role for the first twenty years following the collapse of the U.S.R. Such a view is no longer relevant given the Kremlin's recent provocations.
 The general public and political officials have had less sympathetic attitudes to Moscow . Some German companies remain loyal to Moscow.
 In a Pew Global publication dated June 10, 2015, only 23% of Germans felt Putin was capable of taking actions that would be supported on the world stage . Only 27% still held a favorable view of Russia .
Over half of Germans surveyed did not support using military intervention as a means of defending other NATO allies from the Kremlin .
 The population is generally not keen on using force, especially on behalf of a country that has never been a NATO ally . Much like in France, the population does not want to use force .
 55 in France, 51% of younger Germans were in favor of extending NATO membership to Ukraine as opposed to 32% of their elders . 50% of young Germans in France were in support of NATO membership .
 The EU has caused a bit of division among the German populace . Ukraine should be allowed to join the EU and Ukraine should join it, according to a report .
 57% of older Germans opposed to EU membership for Ukraine . 42% of the younger generation was more open to the idea .
 Despite German reunification, old wounds do not always heal, especially in a country that less than 30 years ago was still embroiled in the Cold War .
 The divide in public opinions among east and west Germans toward Russia is glaring . The divide is glaring.
 36% of eastern Germans see Russia in a positive light and nearly twice as many have confidence in Putin compared to 24% and 19% of western Germans .
 Only 28% of Germans living in the eastern sectors see Russia as less of a military threat to neighboring countries than 40% of their western compatriots . Germany is one of the most outspoken critics against arming Ukraine .
 69% of Germans wanted to contribute financial aid to Ukraine . On the other hand, 69% wanted to help the country .
 There was a bit of hesitation expressed with regards to increasing sanctions on Russia, especially given the economic ties between Germany and Russia . Yet, there was quite a lot of hesitation.
 By 2015, only one-in-five Germans favored increased economic sanctions on Russia . 29% advocated for a decrease in the economic pressure being applied to Moscow .
 The mid-2014 ARD report reflected those concerns with 72% of respondents feeling a certain degree of worry . The report was released on Tuesday .
 Only three-in-ten Germans pointed the finger at Russia, according to a report .
 In April 2014, 49% of the country still thought that Germany's ability to mediate between Russia and the United States was a viable option . This was a sharp transformation in public opinion considering that in April 2014.
 There is doubt about the renewal of bilateral relations between Germany and Russia . Now more than ever, there are doubts about the renewing the bilateral relations .
 Putin has used right-wing groups as a platform to promote his message of ‘anti-EU, anti-US and anti-establishment’ policies to influence the very core of German society .
 Leaders of these groups have responded in kind, leading to an increase of Russian media and political activity within Germany .
 "Die Linke" is a leading opposition group in the Bundestag . The far-right AfD (Alternative for Germany) party is no strangers to Moscow .
 Wolfgang Gehrke traveled to Donetsk in support of the “People's Republic’s Republic,’ bringing aid . On one occasion, he brought aid to the city .
 Alexander Gauland, an AfD party spokesman, met with representatives at the Russian embassy in November 2014 . In another demonstration of Russian deference, Gauland met with Russian embassy representatives in November.
 Germany has emerged from among the major powers carrying the torch in trying to find a resolution to the Ukrainian crisis . Germany is one of the biggest powers in the world.
 Merkel succeeded in putting economic pressure on Russia, all the while maintaining her level of composure and diplomacy . This is no small feat, considering that Merkel put pressure on the country .
 Her ability to secure a united front from the other 27-member states of the EU centered around the sanctions policy . The sanctions policy is a counter-response to Russia’s actions in Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea .
 The sanctions seem to have curbed further Russian aggression in Ukraine, at least for the time being .
 Alexei Navalny argued economic measures not taken to effectively debilitate Russia’s economy . The Kremlin would have also sought to invade the southernmost region in Ukraine, Odessa . Merkel's interactions did highlight a particular weakness in Germany’'s foreign policy .
 Russia’s invasion came dangerously close to neighboring NATO countries . Europe was against military intervention in Ukraine .
 Germany was tasked with keeping the lid on kneejerk reactions that could lead to heightened tensions between Russia and the West .
 Germany can hardly intimidate a nuclearized Russia or make promises guaranteeing the security of threatened states . Merkel instead advocated for a rapid response force as part of NATO’s reorientation towards collective defense .
 Russian media has been prevalent in Germany with platforms, such as Sputnik, RIA Novosti, the radio broadcast “Voice of Russia,” RT, and its German-speaking sister-station RT Deutsch .
 Sputnik, modeled after BuzzFeed, featured a story falsely alleging that a girl from the Russian-German community had been gang raped by a group of Arab refugees . The German government was orchestrating a cover up, according to the story .
 The girl, Lisa, had willingly left home to pursue sexual relations with a man 10 years her senior . Investigations later discovered that the girl had left home.
 The German mainstream media’s attempts to highlight inconsistencies in Russian reports fell on deaf ears . German officials’ denial of a cover-up, as well as German officials' denial of cover-ups, fell on the deaf ears.
 Russian state-controlled media used the incident to exploit underlying ethnic tensions surrounding Chancellor Merkel's decision to open Germany's borders to Middle Eastern migrants .
 The impact of Russia’s media campaign does not stop with extreme political groups . Russia's media campaign has been targeted by extreme political parties .
 Current relations between Russia and Finland can be traced back to their intertwined past . Finno-Russian Relations are currently at a low level .
 After the war, Juho Kusti Paasikivi became President of Finland . He made it a priority to enhance relations with the Soviet Union .
 The Agreement of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance signed on April 6, 1948, was noteworthy . The agreement was signed in 1948 .
 Finland secured Soviet protection from potential Finnish offensives . It ensured military cooperation from both sides in case of another German invasion .
 Finlandization emerged during the Cold War . The term coined Finlandization was coined during that period .
 In practice, it gave Finland the liberty to engage in free market trade while upholding its pluralistic form of government .
4 presidents and their policies maintained a commitment to Finland’s neutrality, focusing on cordial relations with the Soviet Union . Likewise, it established a precedent of subservience to the Soviets .
 Soviet elites received small benefits over time, according to reports . Such efforts did not go unnoticed by the Soviet elites, and, in fact, received little benefits .
 In 1955, the Soviet Union returned Finland’s Porkkala peninsula to the Soviets for use as a naval base following the Continuation War .
6 Finnish leaders continued to reinforce a positive image between the two states throughout the decades . Returning the coastal town effectively removed any remaining Soviet troops on Finland’s bordering territories .
 The European Union presented a logical organization through which to advance relations and create a network of mutually dependent states .
 Russia would be given the chance to influence the region. In turn, Russia, too, would be able to influence its region . Russia has a history of influencing the region .
 A less formal means of collaboration was established under the Euroregions cooperation program . It facilitated cultural and economic integration between member states of the EU and bordering non-allied countries .
 Russia and Finland joined to form the Euregion Karelia, but its benefits seemed to be few and far between . Russia and Finns joined in the early 1990s .
 Putin responded with counter-sanctions after the EU imposed sanctions on Russia . Putin responded to the EU's sanctions with counter sanctions .
 Russia's recent offensive actions against another sovereign territory were deeply disconcerting . Finland is considering whether it should seek NATO membership .
 Finnish policy makers and the general public have not shied away from condemning Russia’s military actions in Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea .
There is a strong consensus among Finns that Russia has acted reprehensibly, illegally meddling in the affairs of a sovereign country . Finns say Russia has acting reprehensible, illegally meddled in the country's affairs .
 Russo-Finnish relations may be headed towards rockier times . Finland condemned Russia’s meddling and resultant atrocities in the region .
 The Russian military measures in Crimea are a violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty . The military measures are in Crimea.
 Advisory Board of Defence Information commissioned a market research company called Taloustutkimus Oy to conduct a study of Finnish opinions on foreign policy, defense strategies, and security issues .
Despite increased awareness, the populace may not yet be sold on the idea of an alliance . Despite the increased awareness of the alliance, the public may not be sold.
 There was less Finnish concern over the situation in Ukraine as a whole. It does seem that as other factors crept into the wake of 2015, there was less concern .
 The Finnish military is quite keen to see Finland join NATO . The Ukrainian crisis is of great importance .
 Its members see Russia as having upset the balance of power within Europe . Its members say Russia has upset the power balance of Europe .
 Finland is on alert for Moscow's next possible move in Ukraine . Russia's transgressions in Ukraine created quite a stir, putting Finland on alert .
 Finnish government officials overtly expressed their reservations about joining NATO . Some Finnish officials have expressed their concerns about the organization .
 Finland receives most of its energy from Russia . Taking an aligned stance could cause tensions in an otherwise friendly relationship .
 Finland is already experiencing the repercussions of the EU sanctions imposed by the EU on Russia .
Cross-border towns rely heavily on Russian customers to purchase their food . The consumer goods sector has been particularly hard hit by the Russian economy .
 The crisis in Ukraine has created an atmosphere of fear fueled by economic hardship and the potential of increased unemployment .
 Russian violations of Finnish air and sea space could be perceived as a deliberate threat to their security .
 Continued media coverage of such actions could actually sway public opinion, affecting the government’s stance on NATO membership .
 Finns might feel compelled to join a military coalition in order to guarantee their safety and security . Russia's aggressive behavior could legitimize the threat that Russia poses to Finland .
 The Finnish government would then have to respond to those perceived threats, perhaps proposing a referendum on the NATO issue and executing that vote accordingly .
 President Niinistö made it clear that Finland has not ruled out the possibility of joining NATO sometime in the future .
 Russia has increased its defense budget in response to Russia’s belligerent actions . It has significantly increased its spending in response.
 The buildup of its national defense could be a deterrent against Russia’s use of force . Russia's use of military force could be the biggest deterrent to the country's military forces .
 Finland has not dismissed the idea of becoming a full-fledged member of Russia . However, following Russia’s aggressive behavior in Ukraine, Finland is not considering becoming a member .
 Finland's struggle to make a decision pertaining to NATO might be rooted in Russia's efforts to conduct a media crusade to undermine Finland’s endeavors to join the alliance .
 Russia has revamped its efforts to wage an information campaign to gain popular support among Finland's citizens .
 Such rhetoric instigates discord, welcomes doubt, and spurs the pro-Kremlin propaganda machine onward . Such rhetoric, such as that of the Russian government, encourages discord .
 Russia is relying on social media to conduct its information operations . Russia is also relying on Facebook and Twitter for its information .
 Russia’s media has found some loyal supporters among the Finnish citizenry .
 Finland's administrators are concerned that such actions could fuel polarization among the Finnish population . Finland might also seek NATO membership for other reasons .
 Johan Eellend, a scholar of Eurasian studies, deduced another stipulation to Finland’s joining NATO—Sweden .
 Despite Russia’s efforts to create aggressive barriers preventing Finland from entering the alliance, Finland cannot ignore its Swedish counterpart . Despite Russia's efforts to creating aggressive barriers, Finland can't ignore Swedish counterpart.
 The Finnish are too reliant on their shared historical and cultural ties with Sweden . They would not risk going against the grain and perhaps jeopardizing their relations with the Swedes .
 If Finland were to join but not Sweden, it would gain another country not easily accessible . If Finland are to join, Sweden would gain a new country not easy accessible .
 If Sweden were to join but not Finland, the decision would potentially give Russia a false sense of Finnish passivity .
 Sweden's public opinion on joining NATO changed after Russia’s annexation of Crimea . Finland may be experiencing a similar problem.
 The Finnish remain more skeptical, but do acknowledge the protection that NATO can offer in a region plagued by uncertainty .
 Finland has managed to tread the line of cooperation with the West while avoiding overt hostility to Russia . Finland remains unquestionably independent.
 Russia is desperate to reassert its role as a major player in the international community . Most journalists can agree that Russia is trying to re-establish its role in the world .
 The hope is that some of the disinformation might actually stick to the public sphere .
 Russia is notorious for preying on states that enjoy freedom of the press . Russia has been known for its anti-government policies .
 Its perceived intentions are to deliberately bombard various media outlets with ideas that promote its modus operandi .
 Russia has promulgated a message of the godless West in the hopes of undermining institutions like the EU and NATO . It seeks to divide and discredit the West, which it seeks to discredit .
 RT has provided around-the-clock coverage of Western politicians whose ideas and policies intersect with Moscow's storyline . The West's hypocrisy in meddling in international affairs and NATO's irrelevance in today’s post-Cold War.
 The West has now become an additional scapegoat for the domestic hardships the Russian people endure . The West is now an extra scapegoat.
 Russia has not shied away from unleashing its propaganda campaign on the whole of Europe . Some countries are facing the majority of its wrath .
 Aligning with populist groups that espouse extreme ideals has created an exploitable window of opportunity for Russia . Russia is traditionally rooted in anti-Semitism, anti-immigration, and Euroscepticism .
 Putin struck up a curious relationship with members of the Front Nationale in France . Putin's relationship with the FrontNationale has been described as "curious"
 Russia’s ability to influence far-right groups in European countries that share a border with its larger neighbor is restrained due to historical tensions .
In Finland, nationalism is the antithesis of a pro-Russian philosophy . In Finland, the two are not compatible, according to the Finnish government .
 France is currently poised to renew basic socio-economic ties with the Kremlin . Germany is wary of Moscow’s future entanglements .
 Finland's policy of non-alignment has served it well throughout its post-World War II history . Current events in Ukraine could steer Finland away from the status quo, reshaping its relationship with Russia .
 Russia's overt aggression is not currently enough of an impetus to radically change Finland’s existing state of affairs . Russia's actions have created a heightened sense of insecurity, but not enough of a change to change Finland's existing affairs .
 The events surrounding the 2014 Ukrainian crisis and Russia's attempts to execute an effective propaganda campaign did, at least somewhat, influence Finnish attitudes in considering NATO membership .
 Finland has more pro-Russian populations than any other country in the world . However, it seems to have backfired in Finland, according to reports .
 The Finns started to seriously think about their safety and security, understanding the gravitas of the situation Russia created . It is fair to say that the Finns began to seriously consider their safety .
 Finland’s current president is eager to re-stabilize the region's economic and political atmosphere . He hopes to take on a more proactive role through his continued negotiations with Putin .
 Finland may continue to stay the course, maintaining the status quo. At least in the near future, Finland may remain the course .
 This thesis examined the extent of Russia’s influence in its near-abroad and in Europe . It also examined the impact of Russia's influence in Europe and in Russia .
 The intent of the research was to conduct a six-country case study across two different regions . The aim was to create a more comprehensive approach to the question that would reveal the actual magnitude of Moscow's reach .
 Analysis reveals the answer to whether Putin is winning the propaganda war regarding Ukraine is not as clear cut .
 The response may seem initially inadequate, I will explain the rationale that has led me to this conclusion . It may provide some guidelines for more effective Western responses, he says .
 A country's geography would be critical to determining whether Putin had effectively carried out his information operations in the Ukraine crisis .
 The closer a state’s proximity to the Russian Federation would be the greater the susceptibility to the Kremlin‘s media campaign would be .
 All three countries in Russia’s near-abroad share a border with their larger neighbor . The results of the rhetoric went beyond purely territorial factors, but rather, pointed to each of the country's political and economic factors .
 Russia’s media campaign surrounding Ukraine mostly affected Belarus and Kazakhstan .
 Latvia’s ties to its other Baltic nation-states as well as its role in NATO seems to have prevented Moscow from reaching its desired effect in its media campaign within Latvia .
 Russia’s narrative of justification has held only marginal weight among European countries of France, Germany, and Finland . Despite its best efforts, Russia's best efforts have not been successful in Europe .
 Russia failed to gain a decisive victory in winning over the hearts and minds of the citizens within these respective states . Despite relying on its close-knit relationship with proRussian political parties and other leaders in these countries, it failed to win a decisive win .
 Belarus has remained faithful to its Soviet origin and has generally supported Russia’s actions in Ukraine .
 Belarusians buy into the narrative that Russia portrays via Russian channels and other social networks . Most Belarusians believe that Russia is telling them via social networks and other networks .
 Moscow needs Belarus, however, to be relegated to the status of “Russia’s little brother,” and keeps a line of communication open with the West . Russia needs Belarus.
 Russia has sought to maintain strong ties with its former protectorate . Russia has suffered a great blow to its economy as a result of the sanctions .
 Belarus has shown that it is willing to oblige, as long as it stands to gain financially from Russia . Russia's influence runs deep, but that Minsk’s support remains contingent on economics . Belarus has been in talks with Russia for years .
 liberalminded voices do exist among Kazakhs, they are few and far between . They are primarily isolated to the younger generations .
 Kazakhstan voluntarily subjects itself to the Kremlin's false narrative. Unwilling to divorce itself from its Soviet heritage and home to a relatively large ethnic Russian minority .
 An overwhelming majority of the population supports Russia’s decision to use force in Ukraine . They claim the Ukrainian government is incompetent to properly run its state's affairs .
 Nazarbayev's control of institutions mimics Putin’s, highlighting the fact that the two have a shared history of authoritarianism . The two are key to prolonging their good neighbor relations .
 Latvia has proven to be the most critical of states in Russia's near-abroad as pertains to Moscow’s influence . Latvia has proved to be one of Russia's most critical states.
 Latvia's political scene has grown increasingly divided with a sizable ethnic Russian minority . Latvia’s political scene is increasingly divided.
 Some members of the Saeima have proved to be loyalists of the Russian regime . Some members have been loyalists to the regime .
 There is a possibility that the pro-Russian political group, Harmony, could be the victor in the upcoming Latvian parliamentary election . The group has raised the general public's concerns over Russia's possible meddling in state affairs .
 Currently, there is a palpable divide between the Latvian citizenry and their government officials .
 The former have been outspoken against Putin's transgressions in Ukraine and Crimea . Some representatives in the latter group have been more reluctant to condemn Russia’s actions in Ukraine .
 Latvia's leaders are wary of Russia's hybrid tactics . Latvia's refusal to use hybrid tactics has fueled a level of distrust towards its own leaders .
 There is only so much anti-Western and anti-NATO rhetoric that Latvia, as a member of NATO, can tolerate . Latvia is one of the world's most anti- NATO members .
 Russian propaganda continues to strike at the very heart of the Latvian social center, playing on the supposed mistreatment of ethnic Russians .
 Russia also seeks to undermine Latvia’s political sector, relying on candidates who share Russia's worldview to gain a foothold in Latvia's government .
 Russia’s attempts have fallen short, failing to fundamentally change the minds of Latvian citizens and the majority of their leaders, at least for the time being . Overall, Russia's attempts to change the mind of its citizens and its leaders have failed .
 Chapter III analyzed the scope of Russia’s influence concerning the Ukraine crisis in Western Europe . Chapter III also analyzed the influence of Russia in the West .
 Russian propaganda efforts to undermine the political sphere have largely failed. Here, Russian propaganda has largely failed .
 Russia has found common ground with the likes of far-right political parties . But its influence remains curbed by the general populations .
 The extent of its successful manipulation lies within the minority communities of Russianspeakers or political conspirators, says CNN .
 In France, Germany, and Finland, public opinion polls demonstrate that the people are resolutely opposed to Russia’s recent actions .
 Russia’s attempts to launch more television stations and increase their viewership in Europe have been greeted with minimal returns, and even suspicion . Russia has been trying to create more TV stations in Europe .
 The Finnish, especially, pride themselves on being well-educated and not easily manipulated by foreign media .
 France, Germany, and Finland apparently will not be deterred in their fight against Russia’s propaganda war .
 France and Germany are committed to building a more robust and unified EU . They are ready to fend off Russia’s attempts to destabilize such organizations .
 Finland's future membership into NATO remains uncertain . Finland is likely to continue to combat Putin’s information operations .
 Russian expert M Galeotti says Russia's inability to wage an effective information war on Western populations . Galeotti: I tend to agree with other skeptics about Russia's ability to wage information war .
 Putin has been able to execute his media campaign, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says it is also important to point out the ways Moscow's attempts to influence have been successful .
 Bradley Jardine seems to share his conclusions about Russia’s propaganda war .
 Central Asia is the last region where Russia’s propaganda holds any weight, Jardine says . Central Asia.
 Kazakhstan is among the territories that have had a negative response to the U.S. foreign policy concerning Ukraine and Crimea . Kazakhstan is one of the countries with a negative reaction to the United States' foreign policy .
 He asserts that Russia has brought back the concept of total war to Europe through its ability to employ both conventional and nonconventional methods of warfare .
 Murphy explains how Moscow launched a successful information war as events in Ukraine unfolded . Murphy then goes on to explain how the events unfolded in Ukraine .
 Russia controls many of the media outlets within Ukraine and abroad, which meant the pro-Russian narrative was fairly easy to disseminate . Russia controls some of the country's media outlets .
 He was not reinventing the wheel, just taking the basic principles of media networks in the West and applying them to the Russian state-run versions . He was taking the principles of West's media networks to Russian versions .
 Putin’s regime, relying on the free flow of information, was free to convey its version of the truth . Putin's regime relies on the Free Flow of information to convey the truth.
 The progression made in information technology helped foment that change, essentially transforming the way the world viewed news and facts . The progression of information technology has changed the world's view of information .
 Media before the Internet was generally limited to a national audience alone, as broadcasts and newspapers had limited reach . This made domestic propaganda easier, but foreign propaganda harder, at least without influential external allies, which were rare in communist days .
 Today, the ability to ‘go viral’ or readily address a crowd attracts a following regardless of the message . Today's ability to go viral attracts a follow regardless of a message .
 The Internet's ability to rapidly transmit information globally has made it more susceptible to propaganda . The Internet can transmit information without solid factual sources .
 governments attempting to promote a specific agenda or provide a revisionist view of history will continue to bombard those willing to listen . Russia is no exception.
Arguably, the combination of technological advancements in the cyber realm have created the perfect environment for exploitation and audience manipulation .
 The information campaign knows no bounds, and its accessibility provides the medium for juxtaposing arguments, clashing interests, and conducting a possible all-out media war .
 It cements a new reality whereby ideas shared through several outlets in a relatively short amount of time can galvanize a population into action . It is hoped that ideas shared by several outlets can galvanise a population.
 Putin’s propaganda has not yet managed to achieve quite this level of influence .
 Russia's propaganda campaign has failed to bring a resounding victory to the realm of information operations . Russia's best efforts to sway public opinion have failed to win the public opinion .
 There are limits to Russia’s soft power, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Russia's soft power is a key part of the Russian government .
 Putin publicly deplores fascists and accuses the Ukrainian government of being infiltrated by them . For example, as previously mentioned, Putin publicly condemns fascists .
 He does not hesitate to align with Western right-wing populist groups that support his cause . He funds those he apparently abhors, but he does not agree with them .
 Even companies that seem in favor of advancing Russian interests are unlikely to do so at the expense of their European homeland . As Lo argues, Europe and the United States need to tap into their own ability to influence people .
 The majority of its middle class has already embraced the Western lifestyle . Many young and talented individuals to Europe and the U.S. have moved to Europe .
 Russia's elites already send their children to schools abroad, buy property in Western countries, and invest millions of dollars into their banking systems . Many of Russia’s elites send their kids to school abroad and buy property.
 Putin's propaganda campaign can begin to shield themselves from its impact . In turn, those regions potentially affected by Putin’s propaganda campaign could begin to protect themselves .
 Finland has been taking steps to combat Russia’s pervasive media campaign . It is also worth taking a closer look at a country like Finland, often targeted by the Kremlin .
 Russia is making its population more aware of Russia's devious intentions. By talking about these efforts publicly, they are making their population moreaware of their intentions .
 Markku Mantila insists that it is the highly educated nature of the Finnish population that makes Russia's attempts less effective .
 The Finns were not willing to entertain the prospect of even being subjected to its content . The station's intentions were clear .
 Finland only has a small population of Russian speakers, which could mean Putin’s message does not have the necessary bandwidth to reach its intended audience .
 In March 2016, Finnish branch of Russian-operated Sputnik shut down after it was not able to garner enough followers . The Finnish branch was shut down in March 2016 .
 The size of ethnic Russian concentrations should be considered . Countries should not fail to use countermeasures in order to reassure and protect those populations .
 In regions like the Baltic states, with large Russo minorities, governments are faced with the especially difficult task of trying to influence those populations .
 Governments could use certain stopgap measures before handing out harsher punishments . They should tread carefully, as inflicting bans on Russian content or platforms is often faced with backlash .
 Information is fact checked before being broadcast through open channels . For example, they could introduce a system of rigorous inspections .
 If networks are found in violation of falsifying data, they will be fined . If they are found to have falsified data, the fines will be imposed .
 After the third strike, the station could be permanently banned from the country . The station could also be permanently barred from the nation .
 Russia continues to try its hand at subverting Western policies and institutions . Russia has been trying to subvert Western policies, institutions .
 well-funded media network that has successfully operated for over two decades now has helped the Kremlin master the art of propaganda .
 Plausible deniability, playing on the sympathies of Russophiles, and the rampant spread of disinformation have all contributed to its effectiveness .
 Moscow has used questionable means to launch hybrid warfare . Moscow is focusing on information operations to achieve its aims .
 The U.S. and Europe are fully aware of its intentions, they should act fast to counter its effects . The United States and Europe should act quickly, they say .
 The U.S. response to Russia’s propaganda machine relies on a committed, holistic approach if it is to succeed in combating this asymmetric style of warfare .
 U.S. attempt to launch counternarrative campaign in Russia will do little to effect change . Putin has taken aggressive measures to close off foreign communication channels within Russia .
 Russia's social media outlets remain open to receiving independent sources through their system of social networking . Some of Russia’s social media channels are open to independent sources .
6 Russia’s strength in executing new generation warfare lies in its ability to exploit the U.S. weaknesses and indecisiveness . Heather Conley suggests utilizing RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty to strengthen these informal networks .
 Murphy: “Failure to confront Russian opportunism will validate Putin’s approach. As Murphy indicates, “failure to confront Russia will validation Putin's approach.”
 The first step should be in revamping the National Security Act of 1947 to allow for more flexible responses to an adversary’s multidimensional attacks .
 To begin with, there needs to be a clearer outline representing the boundaries in cyberspace . What constitutes an attack and under what conditions a counter response is warranted is warranted .
 It is in this sphere where much of the unconventional tactics take place and have become increasingly difficult to combat without clear guidance . In this sphere, it is in the sphere where many unconventional tactics are taking place .
1 Europe has already made progress in debunking the Kremlin’s propaganda . Murphy also advocates that the concept of deterrence (traditionally applied to nuclear weapons) be reevaluated and applied to countermeasures .
 Heather Conley seems to agree and advocates for a concerted effort between the United States and Europe in their fight against Russia’s propaganda war .
 greater measures should be taken to implement more stringent regulations on media outlets broadcasting biased content, doling out penalties or revoking licenses to networks found in violation .
 Such undertakings could act as deterrents, while providing the necessary fortitude to combat Putin’s campaign . Such undertakes could act in the future as a deterrent to Putin's campaign .
 New and Classic Essays, edited by Garth Jowett and Victoria O’Donnell, 1–49, are published in the UK .
 New and Classic Essays, edited by Garth Jowett and Victoria O’Donnell, ix-xv. The book is published in the UK and the UK .
 Reshaping the Europe-Russia Relationship, edited by Marlene Laruelle, 1–33. The Europe- Russia Relationship, was published on Monday .
 NATO’s Response to Hybrid Threats, edited by Guillaume Lasconjarias and Jeffrey A Larsen, 1–13.
 Murphy, Martin N Understanding Russia’s Concept for Total War in Europe. Murphy. Murphy: Russia's concept for Total war in Europe is a concept for the future . Murphy: The concept is based on the concept of World War II .
 Political Rhetoric and Identity, 1300–2000, edited by Bertrand Taithe and Tim Thornton, 1–24.