 Col McFay served as the Commander of the 98 th Flying Training Squadron and Air Force Parachute Team . He was a member of the Air Force's 98 th flying Training Squadron .
 He was a distinguished graduate of both the U.S. Air Force Academy and Air Command and Staff College . He was also a graduate of the Air force Academy and the Air Command.
 Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and swift annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 put the West on notice .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin galvanized his political base with the promise of revanchism . To reassert the prestige lost since the Cold War’s end, Putin has promised revanchistism .
 The recent case of Ukraine is particularly alarming not only due to the forceful seizure of territory but also the “hybrid warfighting techniques employed by Russian forces’s forces .
 The Baltic nations of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, former Soviet Republics with fledgling Western governments located on Russia’s immediate border, seem a logical target for aggression .
 For the United States and NATO, the costs of failing to deter Russia’s revanchist ambitions are clear . The U.S. and NATO are either initiating a campaign to liberate an Alliance member or allowing Russia to remake the post-Cold War order .
 The paper will examine the steps the U.S. and NATO can reasonably take to deter Russia’s revanchist ambitions in the Baltic republics . It will also look at the threat of hybrid warfare, particularly from hybrid warfare .
 It will provide a brief history of the Baltic Republics and the threat posed by Russia and hybrid warfare . It will begin by providing a brief History of theBalt Republics .
 This paper will explore the strategic interests of the main protagonists and consider the requirements for an effective deterrent strategy . Next, this paper will consider the needs for a deterrent strategy.
 The Baltics will examine various ways and means of power that might be applied to deter Russian aggression in the Baltics . It will also look at the threat of hybrid warfare .
 The U.S. and NATO will be able to effectively deter Russian aggression and achieve their strategic interests in the region . In the final analysis, it is only through resolute action in implementing policy recommendations .
 Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and swift annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 put the West on notice . Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 has put the world on notice.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin galvanized his political base with the promise of revanchism . To reassert the prestige lost since the Cold War’s end best exemplified through the forceful reclamation of former Soviet territories .
 Putin's revanchist aims will be thwarted in the Baltics and elsewhere in Europe and NATO's enduring collective security guarantee preserved . Only through a determined approach by the Alliance will Putin’s revanchists be thwarted .
 The paper will examine various ways and means across the various instruments 1 of power that might be applied to deter Russia’s revanchist ambitions in the Baltic republics . It will also look at the threat of hybrid warfare from Russia .
 Geography places Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania between Russia and the Baltic Sea . These nations have come under varying degrees of influence from their larger neighbor .
 Estonia and most of Latvia were annexed by Peter I following Russia’s victory over Sweden in the early 18 th century . Estonia and Latvia were also annexed by Russia in 18th century .
 Lithuania came under Russian rule in the late 18 th century as a result of the partitioning of Poland between Russia, Prussia and Austria .
Under Tsar Alexander III, a policy of “Russification’ was initiated in the 19 th century . Russian governors at the heads of the Baltic republics and instituted Russian as the official language .
 Ethnic Russians account for almost 25% of Latvia's and Estonia's populations . Ethnic Russians now account for nearly 25 per cent of Latvia and Estonia’s populations .
Disaffected minorities currently residing in the Baltic Republics are potential targets for Russian destabilization efforts . As will be shown later in this paper, disaffected minorities are possible targets for Russia .
 The Rise of Revanchist Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008 seemed a dramatic turning point in the country’s post-Soviet behavior .
Former constituent republics of the old Union of Soviet Socialist Republics moved closer to the West . No longer was Putin willing to watch as ex-Soviet republics move closer to West .
 Putin's forces briefly occupied the breakaway Georgian provinces of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Pro-Russian, separatist governments were established in the aforementioned provinces .
 Putin has continued his revanchist policies in Ukraine as part of a broader vision of restoring Russia’s power and prestige, as well as holding Western influence at bay .
 The pro-Russian government of Viktor Yanukovych fell in 2014 following a popular uprising aimed at achieving a less corrupt and more Western-oriented society . Once again, this behavior was evident after the pro- Russian government of Yanukovych fell .
 Putin ordered his forces into Crimea; eventually annexing the territory outright . Putin's forces eventually annexed Crimea outright .
 In the cases of Georgia and Ukraine, the West was either unable or unwilling to respond with sufficient force to halt Russia’s aggression .
 Neither country was a member of NATO at the time of the attacks . Both countries were not member of the alliance .
 The U.S. and NATO must prepare to face a similar challenge. The Baltic republics are members of the NATO alliance . The United States and NATO face similar challenges .
Russian forces used oil and gas supplies as political pressure points to destabilize the state . Such tactics included employing special and conventional Russian forces alongside local separatists .
 The hybrid threat is especially concerning to the people of the Baltics, who also worry about the concentration of Russian conventional forces just outside their borders .
 Some skeptics view hybrid warfare as an “excuse by which Western governments can avoid decisive action against Russia’s Russia . The same thing happened in Georgia and Ukraine .
 Following independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, the Baltic nations moved quickly to cement links with the United States and Western Europe through membership in NATO .
 The U.S. wanted to secure democratic and economic reforms in the post-Soviet space . The United States wants to secure reforms in post- Soviet space .
 The Alliance’s charter requires unanimous agreement of all members to declare an “armed attack,” uncertainty remains about NATO's commitment to defend its Eastern-most members .
 The interests of the Baltic nations are not assumed to be identical, in the case of the existential threat posed by Russia . Continued independence would appear to be the preeminent objective .
 Russia's recent exploits in Ukraine greatly improved Putin's standing domestically . It is possible the Baltic nations might be Russia's next target for aggression .
 Russia's 2015 National Security Strategy identifies the expansion of NATO as 5 a “direct threat’ to the nation’s security . This sentiment is evident in Russia”s 2015 National security Strategy .
 "hybrid warfare" would undermine the Western democratic governments of the Baltic republics . It would also be an indirect challenge to the NATO alliance .
 Western leaders must be especially alert to an increasingly unstable Russian regime . Russian regime intent on inventing external threats to maintain domestic power .
 NATO’s overarching interest is maintaining the cohesion of the Alliance, both for the sake of its own survival and the collective security it affords to member states which have historically experienced great conflict .
 NATO's mandate to act is based on the collective will of 28 member states . NATO remains one of the most powerful military alliances in the world .
 Russia possesses a marked advantage in terms of military strength when compared to the militaries of the Baltic nations . Russia's military strength is considered a significant advantage when compared with the Baltic countries .
 Russian forces from this district could easily overpower the Baltic militaries in a matter of days, RAND Corporation study says .
 As demonstrated in Ukraine, attributing Russian influence to insurgent activity is difficult . determining when a “hybrid attack has occurred is exceedingly difficult .
 Any delay by the Alliance in responding to ambiguous actions can dramatically increase the military problem . In the initial stages of conflict, any delay can increase the problem .
Strong disincentives for any military action against Russia exist amongst NATO’s member countries . Also, strong disincentive for military action on Russia exists amongst NATO's members .
 The U.S. interests in Eastern Europe are inextricably tied to those of NATO as a whole .
 NATO's primary raison d'etre countering Soviet Communist expansionism no longer existed . As the primary architect of the Alliance, the United States has championed NATO .
 The United States has viewed NATO expansion as a preferred policy tool for promoting “democracy and market economies’ of countries formerly under Soviet influence .
 President Bill Clinton led diplomatic efforts to bring Baltic republics to the forefront of NATO's second round of expansion in 2004 .
 America faces an unenviable dilemma when considering the situation in the Baltic republics . U.S. allies and partners are at the pinnacle of security interests of the United States 35 .
 The cost of either action or inaction could be equally high, either in terms of a possible military confrontation with a nation possessing a formidable military . Europe has provided Europe a high degree of stability and security since its inception in 1949 .
 The use of diplomatic instruments of power is important for communicating the intent of actions, both military and otherwise, as well as the resolve to act .
 First, Russia, as the predominant threat, must receive the thrust of diplomatic efforts . Russia must receive a thrust of Diplomatic efforts .
 effective deterrence is contingent upon a clear communication of intent to a specific audience . Effective deterrence is based on a clear communications of intent.
 The U.S. should unambiguously communicate that, unlike Ukraine and Georgia, it will lead the NATO alliance to act in a timely and forceful manner to defend one of its members .
 The U.S. must make clear to Putin’s regime that the sovereignty of the Baltic nations are inextricably tied to the cohesion of the NATO Alliance . The sovereignty of Baltic nations is a critical national interest, according to the United States .
 NATO is prepared to act to counter aggression. In this regard, demarcation lines upon which NATO is ready to act must be well considered .
 NATO's willingness to act in the event that positive Russian involvement is identified is critical for avoiding misunderstanding and unnecessary military escalation. Undoubtedly, clear diplomatic communication prior to a crisis is critical .
 An area where they might be particularly vulnerable is the perceived treatment of ethnic Russians, particularly in Estonia and Latvia .
Internal relations between Baltic governments and their Russian minorities have shown few signs of improvement in the past years .
 There has been a notable lack of progress addressing ethnic grievances . There has also been a lack ofprogress addressing ethnic issues .
 The U.S. should encourage Baltic governments to take positive steps to address the perceived civic inequities of their Russian populace . The United States should encourage the Baltic nations to take steps to lessen the vulnerability to exploitation at a later date .
 U.S. should apply its full diplomatic might towards encouraging the Alliance’s decision making body the North Atlantic Council to pre-determine indications and warnings upon which the Alliance is prepared to act .
 The NAC must decide whether to act or accept the risk from inaction . For example, a predetermined trigger might come in the form of positive identification of a Russian military presence in the Baltic republics .
 The implementation of pre-decided intervention points may assist in preventing costly delays in action in the event Russian aggression is identified .
 Any postponements in decision-making could create an infinitely more difficult military challenge of forcibly removing Russian forces from Baltic territories . It is far less appealing and feasible measure than deterrence.
 At the strategic level, the United States and NATO must communicate their commitment to the Baltic republics .
 Historically, America’s failure to clearly make known its regional interests has resulted in aggressive actions by regimes not expecting a United States reaction .
This was evident when Iraq attacked Kuwait, precipitating the 1991 Gulf War . This was evident in the 1990s when Iraq invaded Kuwait, when Iraq was attacked .
 U.S. Ambassador to Iraq April Glaspie failed to communicate America's interest in preserving Kuwait’s sovereignty, he says . He says it likely provided the opening for Saddam Hussein to invade Kuwait . Glaspi: A failure of the United States Ambassador to
 U.S. forced to forcibly eject Iraq’s forces from Kuwait after faulty strategic messaging and failure to clearly convey intent .
 U.S. and NATO leaders must clearly convey to Russia’s leaders, perhaps in the form of a NAC resolution, the willingness of the alliance to act resolutely in the defense of its Baltic members .
 strategic messaging is critical within the Alliance to shore up support for actions against perceived threats . Next, strategic messaging will be critical in response to perceived threats.
 Solidarity in the form of unified messaging, particularly on the part of NATO’s most powerful member-states, would facilitate the support of smaller, less threatened nations .
 The U.S. President is critical to gain international support for deterrent actions in the Baltics . America’s inherent leadership role in the Alliance is critical, he says .
 At the operational level, the U.S. and NATO must be prepared to counter an intense campaign of information operations in the event of hybrid war .
 NATO’s 11 participation in Afghanistan appears both overly hierarchical and ill-suited to respond to extremely dynamic events . NATO's current communications structure appears to be overly hierarchical, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As such, it must develop a more responsive system of strategic communications . It must develop more responsive systems of communications .
 Any counter-information campaign must defeat enemy propaganda on social and traditional media platforms to defuel separatist sentiment and quiet civil unrest . As Russia demonstrated during its invasion of Ukraine, any counter- Information campaign must be defeated .
 The Baltic States would likely prove too costly and dangerous for Russia, because it would trigger an Article 5 response . The Baltic states would likely be too costly for Russia .
 Russian ethnicity is near 50% and more susceptible to a hybrid “pull-off,” similar to that seen in Eastern Ukraine . The Baltics are more susceptible.
 The U.S. and NATO must smartly leverage the informational realm to enhance the effectiveness of its other instruments of power . To defend against this possibility, the United States and NATO should smartly use social media to enhance their power .
 The Alliance must design a more responsive communications architecture to counter damaging disinformation inherent in hybrid warfare .
 The Alliance’s information strategy should empower commanders at all levels, not just the strategic, to be active participants in the Alliance's information strategy . Russia's hybrid tactics in the information realm are damaging to the Alliance, says Peter Bergen .
 The threat of NATO military power is critical to deter Russian aggression in the Baltics . Military power is crucial to deter Russia's aggression in Baltics, according to NATO .
 In the past, Putin has displayed a proclivity to ignore diplomatic messaging unless it aligns with his interests or is substantiated with a credible threat of military force .
 This has been most evident in the recent failures of Western governments to deter Russian aggression in both Georgia and Ukraine . This is the most obvious failure of Western nations to deter Russia's aggression .
 Few of NATO's current air bases or land forces are well-positioned to defend Eastern Europe . First, due to geopolitical realities that existed during the Cold War, few of NATO’s current air base or land force are well positioned to defend Europe .
It is unlikely NATO would deploy forces on a sufficient scale to repel a large scale Russian invasion . It would still be possible to place enough friendly forces in the Baltic region to demonstrate credible U.S. and NATO interest .
 The risk of attempting to deter a nation with advanced nuclear weapons must be considered . Next, when considering military options involving Russia, the risk of trying to deter the nation is considered .
Currently, Russian military doctrine advocates the use of nuclear weapons as means of “de-escalating’s a conflict once war is initiated . Currently, Russia's military doctrine says nuclear weapons can be used as a way to de-escalate conflict .
 Russia’s interests in the Baltic republics are implicitly greater than those of the West . The threatened use of nuclear weapons would deter Western nations from military intervention .
 Russian aggression before hostilities occurs is vitally important to preventing great expenditure of national blood and treasure .
 To remedy these problems, there are several near-term military options that are available to U.S. and NATO leaders .
 A permanent stationing of forces in the Baltic republics would be ideal considering the current threat . A sufficient military presence could still be established through the use of rotational forces .
 NATO should establish a standing joint force in the Baltic republics of sufficient size and strength to cause Russia's leaders to take a serious pause when considering the costs and risks of a “snatch and grab” invasion .
 Russia would act as a “trip wire’ that would prevent Russia from taking territory in the Baltics without first engaging U.S. or other Western militaries, thereby raising their costs and risks.
 NATO should invest in infrastructure which enables the rapid insertion of forces that are otherwise kept nearby and outside of direct assault . Second, to further demonstrate the Alliance’s commitment to the region, NATO must invest in the infrastructure that enables rapid insertion.
 The U.S. should contribute assets such as Close Air Support aircraft and Air Defense assets to the Baltic States, which would have a strong deterrent effect. Third, the United States should contribute Assets such as close air support aircraft and air defense assets .
 The U.S. should expand its efforts to strengthen bilateral partnerships with the Baltic militaries to increase its capabilities and ability to integrate equipment into the NATO structure .
 The benefits of a closer partnership would largely be in pre-integrating U.S., NATO, and Baltic nations command structures in the event of hostilities .
Russia's military options are unlikely to prevent a large scale invasion of the Baltic region by Russian forces . If Moscow determined that was their only option, forward deploying NATO troops, investing in Baltic military infrastructure, and further integrating the Baltic militaries into existing U.S. and NATO military structures
 Russia’s economy was significantly impacted as the result of stringent economic sanctions imposed by the U.S. and the E.U. combined with sharply declining oil-prices since mid-2014 .
 U.S. should be prepared to exercise available “sticks’ by further tightening existing sanctions. Conversely, if economic “carrots’ are ineffective, the United States should be ready to exercise “stick’s’.
 U.S. should consider expanding coalition of nations willing to stand up to threat of Russian revanchism, especially those with close economic ties that could be induced through favorable “off-set” agreements .
 The Baltic republics have become less susceptible to Russian economic leverage during the past decade . Ukraine and Georgia have become more susceptible to Russia through greater integration into Europe's economic system .
 The U.S. could choose to side with Russia in international disputes outside the Baltic region . In addition, the United States could also choose to sides with Russia.
 U.S. could put its diplomatic and economic weight towards a favorable resolution for Russia in its disputes with Japan in the East China Sea or with Canada and Norway in the Arctic region .
 Either of these actions could offer favorable inducements for Russia to avoid antagonizing the situation in the Baltic region further, and thereby improve stability .
 The U.S. government is projected to provide the Baltic republics approximately $100 million dollars in fiscal year 2016 . The European Response Initiative is part of the European Response initiative .
 The U.S. should make its economic assistance targeted and conditional on actions that minimize the Baltic states' vulnerabilities . The Baltic states face hybrid threats, the United States says .
 Baltic government should be encouraged to positively address the causes of perceived civic inequities of the Russian minority population . Baltic government must also increase investment in and modernization of their militaries .
 The United States President should be prepared to make the case to Congress about the necessity of strengthening America's partnerships with the Baltic governments in order to deter the threat of Russian aggression .
 He 15 should make clear that if deterrence fails the ultimate cost to the U.S. and its allies will be much greater . He should make it clear that the cost of deterrence will be greater if it fails .
 The U.S. and NATO should make diplomatically clear that they will act in a timely and forceful manner if the Baltic republics are threatened .
 At the strategic level, the U.S. and NATO should communicate their commitment to use all instruments of power to deter Russia from aggressive action in the Baltics .
 NATO should establish a “standing’s joint force in the Baltic republics. Militarily, it should be a ‘standing” joint force, NATO says .
 The U.S. could offer assistance in settling long standing economic disputes between Russia and the Baltic republics .
 The costs of failing to deter Russia’s revanchist ambitions are clear, says the author . The costs are clear.
 It is in the interests of both the U.S. and NATO to act now while the strategic situation favors deterrence .
 U.S. leaders must encourage member nations to act with one voice and against threats to the Alliance and the Western values it represents . The potential for fractured opinions inside NATO is a concern .
 The United States and NATO can show a credible and communicated capability to deter Russian threats by employing 17 ways and means across the diplomatic, informational, military, and economic realms to minimize the vulnerability of the Baltic republics to hybrid warfare .
 The maneuver was not recognized by most of the international community . This maneuver was seen as a move that was not accepted by many of the world's leaders .
 The criteria for effective "deterrence" discussed during interview with Colonel Mark K Ciero . The criteria were also discussed .
 The U.S. should send more nuclear weapons to Europe, says Brookings . The United States has sent more nuclear Weapons to Europe than ever .
 The Baltic Nations and Europe, 193 countries, are based in Europe and the United States .
Mark J. Conversino, Professor, School of Advanced Aerospace Studies College, Alabama, is a professor at the University of Alabama . Conversino is a member of the U.S. Air Force Academy in Alabama .
 Ciero, Mark K., Colonel, Director of Management for the Commander of Allied Air Command, was interviewed on 30 September 2015 . He was interviewed by the U.S. Air Force commander of the Allied Air Force .