 The leader of the Ukrainian terror force in the Crimea by the Russian FSB was arrested . He has a confession .
 Yevgeny Panov was born in 1977 in the town of Dneprovka, Zaporojie Region, Ukraine . His name is Yev Geny Panova .
 He has admitted to so-called Anti-terrorist operations in Eastern Ukraine from August 2014 to August 2015 . He participated in the war against the separatists of Donbass .
 He was recruited by the Ukrainian security service in Kiev for acts of sabotage in Crimea, he said .
 During his confession, he submitted the names of five other accomplices . The confession was made during his confession .
 The FSB has recorded the interrogation, and Rossiya'24 has sent the Video where I saw it . The Russian news channel has sent it to the FSB .
 The group also includes Sambul Alexei and a guy whose name I don't know, but the Codename Deshikh module . The group is also known as 'Deshikh'
 "Our task was targets for Sabotage reconnoiter," says Panov . The mission was "to perform"
 Poroshenko government sanction has exported Terror against civilian facilities in the Crimea. What we know for now, Poroshenko has commanded Terror against civilians in Crimea .
 He was brought of Obama, Merkel and co. to Power and is supported . So he is a war criminal, one of the was brought to Power . He is also a war Criminal .
 The Russian Ministry of foreign Affairs presented evidence to the head of the EU Delegation in Moscow . Vygaudas Usackas detailed evidence about the attempt of the Ukrainian Ministry of defense, terrorist attacks and acts of sabotage in the Crimea .
 The Russian Prime Minister Dimitry Medvedev said he excludes a termination of diplomatic relations with the Ukraine . The Russian PM said there is no other Option if there is not an option .
Medvedev said in response to Kiev's attempt terrorist attacks in the Crimea . If there is no other Option to the Situation to influence, then the President may so-make a decision .
 The Prime Minister said he considered the subversive act in the Crimea as a crime against the Russian state and its population .
 FSB interception of Ukrainian sabotage groups attempting to infiltrate Crimea raise tensions . FSB intercepted of Ukrainian sabotaging groups.
 Russian forces and alleged Ukrainian infiltrators killed several people in a shoot out in Crimea . Ukrainian sabotage groups claimed to have attempted to infiltrate the peninsula .
Three Ukrainian sabotage groups connected to the Main Intelligence Directorate of Ukraine’s Defence Ministry . One FSB operative and one Russian soldier caught up in the shoot outs .
 Other reports speak of the death of at least two Ukrainian infiltrators, and of the capture of several others . However the FSB report does not confirm the reports .
 Ukrainian armed forces’ standard special weapons were found in one of the locations involved in the incident . The FSB report does however speak of twenty improvised explosive devices containing more than 40 kilograms of TNT equivalent, ammunition, fuses, antipersonnel and magnetic bombs, grenades and the Ukrainian
 The FSB report also says that several Ukrainian and Russian citizens belonging to an undercover spy ring operating inside Crimea have been arrested on charges of planning to help the saboteurs .
 Yevgeny Panov is a resident of Ukraine's Zaporozhye region born in 1977 . The FSB says he is an employee of the Ukrainian Defence Ministry's Main Intelligence Directorate .
 Some Russian media reports have suggested that the intention was to create “false flag’s incidents’ that would set Crimea and Russia against each other .
 The reference to “critical infrastructure and life support facilities on the peninsula’s peninsula does not however support this . It does not.
 It suggests an attempt to disrupt power supplies and possibly water treatment plants at the height of Crimea’s tourist season .
 The Ukrainians for their part deny all the allegations . They claim that the whole incident has been invented by the Russians .
 The Western media is following the Ukrainian line with wild speculations that the Russians have fabricated the whole incident in order to justify a Russian invasion of Ukraine during the Olympic Games .
 The full truth of this incident will only become known over time – when or if people like Panov are put on trial – there is actually no reason to doubt that the Russian account is true .
 The Russians are hardly likely to arrange the death of one of their own FSB operatives and of their soldiers in order to fabricate an incident like this . The report of the capture of several of the saboteurs, and the arrest of the members of the spy ring which was created
Ukrainian leaders frequently speak of Ukraine being at war with Russia . It is not difficult to see why they might authorise a sabotage mission of this sort .
 Ukrainian plan was to claim that the attacks were the result of local anti-Russian resistance cells, thereby fostering the fiction that there is opposition to its unification with Russia .
 Ukrainian leadership has been a cause of serious embarrassment to the Ukrainian leadership and its Western backers . There has been no real evidence of such opposition up to now, says the Ukrainian leader .
Two days ago I reported about a meeting Putin had with his security chiefs which appeared to have been hurriedly convened in a secret location . Two days ago, I reported on a meeting with Putin's security chiefs .
I speculated that the meeting was held to discuss the situation in Aleppo . I speculated that it was to discuss situation in the city .
 Aleppo was discussed at this meeting as shown by the presence of Foreign Minister Lavrov and the Kremlin’s account of the meeting . The meeting also discussed the situation in Crimea, and the reports of the Ukrainian sabotage mission there .
 Putin linked the incident to the attempted murder of Igor Plotnitsky, the leader of the Lugansk People’s Republic . Putin held a joint press conference with Armenia's President Sargsyan .
 If true that would suggest that the government in Kiev is now turning to assassination and sabotage tactics in order to keep the struggle with Russia going .
 It is not clear how planting bombs in Crimea could aid a military offensive in the Donbass . Alternatively it could be that the Ukrainians have carried out these operations in preparation for the summer offensive . It has yet to happen .
 Ukrainians might be sensing a weakening in European support and might have launched the operation in order to heighten tensions and to rally support and to further undermine the Minsk II peace process .
 Putin has made it very clear that the Russians are taking it extremely seriously . Whatever the precise motivations behind this incident, Putin has said it is very clear .
 He has already said that there will no Normandy Four meeting with Merkel, Hollande and Poroshenko at the forthcoming G20 summit in China . He has also said there will be no Normandy four meeting with Hollande, Hollande, Poroshenko and Hollande .
 Russian operatives accused of carrying out violent actions on Russian territory . The Russians continue to recognise Ukrainian as Ukrainian .
 The Russian FSB averted terrorist acts in the Republic of Crimea . It was being prepared by the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine .
 The goal of the attacks was the destabilisation of the socio-political situation on the peninsula prior to approaching elections to the federal and regional governmental institutions .
 The search operations carried out during the night of 6/7 August 2016 in the city of Armyansk, Republic of Crimea, uncovered a group of saboteurs .
 An FSB operative was killed by enemy gunfire while attempting to detain the terrorists .
 The follow-on measures on the territory of the Republic of Crimea eliminated a network of agents operated by the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 Ukrainian and Russian citizens, engaged in the preparation of terrorist attacks, were arrested . They are now giving evidence .
 Yevgeniy Aleksandrovich Panov, born 1977, is an inhabitant of the Zaporozhye Region of Ukraine . He is an operative of the Main Intelligence Directorate of Ukrainian MOD, who has also been arrested and is giving evidence .
Ukrainian MOD special operations units attempted two more infiltrations by saboteur units during the night of August 8, 2016 .
 The infiltration effort was covered by heavy fire from the adjacent country, including by armored vehicles belonging to Ukrainian military .
 Russia has warned Ukraine against efforts to revise the status of the Sea of Azov in violation of international law . Russia has urged Kiev to refrain from attempts to unilaterally establish new state borders .
 Tensions climaxed on Sunday after Ukrainian ships entered Russian territorial waters . Tensions escalated on Sunday.
 Three Ukrainian ships crossed into temporarily off-limits Russian territorial waters in November . The ships violated Articles 19 and 21 of the United Nations Convention of Sea Law .
 Two Ukrainian vessels were heading towards the Kerch Strait in the Sea of Azov . The security service described it as a zone where a “provocation, organised by Kiev, was unfolding .
 Russia deployed its own naval assets, as well as combat aircraft, with Su-25 jets patrolling the area in the vicinity of the Crimean Bridge .
 FSB vessels went on to pursue the intruders, who failed to respond to demands to leave the Kerch Strait . The Russian side opened fire, prompting the Russian side to open fire .
 The three ships were eventually detained and escorted to the port of Kerch . They were eventually escorted to Kerch.
 The Russian Foreign Ministry accused Ukraine of an “unequivocal provocation’ and aggression . The Foreign Ministry said Ukraine was violating key provisions of international law .
Russian border guards acted in compliance with international law to curb the foreign intrusion and protect the country’s territory from violators .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko signed a decree introducing martial law in the country . The decree would be effective from November 26 to January 25, 2019 .
 Kiev encouraged its Western partners to step up sanctions on Russia . Kiev also encouraged its West partners tostep up sanctions .
 Ukrainian ships violated international law by illegally entering Russia’s territorial waters . The West was quick to blame the escalation of the situation in the Kerch Strait.
 Tensions in the Sea of Azov mounted this year after Ukraine detained two Russian vessels heading to ports in Crimea . Ukraine detained the vessels, which Kiev considers to be Ukrainian territory .
 Russia increased patrols off the country’s Azov coast, which prompted Kiev to accuse Moscow of illegal searches .
 Ukrainian parliament passed a draft law last month enabling Kiev to expand maritime controls over an additional 12 nautical miles off its southern coast . The law is ostensibly to curb smuggling in the Black Sea .
 Most recently, Russia warned Ukraine against any attempts to alter the status of the Sea of Azov as inland waters shared by the countries .
 Moscow urges Kiev to refrain from any steps to unilaterally establish a state border in the Sea of Azov . Such efforts would be deemed as a violation of international laws, Moscow says .
Ukraine's Crimean peninsula declared itself independent Monday after its residents voted overwhelmingly to secede and join Russia . The United States and the European Union slapped sanctions against some of those who promoted the divisive referendum .
 Ukraine's political turmoil has become Europe's most severe security crisis in years . Tensions have been high since Russian troops seized control of Crimea two weeks ago .
 Large numbers of Russian troops are also massed near the border with Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine . The region has sharp political differences with the new government in Kiev .
 The U.S., EU and Ukraine's new government do not recognize the referendum held Sunday in Crimea . They say the referendum violates both Ukrainian and international norms .
 Moscow considers the vote legitimate and Russian President Putin was to address both houses of parliament Tuesday . Moscow, however, considers it legitimate and Putin is to address the Crimean situation .
 Crimean referendum could also encourage rising pro-Russian sentiment in Ukraine's east and lead to further divisions in this nation of 46 million . The Crimean referendum was held in Crimea in March .
 Crimean lawmakers were traveling to Moscow on Monday for negotiations on how to proceed . A delegation of Crimean lawmakers was traveling to Russia on Monday .
 Russian lawmakers have suggested that formally annexing Crimea is almost certain with one saying it could happen within days . Russian lawmakers say the annexation could happen in days .
 Those living on the strategic Black Sea peninsula applauded the move, since it received over 97 percent backing from voters .
 Nikolay Drozdenko, a resident in Sevastopol, the key Crimean port where Russia leases a naval base from Ukraine . "We came back home, Russia is our home," he said .
 Crimean parliament declared that all Ukrainian state property on the peninsula will be nationalized . The Crimean Republic will become the property of the Crimean Republic .
 Lawmakers also asked the United Nations and other nations to recognize it and began work on setting up a central bank with $30 million in support from Russia .
 The United States announced sanctions against seven Russian officials . EU's foreign ministers slapped travel bans and asset freezes against 21 officials from Russia and Ukraine following Crimea referendum .
 The ministers did not immediately release the names and nationalities of those targeted by the sanctions . The ministers have not yet released the names of the targets .
 The Crimeans who voted to join Russia are now ever more convinced they're on their way . The diplomatic standoff between Moscow and the West has been tense .
 As soon as the tally was in, the party on the streets in the Crimean capital of Simferopol started .
 Crimea's new prime minister said aloud what many in the crowd before him were feeling . Palmer says Crimea's newly-elected leader said aloud. Palmer: "I'm sorry for what I've done to Crimea"
 The Crimean government said 83 percent of voters cast ballots for Russia . Most of them were convinced that a vote for Russia was aVote for a better life .
 Moscow calls on Ukraine to become a federal state as a way of resolving polarization . Ukraine's western regions favor closer ties with the 28-nation EU and its eastern areas, which have long ties to Russia .
 Russia's Foreign Ministry urges Ukraine's parliament to call a constitutional assembly that could draft a new constitution . The new constitution would give Ukraine more power to its regions .
 The new government in Kiev emerged after pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych fled to Russia last month after three months of protests culminated in deadly clashes .
 Ukraine's Foreign Minister Andriy Deshchytsya visited NATO headquarters in Brussels to request technical equipment to deal with the secession of Crimea and Russian incursion there .
 NATO says it is determined to boost its cooperation with Ukraine . NATO said in a statement the alliance was determined to strengthen its ties with the country .
 Deshchytsya said he also talked with NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen about sending monitors to Ukraine . The move would certainly inflame Russia .