 By the end of 2013, political turmoil broke out in Ukraine after the riots on Maidan Square . Over 70 protesters were killed in the riots .
 President Yanukovych fled to Russia and was removed from power by the parliament in Kyiv . President Yanukovych was ousted from power in the country's parliament .
 An interim government was appointed and presidential elections were set for 25 May 2014 . The interim government has been appointed and the presidential elections are set for May 2014.
 Petro Poroshenko won these elections and got installed as the new President of Ukraine . Businessman Poroshenko was elected President of the Ukraine .
 Russia took control of the autonomous region of Crimea in the wake of the ousting of President Yanukovych .
 On 16 March 2014 an overwhelming majority in this region voted to join Russia . In a referendum unrecognised by the rest of the world, Russia joined the country .
 Ukrainians went to the polls in October 2014 to elect a new Ukrainian parliament . In October 2014 Ukrainians voted for a new parliament .
 Pro-Western parties won an overwhelming majority during these elections . Pro- Western parties won a majority of votes in the elections .
 The self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics in Donbas decided not to allow for these elections . They decided to hold their own, a week later . The Self-proclaimed republics held their own elections .
 He is a Ukrainian billionaire businessman . He got elected as the fifth and current President of Ukraine . He is also a former Ukrainian President .
 Poroshenko served as the Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2009 to 2010 . He also served as Minister of Trade and Economic Development in 2012 .
 From 2007 until 2012, he headed the Council of Ukraine's National Bank . He is currently in charge of the National Bank of Ukraine .
 He was elected president on 25 May 2014, capturing more than 54 percent of the votes in the first round . He won outright and avoided a runoff .
 During the parliamentary elections on 26 October 2014 his bloc became the largest party in parliament . During the elections he became the biggest party in Parliament .
 Volodymyr Borysovych Groysman was born in 1978 in Vinnytsia into a Jewish family . He is the son of a Jewish father and father of two children .
 In 1994 he started his career as a commercial director of his father's small private business company . He is now aCommercial director of a private enterprise . He has been a director of the company since 1994 .
 In 2002, he was elected as a member of the Vinnytsia City Council . He was elected in 2002 local elections .
 Groysman was elected head of the city council and acting mayor in November 2005 . In 2006, he was elected as mayor, whereafter in 2006 he waselected as mayor .
 Groysman became vice prime minister for regional policy and minister of regional development, construction and housing and communal services of Ukraine in the first Yatsenyuk government .
 Groysman was elected into parliament after being in the top 10 of the Petro Poroshenko Bloc's electoral list . In the 2014 parliamentary elections, Groysmen was elected to parliament .
At the first session of the new parliament, he was elected as chairman . He was elected at the first parliament session . He is the chairman of the parliament .
 Ukraine has a parliamentary presidential system, which means that the country elects on national level a head of state, the president, and a legislature . The country also elects a president, a legislature and a parliament .
 The president needs a majority of the votes in the first round to be elected . President Barack Obama needs to win majority of votes in first round .
 Only the two candidates with the highest amount of votes can compete . Otherwise a second round is held .
 Half of the members were elected by proportional representation and the other half by single-mandate constituencies . Until 2005, half of the lawmakers were elected in proportional representation .
 From that moment on, candidates can be elected through party lists or self-nomination . From that time, candidates are able to choose their own party list or party lists .
 The constitution prescribes that the governmental parties must have a majority in parliament . The constitution also says that the government parties must be in power .
 minority coalitions are formally no option for government coalitions . Thus, minority coalition is no option.
 Representative bodies and heads of local government throughout Ukraine are elected simultaneously with the Verkhovna Rada . The Verkhova Rada is the country's second largest body of government .
 President Yanukovych abandoned a trade agreement with the European Union in November 2013 . He favoured closer ties with Russia .
 Hundreds of thousands of people were on the streets within days, dubbed the Maidan protest . After the protesters were beaten at night by police, the videos of the incident went viral .
 The Maidan protests resulted in pro-EU protesters occupying the Maidan square and taking control of government buildings for months .
Clashes between pro-EU protesters and police resulted in an apogee on 18 February 2014, when over 70 protesters were killed . Over 70 people were killed in the clashes between the two sides .
 In the political turmoil that followed, President Yanukovich fled the country to Russia .
 An interim government was appointed with Olexander Turchynov as interim president . The interim government has been named as an interim government .
Pro-Russian protests broke out in eastern Ukraine and the southern province of Crimea . In the weeks that followed, pro-Russian demonstrations broke out.
 Pro-Russian and Russian forces took control of government buildings and strategic military complexes in the Crimea on 27 February . Tensions between Ukraine and Russia have increased between the two countries .
 Crimea joined Russia trough a referendum in which an overwhelmingly majority voted in favour of Russia . On 16 March 2014, Crimea joined the Crimea in a referendum .
 The West claims this is a violation of territorial integrity and violation of international law . Russia says it had to protect its Russian citizens in Crimea .
 In the months following the annexation of the Crimea by Russia, the conflict reached a climax .
 The event sparked international outrage and triggered the close involvement of the international community . The event has been described as 'the most significant event in history'
 The European Union, the U.S. and other countries intensified sanctions on pro-Russian separatists and Russia . The EU, the United States and others intensified sanctions.
 Donetsk and Lugansk declared themselves independent from Ukraine on 11 September 2014 . Meanwhile, the provinces of Donetsk, Lugansk and Donetsk declared themselvesindependent from Ukraine .
 Both parties agreed to a ceasefire in the capital of Belarus, Minsk, on 6 September 2014 . The ceasefire was agreed to by both parties .
 This so-called Minsk I ceasefire was violated continuesly, and got out of control in January 2015 . The ceasefire was broken by the Russian government, but it was never broken .
 In February, Ukraine, Lugansk, Donetsk and Russia agreed to the Minsk II accords, and a new ceasefire was born . The ceasefire was in place in February .
 Pro-Russian separatists opened an offensive on the strategic city of Debaltseve in the first week . The Ukrainian army retreated from the area, which led to their victory .
 Both parties seem to abide by the Minsk II accords, although fighting remains an every-day activity .
 President Poroshenko announced that he intended to hold early parliamentary elections as soon as the political chaos in the East had been resolved .
 On 25 August Poroshenko dissolved the parliament and announced that early elections would be held on 26 October 2014 . The parliament was dissolved on 25 August .
 Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk already announced that he wanted to resign . Two parties left the coalition government after two parties left.
 parliament voted against this, forcing him to remain Prime Minister until the early elections . However, he was forced to remain PM until early elections in early 2015 .
 These elections on 26 October were won, by an overwhelming majority, by pro-Western parties . The elections were held on 26 November .
 Preliminary results show Poroshenko’s Bloc will likely have the most MPs overall . Preliminary single-mandate districts results showed that Poroshenko's Bloc would likely have most MPs .
Ukrainian election watchdog: "attempts to bribe voters in this election were probably as common as under President Viktor Yanukovych" A local observer from the OPORA election watchdog said .
 In general, candidates were free to campaign, and the election campaign was competitive and visible . But in general, candidate's campaign was free to run, and candidates were able to campaign .
 Misuse of administrative resources was not named as a major concern, unlike in previous elections .
 The OSCE's preliminary findings showed that democratic principles were generally respected . Overall, the OSCE’s preliminary findings show thatdemocratic principles are generally respected.
 With all votes counted, the Central Election Commission showed six parties passing the 5 percent electoral threshold and thus entering Ukrainian Parliament .
Far right-wing party Svoboda seems not to have made it into parliament, with 4.71 percent of the votes . The far-right party has been criticised for being too conservative .
 The far-right wing party Svoboda released a statement claiming ‘mass falsifications’ based on the difference between the exit polls and the actual results .
 The party believes that it had in fact passed the 5 percent threshold, and that the alleged falsifications are the result of efforts by Russian President Putin and his ‘agents’ in Ukraine .
 CEC Chair Mikhail Ohendovski promised the party to check the ballot protocols of the districts where Svoboda believes falsifications took place .
 These two breakaway regions held their own elections on 2 November 2014 . The two breakaways were held in November 2014.
 Only 42 percent of the people in the Donetsk region were able to vote in the elections . 26 percent in Luhansk were ableto vote in October .
 The EU has not recognized the elections of 2 November in the Donbas and stated that they were illegal . The EU does not recognize the elections.
 The OSCE said it would have nothing to do with the elections . The organisation did not send any international observers to the election .
 On March 31 2019 the first round of presidential elections was held in Ukraine . The Ukrainian presidential elections were held in March .
 Comedian Volodymyr Zelensky enjoyed 30.23 percent of the votes so far . Central Election Commission now has counted 99.88 percent of votes .
 Zelensky, 41, is best known for his role in the political comedy series Servant of the People . He plays a teacher that becomes president of Ukraine through some extraordinary circumstances .
 During his anti-establishment campaign he mocked his political rivals with jokes, sketches and other performances .
 Zelensky promised that, if elected, he will fight against corruption and for reforms . He also promised that if elected he would fight for reforms.
 He promised to address and implement peace talks for eastern Ukraine . He also pledged to address peace talks.
 He also wants to implement a new law on ‘People’s Rule’ in order to establish referendums where Ukrainians could express their expectations for the authorities .
 The 2014 elections were held in Ukraine on Sunday 25 May as former president Yanukovych was ousted by the Euro Maidan revolution on 22 February .
 Petro Poroshenko, the winner of the presidential elections with 54. percent of the votes, became president of a country in chaos .
 Two eastern regions declared independence and were plagued by violence . The country faces bankruptcy as the country faces a bankruptcy .
 The new president of Ukraine was tasked with restoring peace and order in the country . Ukraine's new president is expected to take over from President Vladimir Putin .
 Many of the people in the eastern part of the country were not able to vote . Many people were not allowed to vote.
 The Kyiv government lost control in large parts of the Donbas region where separatists did not allow people to vote . The government was losing control in the region .
 Donetsk, home to one million Ukrainians, not a single polling station was opened . In the city of Donetsk, the city is home to 1 million Ukrainians .
 voter turnout in the eastern regions of Ukraine was very low . With the rise of armed groups, the increase of paramilitary activity and a population that distrusts Kyiv, voter turnout was low .
 The elections were seen as the most important since Ukrainian independence . The elections are seen as most important in Ukraine since independence .
 It lost its ideological vestiges of the past and opted for reform . It also lost its ideology and opted to reform .
 The new program underscored the need to carry out privatization, implement changes to the tax and criminal codes, fight corruption and introduce a pro-European foreign policy .
 The SPU calls itself democratic socialistic, but shows signs of social democracy . The S PU calls itself socialistic. But it calls itself "socialistic"
After the Orange Revolution, which it supported, the SPU ran independently in the 2006 parliamentary elections . The Orange Revolution was formed in the wake of the 2006 Orange Revolution .
 It received 33 seats in the Verkhovna Rada, and was part of the governing coalition . It is one of the most popular parties in the country .
 In 2007, the party did not pass the threshold of 3 percent, winning only 2,86 percent of the votes . In the 2007 parliamentary elections, the Party did not win enough votes .
 Analysts say this loss could be explained by disagreement over coalition-participation of the SPU after the 2006 elections .
 SPU changed sides, leaving the Orange Revolution partners to join the coalition of Prime Minister Yanukovych . Timoshenko portrayed the SPU and its leader as unreliable traitors .
 The party won 0.46 percent of the national votes in the parliamentary elections of 2012 and no constituencies, and thus failed again to pass the electoral threshold .
 Petro Poroshenko Bloc is a political party in Ukraine created on 27 August 2014 . The party was created in August 2014. It is the first political party created in Ukraine .
 The Petro Poroshenko Bloc is a liberal-conservative party, previously known as Solidarity party . The party was set up by the current President of Ukraine in 2001 . It was previously called Solidarity Party, which was set-up by the president of Ukraine .
 In August 2014, Solidarity was renamed to Petro Poroshenko Bloc . Yuriy Lutsenko, the former Minister of Internal Affairs, was unanimously elected its head .
 The party's main objective is helping Poroshenko implement his election promises . Poroshenko wants to become a member of the European Union, enhancing social protection and ending corruption .
 The party's current election program is called 'Strategy 2020' and aims to implement 60 reforms and special programs that will make Ukraine eligible to apply for EU membership within six years .
 The party's position also includes open list elections, decentralisation, creation of independent media . The party also includes abolishment of immunity of senior officials, privatization of all Ukrainian coal mines and liquidation of all mines .
 The party is also concerned with ethnic issues within the country . It is aiming to ensure language rights for Russian speakers at the same time maintaining Ukrainian as the official language .
 In the War in Donbass the party advocates an end to the conflict by peaceful means . The party is in charge of the conflict in the region .
 In the latest parliamentary elections it won 29 seats, making it the 4th largest party in the country .
 ‘Leading force’ was founded in 2010 but did not participate in the parliamentary elections of 2012 . It was the successor of another party called “Leading Force’s’. It did not take part in the 2012 elections .
 Six parties who all did not want to endorse Euromaidan decided to merge and take part in the 2014 parliamentary elections as Opposition Bloc . The party started working on 14 September 2014, after a forum took place in Kiev based on Peace, Stability and revival .
 Paulafort was hired as an advisor to the presidential administration of Ukraine . He was hired by an American lobbyist.
Opposition Bloc advised to create new political party called Opposition Bloc . Instead, he decided to argue to help stabilize Ukraine, and create a new party .
 Yuriy Boyko headed the party’s election list, though he also mentioned that Opposition Bloc does not represent parties, but rather consists of only individual politicians .
 On 27 November 2014, an opposition bloc parliamentary faction of 40 people was formed . The opposition bloc was formed in November 2014 .
 Following the 2015 local elections, Opposition Bloc was one of the winners .
 They want to protect Russian as a regional language, and want maximum decentralization . They also want to protection Russian as an regional language .
 Batkyvschina has been in parliament since the 2002 parliamentary elections . As the core party of the former Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc, Batkyvchina is a former member of the party that was once in power .
 After the November 2011 banning of the participation of blocs of political parties in parliamentary elections, the party became a major force in Ukrainian politics .
 In the 2012 parliamentary elections the party also added "United Opposition" to its name . The party also aligns several other parties under its colours .
 The main goal of the forum was to form an electoral bloc aiming to oust President Kuchma . The forum was aimed at forming a bloc to oust the President . It was also aimed to form a bloc aimed to oust Kuchman .
 BYuT cooperated with Our Ukraine in the 2004 presidential elections, supporting Viktor Yushchenko's candidacy .
 Once Yushchenko was appointed President after the Orange Revolution, Tymoshenko became Prime Minister . Once YUSHchenko was appointed President, he became PM .
 Yushchenko sacking Tymoshenko on accusations of corruption . However, the cooperation faltered and finally resulted in the sacking of the Ukrainian leader .
 BYuT then ran independently in the 2006 parliamentary elections . It became the second largest party, beating Our Ukraine .
 Shortly after the elections, it was announced that BYuT and Our Ukraine – People’s Self Defense Bloc formed a coalition .
 Yanukovych won the presidential elections in 2010 and the parliament ousted Tymoshenko 's coalition in a no-confidence vote . After the election in 2010, he went into the opposition again .
 Yanukovych needed the support of several extra MPs to obtain a majority in parliament . In order to obtain the majority, Yanukovych needed a majority of extra MPs .
 Tymoshenko had to go to jail after being found guilty of abuse of power . Theoshenko was sentenced to 7 years in prison .
 She also had other lawsuits running against her as well, connected to her time as prime minister .
 In July 2012 members of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People joined this list . Members of the Crimea Tatar people joined the list .
 Front for Change leader Arseniy Yatsenyuk is still the party's leader in parliament . Tymoshenko was imprisoned at the time and is still a member of the party .
 Tymoshenko was released from prison during the Maidan revolution of 2014 . She hasn't managed to regain the prominent role that she had in Ukrainian politics .
 In its current form the party was founded on 24 April 2010 on the basis of the Vitali Klitschko Bloc, a local political alliance .
 The party’s election list was a mixture of candidates who used to represent parties from all over the political spectrum of Ukraine .
 In the 2012 parliamentary elections UDAR won 13.97 percent of the national votes and 6 constituencies and thus 40 parliamentary seats . UDAR was elected to 40 seats in the parliament .
 Klitschko was one of the political leaders representing the Maidan at talks with Yanukovich and the European leaders . He was a political leader at talks.
 The All-Ukrainian Union “Svoboda’s’ was formed in February 2004 with the arrival of Oleh Tyahnybok as party leader .
 Svoboda is a Ukrainian nationalist party that often voices opposition to perceived Russian influences in Ukraine . The party is a political party that has been linked to Russia .
 The party is known for its anti-communist stance . Several party activists over the years have been accused of trying to destroy communist-era statues .
 Svoboda claims to receive no financial support from oligarchs, but rather from small and medium-sized businesses . oligarchs have typically played a major role in funding of other Ukrainian parties .
 The party has been accused of racism and anti-Semitism, which it denies . The party denies the allegations .
 Svoboda went up from a marginal regional party to a power represented in the parliament within only a few years . The party was once a marginal party.
 The Azarov government was seen as too pro-Russian by the electorate . Its success was preceded by a local success, analysts say .
 The Our Ukraine Bloc was officially formed in February 2002 . It united ten nationalist and centre-right parties that emerged during the time Ukraine gained independence .
 The gathered parties historically all had an anti-communist rhetoric . Their goals were to keep distance from Russia and strengthen Ukraine’s statehood .
 The bloc's priorities are a significant increase in the wellbeing of the majority of Ukraine’s citizens . A strong economy and effective social protection are among the priorities . A just society and the establishment of a moral and honest government.
 In 2004 the Our Ukraine bloc and the Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc united forces in the presidential elections . Both backing Yushchenko’s candidacy in the Orange Revolution .
 On 26 December 2004 Our Ukraine’s leader Viktor Yushchenko was elected as president .
 On 5 March 2005, parts of the Our Ukraine Bloc consolidated into a new party, Our Ukraine People's Union . The party was formed in 2005 .
 The party tries to transform its image from right wing nationalist to liberal . The party is trying to change its image.
 With the country’s economy in decline, it grew in popularity and re-emerged during the 1994 parliamentary elections .
 The CPU received a lot of protest votes, but analysts predicted a decline because of aging of their electorate and the outdating of their Soviet nostalgia .
 After the 2006 elections, the party had only 21 seats, but in 2007 elections, it regained some seats . In the 2007 elections it won 27 seats, winning a total of 27 seats in the Rada .
 The communists are loosening their Soviet style arguments. They argue for respect for private business, freedom of religion, a multi-party system and foreign investments .
 Petro Symonenko state policy should be based on balancing real incomes and expenditures, according to their leader . The surplus should be spent on services like education and healthcare .
 After graduation she worked as an engineer-economist in a machine-building plant in Dnepropetrovsk .
 She and her husband headed several commercial enterprises, including oil and gas trade . After that she went into private business and together with her husband, she headed several businesses .
 The latter grew into a multi-million enterprise and was in trouble with the tax authorities by 1996 . The former grew into an enterprise that was worth more than a million dollars .
 Tymoshenko claimed the authorities were harassing her because of political reasons . She said she was harassed by the authorities for political reasons.
 In 1997 Tymoshenko became first deputy to the leader of the All-National Movement Hramada, Pavel Lazarenko . He entered parliament for the first time in 1998 .
 In November 1998, she unexpectedly called for a dialogue with Kuchma . Lazrenko's authoritarian rule of Hramada was motivating this by his authoritarian rule .
 Tymoshenko was president of United Energy Systems of Ukraine in 2001 . She was arrested under charges of forging customs documents and smuggling gas between 1995 and 1997 .
 After her release she called on Yushchenko to head the opposition movement . She called on the opposition to head her own party .
 In 2004 Bloc Yulia Tymoshenko and Our Ukraine announced the creation of the Force coalition to support Yushchenko’s candidacy in the 2004 presidential elections . The coalition was formed to support the Ukrainian president's candidacy .
 The relationship between Yushchenko and Tymoshenko was bad and deteriorated even further over years among squabbles and power struggles .
 She ran for president in the 2010 election as the main rival to Victor Yanukovych, losing the Presidency by 3 percent of the votes . She ran as a main rival.
 Tymoshenko was found guilty of abuse of power and sentenced to 7 years in prison . She was released from jail following the Maidan revolution .
 Vitali Volodymyrovych Klitschko was born on 19 July 1971 in Belovodsk, Kyrgyzstan .
 He is the leader of the Ukrainian Democratic Alliance for Reform . He is also a former Member of the Ukraine parliament .
 Klitschko openly supported the candidacy of Viktor Yushchenko during the 2004 Ukrainian presidential elections and the following Orange Revolution .
 In 2005, Klitschko was appointed as an adviser to President Yushchenko .
 He was a leading figure in the 2013–2014 Euromaidan protests . He announced his possible candidacy for the Ukrainian presidency but later withdrew . He later endorsed Petro Poroshenko .
 Klitschko sees the European Union as Ukraine's model for future political and economic development .
 Klitschko's main concern is social standards and the economy of Ukraine . He also wants to improve Ukraine's social standards .
 He wants to ensure the independence of judges by switching from a system of appointed judges to elected judges . He wants the system of elected judges to be replaced with elected judges, he says .
Four years later, he was re-elected, but as a member of Victor Yushchenko’s Our Ukraine bloc . Four years after his re-election, he had been re- elected .
 He was expelled for mentioning Ukrainian Insurgent Army as an example of those who armed up against "Russians, Germans, Jews and other enemies who wanted to take away our Ukrainian state" Two years later, he was expelled.
 Svoboda won 37 seats in parliament in the 2012 parliamentary elections . In the 2012 elections Svobododia won 37 parliamentary seats .
In 2014 elections the party did not reach the 5 percent threshold in the party list voting . In 2014 elections, the party didn't reach the threshold of 5 percent in list voting.