 Russia’s FSB security service said the ships had illegally entered its territorial waters . Two small Ukrainian armoured artillery vessels and a tug boat were among the ships .
 The Sea of Azov is a vital shipping lane for Ukraine and Russia . It is part of a new escalation in tensions between the two countries . The strait is a narrow strait that is vital for both the rival nations .
 Sea of Azov is a northern extension of the Black Sea . It is just 15 kilometres wide . The Sea is linked via the Strait of Kerch, which is 15km wide .
 Dotted by busy industrial ports, the sea’s sole access to the Black Sea is this strategic strait . The Mediterranean is the Mediterranean's sole access.
 A treaty signed between Ukraine and Russia in December 2003 provided for common management of the sea and the strait . The treaty was signed in 2003 .
 It did not, though, demarcate the maritime border between the two countries . The two countries have not been formally separated .
 Russia’s internationally condemned annexation from Ukraine of the Crimea peninsula in 2014 gave it control of both sides of the strait . Moscow has been accused of since squeezing access for Ukrainian ships .
 A Russia-built bridge over the Strait of Kerch and linking mainland Russia to Crimea was inaugurated in May 2018, infuriating Ukraine and its EU and Nato allies . The bridge was designed to link Russia and Crimea to Crimea .
 President Vladimir Putin personally championed the Crimean Bridge project . He said it was the realisation of Russia’s historic ambitions .
 Ukraine says its larger ships are unable to get under the bridge’s 35-metre arches to and from its ports on the Azov Sea .
 The result for Ukraine is a significant drop in shipping traffic and economic losses . The result is a drop in ship traffic, economic losses and shipping traffic .
 In July the EU expanded its sanctions against Moscow to include companies involved in the bridge’s construction .
 Ukraine’s important port city of Mariupol is situated on the northern edge of the Sea of Azov . It has vital access to heavy industry in the eastern part of Ukraine .
 It is the only major city in southeastern Ukraine under government control . Pro-Russia separatists seized parts of the east in the wake of the annexation of Crimea .
 Donetsk and Lugansk regions, whose conflict with Kiev has caused at least 10,000 deaths since 2014 . This includes the Russian-backed rebel Donetsk and Donetsk regions, which have been in conflict since 2014.
 Mariupol, home to around 500,000 people, is dominated by two vast iron and steel businesses which together employ tens of thousands of people . The city is home to more than 1,500 people .
 Kiev and the West have accused Moscow of deliberately blocking ships from accessing the commercial port . The port is some 55km from the Russian border .
 Ukrainian media have reported that the Mariupol and the Berdyansk port saw earnings fall by almost a quarter during the first seven months of this year .
 Russia’s foreign ministry accused Ukraine of provoking an incident in the Kerch Strait near the peninsula of Crimea on Sunday . Russia's foreign ministry accuses Ukraine of creating a pretext for new sanctions to be imposed on Moscow .
 Russia seized two small Ukrainian artillery vessels and a tug boat . Moscow said the vessels had illegally entered Russia’s territorial waters .
 The foreign ministry said in a statement that it would respond harshly to any attempts to undermine its sovereign and security . The Foreign Ministry said in the statement that the foreign ministry will respond harshly.
 Nato to hold emergency meeting with Ukrainian officials at alliance headquarters in Brussels on Monday . Nato will hold an emergency meeting on Monday over the naval standoff off the coast of Crimea .
 Russia fired on and then seized three Ukrainian ships on Sunday . It accused them of illegally entering its waters in the Sea of Azov . The spike in tensions raises fears of a wider escalation .
N Nato chief Jens Stoltenberg held phone talks with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko . Officials from the two sides will meet later in the day .
 Kiev demands the return of its ships and sailors from Russia . Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 . Kiev demands return of ships, sailors .
 The Ukrainian military has been put on high alert . The country's parliament is to vote on a request by Poroshenko to impose martial law for 60 days .
 Ukraine has urged its Western allies to step up existing sanctions against Russia over Crimea and its role in the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine . Ukraine has also urged the West to step-up existing sanctions on Russia .