 House Resolution to send lethal arms to Ukraine also calls for a long-term strategy for overthrow of Vladimir Putin .
 The House's bill has nothing to do with Ukraine at all . The bill calls for lethal aid to Ukraine .
 The U.S. and its allies need a long-term strategy to expose and challenge Vladimir Putin’s corruption and repression at home and his aggression abroad . Let that sink in for a second.
 The U.S. Congress has put a “long term strategy’s’ to challenge Vladimir Putin . The goal is to challenge the democratically-elected President of Russia .
 House of Representatives has taken a big step toward re-igniting and expanding the bloody civil war . The House has taken the first step toward expanding the civil war.
 The bill demands that President Obama send lethal military equipment to the U.S.-backed government in Kiev . It makes it clear that the weapons are to be used to take military action to return Crimea and parts of eastern Ukraine to Kiev .
 Congress is giving Kiev the green light to begin a war with Russia, with the implicit guarantee of U.S. backing . U. S. backing is implicit in Congress's backing .
 S. President Barack Obama, Russian President Viadimir Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping are all in the top three spots .
 MACHIXE OUNiSHOT meet machine gun dealers, collectors and enthusiasts from all over the country .
 It's three days of machine gun shooting, dealer displays, shooting competitions and a spectacular Saturday Night Shoot .
 The machine gunners are shooting at a wide variety of used appliances, old vehicles and barrels of fuel with pyrotechnic charges attached, painted orange .
 Water Cooled Brownings, Mini-guns, AK-47s, MG-42s, Tommy Guns, M-16s, Vickers belt fed, Uzis, MP5s and others .
 The Military Gun Show draws dealers from across the country who buy, sell and sell and trade rifles, pistols, shotguns and machine guns .
 They sell ammo, military surplus, hard to find gun parts and much more . They also sell ammo and military surplus . They sell military surplus.
 Admission is $ 15 per person per day and for children under 12 it’s $5 per day . Admission for under 12s is $5 a day for children .
 This means NO loaded Firearms of any kind may be carried on Knob Creek property . This means no loaded firearms of any type may be carrying on KnOB Creek property.
 All firearms must be declared and zip tied with magazines out at the admission gate . All firearms should be declared, zip tied and declared at admission gate.
 The gun show area and lower ranges are included in the parking lot . The parking lot is also a popular destination for gun shows .
 Camping at Knob Creek Gun Range is offered on a first come first serve basis . Camping is pro-rated from $50.00 per person setup on Thursday to $20.00 on Saturday .
 ZOG finds it harder to control perceptions of the Islamic State in the West . ZOG has asked regional actors to move more strongly against the influence of the self-proclaimed Islamic State . None have responded quite as efficiently as Iran .
 CIA Director John Brennan worries that one Iranian general poses a significant threat to U.S. counterterrorism efforts . The CIA Director worries that the Iranian general, lauded by Iraqis, poses a serious threat .
 The CZECHS were told not to throw tomatoes and eggs at a U.S. military convoy rumbling through Eastern Europe . The local media reported the laws of the land were cited .
 Those in love with egg and tomato hurling may get up to three years if convicted . If convicted, they could get three years in prison .
 The Justice Department has ordered bank tellers across America to contact law enforcement if they suspect your cash withdrawal may have something to do with illicit activity .
 No proof needed, or any sort of red flag indicator merely suspicion, is now enough to have you investigated by authorities .
 FBI learned of massive spy ring inside the U.S. run by the government of Israel .
 The USS Iwo Jima and the USS Fort McHenry are on standby in the Red Sea . They are ready to respond at any time following the anti-ZOG uprising in Yemen .
 This is exactly the kind of chutzpah they tried in June 1967 with their USS Liberty gambit . This is the same type of chutpah that they tried with the USS Liberty in 1967 .
 10-year-old girl died on March 23 as a result of artillery shelling in the Petrovsky region of the city of Donetsk . In the Gorlovka area a 14- year-old boy became a victim of that shelling, a local news agency says .
 CALIFORNIA is heading into its fourth year of record-breaking drought with no liquid relief in sight . The drought is the fourth year in a row.
 High temperatures, little precipitation and historically low snow pack find the State with dwindling water reserves . High temperatures and little precipitation are among the reasons for the state's dwindling reserves .
 A Times op-ed recently, that California has only one year of water in its reservoirs . California has just one year to fill its reservoirs.
Only a handful of companies in the world will attempt it . The blasters collapse straight down into its own footprint .
 For a building to collapse in this fashion, all load bearing supports must fail at exactly the same moment . The collapse of a building is the same time as the collapse of another building .
 The claim that it resulted from fire requires its heat to be equally distributed throughout the building . All the load bearing members fail simultaneously .
 State Department employee Daniel Rosen has just been arrested again on porn-related charges . Rosen was arrested on a porn- related charge .
Matt Hale’s federal public defender has asked for an extension of 30 days to prepare a supplemental brief . The hearing will be on May 1,2015 .
 PETER MALLEN Kent, England, recently received his third issue of his publication . I like it very much, he says .
 Tim Wise grew up in a wealthy Nashville family and became involved with militant Marxism and criminal activity when he was young . He became involved in militant Marxism when he were young .
 He has bragged about running a fake ID mill, “vandalizing government property,” committing theft, using drugs and selling stolen property . He has also bragged that he has run a fake IDs mill, and has been arrested .
 "White Privilege" is an extreme political ideology that demonizes all White people, says Wise .
 Wise says White people have more money than Black people because Whites are oppressing Blacks . Wise says that White people are more wealthy because they are oppressed by Whites .
 He has made a fortune as a paid speaker at colleges and left-wing events . He has spoken at college events and college events .
 Wise is known to become enraged when questioned about his own wealth . However, Wise is also known to be enraged about his wealth .
 The psychotic race hatred that he promotes on a daily basis is on his Facebook page . To see the psychotic race race hatred, check out his Facebook account .
 He must be oppressing both Black and White people to obtain his wealth, according to his own writings . So, he must beoppressing both black and white people.
We strongly encourage conservatives to protest Wise’s speaking engagements . We strongly encourage Conservatives to protest his speaking engagements.
 twice since 2013 there have been protests against those Tim Wise speaking engagements on college campuses in Indiana . Twice since 2013 the protests have been held against those speaking engagements .
Both times, supporters of Tim Wise turned violent and someone was arrested and charged with a felony . Both times, people were charged with felony .
 The second was a packed auditorium, but no one was compelled to be at the sparsely attended .
 The officer moves cautiously toward the back of the car and says, “Sir, do not move.’ ‘Sir,Do not move’
 highway patrolman walks up to window slowly and asks for driver's license and registration . Ten minutes later another patrolman arrives, asks the man for his driver’s license and register .
 He would whip hunger, fear and oppression, abstaining forever from Europe’s wars . But he would also abstain from Europe's wars .
 When politicians lie, the State bites off what only individuals can chew, they bite them . The State is the only person who can chew .
 Olaf Childress Editorial faculty: Nancy Hitt, Christine Miller, Donald Sullivan and Donald Sullivan . Valerie Protopapas and Ingrid Rimland Ziindel are among the faculty members .
 Mark Anderson, Bill Ebb, Lloyd Caperton, Chris DeHuff, Jason Gerhard, Bill Ivy, John Kaminski, John Peeples and Carolyn Yeager are among the stars .
 Payable in U.S. dollars or other instruments readily convertible thereto. Payable for any of these instruments .
 Join this nonprofit newspaper and help de-program the brainwashed population . Join this website and help De-Program the brainwashing population .
 Anyone may reprint or quote The First Freedom in whole or part; just give full credit and address. Except for copyrighted articles.
 We may carefully edit submitted manuscripts to fit space and style sheet without changing meaning . prefer email, prefer email; publish only the writer’s name, city and State but need address and phone verification .
 Signed articles by contributors do not necessarily represent The First Freedom’s views . Signings by contributors don't necessarily represent First Freedom's views .
 Gail Jarvis abbevilleinstitute.org Ihe lack of interest in the film ‘Selma’ by both the public and the film industry is a healthy sign .
 It is an indication that the public is growing tired of this particular movie formula . It is often called the “Mississippi Burning Syndrome’s”
This movie formula has been a powerful opinion-molding device, but political trends and social movements tend to go in cycles . This movie formula is a powerful idea, but it's also a powerful political trend .
 Social trends gradually become old hat and lose their impetus . But society never completely reverts back to the way it was, according to experts .
 As a social trend passes its cusp and nears the end of its cycle, its proponents are often caught unaware .
 A review of the movie "Selma" recently appeared in The Brunswick News of Brunswick, Georgia .
 Bethany Leggett spent one month in Alabama, visited Birmingham, toured the local Civil Rights Institute, and visited the famous 16th Street Baptist Church . She also visited the local civil rights institute, and the famous church .
 Her admiration for the film was effusive. So, unlike the general public, her admiration for it was not effusive .
 Even the “historical errors’ in ‘Selma’ failed to diminish her high praise, she says .
 I960 events contained in contemporary school textbooks. I don't need to discuss that problem. I'm sure that most of you have read about the interpretations of I960 .
 Leggett’s glib understanding of 1960s events has become all too common .
 Congress instead acts as if one morning the Russians woke up and decided to invade Crimea and Ukraine .
 The resolution pins the Oprah Winfrey’s cinematic version of a celebrated Martin Luther King event to be an important learning experience . It would be a learning experience, says the resolution .
 Winfrey's "Selma" film is an educational tool for students in the same way that "To Kill a Mockingbird" has become a teaching device . Winfrey’s “Selma” film is a teaching tool.
 Leada Gore, a journalist for The Birmingham News, states her indignation that Alabama allows citizens to celebrate Robert E Lee's birthday on the same day as Martin Luther King’s birthday . Gore: Alabama allows people to celebrate the day of King's birthday.
Alabama has celebrated General Lee’s birthday for over a hundred years before MLK day was even created . The fact that Alabama has celebrated her birthday is irrelevant to her .
 Gore claims those who celebrate Lee on the actual anniversary of his birthday do so only to detract from the importance of MLK Day, which should be sacrosanct .
 This forum addresses misconceptions and misunderstandings about the historical man . It also addresses misconceptions about the man.
 He was a statesman, politician, philosopher, architect, meteorologist, farmer, philologist, paleontologist, biologist and inventor among other things .
 He is generally known to the public today only as the throughout a 2 8-day period .
 Gore learned that her disparagement of Robert E Lee was not widely shared . She learned that she had not been widely shared by others .
 In a follow-up article, she resorted to a common journalistic gimmick by selecting and printing those responses that tended to make Robert E Lee supporters appear to be backwater hayseeds . In a second article she chose and printed those responses.
 A few journalists use this technique, but it indicates a lack of integrity . Quite a few journalists used this technique.
 We know from past experience that no matter how many Southern traditions are eliminated or how many are forbidden, activists will never be satisfied . We also know that many Southern celebrations are forbidden .
 The U.S. and its allies need a long-term strategy to expose and challenge Vladimir writer of the Declaration of Independence and an owner of slaves .
 This conference will explore beyond the narrow perception of America’s third president .
 The Thomas Jefferson Heritage Society has invited scholars of excellent reputation to explore the person behind those myths . The society has asked scholars to explore those myths.
 Topics to be discussed include Jefferson’s learning process, his conception of history, notion of the relation between mind and body . His influence on him of the Christian religion and the central role of morality in his philosophy .
 The seminar will be held on Saturday, and will be supported by gullible journalists . The seminar is expected to be held in New York City .
Many of us long for a journalist with original rather than merely indoctrinated opinions . Many of us are long for us to have original, original opinions, not merely merely indoctrination .
Journalist has achieved enough maturity to understand that there are two sides to every story . It would be refreshing to come across a journalist who had achieved enough mature to understand the two sides .
Leggett belong to that aggregation of young journalists after 1975 . Leggett belonged to the group that was formed in 1975 .
 They have been exposed to establishment-sanctioned views since their birth . So they have been exposing them to establishment views .
 The Selma March and other notable civil rights events occurred before they were bom, so their perceptions of those events come from media, movies and TV portrayals .
 These portrayals are essentially presented in the versions that best accommodate the Left’s political strategies, says the author .
 The failure of ‘Selma’ is not the only healthy sign I’ve come across. People are tired of it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Reports indicate that these two newspapers are re-assessing their political philosophies in an attempt to recapture their lost readership .
 For their survival, they will have to allow more moderate, middle-of-the-road opinions . For their Survival, they'll have to be more moderate.
 As a CPA/ financial consultant, he helped his clients cope with the detrimental effects of misguided governmental intrusiveness . He also helped clients deal with the harmful effects of the government .
This influenced his writing as did years of witnessing how versions of news and history were distorted for political reasons . This influenced his work as did his writing. This influence his writing, he said, as did many others .
 Not a single Member of Congress took the Floor to oppose this dangerous Resolution . The resolution should make it clear that the political leadership of the U.S. will accept nothing short of war with Russia .
 The program will begin at 8 :30 AM, with our morning welcome, conviviality and refreshments for all participants . The lunch hour will also include periodic breaks with a 12:00 Noon lunch hour .
 A public question-and-answer discussion will be held by each of the speakers . The public discussion will take place at the end of the session .
 iVlarch 2015 was a month that should live in infamy . This month was the best month of 2015 .
 The month started out with the revolting spectacle of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu addressing a joint session of Congress for the third time . Netanyahu has been invited by the Speaker of the House without the courtesy of the White House or State Department .
 National Review was quick to declare Bibi “leader of the free world’s free world,” surely one of the most ridiculous claims ever made by a once respectable magazine .
 It was all part of a carefully orchestrated deliberate affront to President Barack Obama . Obama, like it or not, is responsible for the conduct of foreign affairs .
 It challenged the White House’s role in dealing with visiting heads of State and government as a matter of both protocol and common sense .
 Netanyahu characteristically lied about the threat posed by Iran and was greeted by fifty rounds of applause for his lucidly expressed insights into why the U.S. should again be prepared to go to war on Israel’s behalf . Five days later 47 Republican United States Senators signed a letter
 Israel has been demanding a more aggressive confrontation with the Mullahs . U.S. and Israel had the same objective to end talks with Iran and commit the United States to more aggressive confrontations .
 The invitation and the letter were both unprecedented, far exceeding previous stunts by the ubiquitous GOP “maverick” Senator John McCain cavorting with terrorists in Syria or in Ukraine .
 McCain’s hubris, as well as that of other peripatetic Congressmen prowling the world looking for an audience, was on display “over there, where he had no real authority and no one would listen to him anyway. The current incarnation of Republican leadership
 The visit and letter were together an assault on how American democracy is supposed to work .
 The breach of discipline is extremely dangerous. It brings us another step closer to a very costly and perilous war with Iran, says Peter Bergen .
 The most significant damage is to the separation of powers under the Constitution of the U.S. Other remedies are to separation of power separation under the constitution .
Executive authority has increased dramatically in Washington since 9/11, according to reports . The legislature and judiciary should roll back executive authority, the report says .
 The GOP is not addressing the issues that it should be confronting like war powers, immigration . But the GOP isn't addressing issues such as war powers and immigration .
 Article 2 of the Constitution specifies that the executive is the lead agency in dealing with foreign governments . It is instead seeking to challenge Article 2.
 The House of Representatives can choose to defund presidential programs . The Senate can refuse to “consenf’ to treaties that the executive has entered into . The actual work of diplomacy and protecting Americans overseas is the responsibility of the president .
 The presidential prerogative was accepted by the Founding Fathers and George Washington . The legislative branch had responsibility for funding both diplomacy and an army .
 The last indictment submitted under the Act was in 1803, which means that legal experts might well consider it to be unenforceable . But the law is still on the books and one might reasonably argue that both the Netanyahu invitation and the Senate letter to the Iranian government would be considered
 Congress is trying to assert control over some aspects of foreign policy and it is, of course, Israel . Leaving aside the damage that would be done to America’s reputation by repudiating an agreement hammered out with Iran .
 The Netanyahu visit was planned by the Israeli Ambassador in Washington Ron Dermer in collusion with Speaker of the House John Boehner .
 Netanyahu was also banking on his speech to shore up his credentials as tough-talking guarantor of Israeli national security to include having Washington in his pocket .
 The letter to Iran’s appearance five days after the speech hints at collusion and possibly more than that .
Nearly half of the U.S. Senate was prepared to go forth and tighten the screws on Iran .
 The letter undercuts the authority of the U.S. president before an international audience . It is undeniably a threat intended to derail negotiations .
 The letter’s alleged author, 37-year-old freshman Senator Cotton, had been in office all of 62 days . The document was sent directly to the government in Tehran on March 8th .
 Netanyahu had started circulating the draft for signatures the day after Netanyahu spoke . Netanyahu said it was already prepared and not a spontaneous .
 The Nationalist Times tackles immigration, politics, economics, race, race and privacy issues . We do it from a perspective that infuriates liberals and neo-cons, and delights patriots .
 The First Freedom readers may subscribe to The Nationalist Times for the special introductory offer of just $29 for one year, or $55 for two years .
 "If it ain't broke, don't fix h" is an oft-heard excuse for doing nothing . ‘Don't fixh’ is an often- heard excuse for nothing .
 Mr Giraldi defines our faithful machine in the District of Corruption aptly . But that doesn't help if those hired to run the thing won't follow its maintenance book .
 Better wisdom advises, “If a servant ain't worth his salt, don’t keep him.’ act.”
 In 2014 he told voters that ISIS was working with Mexican drug cartels to stage attacks in Arkansas . He sought to imprison the entire families of those suspected of violating Iran sanctions, to include the grandchildren of the convicted .
 Whether it is genuine, opportunistic or just a quid pro quo is difficult to say. Whether it's genuine or just an opportunistic, it's hard to say whether it's true or not .
 In January he tried to strengthen sanctions against Iran . He stated his belief that the talks over the nuclear program should be abandoned .
 It has been observed that most of the defenders of his letter are leading components of the Israel Lobby . But there is more to it than that.
 Cotton received $960,250 from Bill Kristol’s Emergency Committee for Israel and $165,000 from Paul Singer's Elliott Management hedge fund . In his Senatorial campaign last year Cotton received £1,500 from Kristol.
 Kristol and Singer have been active in opposing Iran talks and it should be noted that neither lives in Arkansas .
 There have been suggestions Cotton did not in fact write the letter . There have also been suggestions that Cotton didn't write it .
 Rosenberg believes that it was produced by that organization . 46 Senators would have been unlikely to sign on to a letter produced by a new and untested Senator otherwise .
 Kristol once nurtured the unforgettable Sarah Palin . Some others look to Kristol as a protege .
 Rosenberg explains ‘nothing happens on Capitol Hill related to Israel’ unless and until Howard Kohr wants it to happen . Rosenberg says “nothing happens’s on Capitol Capitol Hillrelated to Israel .
 More than 165,000 Americans have signed a petition calling Cotton’s letter treasonous . The petition has been signed by more than 150,000 people .
Behind that outrage we have a speech, a letter and the usual banal tale of corruption, opportunism and money .
 The Cotton letter hit the news cycle on the very day that Benjamin Netanyahu and Avigdor Lieberman were in the news in Israel .
 Netanyahu announced that there would be “no withdrawals’ from the Israeli occupied West Bank and no “concessions’ to the Palestinians’s. Netanyahu announced there will be no withdrawals .
 So much for the billions of dollars given to Israel and the irreparable damage to U.S. interests, he says . So much of the money was given to the country, he adds .
 All successive administrations in Washington have succeeded in doing is empowering fanatics like Lieberman . The American people have gained nothing, while the U.S. people have lost nothing .
 A New Jersey State Trooper was killed in 1973 and fled to Cuba . A Black female was killed by a cop-killing Black female, who fled to the island country .
 Assata Shakur, formerly known as Joanne Chesimard, is a former Black Panther and the first woman on the FBI's ‘Most Wanted’ terrorists .
 The Confederacy or Confederate Veterans have been pressing to rename buildings, bridges, streets, parks and other things that have anything to do with the Confederate Veterans .
 Lee/Jackson Day will soon be only a fond memory in Charlottesville, Virginia, thanks to some "community organizers" in that fair city . "Community organizers" have helped organize the event .
 Confederate heritage groups have protested much of this, but they are small and don't get much help or support from other patriotic groups . Stalwarts accept none of it.
 Years ago, a flap over Confederate flags in a cemetery where Confederate soldiers were buried . The Sons of Union Veterans spoke up and supported the Confederates .
 There is even a move to remove U.S. flags at certain “progressive’s’ campuses around the country . Veterans groups are all up in arms over it .
 Confederate groups were not too keen on supporting the Confederate groups in a similar situation . But they weren’t too keen to support them in similar situations .
 The U.S. flag is the Confederate flag . Some Marxist groups have said they will go after the U. S. flag when they have finished .
 This is all the result of a century of propaganda against the South first, and then all of America next, by “progressive” politicians, college professors and even some “useful idiof ’ preachers.’ Preachers’
 There is an agenda behind it all and until Southern folks begin to wake up and realize they have to help each other combat this sort of thing, it will continue until all your parks, streets, schools, and whatever else, have undergone name changes and are then named after Marxists and
 Some good Christian folks will speak up and say “Hey, don’t worry about this, the Lord is in control,’ and He is, no doubt of that .
 He might want to use YOU to exercise some of that control in these situations and you ain't having any . You ain’t having any.
It is said slavery is all we are fighting for, and if we give it up we give up all. It is said slaves are all we're fighting for. If we give them up, we will give up everything, it is said .
 Even if this were true, which we deny, slavery is not all our enemies are fighting for . We deny that slavery is a war of war. Even if it is true, it is not a war.
 Ihe South and the Confederate States of America have been harshly discriminated against and suppressed historical facts and figures have been suppressed .
 Dishonest Northern historians have unfairly caused Southern and Confederate history and its heroes, monuments, memorials and flags to be relegated to a less important role than deserved in American history .
 If slavery was all the Southern States wanted they could have kept it without a war or firing a shot . The Southern States could keep it without war or a shot.
 Constitution would have made slavery permanently legal in America if they would rejoin the union . Constitution in March 1861 would have allowed slavery to be permanent in America .
 The South refused and the Constitution of the Confederate States of America banned the international slave trade . The South refuses and the Confederacy bans the international trade .
 Most educated Southerners were in favor of gradual orderly emancipation which would have prevented segregation and Jim Crow laws which were based on Northern Black codes . The majority of the Southerner were educated in the South .
 Confederate General Patrick R Cleburne was killed at the battle of Franklin Tennessee on November 30, 1864 . The words are becoming true .
Alabama League of the South values represented by the Confederate flag of subjugation before it is too late .
 Political correctness and Socialist Marxist Revisionism are attacking everything Southern and Confederate on National, State, and local levels all across America .
 The Confederate flag represents honor, faith, courage, dignity, integrity, chivalry, and Christian values . The flag is a limited constitutional federal government .
 It symbolizes the noble spirit of the Southern people, the rich heritage of the South . The South is a rich and vigorous Southern culture, the South says .
 Liberals have falsely indoctrinated many Black Americans to believe it represents racism, bigotry and is a painful reminder of slavery . Liberals have wrongly indoctrinated black Americans to think it represents Racism .
 White Christian Southerners who fly the Confederate Battle Flag are not the enemy of responsible Black Americans who are working to better themselves . But they are also working to improve themselves.
 The Confederate flag is the last flag to represent the concept of local control of ones’ life in America .
 The Confederate flag is an internationally recognized symbol of resistance to tyranny . The flag is a symbol of Resistance to tyranny.
 It was flying over the Berlin Wall when it was being torn down in 1989 . It has been flown by numerous countries or provinces seeking independence .
 It reminds knowledgeable Americans that government is to be held accountable for its actions . If those actions are viewed as not in the best interest of the people, there is a price to be paid for it .
 The Socialist, Communist, liberal left and that is why they spend inordinate amounts of money and energy trying to suppress this powerful symbol of freedom . This fact has not been lost upon the Socialist, Socialist, Communists, liberal Left and that's why they are spending in
 The Confederate battle flag is a Christian symbol . Secular Humanism advocates believe there is no God and man, science and government can solve all problems .
 The flag also represents the valor and sacrifice of our Southern ancestors in their quest to gain independence and recognition as a sovereign Nation .
 Confederate soldiers displayed tremendous bravery in the face of overwhelming odds and blatant tyranny on behalf of the Yankee government that invaded the Southern homeland .
 The Southland is the flag of the region Southerners call home, the Southland . It was, and is, and will continue to be the flag for the region .
 Jared Taylor and Sam Dickson are regulars at the CofCC Conferences . They were there to represent America .
 Other foreign speakers came from France, Britain, Scotland, Italy, Finland, Greece, Bulgaria, Ukraine and Germany .
 On March 22, I addressed the Russian International Conservative Forum, held in Saint Petersburg, Russia .
 Its purpose was to provide a forum for politicians and thinkers united in their support of National traditions and in opposition to globalism . It was intended to provide an opportunity for politicians to discuss their views on national traditions .
 There was a strong sentiment throughout the meeting of support for Russian sovereignty and European National independence in the face of pressure from the United States .
 The goal of all the participants was “to preserve National identity and culture,’ says Yury Luybomirsky . “ independence from outside pressure and influence was essential for that purpose,” he says .
 Demonstrators protested outside the conference site, and the meeting had to end early because of a telephoned bomb threat .
 These parties have been tarred with extremist labels, but are all dedicated to preserving European and National traditions .
 Russia was represented by such groups as the Russian Imperial Movement, New Russia, and the editor of Nationalist magazine Russian Observer . Russia's Imperial Movement was also represented by New Russia .
 There was also a contingent of Cossacks, dressed in traditional military uniforms .
 "There is a CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) presence there [in Ecuador's opposition] which has a goal of weakening the government," Correa said .
 The CIA aims to drag Ecuador into President Rafael Correa chaos by influencing the opposition ahead of the upcoming elections, Correa says .
 The U.S. spying agency and Ecuador’s right-wing opposition were likely involved in recent protests in the country, Correa noted .
 Ecuadorians staged protest rallies on March 19 in about a dozen cities, including the capital, Quito .
 The protesters called for political change as well as reforms in labor and land policies .
 Correa's administration enjoys public support after raising living standards for the lower classes . This is while Correa’s administration enjoys support for raising standards for lower class .
 The country's GDP per capita rose from $3,572 in 2007 to $6,002 in 2013 . The country’s GDP per per capita increased from $2,000 in 2007.
 Correa has also succeeded in reducing both the poverty and unemployment rates in Ecuador since he assumed power in 2007 . Correa is also trying to reduce both the unemployment and poverty rates .
 WikiLeaks cables have revealed Washington's efforts to interfere in Ecuador’s internal affairs as well as its spying agencies’ covert operations to bring Correa down .
 In 1963, the U.S. orchestrated a coup d’etat by the military junta in Ecuador to topple the leftist government of Carlos Julio Arosemena Monroy after he expressed opposition to the government .
 A senior Iranian official says the Islamic Republic is ready to dispatch a medical team to Yemen to treat those wounded in recent deadly bomb attacks in Sana’a .
 Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister for Arab and African Affairs Hossein Amir-Abdollahian condemned the terrorist bomb attacks . Tehran is ready to treat the wounded as soon as possible, he said .
 Three bomb attacks were carried out at two mosques in Sana’a the previous Friday .
 Iran’s Foreign Ministry Spokeswoman Marzieh Afkham also denounced the bombings . She said Yemen needs stability and peace more than ever .
 The blasts came against the backdrop of intense gun battles between supporters and opponents of fugitive President Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi in the southern port city of Aden .
 More than a dozen people died in the fighting, which also forced the closure of the Aden International Airport .
 Rehired Hadi, along with members of Prime Minister Khaled Bahah’s cabinet, stepped down in late January . The parliament did not approve the president’'s resignation .
 The president fled his home in Sana’a on February 21 after weeks under effective house arrest and went to Aden, Yemen’s second largest city . He officially withdrew his resignation and highlighted his intention to resume duties .
 This came after the Houthi fighters took control of Sana’a in September 2014 . This comes after the Yemeni government was taken over by Houthi forces .
 Ukrainian governor would ‘take over’ power plant rt.com LJkrainian oligarch Igor Kolomoysky has allegedly threatened to send volunteer battalions from eastern Ukraine to Kiev to seize a leading energy firm and power plant .
 The ex-governor’s gamble comes after one of the companies was shut for non-payment .
 The audio record was posted by Ukrainian joumalist-turned-MP Sergey Leshchenko on his Facebook page . The former Dnepropetrovsk governor was fired by Petro Poroshenko recently .
 Kiev government's so-called ‘anti-terrorist operation’ in eastern Ukraine, he says . We can transfer people to Kiev from the ATO area, he adds .
 It was not immediately clear when the alleged conversation had taken place .
Last month, Poroshenko signed a decree firing Igor Kolomoysky as Dnepropetrovsk governor . The decree was signed by Poroshenko .
 It was a kick in the teeth to a country that has gone through the Maidan . The Maidan has been dubbed the "Maidan"
 Kolomoysky's dismissal is "the weakest punishment that he could bear," Leshchenko wrote on his Facebook page .
 Kolomoysky reportedly talked about possibility of separatist uprisings in Dnepropetrovsk . Earlier media had speculated about the threats posed by the oligarch to Kiev .
 The conflict involving Kolomoysky, who is worth $1. billion according to Forbes, broke as the Ukrainian parliament passed a law that the State can manage any company in which it has a majority share .
 Kolomoysky’s companies own about 43 percent of Ukrnafta, the country's biggest oil company .
 The State needed 60 percent ownership to exercise active control over a part-private company . Kolomoysky could block any government decision within the company, including withholding dividends .
 He reportedly threatened to ‘bring 2,000 volunteer fighters to Kiev’ before being persuaded to stand down . He also reportedly threatened “bring two,000 volunteers’ to Kiev.
 fighters of the Dnepr-1 battalion, funded by Kolomoysky, took control of Ukrnafta’s central Kiev offices . The next day, fighters of a battalion took control.
 Kolomoysky reportedly financed volunteer battalions waging war against the eastern Ukrainian militias . Over the past year, Kolomoyssky has reportedly financed battalions.
 The SBU demanded that Kolomoysky be prosecuted for seizing Ukrnafta . The head of the Ukraine’s Security Service, the SBU, demanded that he be prosecuted .
 SBU chief Valentyn Nalyvaychenko said representatives of the Dnepropetrovsk regional administration may have been involved in gang activity . The recent murder of an SBU officer in Volnovakha near Donetsk was reported .
 Problems with Ukraine's financial system may simply bury the entire financial system of Ukraine .
 Dmitry Marunych is the co-chairman of the Kiev Center for Energy Strategies . He says the bank is a system-based bank .
 Donetsk and Lugansk People’s republics used a year ago to build their own State, Bezpalko says . He is now trying to play on the same trends that the Donetsk, Lugansk people's republics use to build a state .
Foreign controlled NGOs are looking for attention in Hungary as well as elsewhere .
 Demonstrators closed both lanes of the Elisabeth bridge . The police had to divert traffic to the bridge to avoid traffic .
 Public Transit Company BKK gave public notice that due to the demonstration both the Chain Bridge and the tunnel had been closed to traffic . BKK said the demonstration was due to a demonstration of the bridge and tunnel .
 Hungarian people don’t buy their lies. These foreign agents are desperate and quite enraged at not being able to launch their color revolution in Hungary .
 Obama and his eronies, ineluding outgoing Attorney General Erie Holder, have given their none-too-subtle nod of approval by assoeiating with greedy raee-peddlers .
 Sharpton and eompany have beeome fabulously wealthy as their Blaek followers spiral toward destruetion . The industry is based upon an overt hatred of Whites dating baek.
 The Blaek eommunity that threatens to tear Ameriea apart at the seams. When eoupled with multi-generational government welfare, a violent dependeney state has been ereated .
 America’s Racial Powder Keg examines this phenomenon without the eonstraints of politieal eorreetness like no mainstream book has the eourage to do .
 The issue of raee will never again be seen through the same rose-eolored glasses . The book will be published in September .
 No other author or publisher ever eould. Here’s a book that diseusses the taboo topie of raee relations .
 Order from AFP, 16,000 Trade Zone Avenue, Unit 406, Upper Marlboro, MD 20774-8789 or call 1-888-699-6397 toll free to charge . Order fromAFP, 16000 Trade zone Avenue, U.S.
 Order the book online at www.americanfreepress.net.net . The book is available for free .
 A sample packet of three recent issues of AMERICAN FREE PRESS ■ and two sample issues of THE BARNES REVIEW REVIEW Revisionist history magazine .
 AFP is besides The First Freedom one of the last remaining independent voices of truth countering the New World Order propaganda of the controlled mainstream media . AFP is also besides the First Freedom.
 The BARNES REVIEW is the only politically accurate history magazine published in the United States today .
 Just mention ‘The First Freedom Special’ when ordering by phone or mail . Just mention the First Freedom special when ordering.
 Call toll free at I-888-699-NEWS or send your order to the above address . Send your order for theabove address to I-88-699.
 This understanding was sealed in what is known as the Balfour Declaration, Pftralcn Ctfflca, HovMhbW' ISW* PW Lord Botlieohlld^ 1 niurch pldflLQwt In to oa bena
 I Should ba grateful If you would bring this dooloratlon to the knowledge of tha ztonlat 7ederatlon. Named after the United Kingdom’s Foreign Secretary, Arthur James Balfour .
 The Zionists say it was necessary to prevent persecution of Jews and fulfill their misinterpreted Bible prophecy . The Zionist says it is necessary to protect Jews from persecution .
 All of this occurred before the so-called “Holocaust industry took root, says CNN's John Sutter . "Holocaust’s" history shows that all of this happened before the ‘Holocausts’ took root .
 The placement of a Jewish nation in Palestine was foolhardy, we believe, and current events tend to support this . But, we also believe, the placement of the Jewish nation was fool hardy, and we believe it was .
 Israel was a Jewish homeland before the establishment of Israel in 1948 . It was unknown to most of the modern world, but there already was another Jewish homeland .
 Birobidzhan is located strategically between Russia and China . It shares good relations with it, and is located in the region .
 The population is dwindling due to migration to Israel, but that could be reversed with greater economic aid and marketing . Israel's population is declining due to immigration to Israel .
 RNPA would support diverting U.S. aid that presently goes to Israel, sending it instead to Birobidzhan .
 The Jewish menorah is a center piece in the city's fountain . Jewish culture is abundantly displayed, as the photo above demonstrates .
 The Soviet Union started as the Soviet Union’s answer to Zionism and the misbegotten Balfour Declaration . It may very well provide an answer to the dilemma in the Middle East .
 Room for legal settlements Birobidzhan is roughly 34,000 square miles in area, compared to Israel which is only 7,951. square miles .
 Birobidzhan one is struck by its neat and clean appearance .
 Located on the Trans-Siberian railroad, its station house is a neat example . The station house was built on the railroad.
 Birobidzhan, not Israel or Miami, would be the perfect retirement option for elderly Jews .
 Birobidzhan has 14 public schools and all are required to teach Yiddish . All schools in the country have 14 schools .
 Young Jews are taught at an early age Jewish songs, dance and traditions . Young Jews have been taught at the age of 20 years .
 To those Jews who insist that all they want is their own nation, Birobidzhan is the logical choice . To those who want to be their own country, he says .
 A menorah dominating the main square in Birobidzhan Martin Luther on the Jews on the Jew .
Martin Luther's 1542 book was written in 1542, four years before his death .
 The Pope was a believer in the Word of God and had the guts to tell the Pope so in no uncertain terms .
 He also wrote a book entitled On the Jews and Their Lies, in which he holds nothing back .
 We show them every kindness. They have no reason to act this way, since we show them all kindness, we say . We also show them each other every kindness .
 They live among us, enjoy our shield and protection, they use our country and our highways, our markers and streets . They use our highways and our markers, and use our streets and roads .
 Our princes and rulers sit there and snore with mouths hanging open and permit the Jews to take, steal, and rob from their open money bags and treasures whatever they want . Meanwhile our princes and ruler sit there.
 The Jews let the Jews, by means of their usury, skin and fleece them and their subjects, make them beggars with their own money . That is, they let them be beggars, and the Jews let them leave them with their money .
For the Jews, who are exiles, should really have nothing, and whatever they have must surely be our property . For the Jews who areExiles, the property must be their property, and they should have nothing .
 They do not work, and they do not earn anything from us, nor do we give or present it to them . Yet they are in possession of our money and goods and are our masters in our own country and in their exile .
 A thief is condemned to hang for the theft of ten florins, and if he robs anyone on the highway, he forfeits his head .
 Pastor Luther’s writings are no different from those of Mr Henry Ford, a man who has always had my respect and admiration . But when a Jew steals and robs ten tons of gold through his usury, he is more highly esteemed than God himself .
 These articles were first written in the 1920s and are featured monthly in this newspaper . They were first published in the 1930s and first featured in the newspaper .
 Birobidzhan is an administrative center of the Jewish autonomous oblast . The city is located 75 kilometers from the border of China .
 Birobidzhan was named after the two biggest rivers in the Jewish autonomous oblast Bira and Bidzhan .
 This city received its name from the Evenky people’s language, as the space preservation . The city's name was given to the city by its people as a space preservation.
 The modem day ‘princes and mlers’ are of the latter ilk .
 Martin Luther would not survive today because of his “anti-Semitism,’ that is, his truthtelling. I find it humorous that Martin Luther wouldn't survive publicly today because he was anti-Semitism .
Martin Luther's name will be wiped out of the modern State of Israel . The Lutherans would be offended to learn of the wisdom of Martin Luther and then wipe his name forever .
 If this word gets out, the Jews will label it a ‘forgery’ and send it the way of the Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion and The Merchant of Venice . Between these rivers Bira and Bidzhan was thus called .
 The settlement was founded near station Tikhonkaya and became the workers’ settlement in 1928 . Birobidzhan’s history.
 In May 1928, the committee on the use of land was responsible for inhabiting free lands in the Amur region . The decree was adopted by a committee in May 1928 .
 Settling of this region became especially important for the USSR after the SovietChinese conflict in 1929 and occupation of Manchuria by the Japanese in 1931 . Settling in this region was particularly important for USSR after Soviet Chinese conflict.
 The USSR government wanted to improve relations with the West and its Birobidzhan project could influence Jewish and proJewish public opinion in Europe and America .
 The prospect of having Jews inhabit the Far East was also calculated to bring in financial aid from rich Jews living abroad .
 Founded Jewish settlements connected the Trans-Siberian railway with the river Amur valley . Founded in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Hard living conditions and severe weather got nowhere due to hard living conditions . But due to severe weather this process got nowhere .
 At first a considerable number of Jewish settlers arrived in 1928-1933, but over half of them later left the region .
 On October 10th, 1931, the settlement Tikhonkaya was renamed Birobidzhan . The settlement was renamed Tikhonskaya in October 1931 .
 In 1934, when the Jewish autonomous oblast was formed, Birobidzhan became its administrative center . The Jewish autonomous Oblast was created in 1934 .
 Birobidzhan was a distributing railway center where goods for all of the region were brought . The railway center was a distribution center for the region .
 The Trans-Siberian railway and federal highway M58 “Amur’s’ run through the city . Birobidzhan transportation is a key part of the city's transportation .
 The stations Birobidzhan I and Biroidzhan III form a triangular railway line to Leninsk on the border with China joining that country and the Trans-Siberian railway .
 The city in Russia is known in Russia as the place with the highest rate of drug-related crimes . The city is also known in the country as the city with the lowest rate of crime .
 Birobidzhan is a key point of transportation for drugs from the Far East of Russia and China to western Russia and Eastern Europe . Only highway and railway pass through this city .
Climate of the region is rather favorable to growing narcotic plants . Also the climate of the area is more favorable to narcotic plant plants .
 The area has the highest unemployment level in the Far East, about 10% in 2012 .
 A lot of people (local and foreigners) are tempted to earn “easy’s money hereabouts by growing, producing and transporting drugs . That's why many people are tempted by growing and producing drugs .
 39 civilians dead in Saudi air strikes on Yemen presstv.ir ilearly 40 civilians have lost their lives as neighboring Saudi Arabia pushes ahead with its air strikes against the Houthi Ansarullah movement .
 The authorities say 12 of the 39 victims were killed when Saudi warplanes struck residential areas close to al-Samaa military base . The authorities are speaking on condition of anonymity .
 The military base is used by army units believed to be loyal to Mohammad bin Salman bin Abdulaziz A1 Saud .
 The military aggression against Yemen came as fugitive president Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi arrived in Saudi capital, Riyadh .
 Riyadh said it had launched the strikes to defend the “legitimate government of Hadi’s government . Riyadh said the strikes were launched to defend Hadi upon his request .
 Saudi air strikes have drawn condemnation from many countries, including Iran, Iraq and Russia, as well as the Lebanese resistance movement, Hezbollah .
Saudi government invasion of Yemen's sovereignty comes against a backdrop of total silence on the part of international bodies, especially the United Nations .
 The world body has so far failed to show any reaction whatsoever to the violation of the sovereignty of one of its members by Riyadh . Riyadh is the only member of the world body that has not shown any reaction .
 Former Republican Guard Commander Brigadier General Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh. Saleh is a former Republican Guard commander . Saleh was a member of the National Guard .
 Three air strikes also targeted the presidential compound in southern Sana’a in the wee hours of that day .
 Eight people were wounded when an anti-aircraft missile slammed into a market in Sana’a that day .
 One of the injured is in a critical condition, a security official said . The injured man is in the critical condition .
 Tribal sources say airborne assaults struck a military installation in the oil-producing central province of Marib . The military installation is used by an army brigade loyal to Saleh .
 On March 26, Saudi fighter jets bombed an army camp located in the southern outskirts of Sana’a, inflicting “dozens’ of casualties at the camp .
 Saudi Arabia has reportedly given a three-day ultimatum to Yemen’s Houthi Ansarullah fighters to withdraw from all political and security institutions and key military bases in the country . If they leave the capital, they will face intensified attacks .
 Ansarullah leader Abdul-Malik al-Houthi said two fronts would be established in the country . He noted that according to Ansarulla leader's speech on March 26, two fronts will be established .
 On March 21, a provocative Dragoon Ride 1,100 show-of-force U.S. convoy began moving through six Eastern European countries . The convoy was headed for Vilseck, Germany, home base .
 U.S. heavy weapons were to continue through April 1, along the way positioning heavy weapons close to Russia’s borders . They were to be positioned through the next month .
 S Army European commander General Ben Hodges is involved in Kiev’s war on Donbass . S Army Europe commander General Hodges has been in Kiev for more than two years .
 White House, Congress and media scoundrels claiming otherwise. So do his Pentagon superiors, the White House and Congress claim otherwise.
 Obama's Dragoon Ride and Atlantic Resolve show-of-force may be a prelude to direct confrontation with Russia ahead .
 Washington’s so-called European Reassurance Initiative and related efforts support its NATO allies and partners .
 The Pentagon established six new front line command centers in Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Poland and Romania . All former Soviet republics or Warsaw Pact countries are now in the U.S.
 RT International asked State Department press office director Jeff Rathke to explain Washington’s double standard .
 He lied claiming no U.S. criticism exists, ignoring frequent anti-Russian comments expressed by department spokeswoman Jen Psaki .
 Washington pressured Vietnam to prevent Russian aircraft from refueling on its territory . Last month, Vietnam was pressured by Washington to prevent Russia refueling.
In February, U.S. surveillance aircraft provocatively flew over disputed South China Sea islands . In February, the aircraft flew over the disputed islands in the region .
 No third world country this Challenging Russia heads toward direct confrontation . No third country this year. Russia is the second largest country in the world .
 Washington willfully sabotaging multiple Russian spearheaded ceasefire initiatives assures continued conflict . Then Washington willful sabotaged multiple Russian initiatives . The U.S. also willfully sabotaged several ceasefire initiatives .
 The price of imperial arrogance is resumed full-scale war at Obama’s discretion . Obama's decision may be heading toward setting the entire conflict ablaze .
 Western European leaders need to break with Washington on Ukraine policy allying with Russia for regional peace and security .
 On March 19, European Council President Martin Schulz called diplomacy “the only viable solution’ to resolving Ukraine’s conflict . Schulz: Diplomacy is the only solution to resolving the conflict .
 Kiev’s puppets take orders from Washington, which wants war, not peace . Kiev's puppets are puppets.
 He reneged on granting Donbass autonomous self-rule status, and is maintaining an economic blockade . He is maintaining a blockade .
 Lavrov calls for more Normandy format four-party talks to try to prevent what increasingly looks likely . Lavrov called for moreNorman format talks.
 On March 19, Russia submitted a draft Security Council resolution for the full implementation of Minsk terms agreed on . The resolution is expected to be approved by the Security Council next month .
 The Donetsk People’s Republic Defense Ministry reported 34 shellings in one recent 24 hours .
 Listen to cutting-edge discussions with distinguished guests on Progressive Radio News Hour on the Progressive Radio Network .
 From the State Department, she generates wars and from op-ed pages he demands Congress buy more weapons . She generates wars, he demands more weapons.
Military contractors kick in money to think tanks where other Kagans work . There's a payoff, too, as grateful military contractors pay for tanks .
 The husband-and-wife duo makes quite a one-two punch for the Military-Industrial Complex . They apply political pressure to ensure higher appropriations and watches .
Robert Kagan's brother Frederick and wife Kimberly Kagan run the Institute for the Study of War . Robert Kagan is a neocon intellectual .
 leadership occasionally means telling people what they don’t want to hear. But leadership sometimes means telling them what they do not want to see .
 Nuland is the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs . The Ukraine crisis might not exist if it weren’t for his efforts, he says .
 Nuland gained promotions under former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and John Kerry . He also received backing from John Kerry, too .
 Nuland soon undertook an extraordinary effort to promote “regime change’ in Ukraine. Confirmed to her present job in September 2013, she soon undertook the effort .
 She personally urged on business leaders and political activists to challenge President Viktor Yanukovych . She personally urges on business and political leaders to challenge Yanukovych .
 Nuland made clear that the U.S. would back a “regime change’s’ against Yanukovych, which grew more likely as mercenaries poured into Kiev from western Ukraine .
 Nuland treated her proposed new lineup of Ukrainian officials as if she were trading baseball cards, casting aside some while valuing others . Nul and treated the proposed new line of Ukrainian official as if they were trading cards .
 The coup against Yanukovych played out on February 22, 2014, as the militias and other violent extremists overran government buildings . President and other officials were forced to flee for their lives .
 Nuland’s State Department quickly declared the new regime “legitimate’ and Yatsenyuk took over as prime minister . The new regime was quickly declared ‘legitimate' by the State Department .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin caught off guard by coup next door . Putin held crisis session to determine how to protect ethnic Russians and Russian naval base in Crimea . Crimea's secession from Ukraine and annexation by Russia a year ago .
 The State Department peddled a propaganda theme to the mainstream U.S. news media about Putin having somehow orchestrated the situation in Ukraine so he could begin invading Europe . There was no evidence that Putin had instigated the Ukraine crisis.
 Nuland and other American neocons pushed for economic sanctions against Russia and demanded arms for the coup regime . The new Kiev government launched a brutal ‘anti-terrorism operation’ to subdue an uprising in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 A new Cold War took shape amid barrage of “information warfare’s’ aimed at the U.S. and world publics .
 Nuland wouldn’t comment specifically on her husband’s attack on Obama . She indicated that she held similar views .
 Nuland jumps in to make sure that the interests of war are protected . The peace deai is held in Ukraine .
 In February, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Francois Hollande hammered out a plan for a ceasefire and a political settlement, known as Minsk-2 . Nuland engaged in more behind-the-scenes maneuvering.
 Germany Nuland mocked the peace agreement as “Merkel’s Moscow thing,’ according to the German newspaper Bild .
 Nuland also laid out a strategy for countering Merkel’s diplomacy by using strident language to frame the Ukraine crisis .
 Nuland sounded determined to sink the Merkel-Hollande peace initiative even though it was arranged by two major U.S. allies and was blessed by President Obama .
 Nuland’s hand-picked Prime Minister Yatsenyuk inserted a poison pill into the legislation to implement the Minsk-2 political settlement .
 The Ukrainian parliament in Kiev added a clause that, in effect, requires the rebels to first surrender and let the Ukrainian government organize elections before a federalized structure is determined . The clause is in effect.
 Minsk-2 had called for dialogue with the representatives of these rebellious eastern territories en route to elections and the establishment of broad autonomy for the region . The region has called for broad autonomy.
 Kiev refused to talk with rebel leaders and insisted on establishing control over these territories before the process can move forward . Nuland’s hardline position reflects the hardline stance of Kiev .
 If the legislation stands, the result will almost surely be a resumption of war between military forces backed by nuclear-armed Russia and the U.S. It is a very dangerous development for the world .
 The Ukrainian civil war will resume but so will the Cold War between Washington and Moscow with lots of money to be made by the Military-Industrial Complex .
 Nuland’s husband, Robert Kagan, drove home that latter point in the neocon Washington Post .
Palantir supplied software to U.S. military intelligence in Afghanistan . Palantir provided software to the U. S. military.
 Since its founding in 2007, ISW has focused mostly on wars in the Middle East, especially Iraq and Afghanistan . It has closely cooperated with General David Petraeus when he commanded U.S. forces in those countries .
 The Family Kagan has almost a self-perpetuating, circular business model working the inside corridors of government power to stimulate wars . In other words, the Kagan is also working theinside corridors of Government power .
 The only thing that makes the NulandKagan operation special perhaps is that the whole process is all in the family . The operation is special, the only thing to make it special is that it is all the family.
 Robert Parry broke many of the Iran-Contra stories for The Associated Press and Newsweek in the 1980s .
 Russia blames Kiev for heavy weapons deployment in eastern Ukraine . iVloscow accuses Kiev of violating a recent ceasefire deal with pro-Russia forces .
 Ukrainian authorities say all of its heavy weapons have been withdrawn . The ministry says the claims are once again proving to be false .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko says his government has withdrawn its heavy artillery from the line of contact in eastern Ukraine . This comes as the OSCE mission is on a mission to the region .
 Russia’s Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov also said that Kiev was attempting to sideline the mission of the OSCE . The OSCE is tasked with monitoring the implementation of the truce .
 The OSCE has “significantly improved the quality of its reports, a Russian official says . The OSce has ‘significantly improvement’ The Russian official said .
 He slammed a request by Ukraine for an international peacekeeping force to be deployed in the east . He argued that such a unilateral move undermines the Minsk truce deal .
 Lavrov emphasized that the deployment of such a force can only take place if the pro-Russia forces in eastern Ukraine also back the move . Lavrov said the deployment can only be done if pro-Russian forces in east Ukraine back it .
 Ukraine’s warring sides reached a deal, dubbed Minsk II, at a summit attended by the leaders of Russia, France, and Germany in Belarusian capital city of Minsk .
 The agreement introduced measures such as a ceasefire, which took effect on February 15, the pullout of heavy weapons and constitutional reforms in Ukraine .
 Donetsk and Lugansk have been hit by deadly clashes between pro-Russia forces and the Ukrainian army . Kiev launched military operations in April last year to crush pro-Russian protests there .
 Around 1. million people have also been forced from their homes over the past months as a result of the turmoil .
 Ukrainian soldiers man a post on a front line near the small eastern city of Kurakhove on March 11, 2015 .
 Nuland noted that “despite some publicly-stated concerns, those countries have supported sanctions’ in the European Union Council .
 The United States, the European Union and their allies blame Russia for fueling the internal conflict in Ukraine . The U.S. has imposed a series of sanctions against Russia targeting its defense, banking, and energy sectors .
 Russia has repeatedly denied the allegations and responded with her own export bans . Russia has also responded with its own export ban .
 Some European Nations including Greece, Hungary and Cyprus have opposed further sanctions . Spain has recently stated its opposition as well as Spain .
 Egypt's deposed Islamist president, Mohamed Morsi, is on trial at the police academy in Cairo on January 8, 2015 .
 The Disciplinary Council of the Cairo Court of Appeal sent thirtyone judges into compulsory retirement . The judges signed a statement in support of Mohamed Morsi during the 2013 anti-coup sit-ins .
 The court acquitted 25 other judges accused of the same charge. The court, however, acquitted 25 others accused of same charge .
 Judges who support the 2013 military coup now in charge have faced no restrictions by the country’s judiciary in expressing their opinions . This is while those judges who supported the 2013 coup have also faced no restriction by the judiciary .
 Rights groups have severely criticized the government of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi . The government has launched a heavy-handed crackdown on journalists .
 Rights groups say this crackdown on Morsi supporters has left over 1,400 dead and 22,000 arrested . Hundreds have been sentenced to death in mass trials .
 Morsi was ousted in July 2013 in a military coup led by Sisi who was then army commander . Morsi was then the army commander who was ousted.
 Plutarch’s Parallel Lives compares the great Romans against their Greek counterparts . Foul-mouthed huntress Victoria Nuland is the author of the book .
Both coups backed by that coup occupy the District of Corruption . We present an analogy between today's Ukrainian and Egyptian coups .
 Police used teargas to disperse protesters in Quebec City, eastern Canada . Protesters were protesting against austerity policies .
 This protest took place outside the National Assembly building on March 26 .
 Police had already arrested dozens of anti-austerity protesters during a student demonstration in Quebec City on March 24 .
 The students were marching against government cuts which they said would negatively impact public-sector workers . The students said they were protesting against the cuts .
 No permit Police called the move illegal since protesters had not provided their itinerary from the outset .
 The protest had been organized by the anti-capitalist Revolutionary Student Movement . The protest led to “two mass arrests,’ according to local law enforcement .
 Tens of thousands of students have gone on strike in the city, as well as the cities of Chicoutimi and Montreal .
 The Tuesday, March 24, demonstrators in Montreal also saw police firing tear gas and reportedly ready to use rubber bullets and sound bombs . The Montreal demonstration was held on March 24 .
 Students have been protesting across Canada’s province of Quebec ever since February 2012 . They are trying to mount pressure against the provincial government to drop a plan to increase tuition fees .
 S. S. military troops to the region have no experience in public health . No one has produced rigorous laboratory proof of a single person dying from something called Ebola virus .
 Wars over blood diamonds and colonial genocidal tribal wars have left a devastated, mal-nourished population in its wake .
 The Pentagon was developing an Ebola vaccine with Monsanto and suspicion was that the 3,000 U.S. troops were sent to force the population to become human guinea pigs for the untested substances .
 Today, four years after, the country is anarchy pure with roving lawless bands killing and looting . The country is now a nation of anarchy pure .
 S Government teamed up with Bill Gates, a eugenics protege and intimate of David Rockefeller . S Government has teamed up to "Mr Vaccinate All Africans"
 GMO from a company where Gates is a major stockholder. They are colluding to contaminate the incredibly rich and productive soils of Africa with GMO, GMO .
 The CIA and Pentagon's AFRICOM, together with Monsanto, push unwanted GMO crops, on African countries .
 The U.S. is seeking new markets for American GM crops in Africa, report says .
 USAID has two projects in Africa which “help’s various African governments draw up national biosafety laws . Such consumer protection is lacking in all but seven African countries .
 USAID in collusion with Monsanto, world’s largest GMO purveyor, drafts laws that permit insufficiently tested GMO seeds such as Monsanto GMO maize to be considered “biosafe.’
 If you have not proven safety of GMO and other bio-engineered crops, protection of human health is primary, not free trade . It puts the ‘precautionary principle’ as primary .
 Once the Protocol came into force, Washington began to lobby African governments to accept GMO crops with minimal safety assessment .
 The USAID is assisting Regional Economic Communities in Africa to develop policies aimed not at ensuring biosafety, but at limiting regulation . They consider to be a barrier to regional trade in GMO food and crops .
 The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation works hand-in-glove with USAID by funding organizations such as the African Agriculture Technology Foundation . The aim is to promote introduction of GMO crops into Africa .
 Gates also works closely with the Rockefeller and Gates Foundations in their Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa, which pushes GMO crops .
 If harvest failure, declining crop yields and mandatory use of Roundup weed killer from Monsanto can be called a biological wonder . Bill Gates and David Rockefeller have dreamed of biochemical population reduction for decades .
 President, through the USAID, in an alliance with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and Monsanto to spread death and destruction of natural agriculture in Africa . The USAID is in a partnership with the Gates Foundation.
 The dark secret is that they are wittingly trying to kill off the darker-skinned peoples of the African Continent .
 State Department Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs . She was responsible for the Rwandan Genocide of more than one million Tutsis in 1994 under Bill Clinton .
 Senator Jack Tenney was once head of California Un-American Activities Committee . Zionism is Communism .
 S TV exposed as social engineering tool in Korea by Wired.org . The article was titled “The Plot to Free North Korea with Smuggled Episodes of ‘Friends’
 State Department's National Endowment for Democracy is a de facto “department of regime change’s regime change. It is backed by Wall Street's Fortune 500 .
 If TV shows from America are considered a tool for social engineering in North Korea, they are most likely to be used as a tool of social engineering .
 The degradation of American culture, the family, and weakening of local communities is a direct result of this . The degradation is a result of the growing centralized dominance of corporatefinancier monopolies and police and surveillance state .
 Kang likens the USB sticks to the red pill from The Matrix . The USB sticks have the power to shatter illusions .
 They realize that this isn’t the enemy; it’s what they want for themselves. They realize this isn't the enemy. It’'s what they wanted for themselves, they say .
 The pursuit of freedom has little or nothing to do with the pursuit of free speech, says the author .
 Local communities that are incapable of organizing themselves, because individuals themselves are unable to build families, reduces the potential of competitors rising up and challenging the status quo established by Wall Street and Washington .
 Western media is dominated by Western interests, says John Sutter . Sutter: "Western media best feeds the sort of self-absorbed behavior endlessly promoted"
 North Koreans are trying to corral North Koreans out of one cage and into another . Instead, they are working to corrals North Koreans into another cage . North Korea is trying to get them out of a cage and out of another .
 Some might argue this “other cage’s more comfortable is more comfortable, but it is still a cage nonetheless .
 It is not done for any altruistic purpose, but simply to enroll millions more from yet another region of the planet into Wall Street’s global-spanning, unsustainable, exploitative consumerist paradigm .
 S. S. corporate-financier interests on other people through tricks when possible and by force when necessary . S.S. S corporate- Financier interest on other person through tricks.
 Wired's article is meant to give readers a sense of moral superiority over the West’s many perceived enemies .
 State Department’s role in this particular propaganda campaign illustrates that not only are people being manipulated, they are manipulated through an extraordinarily dishonest campaign .
 No less misleading when offering “freedom to others, truth and transparency are essential. When offering ‘freedom to other people, truth is essential,’ says John Sutter .
 The ill-informed or misinformed cannot make truly honest decisions about their future, says one expert . "I'm not sure what I think about my future," he says .
 State Department never mentioned a fact never mentioned by Kang and the NKSC is just as deceptive as the State Department .
 Russian army's mobile tactical air defense S-300 and S-400 systems can now be hit by the Russian army .
 It is designed to engage hard targets such as nuclear warheads, rather than satellites . It is also designed to target hard targets like nuclear warheads .
 This missile’s specialization is not soft targets like low Earth orbit satellites with easily intercepted orbits . This missile's specialization isn’t soft targets. It's not easy to intercept, but it's not a soft target .
 The 40N6 missile is capable of exo-atmospheric interception of IRBM warheads in their terminal phase . Any aircraft target within the missile range’s perimeter can be intercepted .
 S-500 Prometheus air space defense systems are scheduled to enter service next year . They will intercept warheads of the ICBMs (intercontinental ballistic missile) This task is going to be delegated to the upcoming Prometheus air defense systems .
 The final customizing of the 40N6 missile has been going on since 2008 . It is explained as an extremely challenging assigned task to guarantee the declared target kill altitude.
 The media reported that the 40N6 missile passed final State quality tests in January 2015 . The media said that the missile had passed final state quality tests .
 A source in Russia’s Defense Ministry told Tass news agency that the new missile is going to be supplied “primarily to the Western Command,’ the source said . The regions of Russia bordering NATO member States will get the missile .
 The 40N6 missile is a genuine breakthrough for Russia’s national airspace defense . The missile significantly alters the operational capability of missile systems already in service .
 Arsenal Russia possesses around 2,000 systems of various modifications of the S-300 Favorite and first-rate S-400 Triumph . Arsenal Russia also possesses around two,000 S-200 Favorite systems .
 Just one S-400 Triumph battery can simultaneously attack 36 airborne targets with 72 missiles . The target’s maximum speed is 4. kilometers per second .
 Shielded Well integrated with thousands of other air defense systems scattered throughout the country . They ensure deeply echeloned air defense of all vital military, industrial, and administrative installations .
 All of Russia’s S-300 systems have been upgraded to the latest versions . Production of this type of air defense system has been suspended in favor of manufacturing the S-400 .
With the 40N6 missile available, S-300 complexes are getting space defense quality . Now, with the 40 N6 missiles available, they are getting better .
 The 40N6 is also a common missile for combat army and site protection air defense . It is also an air defense missile for the military .
 Standard Missile 3 Block lA-IB began service in April 2014 after several years of hit and miss testing . S version of sea-based Standard Missile3 Block l a-IB was launched in April 2013 .
 In 2012, RT reported the naval version of the S-400 was also being developed . The S-500 may also be being developed.
 These S-300 and S-400 systems are fully mobile and may be positioned at virtually any place where a tank-based propelling system might take them. Deployable where needed.
 This was especially unfathomable in regards to Germany, a fellow Christian Nation. Glaring incompatibility was especially unathomable .
 The Soviet Union was a dictatorship under Stalin, the U.S. a representative democracy that had elected Roosevelt to serve as its president . Roosevelt was elected president of the Soviet Union .
 Communism was a Jewish ideology adhered to by Stalin and his Jewish supporters, even as Roosevelt was surrounded by Jewish advisors . That uniting bond was the Jews.
 That this alliance would break up after the war and result in bitter enmity producing the Cold War was obvious . The alliance would have been broken up in the wake of the war .
 Jews were allowed to do business with the arch enemy of the United States, the Soviet Union . But even throughout the postwar period Jews were able to dobusiness with the Soviet Soviet Union.
 Years ago, I saw a picture of his elderly wife in Time magazine, beautifully gowned and dripping with jewels .
 A huge diamond necklace may have graced the neck of a Czarina . The necklace is thought to have been from the treasure trove of the Czars .
 The motto of the Jews has always been ‘business is business,’ unhindered by any loyalty to the Nations in which they live .
 Armand Hammer was amply amply The First Freedom isn’t for everybody . It seems that ArmandHam wasAmply The first Freedom isn't for everybody.
 Theodor Kaufman's booklet Germany Must Perish was published in the 1950s . Kaufman's book Germany Must perish was written by the Jewish Jewish leader . Kaufman: The confrontation saved Germany and the Germans from having been wiped off this earth .
 All of Germany’s territory was meant to be parceled out among its neighbors and every German male sterilized . Every German male was sterilized.
 The Soviet Union and the United States were once bosom buddies when aiming to destroy Germany . But each side now wanted its part of Germany to help contain and fight the other .
 Gorby was also about to release Rudolf Hess, Hitler’s second in command, held throughout his long prison sentence .
 If freed, Hess could have talked, so the English silenced him, he murdered him in his cell . If freed he could have spoken, he would have been murdered in his Cell .
 Boris Yeltsin usurped power from Gorby and, as a willing Jewish stooge, killed off Russia’s legislative Duma in 1996 . The U.S. news media merited a few lines in the news media .
 Ihe China International Payment System is due to kick off this year . New system will make payment transfers just as easy as in dollars and euros .
 The launch is expected in September or October, depending on how tests go, a source says .
 Another person with direct knowledge of the matter said the goal is to start the first phase before December .
 Putin became to his country what Adolf Hitler had stood for in Germany . He took Russia back from the Jewish oligarchs and created prosperity .
 A revitalized Russia under Putin is recovering its Christian roots . No longer in thrall of Communism, a revitalized Russian under Putin.
 Our Jewish-controlled media do not like this Russia one bit, and agitate not only for sanctions but war ‘in order to support the Ukraine’
 In the early thirties there had been no calls for sanctions by the West . The Soviet Union collectivized the Ukrainian farmers, plundered their grain and seed corn creating a mass starvation known locally as the Holodomor .
 Mediacracy’s vendetta Putin and Russia are now relentlessly maligned in the Western media .
 I have my own ideas as to why, and it has nothing to do with other international payment systems . I have a own idea as to how to make transactions more fluid and rapid .
 The super-network will consolidate and replace the existing multiple clearing houses that process yuan payments, and rival majors such as Visa and MasterCard .
 The move should help bump the yuan's presence on the international stage, as the payment system will make it faster and do with Russia's taking back the Crimean peninsula and adjacent territories .
 Putin was a true Russian patriot, who slowly but cleverly took his country back from the Jews . It was Putin, a trueRussian patriot, and a true Russia patriot .
 Putin and his country are in the dog house. It is for this reason alone that Putin and, with him, his country is in a dog house .
 If Jews and their Jewish media push us into an armed confrontation with Russia, it will be the end of our world, says Peter Bergen .
 USrael has nuclear weapons at the ready in Germany under its exclusive control, as no German is allowed into that arsenal .
 If war comes with Russia, Putin and his people would be stupid to remain like sitting ducks waiting for the firing of those bombs .
 Chinese currency is easier to carry out cross-border transactions using the Chinese currency . They do not give a hoot about the American people .
 It’s the fifth most-used currency in international payments, according to the SWIFT network . It is the fifth-most-used currencies in the world .
 In December 2014, about 2.17 percent of payments were made in yuan, up from 0.63 percent in 2013 . In 2013, about 0.62 percent was made in the country's currency .
 China has been exploring ways to cut dependence on the dollar and other hard currencies in international trade . China hopes to settle more deals in yuan.
 China has trimmed its 2015 forecast to seven percent, the lowest growth rate in the last 25 years . The world’s second biggest economy grew by 7. percent in 2014 .
 A Federal informer in Missouri came up missing . It was presumed that he had been abducted .
 Federals were claiming Confederate military forces had captured their informer .
 The Southern hostages held by those Yankees had no connection with said troops, according to the Yankees . The hostages were held by the Yankees.
 Both pro-Southern and pro-Northem citizens made pleas on behalf of the innocent men . Both men made pleas for the innocence of the men .
 The order had the highest backing from all levels of the Federal government . That order had been backed by the federal government .
 The ten men were loaded on wagons, seated on newly-made coffins and taken to the fairgrounds where the hideous act was carried out .
 This was not the first time such an act had taken place. For all, it was not a first time this was not an act .
 General Merrill nearby had ordered the execution of ten Southerners himself .
 No, the time had come for this group of men to pay the supreme price for believing in States’ Rights and their Southern homeland. No, it had come to this time for these men.
 On reaching the fairgrounds, the men were placed in a row and seated on their coffins . The men were seated on the coffins on the fairground .
 Some few feet away stood 30 Federal soldiers, and behind them another 30 in reserve .
 The only problem was with such a fusillade no more than three of those hostages were killed instantly .
 The reserves took their time when moving in to shoot each of those survivors at point-blank range with pistols . They all stopped moaning when they were shot .
 The hostage untouched by that first volley sat there on his coffin watching as they moved with each shot down the line closer to his eternity .
 Not only in the South, but also in London and even in the North, decent people made loud objections against that barbaric act .
 Twice during Lincoln's cabinet meetings the issue was brought up about how to put the best face on this atrocity .
 McNeil was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General of the United States Volunteers . McNeil carried out such a barbarous action while in charge of those “loyal” Missouri troops .
 Abraham Lincoln was an all-loving and tender-hearted Abraham Lincoln . He was also a tender and loving man .
 General Thomas Ewing sent to prison as many wives, mothers and sisters of William Clarke Quantrill’s Confederate partisan band as his troops could round up .
 Ewing had been warned that the building was in danger of collapse . guerrillas believed it had been deliberately sabotaged . Ewing was warned that it was in risk of collapse.
 Quantrill and his men sacked and burned Lawrence, Kansas, in retaliation . In retaliation Quantrill's men were sacked and burnt .
 Ewing then issued an order forcing all persons in four counties of western Missouri to leave the State . Ewing issued the order forcing people in the four counties to leave.
 The ensuing arson was so thorough that stone chimneys could be seen for hundreds of miles . The chimneys were so extensive that they could be spotted for up to 300 miles .
 A desolated country, women, men and children, some almost naked, many on foot and others in wagons left Missouri .
 The Union confiscated property in the area and sold it at auction . When guerrillas attacked, the Union confiscated the property .
 Suspects sat in prison where they were confined in crowded and insufficiently-ventilated quarters . By 1864 the mortality rate among them reached fifty percent .
 The charges against civilian prisoners in many cases were of trivial character . Many of the charges against civilians were of minor character .
 Federal General John Pope ordered his troops to essentially begin waging war on the civilian population of Virginia . After suffering repeated battlefield defeats in the Shenandoah Valley at the hands of General “Stonewall’ Jackson, Jackson, he responded by commanding his troops .
 Anyone who took such an oath and was later suspected of being “disloyal would be shot, and his property seized . Anyone who takes such a oath will be shot .
 By the end of 1862, there was a large upsurge in “authorized foraging,’ as the Master War Criminal Abraham Lincoln Federal government called such pillaging and plundering of civilian property in the South .
 Lincoln wanted Southern civilians to suffer, which required him to abandon international law and the U.S. military’s own code . He began waging total war against Southern citizens, noncombatants, mostly women, children and men .
 Lincoln’s entire battle plan from the very beginning was to wage war on civilians as well as the Confederate States Army .
 Union General Winfield Scott's overall strategy was called “the Anaconda Plan,’ since it would strangle the South’s economy by attempting to blockade all the coastal ports and waterways including the Mississippi River .
 Any naval blockade is necessarily a war on the country’s civilian population as well as its armed forces .
Even drugs and medicines were on the list of items that Lincoln decreed could not be permitted to enter the Southern States . So severe was the blockade of Southern ports that even drugs and medicine were banned .
 Many civilians suffered and perished for lack of such essentials . Navy succeeded in this endeavor, many civilians died .
 The Lincoln administration's policy is the fact that his most trusted generals are responsible for waging war on civilians . War criminals are not just the result of a few out-of-control soldiers .
 Grant, Sherman and Sheridan had excelled at those practices for years . Grant and Sherman had been at the same practice for years.
 President and General-in-Chief wanted it conducted as official policy of the Union Army . He wanted it carried out by a high-ranking officer .
 Sherman would wage war against helpless civilians, women, children and the elderly . Many of them at the time already barely getting enough to eat .
 He would burn some Southerners out of their homes and subject the rest of them to slow starvation . He would destroy all the animals and crops that his men hadn’t consumed .
 The Communist Manifesto and co-founder of modern-day Communism, Friedrich Engels, also held this opinion of Sherman .
 Senator John Sherman was all for a strong and indivisible centralized government . Sherman was a member of the Senate.
 The Confederates' offenses came to but a fraction of the Federal Army’s . Crimes were committed on both sides, yet the Confederates’ offenses were not .
 General Robert E Lee invaded the North, but forbade any forays against civilians . The North had no right to invade civilians .
 Sherman and his army were attempting to bring Memphis, Tennessee, under Federal control . But their Mississippi River troop transports and gunboats were being fired upon by snipers .
 Frustrated by his inability to hunt down and subdue the Confederate soldiers . Frustrating by his ability to hunt andSubdue the soldiers .
 Walcutt, to burn the entire town but leave one house standing to mark the place where a town once existed . The town was burned to burn, but one house stood to mark where it once was .
 His troops also beat to death a young man who was a guerrilla suspect, but his family turned out to be Unionist . The young man was also beaten to death.
 His wife responded by expressing her sincerest wishes that the war would be a war “of extermination and that all would be driven like the swine into the sea’s sea .
 The satanic beast out from the pits of hell implemented his total warfare by sword, fire and starvation . The satan beast out of the pit of hell.
 Sherman’s fame was yet to become forever associated with his ‘March to the Sea’ campaign . He had already developed his methods in Mississippi, Alabama and Tennessee .
 It was in these States that he began directing his operations not only against the Confederate Army, but also the civilian population .
Similar bombardments occurred in other Southern towns and cities under his orders . Similar bombardments occur in other cities and towns under the orders .
 Sherman’s army of looters entered and proceeded to sack whatever remained, dragging into the streets and destroying pianos and articles of furniture, seizing whatever appeared to be of value . Jackson all but demolished.
 Those articles they could not carry they vandalized, thrust their bayonets into pictures, broke mirrors, knocked out windows and even removed doors from their hinges .
Under his watchful eye those looters sacked farms, plantations and slave cabins . Under his watchfulness, he sacked farms and plantations .
 The Islamic State's combined efforts against the Islamic State would amount to $6 million . By comparison, its combined efforts would be $6. million .
 If you read the document, it refers to “Russian aggression,” that’s a direct quote, ‘destabilizing Europe’ and it uses the term “revanchist’ now .
 So to suggest this is a little off the edge, it’s much more than an exaggeration, it's not true, it says . But it's a bit of a bit off-the- edge, says the author .
 The U.S. pays about 70 percent of NATO’s costs at this point . NATO members are trying to scale their contributions up to 2 percent of their budgets .
 The British have already announced that they have no intention of doing that . The British government has said that they will not do that .
 NATO countries are using a scare tactic to get more money to come up with some more money . The scare tactic is to get NATO countries to pay more money.
 U.S. paratroopers are training the Ukrainian national guard in Poland . In Latvia, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia you have U S. special forces, in Latvia, Lithuanian and Estonia .
 S gestures that have banned Russian citizens from entering the United States. S gestures have been banned by Russian citizens .
 Former Hungarian Prime Minister Gordon Bajnai is among those affected by the ban . Russian newspaper Izvestia suggests he is among them .
 According to Russian press reports, the majority of those blacklisted are European politicians known for their anti-Russian phobias .
 No fewer than 60 U.S. and 13 Canadian senior government and parliamentary politicians or government officials are also blacklisted .
At least 16 Hungarian citizens are also affected by the ban . Izvestia reported that at least sixteen Hungarian citizens also affected .
 These are politicians, public officials, public figures who “hold openly antiRussian views, among them a former Hungarian prime minister’s former prime minister, wrote the paper .
 President Barack Obama’s deputy national security advisor Caroline Atkinson and two more presidential advisors .
 Also on the list are Republican Senator John McCain and the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Robert Menendez .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry declined to name those affected by the ban . It did not rule out that more politicians will be added to the list if the U.S. and the European Union introduce new punitive measures against Russian citizens .
 States introduced punitive measures against Russian citizens last year after Crimea voted to rejoin Russia . Crimea voted in a democratically held referendum to return to Russia .
 Ferenc Gyurcsany could be the one affected by the Russian government’s travel ban .
 Putin has become one of the most vocal anti-Putin critics in Europe . The former prime minister kept very good relations with Putin, but later betrayed the Russian president just like his own country .
 Gyurcsany is one of the most ardent promoters of foreign interests in Hungary . It is no secret that he is a promoter of foreign interest in Hungary.
 He is one hundred percent behind the creation of the United States of Europe and the elimination of European Nation States . He and his fringe party are one hundred per cent behind the U.S.
Gyurcsany is the first Hungarian prime minister of the post-1956 era . He ordered police to shoot peaceful protesters during the 2006 unrest . He was the first prime minister to order the shooting of peaceful protesters .
 Gyurcsany will apply for a Russian visa, so we may soon learn whether he is the one affected by the travel ban .
 Fox News is probably the most editorial of all of the American outlets .
 Senator Jack Tenney was once head of California Un-American Activities Committee . Tenney: "I do not think the U.S. considers the Zionism is Communism"
 I don't think that they see them as a real threat to American security. I don’t think they see it as areal threat to U.S. security .
 Russia and China are the two most prominent countries in the world, according to CNN. I think they are in competition with a number of countries, including China .
 This is not about destabilizing Europe, it is about the Chinese aggression in East Asia . This is about Russia, not Europe, the revanchism, Russian aggression, it's about China's aggression in Asia .
 The U.S. wants to remain the big dog on the block and the competition for that right now is Russia and China. What it’s about is the U. S. want to remain a big dog.
 Both countries have established alternate poles of power and finance in the world Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the BRICS countries .
 The U.S. doesn't like this new Chinese bank which is formed up, it doesn’t like it the bank which the Russians have put together for Central Asia . The bank has been formed up by the Russian government .
 The danger is if you talk in a certain way you may convince a number of people that that’s the way things really are, and that's the danger of uncertainty and where mistakes can lead to some very bad things .
Nine people have been killed in a suspected U.S. drone strike in Afghanistan’s eastern province of Nangarhar .
 Two intelligence officials in Pakistan say Tuesday's air raid targeted militants in the Nazyan area of Nangarhar near Pakistan’s Khyber Agency .
 The assailants were reportedly from a terrorist group that recently pledged allegiance to pro-Taliban militants in Pakistan . S. S.
 Nangarhar governor says he was only aware of Monday air strike that killed two suspected militants . MQ-9 Reaper drone fired a Hellfire missile, officials say .
 Since 2004, the U.S. has been carrying out drone strikes in Afghanistan and several other Muslim countries . Yemen, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Somalia have been targeted by drone strikes .
 Washington claims the targets of the drone attacks are al-Qaeda militants . Local officials and witnesses say civilians have been victims of the attacks over the past few years .
 U.S. officials rarely inform their respective governments about drone attacks that often target civilians . U. S. officials often don't tell their governments about drones that target civilians.
 Uruguay won't accept more Gitmo inmates in Cuba El Salvador . The only other Latin American country that has granted Guantanamo Bay prisoners asylum .
 The Guantanamo Bay prison at the U.S. naval base in Cuba was set up in 2002 to keep terror suspects captured during the so-called U. S. war on terror .
 Foreign Minister Rodolfo Nin Novoa says his country will stop granting asylum to inmates from the Guantanamo Bay prison in Cuba .
 Uruguay has faced “cultural and infrastructure problems in dealing with refugees,’s Nin Novoa said . Uruguay has also faced ‘cultural and Infrastructure problems’
 This comes after cases of domestic violence incidents involving refugees were reported by local media in Uruguay . This is the latest in a series of incidents involving refugee refugees .
 Uruguay's decision on accepting new refugees will be put on hold until the end of the year . Nin Novoa also said Uruguay’s decision to accept new refugees is on hold .
 S. S. military prison for 12 years over alleged links with al-Qaeda terrorist group . They had never been charged with any charges .
 Mujica was himself a prisoner once during the former military rule in the country . He gave the Guantanamo prisoners asylum in the South American State on “humanitarian grounds’s grounds .
 Obama faces difficulties closing the Guantanamo Bay prison due to resistance from Republican lawmakers in Congress .
 The writer noted in the 1920s that everything they called for was happening . But this writer noted that everything was already happening .
 The Dearborn Independent 1 January 1922 can hardly be an accident that antagonism directed against the Jews is to be found everywhere in the world where Jews and non-Jews are associated .
 Jesse H Holmes, in The American Hebrew This is a candid address to the Jews of the United States . Holmes: As the Jews are the common element of the situation, it would seem probable that the cause will be found in them .
 The Jewish Question is set before them the Jewish Question as their question, theirs to consider . Without subterfuge, without flattery, without fear of all that they may threaten or can do, this attempt is made to set it before them .
 This paper has merely become the vehicle of unwelcome facts which have finally thrust themselves up for final disposal in this country . This paper is merely the vehicle for unwelcome facts .
 The paper's humor will not affect the facts at all, according to the author .
 The present policy of Jewish leaders is to do neither, but to indulge in antics which go a long way toward illustrating what this paper has said .
 What The Dearborn Independent says is true, and tens of thousands of Jews know it is true . The Dear born Independent says it's true .
 No representative Jew has ever approached us with a denial of the truth of what has been stated in this paper . No representative Jews have ever come forward to deny the truth .
 This objection has been seriously and courteously made by a number of Jews who have conferred with The Dearborn Independent on this series of articles . It has been as seriously and Courteously considered.
 Being Jews are a problem for the Jews themselves, says the author . Being Jews is a problem, he says .
 Third, it is time for some one to call attention to the necessity of cleaning up on that problem .
 The Dearborn Independent would count no labor lost that would rouse the Jews to solve the Jewish Question in this country . See coupon on page 24 toward the same conditions which have menaced their race in Europe .
 The purpose of this series of articles is to let in the light to show the Jews generally that the stench had become too great .
 The list of charges for the Jews of the United States to consider as affecting the distinguished members of their race is very serious .
 There is a distinct “Jewish idea in business and professional life which has eaten away the traditional principles of honor on which Anglo-Saxon life was erected .
 A Jew in business or professional life makes a breakaway from trickery, deception, dishonesty and exploitation of the gullible public . A Jew also knows that the majority of his brethren in the same line practice different methods .
 Jewish ownership is a solid wall of Jewish ownership and control. It is true that behind the amazing degeneracy of the modern stage and motion picture is a strong wall ofJewish ownership .
 This ownership and control must bear the responsibility for the rapid and dangerous deterioration which has come since such ownership of control was achieved . Owners must bear responsibility for rapid anddangerous deterioration, says author .
 It is true that behind all the shoddy and make-believe and adulteration in the staples of life is the Jewish idea of profits, “making the ephah small and the shekel great’s”
Before Jewish influence began to be felt in American business, sound quality and a fair price were the rule . It is idle to retort that apt pupils have been found among non-Jews .
 It is the Jews’ ceaseless boast that wherever they go they change business, but not for the better .
 Jewish groups control influence in literature, art, politics, economics, fashion and sport . It is true that beneath all the network of trivializing influences in literature is Jewish influence .
 Orientalism has served as a subtle poison to dry up the sound serum of Anglo-Saxon morality on which this country thrived in its formative years .
 These charges and many more have all been made in detail with evidence submitted, and need not be repeated here . Case closed .
 The present purpose is simply to get the problem squarely before the Jews of the U.S. The present goal is to find out what the problem is .
 Jewish leaders have not attempted to disprove charges against Jewish leaders . The charges are true, they cannot be disproved, they have not been disproved .
 This question is best answered by three typical replies made by Jews during the course of the present series . This question was asked by Jews in the past three years of the series .
 There is a principle, seldom expressed among the Jews, that Jews should not have public attention called to them except by themselves or their chosen spokesmen .
 Any establishment of Jews as an accepted and trusted part of the general citizenry must include their being known as such . This is unfortunate, because any establishment of the Jews as a trusted member of the public must include them . It is unfortunate.
 In this country the Jew should not only welcome the widest knowledge but should himself undertake the exposure of those things which will eventually bring a shadow on the name of his race .
 The Jewish attitude has always been one of defense, regardless of the merits of the case . When exposure could no longer be suppressed, the Jewish attitude is always a defense .
 The principle may do for other countries, but not for the U.S. Now, that principle may have been used for other nations .
 If the Jew is wise, he ought speedily to take warning that in this country, the old line of action will not succeed .
 If Jews continue to defend the malefactors of their race against the rest of the people, they must not be surprised if the public begins to view them as all one crowd .
 It admits that there are two ideas in conflict in the United States . It calls the Jewish Universal idea the “Puritanic idea,’s “Jewish Universal idea’
 This view would command respect if it represented a superior morality in conflict with a lesser morality, if it represents a higher civilization against a lower civilization . This view is similar to that of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 The Jewish idea has a tremendous infiltrating force and a serious degenerative power, says the author . The Jewish concept has a huge infiltrating power and has a very serious degeneration power .
 It eats the substance out of the civilization which it attacks, destroys its moral virility . It throws down its reverence, saps its respect for authority, casts a shadow on every basic principle . It eats out of a civilization which is attacked, destroys the moral vir
 Moral gravitation being, like physical gravitation, downward, is not difficult to seduce human nature to lower levels . It is a massive task to lift it to higher levels of morality and reverence .
 The campaign in the U.S. is a campaign for the breakdown of the ideas that now obtain, not a lifting of them to a higher degree of nobility . The campaign is aimed at a breakdown of ideas now obtain.
 If it were an attempt to substitute the austerity of the Mosaic law the law given to Moses, not the ordinances decreed by Moses for the half-hearted Christian idealism.
 Moses condemns modern Jews more severely than anyone else could . Moses condemns the modern Jews. But Moses condemns them more severely.
 They have built their international power upon the exact opposite of the Mosaic law . They have also built their global power on the same law as Mosaic .
 Moses was given a law of human society which would have saved civilization its greatest tragedies . Moses was born in Moses' home in Jerusalem, Egypt .
 Moses has a social program, obedience to which for one day would completely wreck the Jewish international power . Moses has been known for his social program .
 Moses is their judge, and when the Law is established Moses will be their destroyer . Moses is the judge of the Law, and will be the destroyer of the law .
 Let the Jews think seriously what is this idea which they set up to follow. Where they err, let the Jews err.
 Let them think forward and visualize the effect if this idea should become regnant. Let them see the effect of this idea if it becomes regnant .
 It will not become regnant here; there are safeguards here which the true Israelite will understand . But it is as certain as day that the idea will in the end destroy, utterly destroy, all who trust in it .
 Many Jews will recognize this sentiment as their own, but they will be readier to express it to a non-Jew than to a Jew . Many Jews may recognize it as their Own, but it will be harder to express this sentiment to a Non-Jew .
 There is need of prophets in Judah today, says the author . "Men who will rise among the people and tell them plainly"
 Jewish "art" has so accustomed the Jews to make-believe that the writing is looked upon as a performance, nothing more. Here and there a literary man attempts to speak .
 No one with a sense for such things and there are believers still left in Judah will doubt that the times are ripe for a great change .
Strong feeling among remnant of believing Jews that it is interpreted as forewarnings of the Messianic period . So strong is the feeling among the remnant of Jews that they believe it is.
Among the Judaized Christian sects, other interpretations are given to the times . Most of which are used to support political Zionism which represents the materialism and unbelief of present-day Judaism .
 But however misinterpretative these sectarian and Jewish conclusions may be, they indicate a sense of imminent change . But they may be.
 A greater change is indicated than migration to Palestine would be for that would not mean any change at all in the world, says the author .
 Christians should re-examine their ground for so strange and immoral a conclusion. Christians misguided Christians, one must say .
 The break-up of this civilization, this age of civilization, will occur because of the collapse of this system by which the Jew has obtained his hold on the nations .
 The fallacy of Jewish tribal destiny to rule the world will pass with it, he writes . The system that gives him his hold is doomed, he says .
 prophets should be expected to arise in Judah to recall their people to the Law whose previous denial meant their overthrow . Change with this change already on the threshold, prophets are expected to rise in Judah .
 A sufficient number of Jews will see the truth and act upon it, says the Jewish community .
 The second is in dispute, but is by no means beyond consideration, especially by Jews . Solidity no matter what the second is, it is not beyond consideration .
 In these matters the Jews are much wiser than the so-called Christians . The Jews are more wise than the Christians .
 The “law of the stranger” permits several important things which the “Law of the brother’s brother” prohibits . The ‘law of a stranger’ permits many important things.
 This is one of the influences which has helped to solidify Jewry against the rest of the world . The influence of the jewellery industry has helped solidify the Jewish community .
 Judah, the “driven part of Israel, has been blindly attacking the ‘led’ part of the country, says the author .
 Judah says he would make a return to Palestine a mere summer excursion in comparison . If these things should once take hold of the intensified consciousness of Judah, he says .
 The Anglo-Saxon peoples are seeking a reason for the sense of unfitness they feel when they adopt the traditional attitude of enmity toward the “others,’ the ‘others’ in this case being the Anglo- Saxon peoples .
 The reason for this sense of impropriety is that in this land, the Jew will have to change his attitude of antagonism and dwell in peace as in a land prepared for him .
 Not as lord of it, by any means, but as a grateful wanderer at last come home. Not as Lord of it by any way, but a grateful Wanderer at the last.
Not as a ruler, but as adding his bit to the righteousness, prosperity and peace of the people . Not as a leader, but a leader who adds his bit of righteousness and peace to the people.
 Let the Jew get back his Mosaic religion it is the most perfect social system ever devised and directly contrary to the practical modem Jew’s idea of things .
 Let the Jew keep as long as he pleases his idea that he is racially different. Let him keep his idea of being racially different, he says .
 The suggestion of intermarriage is a cmde one and always indicates a lack of grasp of the Jewish Question .
 They are not objectionable in any way, but the slightest regard for them can only hold them as romantic . They're not objectionable, but they're not offensive, they're romantic, they say .
 Let him shed his false program of breaking down Christendom by the infiltration of Orientalism into business, art, entertainment and the professions. Let him shedding hisfalse program of break down Christ endom .
Let him abolish the false ideal that it is an honor to Jewry to save a guilty Jew from the common law . Let him abolish it, and it is a disgrace to Jewy to see a guiltyJew punished by the common Law .
 The Jewish community charges itself with their misbehavior and will use methods well known to Jews to bring that misbehavior to an end . Let him draw up notice on all Jews of the United States who by hook or crook are sowing vile seed in society .
 Anti-defamation committee grows frantic over innocent remarks on the part of “Gentiles’s” Committee is absolutely indifferent to the misdeeds of thousands of Jews .
 A good deal of bad temper exists among many Jews, no doubt, says the Dearborn Independent .
 Human nature being what it is, they will hate to start at all if it will seem that the present agitation has compelled them .
 Jews offer warning word, however unwelcome, and a light, however undesired, which it would be most unwise for Jews to ignore .
 The average proJewish spouter is competent to understand, says the author . The article was conceived in a spirit far different than the average pro Jewish spouter .
 Jews should quit their attitude of attacking everyone who shows them the truth, according to a report by the Jewish group .
 The enemies of the Jews are those who defend them for the pay of hire or praise or votes .
 The enemies of the Jews are those who bespeak them fair to their faces . They express quite different thoughts behind their backs .
 Two of the principal ‘Gentile’ defenders of the Jews are men who privately hold and express thoughts about the Jews which are sheer hatred and enmity and fear . The writer of this personally knows that two of the main “gentile
 The enemies of the Jews are those who encourage them to take an attitude that they cannot hold in America not as affecting their personal liberty, but their social attitude and the Public Right .
These are the enemies of the Jews, and yet these are the ones whom Judah counts his friends . These are the people he counts his friend .
 The Question is a question about what this whole Question means . The question is "What this whole question means?"
 Judah’s friends today are those who will speak the surgical truth to him, braving his fury .
 Judah's leaders have betrayed him in this country they do not know they have crossed the Jordan. Judah’s leaders have been betrayed by the Jordan's leaders .
 The Jews have read it, and they have not found hatred, they have found abuse and calumny . They have found statements of fact calmly set forth, not to arouse hatred among the non-Jews, but torouse a sense of social responsibility .
 The emergence of the Jewish Question is a part of the culmination of destiny that has come upon us, he says . It's not for harm but for good, he adds .
 The Jews must uncover their eyes and unstop their ears, and they will hear that to which they have been too long heedless . The Jews will see the beginning of the end of their travail, says the author .
 The justification of a discussion of the Jewish Question is the good of the Jews . The greatest present obstacle to that good is the Jews themselves, the author says .
 Chinese court xinhuanet.com A. commonwealth organization has demanded an industrial polluter in Shandong province receive hefty penalties . The law came into effect on January 1 .
 The Intermediate People's Court in Dezhou City, east China’s Shandong Province, confirmed it accepted the lawsuit lodged by the All-China Environment Federation .
 The federation demands 30 million yuan (4. million U.S. dollars) compensation for damages from air pollution discharged by the Zhenhua Co. In it, the federation demands a total of 30 million Chinese yuan .
 The case arose after Zhenhua, which produces glass, neglected warnings by environmental watchdogs that they were emitting excess sulfur and dust . The company produces glass.
 The company was placed on a blacklist by the Ministry of Environmental Protection in October last year . The company failed to treat the emission after failing to treat it .
 Experts from the federation received several strong complaints from residents . It's not for everybody, they say .
 First environmentai iawsuit living near the company’s plant regularly discharges foul-smelling yellow smoke .
 The litigation is a new attempt to check headstrong violators like Zhenhua, says Ma Yong, a litigation director .
 It is the first case after amendments to the environmental protection law were enacted by China's National legislature in April 2014 .
 The new environmental law must be a powerful, effective tool to control pollution, Premier Li Keqiang said . The new law must not be as soft as cotton candy, he said .
Lawyer Fu Qiang says big industrial polluters are often protected by the local government . He says local government makes pollution control difficult .
 Non-governmental organizations will play a bigger role in representing public interests for environmental cases in the future . Non-government organizations will be more likely to represent public interests in environmental cases .
 The federation’s involvement has also triggered more government efforts . The federation's involvement is also triggering more government attempts .
 The Dezhou municipal government urged Zhengzhou Company to immediately overhaul emission treatment facilities to meet pollution control requirements before the end of the month .
 China to invest $15bn in Ukraine housing rt.com.com \^hina is going to provide Ukraine with $ 15 billion in loans over 15 years to support construction of affordable housing .
 The project is aimed at meeting the country’s public housing policy, forming a social housing fund, building affordable homes and improving the infrastructure .
 Ukraine will implement a pilot $1 billion project to build affordable housing using Citic as the general contractor . Citic will be used as a general contractor for the housing project .
 Gennady Zubko said the country was in talks with China about attracting investment to implement a program of renting real estate with an option of further acquisition .
 Financial arrangements with China traditionally require the fulfillment of a number of conditions, such as involving a workforce and technology from China .
 In spring 2011 Ukraine and the ExportImport Bank of China signed an agreement to build a high-speed railway line between Kiev and Borispol International Airport . The agreement includes $2 billion of infrastructure projects in the Kiev region .
 Petersburg, later called Leningrad, and, from March 1918 on, Moscow, and the consequent effects on the vast tracts of Russia .
 Solzhenitsyn's classic and massive The GULAG Archipelago is based on his classic book, The GulAG archipelago .
 The members of the Federation of Constituents [advocates of a democratic constitution] and the network of ‘soldier universities’ were immediately included . The members were also included in the group.
 The same applied to railroad men who refused an oath swearing armed defense of Soviet authority . Telegraphers were unsympathetic toward their new masters and insubordinate trade unionists .
 One single authority entrusted with spying on citizens, with arresting them, with conducting investigations of them . One authority directed their prosecution, furnishing their judges and carrying out sentences upon them .
 On September 5, 1918, the Red Terror followed with instructions for mass shootings and erecting concentration camps under the direct authority of the Cheka .
 The Cheka also continued rounding up Mensheviks (the anti-terrorist communists), and other members of smaller parties on nocturnal excursions . The CheKA also continued to round up members of small parties on excursions.
 People were shot recklessly on the basis of arbitrary lists particularly academics, artists, authors, authors and engineers . People were also shot on the grounds of arbitrary Lists .
 The regulation on forced food collection of January 1919, the farmers were also targeted . The farmers were forced to collect food in January 1919 .
 The mass “collectivization of agriculture” in Ukraine led to the death of about 6 million humans . In the 1930s, the mass ‘collectivisation of agriculture in Ukraine’ led to death by starvation of 6 million people .
 In order to grasp the full and monstrous truth, one would have to be dragged through many lives in many camps camps . The first phase alone could not be survived without special favors from someone, since the camps were devised for your extermination .
 Barnes Review is the first-time ever English review of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s banned book .
Victor Thorn’s new study is published in The Barnes Review revisionist history magazine .
 There was no security for anyone’s life, dwelling or property, according to the government . “2.2.3.5.5,’ says the author of the book, "2.4.5," says the book .
 Anyone who spoke publicly against them was seized in the same instant . “7.7.6’s” was seized by anyone who spoke against them . ‘7.5’ was seized.
 Jewish involvement in Commnnism no ‘German invention’ The basis for the postwar condemnation of National Socialism was the accusation that it acted out of Germanic “race pride” and aggressively strove to conquer ‘Lebensraum’
 Germany accused of spreading the "falsehood" that Bolshevism was identical to “international Jewry,’ which supposedly financed and supported it for many decades . Germany was accused of spread the “falsehood’s” worldwide .
 The supposed truth, we are told, is that the world-encompassing goals of the Bolsheviks and the reign of terror they spread were recognizably a “Russian’s phenomenon.
 He goes into both its international connections, and into the involvement of Russian Jews in the revolutionary events of 1917-18 . He studies the totality of Soviet history with all its consequences .
 Leon Trotsky became People’s Commissar for the Army and Fleet . Leon Trotsky was chairman of the ^’Revolutionary War Council of the Republic . He was a member of the Central Committee and of the Politburo .
 He mercilessly liquidated “lackeys of imperialism and the bourgeoisie,” “counterrevolutionaries,’ “suspect persons,“ members and clergy of the Orthodox Church and all workers and farmers who did not unconditionally submit to Bolshevism
 Trotsky nearly always surrounded himself with fellow Jews as his closest co-workers . Trotsky was known as the leader of the Communist Party in Russia .
 He established in August 1918 the first concentration camps, and even had women and children locked up . Women and children were locked up and if necessary shot to deter defections to White forces or to terrify strikers .
 Levi B Kamenev (nee Rosenfeld) was a trusted friend of Lenin . He was editor of Pravda from 1913-14 .
 Lenin formed the Soviet leadership troika with Stalin and Zinoviev . In 1925-26 his attempt to limit Stalin’s arbitrary power led to the loss of all his offices .
 Karl Radek was from 1919 to 1923 a Central Committee member and one of the most important leaders of the Comintern . He was born in Sobelsohn.
 He appeared as its envoy in 1919 at the founding congress of the KPD in Berlin in a Soviet Russian uniform . He also appeared as the envoy at the first congress in 1919 .
 He disappointed the CPSU in 1923 by the failure of his financing of the communist revolution and agitation in Germany . He was disappointed by the failed financing of communist revolution in Germany.
 In 1929, he was recalled from his Siberian banishment to be editor of Pravda . In 1929 he was recalling from his Russian banishment.
 In 1936 he was arrested again and condemned to 10 years hard labor . In 1937 he was condemned to a 10-year hard labor.
 Jacob M Sverdlov was co-chairman of the All-Russian Executive Committee . He was also the co-Chairman of Trotsky and Ephraim Sklyansky .
 Joint founder of the Red Army, he demanded “pitiless mass terror against the enemies of the revolution’s enemies . He ordered the extermination of the czar and his family .
 Grigory Yevseyevich Zinoviev, from 1903 on was a close collaborator of Lenin . He worked with Lenin for years .
 In 1917 he became chairman of the Petrograd Soviet and became a member of the Politburo of the Bolshevik party . In 1919 he became a members of the Bolsheviks and was a part of the party's leadership .
From 1919 to 1926 he was chairman of the Communist Internationale . All communist parties were to submit themselves . He was the head of the General Staff of the World Revolution .
 Solzhenitsyn was shot for involvement in a conspiracy to assassinate Stalin . He was arrested in 1935 and was arrested after a sensational show trial in 1936 .
 Solzhenitsyn begins rightly with obligations and religious roots of Jewry as scattered across the world in Diaspora .
Israel's bordersuperseding cooperation is not only Zionist, but much more . Israel is a state of Israel, it is also a Jewish state .
World War I on the East Coast of the U.S. among high-level personages of international Jewry . World War I also exerted itself upon all Jews living around the world .
Ben Gurion justified the proclamation of the state of Israel on May 14, 1948 . With this basic attitude, and supported by terrorist organizations, Ben Gurion said .
 The Spotlight is the weekly newspaper out of Washington, DC, that rose from its ashes when they shut down The Spotlight . The Spotlight was a weekly newspaper from Washington, D.C. The Spotlight.
 52 issues crammed into 47 weeks of the year plus six free issues of Whole Body Health for $59 .
There are pages of this history which one does not open without trembling . There are pages which one doesn't open with trembling .
 Johannes Rogalla von Bieberstein, Jildischer Bolshewismus Mythos und Realitdt [“Jewish BolshevismMyth and Reality’s], Dresden, 2002,136,136. U.S.
 The Russian sees him on top of the czars’ city of Moscow and at the top of a metropolis on the Neva .
 Petersburg and as head of the Red Army (Leon Trotsky) are the perfect mechanisms for our self destruction . The Red Army is the perfect mechanism for self destruction.
 Simeon M Nachimson commanded Lenin’s Praetorian Guard, a Latvian Rifle Regiment .
 Latvia, a country plagued by organized crime, was also home to many Bolsheviks . Latvia was home to a number of Bolsheviks.
 Stalin rewarded him with poison in 1938 . Solzhenitsyn: "Russian people are now confronted by a Jew both as their judge and hangman"
 Sverdlovsk, the former Yekaterinburg, the main industrial city of the Urals, is named after the first Soviet president and the person responsible for the murder of the imperial family . The city was named after Jacob M Sverglov, the first Russian
 Thomas Young of Birmingham, Alabama, was sentenced on that day for the July 30, 1980, murder of the 15-year-old girl . Ventura County, California, District Attorney Gregory D Totten announced on March 20 that Young had been sentenced .
 Judge Jeffrey Bennett sentenced Young to life in prison without the possibility of parole . A jury found him guilty of first-degree murder during the commission of rape .
 Young entered the home of Stacy Knappenberger through a back door, brutally raping and killing her . The murder took place in the daytime when Young entered through the back door .
 DNA taken from him in 2008 matched to a DNA sample taken by law enforcement in 2008 . He was arrested for molesting his 16-year-old granddaughter in Illinois .
 Young was arrested for the murder on September 6, 2012 . Young was subsequently located in Alabama by the Ventura County Cold Case Task Force .
 A jury found him guilty of the murder in the commission of rape on February 26, 2015 . He was then extradited to Ventura, California, where he was found guilty of murder .
 An 18-year-old man has been arraigned for the stabbing murder of Alexander Burkart and another 18- year-old boy is still being sought after .
 Deandre Arnold of Mount Clemens was video arraigned on felony murder charges in 4IB District Court in Clinton Township . Arnold is charged with felony murder in the death of Deandre.
 Magistrate Dan Goulette ordered he be held without bond in the Macomb County Jail . He was ordered to stay in jail without bond .
 Arnold’s alleged accomplice, Jayvon Tarice Cates, 18, was still on the run and being sought after by authorities . Cates was arrested in June 2013 .
 Macomb County Prosecutor’s Office has issued an arrest warrant for his arrest . The Macomb county prosecutor’'s office has issued the warrant .
 On Saturday, February 21st, 2015, at around 8.20 PM Alexander William Burkart, 22 years old, from Mt. Mt. Burkart .
 When authorities arrived on scene, they found Burkhart had been stabbed in the chest .
 He was transported to McLaren Hospital where he was pronounced dead from his injuries . He was taken to a local hospital where he died of his injuries. He was later pronounced dead.
 Macomb County Sheriff Anthony Wickersham declined to specify what motivated the attack . He did state that robbery was not the factor .
 Alex Burkart was stabbed to death by three men . The three men were involved in an altercation that resulted in the stabbing .
 Sheriff, you're not permitted to say the word, though delivering pizzas into certain areas is more dangerous than dodging bullets in a war zone .
 Ferguson, Missouri, has recently begun resembling its White flight counterpart — Selma .
 On Saturday, March 21, first came the notorious #BlackLivesMatter protesters blocking traffic, screaming at all White motorists and chanting their Black power slogans .
 At least 15 people were arrested, described as teenagers and young adults . It's not yet summer.
 A black thug punched this White victim in the face for no reason other than unprovoked hate . This White was assaulted in a St. John's railway station .
 Louis, Missouri, light rail train on March 23 after refusing to talk about the shooting of Michael Brown . Brown was shot dead by a police officer in Brown's home town of St. Louis .
 The victim, 43, declined to identify himself for the media . He was commuting home when a young Black man in his twenties walked up to him and asked to use his cell phone .
 The suspect pummels the victim multiple times in the head while he tries to cover himself with his hands and forearms . The video shows the suspect punching the victim several times.
Security guard who witnessed the attack as the train pulled in to a station alerted police .
 Three Black male perpetrators were captured in the act on surveillance cameras .
 Police believe that those same perpetrators had already committed a violent armed robbery against a group of White male and female victims .
 The third suspect in the murder of a man walking his dog in Overbrook, Pennsylvania, on Thursday night, March 19, turned himself in the next day .
 The next week police say he will be charged with murder and robbery . He is 15 years old, and police said he would be charged next week with murder .
 Brandon Smith, 15, was arrested and charged with murder, robbery and related charges . Police had issued a warrant for his arrest earlier after arresting another suspect accused of being involved in the shooting .
 A 14-year-old male is also expected to face lesser charges for his involvement in the shooting . The shooting took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Authorities say they were able to track down the duo after identifying them from surveillance video taken near the scene of the crime . Two 19th district officers spotted three males fitting the suspects’ descriptions, pursued and apprehended and took them in for questioning .
 The shooting had occurred just before 9:00 PM on 1 Thursday night in the 6400 block of Woodcrest Avenue .
 James Patrick Stuhlman, 51, was shot once in the chest, and died within minutes of arriving at Penn Presbyterian Hospital . Police say that 51-year-old JamesPatrick StuhLman was shot at least once, and was pronounced dead .
 A. bank employee was shot three times during an attempted robbery just after 8 AM March 18 at BancorpSouth on Main Street in Humbolt, Tennessee .
 The suspect was waiting for the victim, who is a bank employee, in a garage at her home . According to the Gibson County Sheriff, the suspect is waiting for her .
 The suspect grabbed the victim, later identified as Janice Frisbee, and forced her into the bank at gunpoint .
 Police caught the suspect down the street from the bank and took him into custody . The suspect was arrested after being caught by police on the street .
 The FBI stated that the female victim was kidnapped by suspect Dominic Shaun Williams, 39, of California .
 The female victim, who was shot three times, couldn’t open the bank vault . She was shot in the head three times .
 Jacarandas, blue tinged trees Laughing children, all say please Smiling nannies loud and chatting Queens Club cricket, Rhodesia batting Braais and picnics .
 Nigerian children aged 11 and younger were taken by the Takfiri militants as they fled the town of Damasak .
 Nigerian forces liberated the town of Chad and Niger earlier last month .
 Officials in Borno State say the terrorists have been known to place young abducted children in schools under their supervision . Males between the ages of 16 and 25 are trained and used to carry out the group’s heinous crimes .
 In mid-March, 70 decomposing bodies, many decapitated, were found under a bridge outside the town . Many decapitated bodies were found in March .
 The Takfiri group has been wreaking havoc in Nigeria for the past six years . It recently pledged allegiance to the ‘TSIL’ terrorists operating in Iraq and Syria .
 Nigerian troops with the help of military forces from neighboring Chad, Cameroon and Niger have started a joint operation targeting the militants .
Terrorists say they have made major progress against the terrorists in the past weeks . They have recaptured many towns held by the terrorists, bringing closer the end of the militants' deadly campaign in the region .
 The militancy has claimed the lives of more than 13,000 people in Nigeria .
 Some 1. million Nigerians have been displaced as well, with many escaping into neighboring Cameroon, Chad and Niger .
 LBJ’s ‘Great Society’ has proven a colossal fraud from the start, says the author .
Conservative-headlines.com Ihe Hufflngton Post has published a pro-racial segregation article . Blacks refuse to act like Whites when among their own .
 Huffington Post published an article defending Blacks-only events on college campuses . The site is a leftwing internet media site .
 This article demands the right for Blacks to have segregated events that exclude White people, even White journalists . However, this article demands that the right to have segregation .
 The article says that Black students need “safe spaces’ where they can bad mouth White people without the “judgment and intrusion’ of the White man’s.
 The Hufflngton Post has become famous for its in-your-face hypocrisy . This is exactly the kind of in- your- face hypocrisy that the HufflNGton Post is known for .
 The London Jewish Chronicle article of February 25, 1992. Among many other Jewish media reports on Lenin from the beginning of the 1990s.
 He favorably contrasted the Jews as revolutionaries with Russians . In addition, he favorably Contrasted the Jews with Russians.
 Maxim Litvinov presided over the Moscow People’s Commissariat of the Exterior froml930 to 1939 . He was sent there by Stalin as his special advocate of a pact against Germany .
 Maxim Gorky says the Soviet trade mission in Berlin was 98% Jewish . Solzhenitsyn says Litvinov was the founder of ‘socialist realism.’
 A similar situation prevailed in the other Western capitals where the Soviets gradually opened agencies . The Soviets slowly opened agencies in Western capitals .
 Jewish authors tend to conceal the shameful acts of Jewish communist executioners . On the other hand, they sometimes refer with pride to the high positions some members of their “tribe’s” enjoyed under the Bolsheviks .
 M Zarubeznyi, author of the 1925 Yearbook of the People s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs, has a special list in his publication .
 The Jewish Encyclopedia provides a long list of 28 Juden in der Sovietunion, op. cit. cit., 221 .
 As Stalin's brother-in-law and closest collaborator, Lazar Kaganovich was one of the most powerful and dangerous men in the world . He was executed with the blood of 20 million people on his hands .
 Stalin organized the persecution of his own ethnic group in Stalin's kingdom . He also organized the gruesome persecution of himself and his ethnic group .
 Kaganovich was responsible for the death of an entire generation of intellectuals and the personal signer of execution orders for 36,000 people . Kaganovic was responsible of the deaths of a generation.
 Kaganovich also ordered the wholesale destruction of Christian monuments and churches . The demolition in downtown Moscow of the Cathedral of Christ the Savior in 1931 .
 The pool was rebuilt at a cost of over $100 million by the Russian people and reconsecrated in August 2000 . It was replaced by a giant public swimming pool, but was gloriously rebuilt .
 In 1957, he was removed from all his positions after a failed coup attempt against Nikita Khrushchev . In 1957 he was remove from all the positions after the failed coup . He was removed in 1957 from all positions.
 Ransdell is the one holding a “Pants Up’ sign . Robert (“With Jews we lose’s we lose) RansDell is one of the people holding the ‘Pants up” sign .
Myriads of our people around the world got out into the streets with banners, flyers, stickers, posters and megaphones alerting the general public to White Genocide, the deliberate destruction of our identity .
 White people across many majority White countries have been subject to genocidal conditions by a loose collection of small but powerful groups which control a monopoly over media and politics .
 Marin County, California, in 2011 was decided to be “too White’ by the U.S. government . For example, Marin county in 2011, Marin County was ‘too White'
 In all my years on this Earth, I have never heard of a place being described as “too Black,” ‘too Asian,’ “Too Brown’ or “ too mixed’ by its own government .
 This is not just confined to the U.S. if s quite as common in Canada, Australia, New Zealand and our European native homelands . It's not just as common as the United States.
White countries opened up to millions of non-White, third-world immigrants . Despite massive opposition from the majority of our populations, the White countries are now open to millions .
 Opening the borders of a rich country will flood it with third-world immigrants . Opening a bank vault to one and all will lure in bank robbers .
 Those anti-Whites opened our borders fully aware that we’d reach the situation that we are in now this trend towards a White minority .
Today’s third Saturday activism is a message to all anti-Whites that we’re not putting up with these genocidal conditions any longer .
 Times are changing, and ordinary White folk are realizing just how much they’ve been conned and lied to, says author . "We have been targeted for destruction," she says .
 Capitalism destroying earth’s ability to support life, says Roberts .
 Anyone who has read half of 9/11's books knows that the official story is a lie . He gave us ten books on 9/ 11, and gave us 10 books on the day of the attack .
 His book has just been published by Clarity Press, a publisher that seeks out truth-telling authors .
 Readers often ask me to write about global warming, chemtrails, vaccines and other subjects beyond my competence . Readers also ask him to write on global warming and vaccines .
 Griffin has made a huge investment in researching climate change . However, I can see that Griffin has also invested in researching the climate .
Human C02 emissions have about three decades to get under control, he says . He sees hope in the agreement between Obama and Xi Jinping that was announced on November 11, 2014 .
 Griffin argues that instead of rushing to its destruction like lemmings, the human race must accept the moral challenge of abolishing fossil-fuel economy .
 He makes the case that clean energy permits most of modern society’s way of life to continue without the threat posed by ever rising emissions .
 Nuclear energy is not among clean energy sources just look at the ongoing radiation pollution from Fukushima . Nuclear energy isn't a clean energy source .
 Clearly the climate is changing, whether it is caused by C02 emissions or some other cause .
Every day brings more reports of perils associated with climate change . Every day brings a new report of the effects of climate change.
On one hand our food is polluted with herbicides and on the other hand by antibiotics . On one hand we are polluted by herbicides, and on another hand by antibiotic antibiotics .
 The “mainstream media aren’t allowed to venture where we go then we have hormones and pesticides. The First Freedom is a rebel newspaper .
 The World Health Organization has found the glyphosate in Monsanto’s Roundup is a likely cause of cancer in humans and animals . The herbicide is widely sprayed on GMO food crops .
 Glyphosate, which is also believed to be exterminating honey bees and Monarch butterflies, is now present in 75 percent of air and rain samples .
Independent scientists found that glyphosate has serious adverse effects on animal life and on animal and human fertility and on human fertility .
 The U.S. government's clearance of glyphosate rests entirely on the industry's own studies of its safety . The scientist pointed out that these “studies’ are not substantiated by independent scientists .
 Many agricultural science university faculties are dependent on research funds from the chemical industry . Monsanto studies are done by scientists employed by the company .
 70 percent of all antibiotics are fed to livestock because it produces weight gain and saves money on feed costs . Martha Rosenberg writing in CounterPunch reports that 70% of antibiotics are used to feed livestock .
 Ninety-three percent of doctors are concerned about the meat industry’s use of antibiotics . Independent scientists have conclusive evidence that the growing resistance of bacteria to antibiotics is due to the use of antibiotic as animal feed .
 The Food and Drug Administration, severely weakened by Republicans, cannot stand up to Big Meat . The Food & Drug Administration has been severely weakened. Republicans have been criticized by Republicans .
 Congress responded to the campaign donations, not to the health and safety of the American people . Congress responded.
 The Animal Health Institute consists of the drug companies who make profits selling 70 percent of their production to meat, egg, and milk producers . The drug companies make profits from their production of meat, eggs and milk .
 The members of the ‘health institute’ are Abbott, Bayer Healthcare, Elanco/Lilly, Merck and Merck . Novartis is also a member of the health institute .
 As the drug companies have more or less stopped the development of new antibiotics, the protection antibiotics provide against infections is rapidly fading .
 The fossil-fuel fracking industry is polluting the remaining surface and ground water . California is reportedly left with one year’s supply of water .
 All of these activities use of antibiotics as animal feed, use of GMO herbicides, fracking are profitable but they impose huge external costs on the environment and on third parties .
 Millions of words have condemned and praised this booklet . The most controversial and “expensive” little English language publication printed in modern times .
 More millions of dollars have been spent on both sides in litigation as the result of the two major Ziindel Holocaust Trials .
 Capitalists make money by exploiting labor and externalizing the costs of wastes produced during the productive process . Capitalists impose those wastes on the environment .
Private interests focused on quarterly profits that are destroying the livability of the earth . It is the short-term time horizon of production organized by selfish private interests .
 Almost every economist on earth will rise up in opposition to that true statement, because they are brainwashed in the neoliberal ideology . Yet in fact is nothing but an apology for capitalist exploitation of labor and the earth .
 Ronald Coase was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics for his article on "The Theory of the Firm" He was a graduate student of Coase's "The Problem of Social Cosf"
 In theory, externalities can be internalized into the process of production so that the producer bears all the costs if all inputs and waste products are subject to property rights .
 They remain ‘common property’ and thus are dumping grounds for waste disposal . They remain "common property" and are “common property.’
Despite pressure from corporations, governments have realized that pollution is a problem . Governments have imposed some regulation, including regulation .
 The regulation is insufficient to halt very much of the extemalization of the cost of production . The regulation raises some costs to corporations, but the regulation is not enough .
In economic terms, this is the crisis that David Ray Griffin presents to us . In economic terms this is an economic crisis, says the author .
 Ransdell was to have a jury trial on March 11, 2015, in Burlington, Kentucky, but it didn’t happen . Robert “With Jews we lose’s.
 He had requested and obtained a jury trial in spite of the negative attitude shown him during his pretrial hearing . He had asked and obtained the jury trial because of his negative attitude .
 Judicial delays are just one way in which they try to wear down the accused .
 Robert was arrested doing a peaceful protest against the MLK celebration in his hometown of Florence .
We need to support Robert and find him a pro-bono lawyer to assist in his trial . We need to find him and support him to help in his case .
 His experiences prove Israel is no democracy but a Marxist Police State, he says .
 This weekly newspaper offers an introductory rate of 16 issues for $17.76 per issue .
 Christine Miller exposes Zionist contradictions in their own words against themselves . Join history sleuth German-bom author Christine Miller as she exposes Zionism contradictions .
Your signed letter with phone number and address is welcome, but will be edited as necessary to fit available space . Your signed letter will be sent with your name and address .
16 page booklet covers migrations from the Holy Land to England in ancient times . 16 page booklet was written by Sir Standish G Crauford .
 The Dearborn Independent published the articles first appeared in the Ford Motor Company's periodical .
 FREE DVD catalog on global conspiracy, legal sovereignty, reduce taxes and avoid taxes, land patent and allodial title .
Members are fighting back to save Dr. Dr. John Sutter after years of mismanagement .
 Pierce's brother, Sanders Pierce, and the alliance’s top street activist Michael Weaver along with many others. Pierce is a member of the alliance's top street activists .
 SALTY SID of Silver Spring sends seven separate sensational scandal spreadsheets for seven dollars . SALty SID sends seven different sensational scandal spreadssheets .
 Sid’s super-sized subscription set includes The First Freedom, Impact, Citizens Informer, The Nationalist Times, CofCC Newsletter, Heritage & Destiny .
Scripturesforamerica.org is a 24 page bimonthly patriotic magazine printed in England .
 Four “rebels’ murdered in cold blood for each invader killed by the angry citizenry .
 Get yours by contacting TFF roving reporter Nancy Hitt, hunleyhitt@gmail.com .
 It's my understanding that a mere six mega-corporations fashion and approve virtually all the establishment-generated information being fed to us daily, both electronically and in print . It’s my understanding. A mere six giant corporations fashion and approves virtually all.
To date, we still have a plethora of alternative news sources, most notably via the internet . To date, to date, they still have available a variety of alternative sources .
 Americans should turn off their TVs and start paying more attention to alternative voices, he says . The monopoly controllers succeed in regulating them off the airwaves, and they are gone forever .
Far from being hired readers of prescripted, pre-approved text, volunteers are volunteers .
 They don’t try to tell listeners what to think; only challenge and encourage them to think . They only challenge them to do what they think .
 At least one newspaper discusses what actually started the so-called Civil War . I wish to inform you how much I enjoy The First Freedom .
Hattiesburg, MS NO SOCIALIST, has been published for more than a decade . Hattiesburg's most valued and necessary publication is now published on CNN .
 I am a White Christian Constitutionalist Nationalist, and as such am fundamentally opposed to Jooz Socialism, National Socialist, or any other of the dozen or so types . I'm a White Christians, and I'm not a socialist or a socialist .
 Our country is down the tubes because people seek pleasure instead of information that requires some form of action; call it sloth .
 In Russia they did nothing that would have stopped the Communist takeover. In Russia, they did not do anything to stop it .
 Nurturing a good show of character is always a goal for activist visionaries and leaders . Kinsley McDower Chicago, IL RAISING THE STANDARD .
 I see many in here who decide on a change for the better, developing a will to be worthy Americans of our forefathers’ principles . I see some in this country who will be worthy of their forefather's principles .
 "I’ve been proud of many, and continue to find more in my wake," he says . "Believe me, I’'ve been proud. Believe me, he’s been proud, and continues to find some more in his wake"
 The accomplishments of these men in here are fortified in pure energy, even in blood sometimes .
 The First Freedom is an inspiration; its worldview is the best I have read anywhere . The First Free is an inspiring inspiration; it's the best he has read anywhere, he says .
 I'm 26 years old and a true hard-head believer in my rights, faith and kinfolk . I’m 26 yearsold and atrue hard- head believer in his rights,faith and kin folk .
 Florida State prison is the latest denial of your newspaper to this Florida state prison . In fighting this latest denial, we fear not retaliation, because we bear the marks of that already .
 The first Freedom can only publish the truth, not get it past a few prison mail room clerks and wardens who feel like many media munchkins that their views are the only news anyone needs .
 Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu's recent visit to the USA was a disgusting sight . The Republican leadership presented the Israeli PM with a bust of Winston Churchill .
 Speaker John Boehner and his cronies sent a clear message that the Republican leadership supports the New World Order and is willing to provide millions of military-age Americans.
 Boehner, Lindsay Graham and John McCain do not speak for rank-and-file Republicans . They remain conservative, devoted to our country's Constitution, not the warmongering State of Israel .
 Indians from India are taking over gas stations convenient stores, motels, and motels . The trend is alarming .
 Years ago, I ran into a man whose story was that he had been in Florida where he met and had a discussion with one of these Indians . He learned that our government had set that immigrant up .
 I would like to see some First Freedom contributor do an investigation concerning this issue . I would want to see the issue investigated by some FirstFreedom contributors .
 Gregory Kay with his expertise would jump on it and find out if it's true, he says . Perhaps he'd jump on his expertise.
 The CSA is trying to save what’s left of the CSA and any other States that wish to join us .
 Chief McDermond says two of his officers violated Robert Ransdell's civil rights . He says he was arrested, handcuffed and jailed due to his protest against MLK Day .
 Ransdell's placards read, "Happy Marchin' Lootin' killin' Day," "HappyMarchin’ Lootin” and “Happy March in the Black’s Killin�’ Day"
 If there’s any justice left in these Jewnighted States you will be charged, tried and convicted for deprived him of his rights under color of law .
 Vol.-179 pages ineluding Genesis ehapter one, Noah’s fiood & Khazar Empire .
 Illuminati, Freemasonry, Secret Societies, Judaism, World War II, Holocaust, Kennedy assassination . JFK assassination .
Mixed race offspring have lower IQ, goes against nature and Biblical law . Mixed race offspring are more likely to have a lower IQ .
 Every food item featuring a “K” or “U’s imprint has paid a tax to a Rabbi . The Rabbi is a Rabbi.
Only its arbitrary enforcement is his problem and ours, says John CARLEY Buffalo .
 Barack Obama Jr. gave a most disturbing and illogical speech on November 14, 2014, giving us his evil plan to turn the United States into a third world country .
 He gave an unconstitutional executive order, bypassing Congress and telling the world that anybody can come to America illegally, you’re ah welcome .
 Illegal aliens receive more benefits from us taxpayers than do Americans, according to the U.S.
 For once in his life, Obama spoke the truth when remarking that “Undocumented immigrants in the country are as American as Malia and Sasha,’s daughters .
 Obama and his Injustice Department refuse to protect and defend our borders . Obama and the Justice Department are among those who refuse to do so .
 The Defamation League of B’nad B'rith put him in there to anger and detract us from themselves . That Kenyan in the Whore House is but a symptom of our real affliction .
 He and they wink back and forth, B O. Knowing they can lose him anytime, they pretend he's their enemy . They pretend he is their enemy, they say . He and he wink back, they winkback and forth .
 Everyone senses the Satanic presence's siren allurements both left and right wherever he turns . Resolution in a rapidly-developing information age when no agenda remains long hidden but must compete openly .
 Let’s be sufficiently resolved to look always ahead, but in seeking that shining light of possibilities beyond, he says .
 No Child Left Behind student to come right out and openly admit where that leaves his whole class . We shouldn’t expect the No Child left behind student to do so .
 Whites form a separate breed illegible to those mistakenly thinking to read its noble mind . Whites form an illegible breed to those who mistakenly think to read their mind .
 Jewish Supremacists view us as a single block, the only ones standing in the way of their New World Order . History has catalogued the Aryan races into subfolders Greeks to Icelanders and European Americans .
 All the other Nations, they think, would be no problem once Whitey were disarmed and brought low . The other Nations think, they say, would not be a problem if Whitey was disarmed .
 For lack of knowledge, we do not wish to rule the world, just our own appetites . We do not want to Rule the world. We want to be able to control our appetites.
Until informing them why they mustn't hate all Americans, this won't change, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A well-armed and rising American free South must elbow off center stage the Zionist-controlled mediacracy’s ridiculous munchkins . To state our case before an awakening world, a well-arm and rising U.S. free South should elbow offcenter stage the
 For such types have parodied Aryan nobility with dubious propaganda since the days of Don Quixote, and lately sink to the shameful subterranean remains of Sodom and Gomorrah .
 The answer does exist, most certain measure has turned things around many times . But given sufficient resolve, it will do so again, says author .
 These cowardly moneychangers eternally lusting for powers not by way of merit but deceit, will go packing like their Gypsy cousins out of our lives and sights again .
 Whites are normally not quick to anger, fear, hate or regret when crimes draw punishments and virtues rewards . At work always again will be nature’s law, no vengeance-seeking on our part .
 Let ‘God’s Chosen’ bend their knees, pray for guidance, seek admittance among the ranks of civilized Nations and beg forgiveness .
 A deep-cycling well pump gives us healing waters, refreshment for the journey ahead . As the tides forever turn, not laterally where nature disallows more gain than we deserve .
 Rome was destroyed, destroyed and rebuilt over many a century is the same justice deciding all cases today . You may count on the fact that what created, destroyed, rebuilt Rome over many years is same justice today .
 We must yell the news abroad, publish facts that a cartoon world misses, display placards, occupy street corners passing out literature, put messages up on billboards along the interstates, convene workshops, challenge the brainwashed to debate us and redirect many a lost, homeless cousin .
 The enemy has browbeaten most people to the point where they’ve no idea what has happened, neither how nor why .
 Let's stop cringing for fear of the Jew, have a little fun and insert some truth back into today’s vacuum .
 The Jews, both a scourge and stimulant unto the world, will keep raising the toll for passage until it's no longer bearable, as that passion is in their blood .
 The Jew himself, by increasingly desperate salvos of propaganda attempting to sabotage our progress, confirms his uneasiness that it will happen . The Jew also confirms he will give every other ethnicity a free pass .
 The necessary quarantine Thereupon let’s invite emissaries from all legitimate States, on condition that no Jews be allowed, to convene at Versailles or some other venue except the Jewnighted Nations .
 We must eventually argue ‘racism’ as a universal desideratum, though the general public won’t hear about its merits until after we’ve commandeered the information, physical goods and services exchanges .
With the White man’s institutions free of Jewish/Marxist/Communist subversion, we may once more discriminate, says David Frum .
 LBJ’s Jewish Great Society decrees must temporarily inconvenience the minorities having moved in where they didn’t belong . We’ve no further designs upon those other races .
 For the Nations of this world cannot be “integrated’ under a single, manmade law; nature won’t have it, he says .
 We might agree upon certain principles such as not comparing apples with oranges but only against their own kind . Still, we insect-like intellects naming ourselves human beings might agree on certain principles .
 Big Jumbo would never challenge Fleetfoot to a three-mile dash. An elephant, so much greater, gets no back grunt from a gazelle .
 Darwin discovered nature’s indisputable law. Incomparable all plant and animal life types adapt or perish, growing thereby .
 The average Zulu voodooist would be wise to attempt no doctorate in the White man’s sciences . Not even an exceptional African American should imagine himself fit to outperform that pureblood .
 Most Aryans will optimally continue the faith, procreate and compete exclusively among their own kind, since that inherited storehouse of lore can serve no other human race to greater advantage .
 A regular paycheck for doing nothing more than occupying space keeps useful idiots burning down only where they're shunted to by temporarily-safe paymasters .
 Once the Federal Reserve's Jewish Ponzi scheme has run its course, the ZOG can’t capitalize on it .
 If things deteriorate much farther, then relatively few of our people will carry the torch forward knowing there is nothing new under the sun .
 Even during recorded history, we recall a convalescent period known as the Dark Ages . Not the first such era, says historian .
 The U.S. President Barack Obama's administration is working to preserve the wells in a cavern or mountaintop monastery . President Obama says he's working to save the wells from collapse .
 That won’t prove possible, but the effort can bring huge rewards to those who attempt it .
 Deprograming the brainwashed masses requires getting in between them and the TV, shoving truths into their faces, questioning false premises .
 Our people will realize they can’t communicate to best advantage among their own while others of a different blood are present . Well instructed, our people will be able to communicate with each other .
 Jewish propaganda notwithstanding, Jewish propaganda isn’t hate. For we’re only fully at ease with Whites like ourselves, and such clarity of discernment, it isn't hate .
 Anybody who can't see ZOG-enforced integration of the public schools as a disaster for every race attending wouldn’t care to challenge us in the I.Q. department.
 A Jewish Apartheid Nation would have us be a Jewish nation. But we are not the “White supremacists’s a Jewish Apart apartheid Nation.
 The "racism" they rant against while practicing (simply racial pride) remains commendable, says the author .
 Both Jews and sensible American Whites have the same idea about living separately as ethnic Nations .
 Jewish penetration into public institutions that outsiders fear, loathe and hate us. As for ourselves, it’s precisely because of Jewish penetration in public institutions .
 This is not to commend anything we do as worthy of imitation by non-Aryans . We’re no angels, we’s no angels. This is. Not to commend any of the things we do that are worthy of imitating .
 Hypocrisy is cheap, its rarity or prevalence depending on who governs the money and information channels . It is cheap.
 The Indians lost their lands by valuing an intruder’s trinkets, whisky and promises while underestimating his cunning .
 All volunteer for ZOG-assigned roles until all volunteer for roles . Whoever has charge of information and finance passes can create the appearance of absolute power .
 We may prove more helpful to every Nation worldwide at this hour by freeing ourselves from under that trespasser s yoke . We may be more helpful than any Nation worldwide by freeing themselves from under the trespasser.
 We are seeking to convince the Jew that he doesn’t want to rule the world or revert for a time to gladiatorial extravaganzas out of Hollywood nor offer bread and circuses . Communism runs its course another time where there would be no contention between inspired ideas
 Admit the fact, Jews; the obverse face of a One World Government is yet again your same old snake oil .
 The real barbarism involves an invasion of privacy, bending another’s will against his normal inclination into some inimical direction .
 It’s the condition of war between two or more Nations, as compared with a contest or legal proceeding, when members within a single society agree on a peaceful settlement .
 Our job is to inform and reassure the first category that they can count on us . Our job, then, is to tell and reassure them that they are safe .