 Ukraine’s ties with the United States and Europe have improved in recent years . Russian threats have intensified as Ukraine's ties with U.S. and Europe improve . Ukraine's relations with the U.
 Ukraine had the second-largest population and economy of the fifteen Soviet republics . Ukraine had a second- largest population, economy and population of the 15 republics.
 The Russian, Ukrainian, and U.S. presidents sign a statement that reaffirms Ukraine’s commitment to transfer all strategic nuclear warheads to Russia .
 The statement also confirms Russian readiness to compensate Ukraine for the value of the highly enriched uranium in the warheads . Ukraine will receive security assurances once it accedes to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear weapons state .
Ukraine and Hungary become the fifth and sixth members of the partnership . Ukraine and Hungary are the fifth, sixth and fifth members of a partnership .
 Russia becomes a member of NATO in June and conducts joint military exercises with NATO . NATO formally suspends ties with Russia until 2014, when NATO formallysuspends ties .
 thirteen former partnership members eventually join the alliance . However, 13 former partners eventually join .
 Former Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma defeats incumbent President LeonidKravchuk . Kuchmma Becomes President .
 It is the first time an incumbent has been defeated in a presidential election in a former Soviet republic . It is first time a presidential candidate has been beaten in the presidential election .
 Kuchma’s presidency is marked by slow growth, several economic crises, and charges of rampant corruption . The president is accused of corruption .
 Russia, the UK, and the U.S. commit to respecting Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, and independence . They promise to not threaten or use force against Ukraine .
 It theoretically has separation of powers, but the president holds significant sway . The president has been in power for more than a decade .
 He or she can dismiss the prime minister and rescind acts of the cabinet, for instance . The prime minister can also dismiss the cabinet .
 The constitution guarantees free speech and private-property ownership and recognizes Ukrainian as the sole state language . Among other things, the constitution also recognizes Ukrainian.
 NATO-Ukraine commission will meet at least twice per year to discuss the relationship . Under this partnership, the commission will meeting at least two times per year .
 Heorhiy Gongadze, a Ukrainian journalist investigating alleged corruption in the Kuchma administration, disappeared on September 16 . Gongadzes disappeared after he investigated alleged corruption. The journalist was a journalist for the Ukrainian government .
 His beheaded body is found two months later in a forest outside of Kyiv . His body was found in the forest near Kyiv.
 The scandal spurs public discontent about corruption among Ukraine’s elites, leading to street protests .
 The parliament passes a no-confidence motion against Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko, who steps down . The parliament also passes a motion against the Ukrainian PM .
 The vote is carried out by parties allied with Kuchma, who had surprised observers when he nominated Yushchenko to be prime minister in 1999 .
 Yushchenko and his deputy Yulia Tymoshenko had been pushing through energy sector reforms that became unpopular with many of Kuchma’s oligarch supporters .
 The 2004 presidential race pits Western-oriented Yushchenko against Viktor Yanukovych. Orange Revolution Overturns Flawed Election .
 Yanukovych is Kuchma’s preferred choice and the candidate supported by Moscow . Yanukovych is Yanukovych's preferred choice .
 The election is a tug-of-war between those who seek closer ties with the European Union, NATO, and the West and those who favor closer alignment with Russia .
 Yushchenko mysteriously suffers dioxin poisoning in September . He survives but with his face disfigured .
 Protesters dressed in orange, Yushchenko’s campaign color, take to the streets in large numbers and force a revote in December . The election will be held in December, after two flawed rounds.
 The second so-called color revolution in a post-Soviet state, a year after Georgia’s Rose Revolution, set off alarm bells in Moscow . The second color revolution was held in the Soviet state of Georgia .
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko signs an Orange flag, a symbol of 2004's Orange Revolution, in his office in Kiev .
 Russia Shuts Off Gas A pricing and transit dispute between the Yushchenko government and Russia’s state-owned Gazprom results in a gas cutoff, lasting a couple of days . European countries that import Russian gas via Ukraine.
 The dispute underscores the energy interdependence between Russia and Ukraine . 80 percent of Russia’s gas exports to Europe passing through the country .
 Ukraine relies on Russia for much of its own natural gas supply, for which it has historically paid below-market rates . At the same time, Ukraine relies upon Russia for many of its natural gas supplies .
 The shutdown occurs amid an economic slowdown that begins to dent Yushchenko’s popularity . The shutdown comes amid a slowdown in the Russian economy .
 NATO begins its twenty-second summit in Croatia, Georgia, and Ukraine . It is debating whether it should offer Membership Action Plans to members of NATO .
 Putin expresses opposition to extending MAPs to Georgia and Ukraine . But in discussions between NATO officials and Russian President Vladimir Putin, Putin expresses opposing MAPs .
 NATO members decline to offer a MAP to either of them . NATO members are unable to reach a consensus .
 Russia Invades Georgia Russian troops invade Georgia following a Georgian military operation against a South Ossetian separatist stronghold .
 The invasion leads to a five-day war and results in an increased Russian presence in the breakaway Georgian republics of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which represent roughly one-fifth of Georgian territory .
Yushchenko sides with Georgia, further increasing tensions between Kyiv and Moscow . Yushchenko's side with Georgia has increased tensions with Moscow .
 Russia subsequently recognizes both republics as independent states, though neither is recognized as an independent state by most countries . Russia later recognizes both nations as independent state .
 The EU considers such agreements to be legally binding contracts that commit countries to developing closer political, legal, and trading ties with the EU .
 implementation of the association agreement could mean major changes in Ukraine that would bring it closer to EU standards . Implementation of the agreement would bring Ukraine closer to European standards .
 Yanukovych Elected President Yanukovych narrowly defeats Tymoshenko, prime minister at the time . Most international observers view the presidential election as free and fair .
 Yanukovych recasts himself as more open to EU integration . Aided by political consultants from the United States, Yanukovych recast himself as open to integration .
 His victory is a sign of voter disillusionment with Tymoshenko and Yushchenko after several years of economic trouble . The Ukrainian government has been in economic trouble for years .
 Tymoshenko has been arrested for “abuse of office,’ she is sentenced to seven years in prison . She is sentenced for seven years .
 International observers see the prosecution as a politically motivated way for Yanukovych to sideline his main opponent . U.S. ambassador calls the trial a farce, a view shared by many .
 The jailing stalls negotiations with the European Union over improving trade and political ties .
 Brussels refuses to finalize the association agreement at the December EU-Ukraine summit in Kyiv . The deal is expected to be finalized at the end of the month .
 Yanukovych Withdraws From EU Talks The Ukrainian government states that it will not sign the agreement at an upcoming EU-Ukraine summit in Lithuania .
 Yanukovych's administration announces it will resume dialogue with Russia about joining the Eurasian Customs Union . Yanukovych’s administration will resume talks with Russia.
 Ukrainians turn out in large numbers to protest Yanukovych’s announcement on EU ties . Ukraine's president has been in power for more than two years .
 Mostly peaceful demonstrations continue for two months in Kyiv’s main Maidan square .
 More than one hundred people are killed in a crackdown on protesters . They turn violent after the government moves to break up protesters .
 Yanukovych and opposition leaders reach a settlement that includes plans for presidential elections before the end of the year . On February 21, Yanukovych and Opposition leaders reached a settlement .
 Protesters say he leaves behind a lavishly decorated palace, which they see as evidence of his corruption . The palace is decorated with flowers and flowers .
 Ukraine’s acting president and acting prime minister make it clear that a top priority will be to bring Ukraine closer to Europe .
 Russia Seizes Crimea, Holds Referendum Pro-Russia forces, including so-called little green men . Crimea is a Ukrainian peninsula where the majority of residents are ethnically Russian .
 Crimean voters choose to secede and join Russia . Soon after, authorities hold a disputed referendum .
 Brussels calls the referendum “illegal and illegitimate’s” and Washington promises it will never be accepted . Brussels calls it ‘illegal’
 Putin admits that Russian soldiers were involved in the annexation of Kyiv . He justifies it as a way to protect ethnic Russians allegedly threatened by violence from Kyiv. A month later, Putin admits he was involved.
 Russia Backs Bloody Separatist War Russia provokes an armed separatist movement to seize government buildings across eastern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian forces resist but are wary of sparking a much wider war with Russia . Russian troop buildups reported along the border .
Fighting has resulted in more than 14 thousand deaths, a quarter of them civilians, and two million internally displaced Ukrainians . By early 2022, fighting has killed more than fourteen thousand people .
 Petro Poroshenko, a pro-West oligarch, wins an outright majority in the first round of Ukraine’s presidential election . Poroshenko Elected President Poroshenko was elected by a majority of voters .
 Poroshenko promises to fix the economy by aligning Ukraine with Europe and to root out corruption that has trailed Ukraine since independence .
 President Barack Obama's administration signals interest in helping Poroshenko battle corruption . Vice President Joe Biden is the U.S. chief envoy for Ukraine .
 A Dutch-led investigation later finds that Russia bears responsibility, with the missile having been provided by a Russian army brigade . Russia denies responsibility, but a Dutch investigation later found that Russia has been responsible .
 Russian units enter Ukraine to push back Ukrainian forces that were on the verge of regaining control of Donbas . First Minsk Agreement signed by Russian units enters Ukraine .
 Shortly after, negotiators conclude the first Minsk Agreement, aimed at ending the fighting .
 fighting continues along the line of contact . However, its terms are not implemented, and fighting continues .
 Putin and Poroshenko meet in Minsk to negotiate a cease-fire in eastern Ukraine . Second Minsk Agreement signed by both leaders .
 Fighting and shelling along the line of contact still flare up from time to time .
 Both sides trade accusations on violations of the deal, but international observers place more blame on Russian and Russian proxy forces .
 The U.S. approves lethal arms sales to Ukraine, moving beyond the nonlethal military assistance that the Obama administration had allowed .
 Trump had named Kurt Volker as his special envoy for Ukraine negotiations . Volker had been named as the special envoy to Ukraine in the summer .
 The U.S. Congress created the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative . The initiative authorized hundreds of millions of dollars in additional military aid for Ukraine .
 The Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople recognizes the independence of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church . The Russian Orthodox Church has close ties to the Kremlin and had overseen the Ukrainian church for centuries .
 Volodymyr Zelensky wins a presidential runoff with more than 70 percent of the vote, defeating Poroshenko . Zelenski is a television comedian and political novice .
 Ukraine's president has a majority party in the parliament . Two months later, Zelensky's party also wins a majority of parliamentary seats . It is the first time since independence that Ukraine’s president has been in power .
 Zelensky had campaigned against corruption and poverty, and pledged to end the war in the east . Many saw the vote as a rejection of Poroshenko.
 A Phone Call Reverberates Trump and Zelensky have a phone conversation that later becomes the focus of an impeachment inquiry by the United States Congress into abuse of power and obstruction of justice . The conversation later becomes a focus of the impeachment inquiry .
 A U.S. government whistleblower expresses concern about Trump’s alleged effort to enlist Zelensky to investigate Biden .
 In November, several former and current U.S. officials testify before lawmakers that the Trump administration postponed a Trump-Zelensky meeting and held up military assistance to get Kyiv to investigate Biden .
 White House officials dismiss complaints as politically motivated . In January 2020 Trump is acquitted in a Senate vote mostly along party lines .
 Zelensky approves Ukraine’s new National Security Strategy . The new strategy provides for the development of a distinctive partnership with NATO .
 Zelensky orders a series of measures against Pro-Moscow Oligarchs . Viktor Medvedchuk is a businessman, chairman of Ukraine's largest pro-Russia political party .
 Medvedchuk is accused of transferring oil and gas production licenses in Crimea to Russian authorities . Authorities lodge treason charges against him .
 Zelensky says the moves are necessary to defend the country . Putin blasts them as motivated by anti-Russia bias . Zelenski says the move is necessary to defending the country.
 Officials from Ukraine and EU member states warn about recent Russian deployments near Ukrainian border areas and in Crimea . Russian Military Buildup Raises Alarms officials from Ukraine.
 Analysts call it the largest troop buildup since Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea . More than a hundred thousand troops, along with tanks, rocket launchers and other weaponry, are on the rise .
 Biden, now U.S. president, and Putin agree to a June summit to discuss a range of contentious issues, including Ukraine, and cybersecurity . The summit will also launch dialogues on strategic stability and cybersecurity.
 The following month, Putin publishes an article titled “On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians,” in which he questions the legitimacy of Ukraine’s borders . He asserts that Russians, Ukrainians are “one people,’ and blames the collapse in bilateral ties on
 The pipeline is set to deliver natural gas under the Baltic Sea to Germany . It could cut off a major source of income for Ukraine, a current transit country .
 Leaders in Kyiv protest that Moscow will use the pipeline as a geopolitical weapon . The pipeline could double gas deliveries to the rest of Europe, which could be used as a weapon .
 The Biden administration opposes the pipeline but agrees to hold off on sanctions . It reaches a deal with Germany to fund alternative energy projects for Ukraine .
German firm involved in the project must take administrative steps before any gas can flow . The process could take until mid-2022, a German-based firm says .
 This includes a draft treaty calling for tight restrictions on U.S. and NATO political and military activities . It also includes a ban on NATO expansion .
 The Biden administration delivers written responses in January . Few details are made public, but it rejects Russia’s insistence that Ukraine never be accepted into NATO .
 White House calls Russian moves on Ukraine an ‘invasion’ 2022 February 2022 . Russia Recognizes Breakaway Regions, Sends Troops Putin deploys Russian forces to Ukraine's separatist regions .
 The military action raises concerns that Russia will try to assert full control over the regions . The regions are partially governed by Ukraine, but are partly governed by the Ukraine .
 Putin says the government in Kyiv is a “puppet regime’s run by foreign powers . He says NATO ignored Moscow's security demands . Putin: NATO ignored Russia's security needs .
 Germany announces the suspension of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, while the United States, EU, and UK pledge additional financial sanctions against Russian entities .
 A drone carrying a Ukrainian national flag flies past Independence Monument to mark Unity Day . Western intelligence agencies allegedly said they'd be invaded by Russia in Kyiv, Ukraine, February 16, 2022 .
 Biden announces sanctions against Russian oligarchs, banks, banks . President Zelenskyy says ‘we are not afraid’ as Putin orders troops to eastern Ukraine .