 A NEW FORM OF WARFARE 26 important examples of the information campaign IMPORTANCE OF MEDIA ANALYSIS 30 relating to events such as the MH17 air tragedy . It refers also to some more recent, A New FORM of WARFare 26 .
 Russia has been drawing lessons from different Allied operations . Russia has worked on adapting its military planning to the realities of a modern conflict .
 It tested these lessons in the recent August 2008 war with Georgia1 . It marked the first use of cyber warfare and information operations in conjunction with a conventional military operation .
 Russia has shown willingness to modernize Soviet-era tools and adapt them to today’s complex information environment . Russia has also shown a willingness to adapt Soviet-style tools to modernized them .
 It has been willing to use more conventional military forces in a supporting role . Critically, it has been able to afford informationbased activities primacy in operations .
 Russia’s information campaign has to be analysed in the context of the strategic narrative of the Russian government . Policy documents like the Foreign Policy Review of 2007 and the State Security Review of 2009.
 The notion of compatriots deserves particular attention as it allows Russia to legitimize the state's duty to defend its compatriots abroad from any kind of threat to their rights .
 The Russian government's long-developed control campaign was central to Russia’s operations in Ukraine . The information campaign and related military action in the effective implementation of the information by Russia corresponds to the characteristics of a new campaign against Ukraine .
 Russia’s narrative was form of warfare where the lines between peace and war were instrumentalized with the help of concurrent war, foreign military force and local self-defence groups messaging .
Main Russian TV are blurred and the main battle space has moved channels were actively involved in framing opinions from physical ground to the hearts and minds of the people in question .
 Control is exerted directly a test-case for Russia in trying out this new form of warfare, including hybrid, asymmetric warfare and cyber warfare .
 The crisis in Ukraine has provided valuable lessons for democratic states with free media to compete with the Russian government . The Ukraine crisis has provided lessons for the forceful, synchronized messaging of the Ukrainian government .
 The characteristics of the new pseudo-nation were outlined by General Valery Gerasimov, Chief the Great Patriotic War . Nearly a year before Nazism and relating it to the Euromaidan protesters the crisis in Ukraine .
 Analysis of Ukraine conflict who are labelled as nationalists, Nazis and fascists suggests that NATO and the EU must adapt to posing a threat to the ethnically Russian part of the new reality where information superiority is becoming increasingly 2 .
 Russia's long term requires a lot of time, effort and resources on the strategy. Investigating and disproving the false and the might and collapse of the USSR.
 Russian information part of international organisations like NATO, the campaign in Ukraine . It is clear that early detection of Ukrainian government, independent media, experts and analysis of those elements within the Russian and even ordinary citizens is critical .
 The report also demonstrates that Russia’s • Disinformation campaigns erode over time . State policy documents contain such indications .
 The role of Compatriots Abroad is critical and campaigns erode over time as more and more should be considered carefully in the future . The evolution of the crisis in Ukraine beyond Crimea demonstrates that disinformation is critical .
 The factual evidence is revealed to negate lies and security implications for countries neighbouring falsification .
 The strategy that Russia has employed in Ukraine is likely to work best in areas where there are larger communities of Russia’s Compatriots Abroad .
 Russia may be ready to provide local support in cases of Russian aggression . They are the targets of Russia’s information campaign .
 The Ukraine and Georgian cases demonstrate that such information campaigns, backed by military means, are easier to carry out in territories bordering Russia . In particular, in those countries not members of NATO and therefore not party to the Washington Treaty .
 Russia has demonstrated that understanding audiences and what motivates them is critical to operational success that is enduring . Russia has shown that understanding audience audiences is key to success .
 Russia’s information campaign has been successful in influencing its audiences . It also bears a degree of counter-productivity as it has radicalized and alienated other audiences . 5 afford information-based activities primacy in INTRODUCTION operations .
 This report examines the information aspect of President Vladimir Putin's accession to power Russia’s strategy against Ukraine . The report also looks at Russia's strategy against the Ukraine crisis .
 In 1999 marks the beginning of a period that Russia has achieved its political and military objectives . Russia has proven adept at using asymmetric and pride to achieve its goals .
 Russia has been drawing lessons country’s influence and regain its former might from different Allied operations . Russia's military planning is closely associated with the establishment of a adapting its military planning to the realities of a strong power vertical .
 Russia has shown a leadership to ensure that its strategic decisions are followed without question . Russia has also shown a willingness to modernize Soviet-era tools and be more modernized .
 This has been adapted to today’s complex information backed up by systematic, long-term investment in environment . This has also been adapts them to today's complex information.
 For a reference on ‘active measures’, see Annex 1. Critically, it has been willing to the development of Special Forces, investment in 3 .
 President Putin has stated that the West ambitions embracing the achievements of Peter have crossed the line in relation to Ukraine . President Putin said the West's ambitions have also crossed the lines .
 I glorifying Joseph Stalin6 and promoting the idea of the Slavic Civilization . I . glorified Joseph Stalin 6 and promoting idea of Slavic civilization .
 President Putin says the West is constantly trying to sweep us into a corner . He says the origins of the power vertical can be an independent position .
 There is a limit to and his establishment of a vertical chain of everything. But there is no limit to the establishment of everything, he says .
 Ukraine choosing the European of successive governments of the Russian vector would seriously undermine the concept of Federation . The idea of Ancient Rus made operational through 8 as the source of the natural cospecific actions on the ground .
 The report focuses existence of Russia and Ukraine on the information-campaign component . The report also focuses on the Information-campaign part .
 Putin's vision of setting up a Eurasian Union of the Slavic Orthodox civilisation would replace the Commonwealth of values, culture and history, and – importantly Independent States .
 The project resonates with the idea that, in ability to keep the two Slavic countries of Ukraine order for the ‘Heartland’ to exist safely, and Belarus under Russia’s direct sphere of it needs to control the “inner crescent” known 6
 The city adopted the name Stalingrad in 1925 to honour Soviet leader Josef Stalin . The name was adopted to honour the Soviet leader .
 The term Ancient Rus is used to refer to the first East-Slavic state . Lucy Ash of the BBC World Service gives a good overview of how in the Middle Ages .
 NATO StratCom COE in cooperation with the Centre for East European 9 Reflected in the article “The Geographical Pivot of History’ by Policy Studies also affirms this reasoning .
 Halford John Mackinder . 7 suggests that Russia’s information campaign is campaign (national policy documents and mediaoriented not only towards regaining influence control mechanisms), analyses the narratives over post-Soviet territories .
 The labelling of the Euromaidan12 as a coup executed President Yanukovich declined to sign it at the by Nationalists, neo-Nazis, Russophobes and antilast minute . However, Ukraine, alleged abuse of the human rights of despite rather promising negotiations, expressed
 Ukraine’s refusal to sign the Agreement Semites, and NATO posing a threat by potentially was perceived by the EU as a critical turning point for Ukraine to fall fully under Russia's economic and political influence .
 National policy documents which help “set the creation of the “Russian World’s” is seen as a ‘unique element of human civilization’ Russia used for its information abroad, maintaining their strong links with the campaign against Ukraine is encompassed in the Homeland .
 ‘Consular Work’ and ‘Cooperation in Culture Foreign Policy Concept of 2013.15 and Science’ contain elements supporting the execution of the Compatriots’ Policy . The remaining two sections on the same ideas have been largely reflected also in the “Cons
 Russia’s National Security Concept of 2000: ‘There is an increasing threat to media.’ It was acquiring information from TV, the internet and other .
 Armenian community national security in the information sphere . For example, part of the Armenian community is part of national security .
 The Samtskhe-Javakheti region of Georgia widely striving to dominate the Russian media because of its lack of Georgian language .
 Russian as the language of communication and treated native languages as less important . Creating a common Russian information sphere purposefully enforced teaching at schools or universities in Russian instead of the native tongue .
 Russia adopted a new State Security Strategy in 2009 . The Strategy resonates with the Foreign Russification of Ukrainians, Belarussians, Kazakhs and other ethnic groups .
 Culture talks of one common information sphere which includes Russia, the Commonwealth and the Commonwealth .
 Russia’s security is maintained and Objectives that were defined by applying the Compatriots’ Policy Foreign Policy Review of 2007 . Russia is viewed as a way of exerting soft power on neighbouring countries .
 Russia's Foreign Policy is an efficient tool for to Russia’s interests. It is important to campaigns everywhere we detect real challenges.
 One cannot underestimate the role of the mass media in executing Russia’s foreign NATO is a threat policy goals .
 The "Russian World" must be united by NATO, and likewise the imperfect nature of legal different means . The main point of this philosophy is that the “Russian World’s” must be unified by NATO . However, the main point is that it
 This concept is also actively instruments and mechanisms, create an everpromoted via Russian mass media channels . This concept was created by Russian media channels. The concept was also actively used to create a concept for the first time .
 The Latvian and Lithuanian experience in that Ukraine’s closer integration with NATO (or the context of the crisis in Ukraine) shows that it is the EU, for that matter . The EU structures contradicts complicated to tackle hostile Russian propaganda Russia's strategic security interests .
 Russian of information for the local Russian-speaking government to justify pressure on or even open populations . This is a means for the Russian of Information for the locals to justify Pressure on or open populations.
 ‘Russian World’ allows Russia to utilize its compatriots as a channel against Ukraine . Russia has been the Russian government's of communication with Russian-speaking powerful control over the mass media .
 Russian information, attitudes and behaviour. As the communities make them multipliers of desired NATO StratCom COE’s research shows .
 Messages support distribution functions by locally engaging such as “brother nations’s, common history, the NGOs and other actors . Messages support distributed services by local actors and NGOs .
 Orthodox religion and common culture have been used to encourage the inhabitants of East of different civilizations . The Russianand South Ukraine to think about a joint future future speaking Orthodox civilization .
 The Ukraine signing in Ukraine is the latest in a long line of events that have been used to influence public opinion in the country . It is the first time the government has used a wide developed and maintained tools to influence the public opinion .
 Russian of the Association Agreement with the EU, strategic policy documents are derived from the Euromaidan protests and the subsequent the Euromsaidan protest . It is the task of these documents to annexation of Crimea .
 The focus has been on instrumentalize and sustain these narratives, as the result of the Russian government’s powerful control understanding of different audiences .
Political technologists play a broader role, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: Political meta programmers, system designers, and political controllers all in radicalize political opposition .
 The Russian Presidential Administration exercises that it was centrally derived . It is obvious that a common and robust editorial was constructed .
 Russian media outlets conforming to the Kremlin’s of the Russian state controlled media have propaganda line were officially recognized by methodically manipulated video and photo President Putin following the annexation of Crimea .
 A Molotov cocktail was thrown in the window of Black Sea TV . Strict media control was exercised within only channel covering the whole Crimea region .
 The channel suffered from appearance of armed groups in Crimean towns, a DDoS attack . The attack demonstrated the special Overall, broadcasts of Ukrainian TV stations .
 The self-proclaimed Minister for Regional men broke into the building of the Simferopol Information, Dmitriy Polonskiy . On 6 March 2014, were replaced by seven Russian TV channels .
Inter was replaced by NTV, the from the increase of violence, lies and the false 14 information flowing from their TV screens’s screens”23.23.
 The videos state-controlled message also helped turn Crimea’s broadcast by TV channels also get published on inhabitants against Ukrainian and foreign media social media .
 Aksyonov was shown on television describing Western media as working for spy services to foment revolution . The pro-Russian leader is shown on TV describing the lessons learned from Western media .
 Russia learned lessons from a popularity review of various TV its own mistakes during previous years .
 The second Chechnya national channels hold the highest ratings24, it war . The sinking of the Kursk submarine does not automatically mean that Russian TV has in 2000 . The Beslan hostage crisis in 2004 and the Beslan hostages crisis were some of the important events which formed the
 Television is the dominant elite’s understanding of how information campaigns news medium in Ukraine .
 Almost all Ukrainians should be organised, including 95.7% of Crimeans . Watch TV for news at least weekly, including 90% of Ukrainians .
 Russian TV worked NTV, ORT, and RTR as well in two dimensions . Russia 24, in the context of Ukraine events, worked N TV,ORT and R TR .
 The internal dimension was as the Russian social media giant VKontakte. The internal dimensions were as well as the internal dimension of the social media company .
 The top five news sources for Crimeans were specified in Russia’s State Security Strategy . All Ukrainian TV stations were specified to ensure information support to Russia's foreign policy . This is an important change since the 2012 survey .
 The events in Crimea and the Eastern regions of to the mobilization of compatriots abroad and Ukraine have demonstrated that even a small information support to Russian state policies can pose a significant threat to security and stability of a state .
 In Russian power elite has ensured systematic Russia’s information campaign against Ukraine, control of narratives. 27.27.
 Narrative control can only be based on the fact that ‘fascism has not been extinguished’ and the which requires serious advance planning . The story is based on an influence operation that is successful as a part of the influence operation .
 A Ukrainian political activist must be good coordination among the actors and a leader of the Ukrainian nationalist movement involved . Stepan Bandera any information campaign for that matter .
 Russia’s Foreign Policy Review of 2007 in Western Ukraine recommends coordinating the work independence from the USSR in the 1930s and of state agencies but also private businesses early 1940s .
 In their fight against the Soviets, the and non-government organisations for the movement saw a possible ally in the Nazis .
 It is believed that the KGB ordered the KGB to kill Bandera in 1959 . It is implementation of information campaigns .
 Bandera has become a symbol for those fighting for the Ukrainian national 27 . For a reference on narrative control, see Annex 6. cause and a "bogeyman" Nazi collaborator for 16 .
 The Bandera notion was used by the Russian government in the context the West and the Orthodox civilization of the East . The concept of the clash of civilizations and the Euromaidan as an expression of nationalism dialogue between civilizations appeared often in and neo-Nazism .
 Putin spoke at the Munich Cultivating anxiety and fear Security Conference in 2007 . He criticized the USA for maintaining a unipolar world order . Putin's speech is the culmination of this discourse .
 The Orthodox Analysis of the Russian narrative would look incomplete without Ukraine . Vyacheslav cultivated a feeling of fear and anxiety in the Nikonov .
 During the initial phase of the conflict, viewers about the concept of Ukraine and Russia as the whole of Ukrainian society were encouraged to the centre of a common civilization on the National .
 Closer association with the EU supported by the Russian Orthodox Church . The EU is supported by Russia's Orthodox Church.
 The Kremlin repeatedly hinted that the EU was narrative which attempts to distort European trying to lead Ukraine into a self-seeking values . This would mean less economic cooperation with Russia is complemented by the anti-European narrative .
Eastern Ukraine will be attacked, of Eurasianism is experiencing a re-birth, according to a report .
 The Eurasian Union also wants to see Ukraine as the support of the Russian Federation’s population an integral part . It also wants Ukraine as a part of the European Union .
 Aleksandr Dugin has adapted Euromaidan to contemporary realities . The most prominent promoter of the government’s policy towards Ukraine and Eurasianism is Dugin .
 According to Eurasianists, Ukraine is a “battlefield of titans’ where good and is important to take into account that this process evil struggle for influence .
 The theory of the clash initiative is viewed as a means for the Transatlanticists of civilizations to steal Ukraine from Eurasia . The theory is seen as a way to steal the Ukraine from Europe .
 Russian politicians often use the term movement in Russia . Eurasianism is a political movement .
 It started among the Russian “brother nations, in the practice of Russian foreign emigrant community in 1920s .
 Eurasianists argue that policy this brotherhood means a strict hierarchy means Russia has a unique identity .
 Inherent where rights of Ukrainians to self-determination in Eurasianist thinking are ignored . Inherentwhere the rights of Ukrainian people are ignored.
 In the Russian state-controlled media, imperialism, Orthodox messianic qualities and a one can often encounter demeaning remarks about Ukrainian statehood . In Russia, a “third way of economic development is Ukraine statehood,’s wish to integrate with possible
 Even entertainment programmes portray Russia as an inferior nation who speak a Eurasian Heartland . There is a vital geographical component.
 Aleksandr Dugin speaks about preserved in modern Ukrainian and historic facts the unity of Eastern Slavs .
 He refers to belorusi about the origin of the Ancient Rus state with Kyiv and Ukrainians as malorusi (“Little at its centre.’s’S’D’T’M’R’: Belorusi refers to
 Russians as velyikorusi (“Great cultivate an inferiority complex among Ukrainians Russians’) When Ukrainian was associated with rural, peasants’ A similarly patronizing, “paternal” attitude towards language and Russian branded as Ukraine can be observed in the speeches
 The nations which live on the territory years have of the historic Russian land must feel that they take a central role in the ideology of the Russian .
 Russian Orthodox Patriarch Kirill's words are broadcast well in advance at the opening of the 3rd Assembly of the Russian of the commemorations . These in producing different programmes and reports on.
 He suggested using financial support for the production of feature films the term ‘countries of the Russian World’ implying on historic events . He also suggested using money to support feature films .
 These films support old myths which have historically been part of glorifying Russia and help create new ones . The films support the myths that have been glorified by Russia .
 Kirill specified that the common usage of the context, the inhabitants of Western Ukraine are Russian language, common culture and historical portrayed as Bandera-followers who, unfortunately, unites these countries .
 The Great Patriotic War to ignite the pathos 18 associated with Nazi elements. The Russian World cannot be considered a serious Peter the Great with historical emphasis on Project without Ukraine .
 The EU is still facing some of a "war mentality" following the 1945 Yalta Conference . Eastern Europe’s sense of related to living memory and genuine issues betrayal following the YaltA Conference .
 The appeal of this leaves plenty of narrative lines to utilize in to Russian-speaking populations’ affections . The appeal has the attempt to split the West.
 Russia’s narrative was made through the fabrication of information, also attempts to break up the transatlantic link historical narrative . The USA is in opposition to Europe .
 The pre-dispositions and then inciting certain actions. This has eased the task of labelling Euromaidan and weakened appeals to the BRIC28 group as Nazis, Fascists and anti-Semites .
 The Russian by “real people’s’ strategy implies instrumentalizing law as a means of legitimizing all its actions .
 The attempt to divide the idea of Russian civilization with its own West by the Russian legal norms and interpretation of international narrative deserves particular attention .
 The aspect of legitimacy is very important in focuses on making the West impotent and risksupporting the Russian narrative . The aspect is veryimportant in focusing on the West's role in Russia .
 It helps Russia to averse when encountering the dishonest Russian appeal to its internal audience, to its compatriots narrative . Russia is averse to a dishonest Russia.
 Russia is on imports of Russian gas, and reminded to instigate “legal self-determination in Crimea Germans of recent history. It was important for Russia it is on imported gas, it was important to remind them of Crimea's history .
 Putin said he believes the Europeans, first and of “legitimacy’ on the annexation of Crimea, were responsible for the annexation . In his public speech and also to encourage similar self-determination following Crimea, President Putin said .
 He is playing on the difference in views between leadership of Crimea New Europe and Old Europe . He formally requested Russia’s help, intervention or to remind European leaders about uncomfortable even annexation .
 Germany Foreign Policy Review of 2007 says Russia should now support Russia in its reunification Security Strategy of 2009 . This provided “legal grounds for historical facts and appealing to a strange logic,’ says the review . Russia fully supported the of human rights, according to
 EU states 28 BRIC refers to Brazil, Russia, India and China which are considered to have in finding a firm common position . President Putin is well aware of the quickly made legal arrangements .
 President Putin listed a whole and the Parliament's vote to remove Yanukovich spectrum of “legitimate’s reasons for what had from power as an attempted coup d’état .
 Russia is trying territory should any proof of humanitarian crisis to prove that its intent is to support the will of the be identified . The policy on the protection of ‘passportisation’ may also provide sufficiently legitimate reasons for Russia to intervene .
 The conviction is based on truth supposedly made to Russia in 1990, that the justice and justice and was passed on from generation to Alliance would not expand into Eastern and Central generation .
 Europe, build military infrastructure near Russia’s borders or permanently deploy troops there . Europe's military infrastructure will be built near Russia's borders .
 Journalists documented acts of violence by Berkut towards Euromaidan protesters, Communication Themes Constructing Perception . They documented attempts to forcefully disperse protesters in early hours of 30 November .
 Following the annexation of Crimea, its Berkut unit was incorporated into the forces of the Russian Interior Ministry .
 The thematic frames are a way of associating a particular • Euromaidan is a US/EU satellite and its impression or opinion with an object or subject . The characteristics of thematic frame are their • the West is ‘evil’ as it doesn’t
 The creation of Russia is familiar to Ukraine but Western frames are related to the human desire to democracies are strangers . The common history of Russia and Ukraine, the friends from foes.
 Orthodox religion can also be used to manipulate audiences, says the author . Orthodox religion is not a uniting element, he says .
 MEDIA Russian-controlled internet trolling Social media has become a popular tool for information campaigns and other online activities . The Russian governing elite cultivates a large number of information collection for intelligence of bloggers and trolls in the social media .
Pro-Ukrainian Kremlin trolls registered in February 2014, most of them registered in January . Reports of increased activity by probeen attempts to block access to pro-Ukraine trolls .
 There were the cases of firing the editor “troll farm’s” in September 2013 .
 Trolling also involves maintaining Internet and maintaining Facebook and Twitter accounts . Trolling has not been completely successful .
 The increased Pro-Russian accounts have been increasingly visible control on social networks since late February 2014 . The increased control has not saved Russia from the mistakes of on social network since late 2014 .
 One particular campaign – “Polite People’s’ involvement in the crisis in Ukraine31.31. ‘Polite people’ – involvement in Ukraine crisis. One particular Campaign – ‘ Polite People.’
 Social media is a particular phenomenon posing alongside young girls, mothers with children . More information on some of the cases can be found the elderly, and pets .
 For a further reference on controlled trolling, see Annex 7. 22 own messages or simply abuse . For further reference, see annex 7.
 Rozovskiy’s profile picture is a photo of a North also used for the recruitment of pro-Russian Caucasus dentist . The North was also used in the advertising brochure fighters.
My name is an internet troll. My name is a person who foments discord online . Igor Rosovskiy is a Russian internet troll . His name is An internet troll, he says .
An emergency physician in Odessa, Texas, has worked as an emergency physician for 15 years . He says there was a terrible tragedy in our city, an online community with the deliberate intent of some people killed other people .
 Trolls often use fake or anonymous profiles to get their grandmother’s inheritance . They kill them in an emotional response or of way by burning them alive, not in a drunken stupor .
 First they brutally beat their trolls who act on behalf of a grouping, victims, then burned them alive . First they beat them, then they burn them alive.
 As a doctor, I rushed to help or state usually maintain multiple fake profiles and those whom I could save, but the fighters stopped me .
Trollers follow specific guidelines for trolling. They don't let me go to the wounded, says CNN's John Sutter .
 One rudely pushed me, promising that I and other Jews would suffer a similar fate . One of the people who pushed me said he would suffer the same fate .
 I saw a young man I could have saved if I could take Social media used for deception him to the hospital . But my attempts at persuasion were met with a blow to the face and lost glasses .
 In 15 years there are several prominent cases of deliberate falsification of information . But yesterday I wanted to cry, not from examples of deliberate false identities, but from my helplessness .
 In his city, such things did not happen even during the worst times of Nazi occupation, he says . "Such things didn't happen even in my city," he adds .
 The “Doctor from Odessa’s” fabrication is the “Dr. From Odessa. The ‘Dr. from Odess’ fabrication’ The strangled pregnant woman in the Odessa trade union building.
 The photo of a pregnant woman supposedly trade union building in Odessa was taken by a troll using a false Facebook account following the tragic fire in the building .
 The Facebook strangled by pro-Ukrainian extremists on the post was supposedly created by medical doctor Igor . Rozovskiy tried to enter the burning building to circulate in the social media until KyivPost render aid . Pro-Ukraineian extremists allegedly published an investigation into the
 A hospital doctor commented on post was promptly translated into English, German . He said that it was clearly an elderly and Bulgarian .
 The doctor called higher of Twitter in Eastern Europe the NATO StratCom medical authorities . There was no COE has analysed the prevailing sentiments on pregnant woman.
 It must be admitted that statistics on the country of origin 3-year-old boy having been tortured and crucified were based on information provided by the Ukrainian military in a public square .
 Pyshnyak claimed to have witnessed the atrocity proportion of Twitter users do not specify their country of origin . The pilot research demonstrated that, although execution, was executed .
At the time, she was speaking with the number of neutral sentiment tweets from a refugee camp in Russia's Rostov .
 The video was widely disseminated on between pro-Ukraine and pro-Russia Twitter social media . It was quickly followed by counterusers .
 The emotional tension in the Twitter information from investigative journalists increased, especially after the Russia's independent TV Dozhd . The Russian military action report or proving it to be false.
 Yevgeny Feldman of the Novaya Gazeta newspaper went to the scene of the purported incident to ask of all the tweets analysed . 12.2% were identified residents whether they had witnessed or heard of as aggressive .
Local Slovyansk residents consistently denied knowledge of any such incident . In the nine-minute video posted provocative comments tended to increase over on YouTube .
 The followers of support and hence have larger influence on these accounts . They use this information in further Twitter accounts .
 A Yatsenyuk distribution of anti-Ukraine information is selective with notable positive appraisal . Of Ukrainian public figures, the only ones references are the only one references .
 Twitter accounts of only notable figures have been B Obama and J. public figures . The presence of European politicians opposition leaders can also be very influential .
 The Russian Twitter information environment of fake accounts has been created by a group of users . Each of them has an insignificant amount of followers of President Putin’s followers . All spreading the same policy which can be explained by the message .
 It has also identified the networks of Russian state’s ability to limit the activity of Twitter users with rather high Twitter influence .
 The who re-tweet and comment on each other’s opinions originating from Ukraine show more tweets in order to increase visibility .
 One division into supporters of Ukrainian territorial such group is formed by anti-Ukrainian users integrity and supporters of the separatists . The influence of pro-Russian state possibly creating a fictional discussion in order to institutions, non-government organisations produce more tweets .
 Euromaidan movement whose tweets have the most influence in terms of re-tweets and elements is the key factor to gaining influence in followers . The successful coordination between these three noticeable influence is a key factor .
 Pro-Russian Twitter users more often use to share opinions, coordination mechanisms are created and how commenting, calling for action, using they work in social media . 25 in Crimea are the most active Twitter users in Crimea .
 The Russian force was dominating the A NEW FORM of information field as well as the situation on the ground WARFARE by having check-points everywhere, demonstrating new equipment and strength in numbers .
 The whole operation was implemented at great speed, using the During the crisis in Ukraine, we have witnessed momentum of local support boosted by an intensive application of a new type of warfare . The government change dominance in the information field and hybrid, in Kyiv combined with the lack
 Crimea as a test case Information campaign – central to the new form of warfare . The strategy and tactics that were employed in Ukraine represent an implementation of the ideas Russia’s information campaign has played a very developed by Russian military analysts .
Russia's RT TV channel, formerly known as Russia, has been accused of abusing the lack of clear definitions and power to the conflict area . It proved that by resources to the required level to be able to compete applying the elements of the new type of warfare can be
 The ‘polite men’ on the ground who acted in fear of potential threat lead to escalated military accordance with the strategy to minimize bloodshed action by increasing numbers of Russian troops and applying strategic communication intent .
 Malaysia flooded the information space, including the English Airlines flight MH17 tragedy . These versions of events illustrate this deception tactic .
 Some evidence 82% of Russians blame Ukrainian forces for downing aircraft . Suspicion falls on pro-Russian separatists .
 Luhansk People’s Republic press service proclaimed Igor Girkin, leader of the Donbass their source, RIA informed . Less than 20 minutes after the crash, Luhans People's Republic Press service proclaimed its leader .
 The Russian mass media reacted quickly by putting out several versions of what had happened . The Ukrainian side as well as speculating on Psychological pressure a United States conspiracy against Russia .
 The Moscow Times published an article on the subject called ‘Putin’s The war in Crimea was never announced .
By the end of the next day, they had already surrounded the key government buildings in Crimean self-defence units,e. local civilians .
 Balaklava Bay and Belbek airport near Sebastopol had blockaded Ukrainian border troops . It was crucial to achieve Russia’s goals in Crimea and established checkpoints on roads across the Crimea .
 Journalists' interest in the origins of the armed men widely used for self-defence groups was high . They got some of them talking on camera .
 Russian army trucks had Russian of certain groups within society susceptible to number plates . Former members of Russian army admitted they had arrived from Russia and held Russian citizenship .
 By mid-March, most of the Ukrainian law-enforcement or military bodies had either been Ukraine and from Russia . Russian-speaking information channels are widely Ukrainian side .
 Foreign Minister Lavrov denies any relationship between armed men and the Russian army .
 Special Operations Forces President Putin admitted that Russian forces had been deployed to Crimea to support local self-defence . The Crimea operation showed that the nature of groups, it already didn't matter .
 The Chechnya and Georgia have improved their performance in recent weeks . Russia has exerted psychological pressure on the Ukrainian army equipment .
 In Crimea, they conducted subversive by besieging military posts, holding Ukrainian soldiers in a silent and speedy manner . They supported hostage without proper access to information, the propaganda-driven partition of the community and relying on directions from the fragile interim .
 The SPETSNAZ also excelled in was exerted by the short-notice military exercises by their cooperation with the local pro-Russian population Russian armed forces near the Ukrainian border and to smuggle arms .
 Argita Daudze personally approached several of the men in unmarked uniforms and received verbal verbal . The use of armed civilians in the conflict was achieved confirmation that they were Russian soldiers from the base in Sevastopol .
 Ukrainian journalists formed self-defence groups to support unmarked armed men in Crimea . Ukrainian journalists also did many on-thespot interviews with the armed men .
 The operations were conducted using this laid out a comfortable environment for taking irregular forces in support of the separatist movement over the territory .
 Cyber Berkut was an important player in the cyber war during the Ukraine crisis . The cyber domain was part of the new form of warfare.
Anonymous group appeared after the dissolution of the infamous Berkut security force in Ukraine at the end of February . It is worth discussing what happened in the cyber domain as part of the utilisation of asymmetric or this voluntary group .
 The group information battle field or military actions are not only the Ukrainian government but also foreign ground . The targets of the group are also the Ukraine government and military actions .
 Cyber Berkut stated that the crisis in Ukraine was the largest cyberwho published the phone discussion between Ms. Ms. and Ms. Berkut . The crisis was the biggest cyberwho released the phone conversation .
 The 44 NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence and NATO itself have taken action . Such actions have been carried out by the 44 NATO cooperative Cyber Defence Center of Excellence .
 Cyber Berkut has leaked phone conversations between US State Department official Victoria Nuland and pro-Ukrainian group Cyber Hundred . The Cyber Hundred is the Cyber Hundred which is the US State Dept. official VictoriaNuland . The group's main task was to fight the US ambassador
 The group declared that it would fight against the provision of confusing information is current government of Ukraine which – as they are an example of reflexive control. stated, matching the Russian narrative – glorified neo-fascism and nationalism and nationalism .
 Russia had managed to hit almost all Ukrainian government Cyber Berkut . The attack on the NATO was particularly interesting .
 Ukrainian government members with the purpose supports the wider Russian narrative that the West is plotting against Russia and developing agencies . This also supports the broader Russian narrative of disrupting communication between government and NATO .
 Numerous cyber-attacks against Ukrainian various capabilities like the Centres of Excellence to military groups have also been reported . The attacks discredit their actions and create tensions between cooperation partners .
Ukrtelecom announced that unmarked gunmen had penetrated there are few international legal constraints that its infrastructure facilities are under threat . Ukrainian company UkrTelecom says it has no legal constraints to regulate information interventions .
 The large-scale disinformation spread by Russia ANALYSIS worsened the situation and resulted in an overload of conflicting information for local populations and the Ukrainian government itself . The Russian government itself was also affected by the disinformation spread .
 Russia’s success in reaching out to the population efforts to portray the new Ukrainian government as of East Ukraine has proved a need for a clear ‘far-right Nazi’ to the inhabitants of Eastern Ukraine . Russia's success has resulted in increased distrust and alienation from the population
 Significant work needs to be undertaken by the international community to boost the Ukrainian Advantages of comprehensive Target Audience government’s capacity in this regard .
 The ability to Analysis conduct proper audience analysis is key to designing any information campaign . Analysis can also be used to design any information campaigns .
 The Ukrainian case clearly demonstrates the advantages of comprehensive TAA skills and the new government in Kyiv facing Russian aggression capabilities . The new government faces Russian aggression.
 The UK StratCom community defines Target Audience task, in a time of crisis, to operate with speed . Analysis as the process of profiling an audience decisiveness and high level of professionalism .
 TAA is a multi-source, scientifically government structures . It is a new majority in Parliament and in the host language used to identify specific and the state being headed by an acting president with motivations for behaviour .
 The government had to prepare for a Presidential election and demonstrate willingness to implement urgent reforms .
 Knowledge of people’s beliefs and ability to predict their actions has been critical to the success of Ukraine's government . Russia's information campaign on the one hand invasion from the South-East where Russia had and Ukraine's failure on the other.
 Russia was able to stationed large numbers of troops on the border, thus to get the support for its actions within the Russianexerting significant psychological pressure . Russia did not speaking population in Ukraine because it knew armed resistance in Crimea .
 Russian troops with clear orders gave Russian troops in Crimea the upper hand to exert psychological pressure . However, the failure its target audience was able to predict its likely to withdraw Ukrainian military equipment .
 The deployment of a specialist assessment team government to counter the well-prepared Russian identified the need for a comprehensive TAA which operation in Crimea in an effective manner . It was very difficult for the unprepared Ukrainian .
 The TAA revealed Kyiv government and certainly keeping well away counter-intuitive facts . It was not was conducted in parts of the East Ukraine in June possible to control the situation .
 The TAA the TAA indicated that the Ukrainian government’s should challenge the successfully accrued credibility was low . This did not universally translate to legitimacy of the separatists and where pro-Moscow, separatist support is supported .
 The TAA was possible attempt to overstretch their ability to focus not on people’s attitudes or perceptions but govern .
 TAA revealed that the Kyiv instead of actual behaviours, identified many government’s ability to influence the population different groupings of interests .
 One of the common was weak and conventional communication strands across all groups . A desire for stability campaigns were unlikely to succeed .
Financial stability and job security were important to-person contacts would prove more effective behavioural motivators . Much more and peace, irrespective of political orientation, would be better .
 Informal power structures were rated as being highly their fears and aspirations . They related directly to job security, according to experts .
 Afghanistan veterans, pensioners, miners, public servants and senior factory workers are among those who died in Afghanistan .
 In their view, military action by the Ukrainian government does not facilitate stability, they say . The Ukrainian government says military action does not help stability .
Ukrainian TV has low credibility and a very limited audience . Locally attuned information campaigns may bring results .
Ukrainian government wants to reach out to local populations in the East . New Ukrainian government is very heavily attuned to local issues .
 A country-wide, one-size-fitsall campaign would have had no traction with the profiled groups .
 The TAA was undertaken in eastern Ukraine by a contracted incountry project involving research teams deployed in the field . TAA further revealed that influence efforts could be enhanced by communicating locally .
 The crisis in Ukraine has provided valuable lessons for the Ukrainian government, the countries years and become able to employ 21stneighbouring Russia . Russia became home to larger century tactics that combine intense information Russian-speaking communities during the Soviet campaigns and cyber warfare .
 Russia has responded to the new information challenge General conclusions with a high degree of professionalism and imagination . Russia has reacted to the information challenge with the high level of professionalism .
 Russian professionalism has to be used as a powerful tool of influence, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Information is a powerful weapon of influence .
 NATO and the EU must adapt to the new reality Russia has demonstrated that information superiority, in relation discipline, multi-level complexity and vertical to military power, is becoming increasingly coherence .
 Russia has demonstrated that in the role of Special Operations Forces and current and continually evolving information information is important to Russia . Russia has shown that in its role of special operations forces is the role.
 Special Forces in the environment, power and control can easily be West. Special Forces can avoid publicity, consistent with their covert gained by manipulating information .
 Russians have incorporated financial markets, business practices into what their Special Operations and public policy, but also influence societal Forces do . Russia has incorporated not only financial markets and business practices in its Special Operations .
 The Allies should consider how well well perceptions, attitudes and behaviours, according to the Allies . The Allies must also consider their behaviour and attitudes .
 Special Operations Forces participate in information itself has tremendous value, how information offensives can be used as a strategic tool .
 The calculated use, and misuse, of Russia’s narrative is reflected in its key state information . Russia's state information has the potential to shape personal policy documents .
 The information campaign was central to documents. Analysis of the most popular values to influence societal norms . Russian TV channels proved that the narrative behaviours are supported by key state policy .
 Crimea alternative narratives in preparations to counter without any military confrontation demonstrated Russian propaganda in the future . Taking over Crimea showed Russian propaganda to the future, according to reports .
 Russia’s well-constructed influence over neighbouring countries with larger Russianoperations is a very essential part of Russian speaking communities . Russian military on ways and means to balance Russia's narratives forces have a strategic communications mind-set targeted at Russia's compatriots abroad .
 Information and communications played the central role in Russia’s narrative . Russia's narrative is largely based on historical Russian operations, the military component memory .
Russian President Vladimir Putin says Russia is not part of the Washington Treaty . He says it is an appeal to human emotion, this is particularly applicable to the countries hope, and perhaps even this promise of renewed .
 Audience analysis is critical to operational Crisis in Ukraine is a result of Russia’s long term success .
Early detection them is critical to operational success that is and analysis of elements within the Russian enduring . The Alliance narrative signals potentially aggressive and one for which the basic tenets of StratCom behaviour are critical .
 Russia’s state policy can provide solutions if properly resourced, documents contain indications which should be integrated into all responses – words and actions further analysed .
 There is “another side of the coin’ to Russia’s aggressive action on the ground, the Russian information campaign. It is also obvious that, prior to taking there is ‘another side to the coin.’ There is also ‘
 Russia’s government works intensively with the public information campaign to prepare public opinion for influencing its audiences .
 Similar activities took place before the 2nd alienated other audiences – West Ukraine and Chechen War and the 2008 war with Georgia . Similar activities in the counter-productivity as it has radicalized and information space also took place .
 The role of Compatriots Abroad is critical and Russia has gained a long-term enemy on the part . It remains to be seen whether the role of Abroad will continue to be critical .
 Russia's security implications for countries neighbouring countries are particularly serious . It can be assumed with a degree of certainty that as a result of the current Russia is particularly serious.
 The Kyiv government will completely discard the idea of participating in the Eurasian is likely to work best in areas which have larger Economic Union or other Russian political, communities of Russia’s Compatriots Abroad . Russia may be ready to provide local Deception is used by Russia
 The Alliance is bound by the requirement to speak and act so-called ‘active measures’ There is no such to deceptive operations conducted in support of Russia, it says .
 The were available to support or participate in these evolution of the crisis in Ukraine beyond Crimea campaigns . The campaigns were also available to participate in the Ukraine crisis .
 How One and showed him to be on active duty within rebel-controlled areas inside the Interagency Group made a Major Difference’ by Ukrainian border .
 Detailed information on this and other cases can be found F Schoen and Ch. The case is the latest in a long line of cases .
 The concept is close in meaning to the propaganda in Latvia and Lithuania concept of psychological influence .
 Lithuanian Radio making process by using means of conveying and Television Commission restricted the reto a partner or an opponent specially prepared broadcasting of Russian TV channel NTV-Mir .
 NTVinitiator of the action. On the eve of Lithuanian Independence Day, NTV initiator decides on a predetermined decision .
 Mir broadcast a programme claiming that during the ‘Ukrainian nationalist coup d’état’ The advancement of reflexive control as a strategic scenario used by the “Lithuanian separatists’ in 1991 was applied .
 The Commission found that line with the Russian belief that the emerging the programme can be exploited to alter order to discredit Lithuanian statehood and the global balance of power .
 The Commission also restricted the re-transmissions of the RTR Planeta . It can be argued that Russia’s information TV channel is well aligned with the Latvian National Electronic actions .
 Similarities can be drawn with Russian TV channel Rossiya RTR in Russian actions prior to and during the war with Latvia for a period of three months . Similarities are drawn with broadcasting of Russian TV station Rossiya.
 Council says Russian TV channels have been distributing misleading and hateful information to Latvia for a long time . Council says Russia has been conducting close analysis of the psychological profile of the President .
 This is viewed able to provoke the Government into the desired as targeted information aggression within Latvia’s decisions and actions . This is seen as a targeted information aggressive within Latvia's decisions and action .
 Latvian law prohibits mass media from and its inability to reach out to the inhabitants disseminating false information, invoking hatred, of Crimea and the Eastern regions . Latvians have no right to contact people in Crimea.
 The restriction of these channels also lead to the control plan . EU legislation does not allow individual member states to protect their owns controlling shareholdings in First Channel information space from similar types of aggression .
 Kovalchuk owns the Video International company which produces these events . These events were accompanied by a debate on advertising for the leading Russian TV channels .
Financial constraints have prevented which produces TV programmes for Krasnij Kvadrat .
 The Baltics and Finland have sent a joint letter companies to the media . One of this idea from moving forward at this time is allocating the advertising budgets of the major state-owned the Baltics .
 Individual countries lack the resources identified as advertising to establish and maintain such channels .
 Vyacheslav Volodin, First Deputy to trolling, is Russia's Chief of Staff of the Presidential Administration of Russia .
 V Volodin takes part in the creation of press Every week . The Presidential Administration materials for certain media campaigns are created .
 Synchronized deputy of all three channels attends these dissemination of propaganda materials (in meetings)
 Komsomolskaya Pravda usually attends these meetings on behalf of and Izvestija – and in loyal internet portals, for the Presidential Administration .
 If propaganda campaigns the administration is represented by staff from require a larger scale, TV channel news and domestic policy administration.
Loyal communicates with TV channel management by political scientists . Political scientists play a key role in information telephone .
 Gromov is one of Russia's most popular places to live in Russia . It is also considered one and abroad, according to Russian media .
 The political scientists and political of Russia’s leading controllers of Russian TV channel commentators. They regularly communicate with content .
 Control over every single message in the Presidential Administration is also ensured by an associate of Markov, Dmitry Orlov, Vyacheslav Nikonov, Yuri Kovalchuk .
 The necessity for using this of the Presidential Administration and the State method was described in Russia’s foreign policy Duma were not synchronized. Significantly, the necessity for use of this of this method was not synchronized .
 First Channel, information operations either internally or in Rossija and NTV, when reflecting events in Russia state or independent media . From this we can conclude that army did not have sufficient resources to conduct the leading Russian TV channels .
 News, Chechens were quite active through their own or analytical guidelines and editorial content .
 The second Chechen war started in 1999 after bombings of residential targets in Russia . After the collapse of the USSR, Chechnya took (the Chechen rebels never claimed responsibility bold steps towards national self-determination for this)
 In 2000, Vladimir Putin became democracies would have supported President and started the centralization of power a peaceful solution to the conflict in Russia .
 President Putin improved relations political dialogue than separation of the Republic between the Presidential Administration and Ichkeria from the Russian Federation .
 Russia failed to implement the information component that would help gain during military operations . This helped with the first Chechen war .
 President mass support from a wide range of audiences . Putin's former roles in the KGB and FSB (Federal within the country and beyond)
 In the first half of the 1990s, Russia had a more independent media than NTV . NTV TV criticised the Kremlin's use of information tools in the implementation of policy .
 Chechen activities were based on the concept that anything and perceived sympathetically, as a continuation of everything could be controlled by the elite . This approach parts of Russian society, Chechen.
 The collapse of the USSR and the fight for selfof the tools that help to achieve this are the determination by nations enslaved by the USSR . During Boris Yeltsin’s presidency, the Kremlin public relations, propaganda and misinformation did not have a particularly good relationship with President Putin .
 Control over Gazprom’s finances was 1993, when the company was in charge of its finances . The Presidential practiced by inserting ‘our people’ in leading Administration and the State Duma.
 The implementation of effective media control started with the takeover of information campaigns . It was not possible in such the largest TV channels, placing them under circumstances .
 Media owners have opportunities to express their views. Communication by and decisions the direct or indirect charge of the Presidential 37 Administration .
 Putin's control of the leading TV channels prevented him from addressing wide Russian the major TV channels was linked to his election and foreign audiences .
 In 1999, when President Putin became the Prime Minister, there were around ten media location or practice of war, their narratives and holdings . The Chechen wars did not see a change in the PM .
 Some of the most influential media thematic frameworks were significantly different affecting elections were Vladimir Gusinsky’s . This affected the international position of the NTV, Boris Berezovsky's TV6 and Yuri Luzhkov’'s two parties involved .
 Mayor of Moscow Yuri Luzhkov was turned from an opponent of President Putin’s into an opponent in 2000 . He was turned into an international and domestic reaction ally through the process of party consolidation .
 Russian media magnate V Gusinsky forced President Putin to postpone to sell his media channels, including NTV, to his vacation .
 B Berezovsky was forced to emigrate from Russia . The victims' families were outraged by the decision to move away .
 The Kremlin neutralized its three days before divers finally reached the submarine . In this way, the Kremlin neutralizes its three day before divers reached the submarines .
 S message on the causes of the accident and the Jastrzembski, a specialist in spin-doctoring, was condition of the crew several times . The war with Georgia in 2008 showed that media about the war in Chechnya.
 Russia was willing to participate in use of the opportunity and began to explain to information warfare . Russia had taken into account previous military terrorist attacks in the USA .
 Russia needed there to be more 'Federal group' in South Ossetia, Russia says . The “Federal group’ (Russian – federaljnaya Russian citizens) are Russian citizens in the region .
 In war in South Ossetia, many had to be found for a ‘humanitarian crisis’ that more special OMON police units were involved . The second Chechen war was caused by the invasion of Georgian not regular army soldiers .
 The audience was misled by stories about protests by committees of mothers of young civil casualties . The audience had been misled by tales of protests by mothers of children killed by soldiers .
 The Kremlin did not confirm the numbers of Chechens' casualties, but also limited the Chechens’ casualties that had been previously reported by the Russian media .
 The Kremlin demonstrated elements of identity. Narratives are controlled through the democracies, the Kremlin said . The Russian activities were not creation of myths and manipulation of the current considered justified .
 NATO and in the use of propaganda will not be able to line with one or several elements of the target to keep Russia from acting in its own interests . This is a detail also common to all the post-Soviet countries that NATO and other international organizations will not have the same identity .
In the framework of narrative control, it is possible to “insert a particular’s. All these examples show that Kremlin officials political or military leaders have changed their opinion about the importance of some country .
 The differences in the media coverage of the two control means control over the process of Chechen wars is connected to the changes in interpreting information .
 If an authoritarian state practices narrative control long enough, of the Chechens from the communication the proportion of its society that does not think process is not enough .
 This demonstrates the nature of the critically perceives information in a hyperbolic Russian state’s control over communication . It uses a specific interpretation even if any media competitors will be neutralized by any this does not correspond to real events. means possible .
 The state administration is also trying to influence processes in the World Ukraine crisis . It is important to consider narrative Wide Web .
 A narrative can be considered an oral Insider points out, the Domestic Policy Department or written story setting out the author’s ideas of the Presidential Administration controls the work .
 Narratives usually materials; offer a clear distinction between the good and 2) creation of fake accounts on social networks .
 If individual narratives are a way in and distributing the ordered information on which a person communicates their personal accounts, collective narratives are based on 3 (3) sending out of spam messages, persecution collective experience and values and one of their opponents on the Internet .
 Konkord holding Evgeny Prihozhin, 39, is personally acquainted with President Putin . He is the director for political communication, which has to be of the Konkords.
 Prihozin has his own propaganda offices in Ukraine, for example, the Kharkiv news agency .