 Ukraine’s snap parliamentary elections have once again proved that the mainstream of society rejects the far right . Not that the Russian government or media will care.
 Ukrainians had to be re-cast as hardliners overnight. Prominent Russian opposition leaders have argued that the idea of popular protests driving out a corrupt regime next door was unsettling for the Kremlin .
 Russian opposition has little credibility in Russia, a country where the overwhelming majority gets their news from state television . The notion that ‘Ukraine is now a Nazi country’ is an easy sell .
 There was also a surprisingly strong showing of nearly 11% for the newcomer Christian democrat party, Samopomich .
 Sadovy came to national prominence earlier this year for supporting the Euromaidan movement . Sadovy is working to dispel the notion that western Ukraine is solely populated by dangerous radicals .
Far-right Svoboda party, headed by Oleh Tyahnibok, received less than 5% of the vote and appeared unable to cross the 5% threshold needed to gain seats in parliament .
 The Radical party is headed by populist Oleh Lyashko, whose firebrand political style has been compared to Russia's nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky . He was accused by rights groups of exacting vigilante justice by torturing alleged separatist leaders . There was widespread fear among moderates that Lyash
 The Ukrainian far right has continued to fail in its attempts to appeal to the mainstream public . The far-right has failed to attract mainstream public support .
 The Ukrainian far right has continued to fail in its attempts to appeal to the mainstream public . Based on the data, it would seem safe to conclude that the Ukrainian far left has failed .
 Former Russian spy chief Nikolai Patrushev famously told Rossiiskaya Gazeta last week that ‘a whole generation of Ukrainians brought up to hate Russia’ But the reality on the ground is much more complicated than that.
Anti-Russian feelings in Ukraine have been on the rise, but they have taken on a political, rather than ethnic-based dimension . Ukraine has been losing lands to Russia, considering that Ukraine has lost land to Russia .
 In 2014, for the first time ever, a majority of Ukrainians – 52% that is – reported that they wanted to join NATO . The development can be put down to Russia’s newfound habit of ignoring the concept of Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 When talking to ordinary people on election day, I made a point of speaking Russian .
 In bilingual Kyiv, it is common for Russian and Ukrainian speakers to address each other in their native languages . While being interviewed, some speakers switched to Russian out of politeness .
 Azov battalion's fighters have no problems speaking Russian – whether to journalists or among each other .
 Even the notoriously right-wing Azov battalion has no problem speaking Russian – whether to journalists, journalists or among themselves .
 Ukraine, while thankfully not turning to mass extremism, is nevertheless returning to business as usual . If anything, the greatest concern now is that Ukraine is still returning tobusiness as usual.
 Poroshenko has a confectionery empire, and is in charge of the country . The political establishment includes any number of familiar, if somewhat rebranded, faces .
 Kyiv voters in Kyiv say that in spite of a revolution that occurred under the banner of European integration, officials are in no hurry to adopt European values . Meanwhile, the economy is tanking; and voters inKyiv say they are no longer interested in European values.
 Voters complained of corruption everywhere – from the judiciary to education . Voters complained about corruption everywhere, including the judiciary .
 Voters complained of corruption everywhere – from the judiciary to education . They pointed out that state hospitals remain as underfunded as ever . In general, Ukraine’s oligarch class was living as well as ever while the rest of the country suffered .
 Some fully expecting Russia to ‘pull the plug’ at the worst possible moment . Many also concerned about possible fallout of latest gas dispute between Ukraine and Russia .
 The conflict with Russia was often referred to with a mixture of disappointment and resolve . The conflict was frequently referred to as an undeclared war .
 Solovyov’s point of view offers a simple, catch-all explanation for both Ukraine's domestic problems and the deterioration of its relationship with Russia . Russia's relationship with Ukraine has deteriorated.
 Russia can be absolved of any wrongdoing with regard to either Crimea or the Donbas . By adopting the view that ‘they’re all just Nazis,’ Russia can also be absolve of wrongdoing .
Russian state media is bound to continue to dominate the Russian state media, if only because the Russian economy is similarly headed into troubled waters . It is a view that is bound for the state media.
 Russia faces both budget cuts and a decreased buying power for ordinary citizens . With the oil price going down, sanctions biting, inflation rising, and the rouble plummeting, it is just the beginning of the Russian crisis .
 The oil-dependent Russian economy was fragile before the Ukraine crisis resulted in a de facto stand-off with the West . Now its outlook is even less positive than before .
 For the Kremlin, it is strategically important that the image of an unequivocally ‘Nazi’ Ukraine continue to endure .
 Ukraine is instead a country that successfully managed to throw off a corrupt government . Otherwise, Ukraine is not a nation that has managed to get rid of its corrupt government.
 Ukraine has experienced no magical overnight transformation, but regime change itself is a key issue for the Kremlin . The country has not experienced any overnight transformation .
 Russia sharply criticised the United States backing of Euromaidan . The Kremlin was increasingly worried about similar United States support for regime change in Russia itself .
 U.S. has been keen to openly intervene everywhere from Iraq to Libya . The reset policy with Moscow had in recent years been focused on treating Russian president Vladimir Putin as a partner .
 continued NATO expansion was a thorn in Russia’s side, but it still wasn’t enough to trigger a significant confrontation .
 Russia may have made itself a target for regime change after all . But by making Ukraine a point of contention, it may have also made it a target .
 The rebel uprising in Ukraine’s Donbas region has sown bloody chaos . By contrast, the uprising in the region has been largely peaceful .
 The downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 over that territory in the summer demonstrated to Western leaders that even their own citizens could easily be sacrificed in this conflict .
 The West's long game is now most likely geared toward regime change in Russia, says Fyodor Lukyanov . sanctions as the most obvious tool, he says .
 The West's long game is now most likely geared toward regime change in Russia, with sanctions as the most obvious tool . The West’s long-game is now more likely geared towards regime change.
 The scenario of Russian regime change has any number of potentially disturbing, destabilizing outcomes . All evidence points to the fact that Putin is simply no longer trusted by Western leaders .
 Russia and the West must consider repairing impossibly strained relations . Not even the threat posed by ISIS has been enough for either Russia or the West to consider repairing relations .
 The majority is focused on survival – on digging in, come hell or high water . The majority, regardless of allegiance to a particular political party, is focusing on survival .
 Kievans are focused on the idea that they must keep going . Everywhere, from shabby state hospitals to basement bars downtown, Kievans want to keep going.
 Ukrainian flags that decorate many balconies and vehicles in the capital have faded in the sunlight over the summer .