activist historians are different from so called memorians or propagandists, who work in service of authorities . This cohort gave rise to a new professional species of historians .
 Likbez historians tried to use their power to influence and promote their activist agenda . They also tried to influence the reformation of state institutions in the past .
 Likbez historians argue that securitization of the past is the main strategy employed for producing historical knowledge .
 Historians’ work is a part of postcolonizing process observed in Ukrainian society since the Maidan protests . Historians' work is part of the post-Maidan process observed since the protests .
 Historians have a much more nuanced relation to power than straightforward opposition or co-option .
 The role of it in an ongoing military conflict, in which history is so intensely misused, is an understudied problem . Still, the role of the military conflict in which it is so intense misused is a problem .
 The group "Likbez" organized by historians who organized the group “Lik Bez’s’ group .
 From the very beginning of the Ukrainian-Russian conflict, historians regarded their profession as a tool in warfare . They positioned themselves as civic activists who strived to influence the situation .
 I scrutinize the role historians played when the whole society underwent dramatic and turbulent transformations . I scrutinized the role these historians played in the society's transformation .
 These are crucial questions to ask about the role of historians during war . These are important questions for historians to answer .
 historians rarely do so. While scholars in some disciplines encourage their students to be involved in societal life and even to become activists .
 History implicitly discourages professional activism as it arguably derails a scholar from ideals of objectivism .
 Historians are often involved in the political and societal life of the country where they live or whose history they study .
 Historians influenced by historical culture not only reproduce the ideas ruling in the society but also have the potential to bring up changes to the society .
 Some groups of historians have explicit activist agendas aimed at giving voice to those who are not in the position to be seen and heard . The Subaltern Studies Group or British History Workshop have explicit agendas .
 Scholars who deal with postcolonial countries, or with countries where open discussion of the past is suppressed, often produce texts which can play crucial roles in political and social shifts .
 It is not seldom that such texts are censored or even banned. That is why it is not often that such text messages are censored .
 Benedict Anderson’s works on Indonesia were banned, and he was not allowed to enter the country for about 30 years .
 These examples demonstrate that it is not seldom that historians play an important societal role, willingly or not .
 Most often, though, they play this role as individuals, not as collective . Most often they are individuals, but not as a collective .
 Historians act as a group in the context of military conflict, says historian . The group of historians is special with the group, he says .
 These individuals purposefully united their professional skills and thinking minds for achieving common aims . These individuals were able to achieve common aims with common aims.
 The goals they had and the ways they wanted to achieve them are discussed in the sections below . The goals and goals they wanted are discussed.
 Historical Front was started in spring 2014 when the conflict in Eastern Ukraine began . The conflict began when the Ukraine conflict began .
 Likbez was one of many civic initiatives organized by professionals with the aim to counteract the Russian information offensive . In this regard, Lik Bez was a member of a group of professionals organized to counter the Russian Information offensive .
 StopFake was organized by former graduates of Kyiv Mohyla School of Journalists . Information Resistance was formed by former intelligence and military professionals to fight Russian propaganda .
 During the first weeks of the protests, some IT workers formed Cyber Hundred, and some translators organized Voices of Ukraine .
Civil societies formed by professionals continued to provide services to keep the state functioning .
Professional skills are the main resource and tool in activist agendas. It is worth studying professionally driven activism where professional skills are a key resource .
Journalists facing challenges of professionalism and patriotism in Ukraine were already tackled . The question of historians facing the similar challenges remains mainly understudied .
 Iryna Vushko’s article about Likbez concentrated mainly on the analysis of the content of their ten-volume, popular history project .
In my study, I concentrate on the motivations, strategies, and results of historians’ works . In my book, I focus on motivations and strategies of historians .
 Likbez is a project that has evolved from 2014 to 2018 . The project is a product of a unique combination of time, place and time .
 Likbez historians saw their role as activists through the possibilities given by their profession . The Lik bez historians were inspired by the work of their profession.
 They believed that by doing what they are trained to do, they could change the country . They believed they could even contribute to its security . They believe they could help change the nation's security .
 Likbez historians presented history as a matter of security, he says . I argue that since the beginning of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict in Eastern Ukraine, Lik bez historians present history as matter ofSecurity .
 They saw themselves and their profession as weapons in the propaganda war . They explicitly wrote their historical texts in response to narratives disseminated by Russian media .
 Historical narratives were framed as issues of national security. In this way, historical narratives wereframed as national security issues .
 In the beginning, securitization of history provided the main explanatory framework that was used to counteract Russian propaganda in short articles disseminated online .
 securitization laid a theoretical and ideological basis for popular history writing disseminated through multiple volumes . Later, secur itization laid the theoretical basis for history writing .
 In the course of their engagement as activists, the Likbez historians strengthened their own positions as scholars . The LikBez historians were engaged as activists.
Public intellectuals helped them claim back the status of intelligentsia that had been in decline since the 1990s . Their new role as public intellectuals helped to claim back their status as intellectuals .
 Historians built up a peculiar type of relationship to political power . In this way, historians built up the relationship to power .
 Likbez activities were acknowledged and symbolically rewarded by the state . As it will be shown, Lik bez activities will be acknowledged and rewarded .
 Within four years, they published an enormous scope of literature . They popularized their works by giving lectures throughout the country . They became regular guests on television shows and appeared on television .
 The case of Likbez also elucidates a more general situation in Ukraine after Euromaidan . The case also explains the situation in the Ukraine after the Ukraine crisis .
 The popularity of Likbez books and lectures indicates that a large part of Ukrainian society underwent a process of self-articulation . Lik bez histories provided ad hoc narratives, according to the book .
History was used as a matter of security by historians who saw themselves as active participants in the information war . I draw on the theory of securitization and argue that history was used by historians .
 I also use the concept of postcolonizing process to understand the context in which the historians’ activities evolved from 2014 to 2018 . I also used the idea of post-colonization process.
 I present the background of intellectual life in post-1991 Ukraine, without which it is difficult to understand in what situation the scholars in Ukraine work. I also present the backgrounds of academic life in Ukraine .
 The project is based on interviews with Likbez historians and analysis of the books published within the project . The project includes strategies used when writing history and analyze the main features of the produced narratives .
 I finish the article by reflecting on the role of historians as activists as activists during war . I finished the article with a final essay about the history of war .
 From Securitization to Postcolonizing Empowerment, I draw on the theories of securitisation as elaborated by the Copenhagen School of Security Studies . The theories were developed by the Danish School of security Studies .
Securitization refers to the process of making a certain issue into a matter of security through a securitizing speech act . Buzan: Securitized speech act is a form of speech act.
 Political scientist Maria Mälksöö effectively demonstrated how the securitization of the past took place in Estonia and Poland . Mälsöö is a political scientist.
 The politics of memory were framed as a matter of security, calling for recognition of the right of these countries to tell their own story of the past differently from Soviet and Russian versions .
 Media scholar Mykola Makhortykh showed how memories of revolutions and wars were employed for the social construction of security issues during the Euromaidan and at the beginning of the military conflict .
 In spring 2014, a part of the Ukrainian territory was annexed by Russia and the armed conflict began in Eastern Ukraine . The securitization of the past intensified.
 The case of Likbez shows how a securitization of the past is realized on the level of professional historians . The case is a case of the history of the Lik bez .
 The securitizing approach is evident not only in the histories Likbez produces but also in the motivations of historians .
 History was analogous to weapons and historians with soldiers, says historian . In this way, history was analogous with weapons and history with soldiers .
How this particular popular history narratives are written is one of the main questions of this article . How this particular history narrative is written is the main question of the article .
 The Likbez activities evolved from 2014-2018, as well as how they were received by the public . The concept of postcolonizing process was elaborated by John Cash .
 Cash considered the postcolonizing process as distancing from the friend-enemy ideology . Cash considered post-colonization process asdistancing from friend- enemy ideology .
 A similar situation was seen in Ukraine and the Baltic states after 1991, when the ontological insecurity was high . There were no grounded reasons for this .
 Ukrainian sovereignty was under threat in 2014 during the beginning of the war in Eastern Ukraine . Historians started to move from history writing influenced by fears and hopes to history writing .
 In these popular history narratives new futures are imagined where enemies of today can be partners of tomorrow . As I argue below, in these popular histories, we look at the history of today's enemies .
 Most historians of Likbez work at the Institute of History in the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences . Most historians work in the Ukraine.
 Historians as well as other scholars in Ukraine found themselves in quite a deplorable situation after 1991 . Historians were regarded highly in the hierarchy of scholars .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, a lack of funding and of understanding how science should function in market conditions resulted in a loss of high status of scholars .
 The books of diaspora historians were brought to Ukraine and used as the basis for new historical narratives . The books were used to create new narratives for historical narratives.
 The Likbez project was founded in the Institute of History in the Soviet-bred Institute of history . The Institute was founded by Soviet-born historians .
Young generation of historians built up new institution separate from Academy of Sciences . They worked on the Likbez project while continuing their official work in the academy and history department .
This form of organization is more fitted to the changing and dynamic times than the old-style academy . This form of organisation can be regarded as a network of professionals .
 Likbez has a fluid and porous structure that easily absorbs new members who often have only a situational affiliation to Lik bez . Lik Bez has been a member of the LikBez for more than 20 years .
 Likbez historians face challenges of market-oriented publishing, collective writing, and work with media and mass public .
Historians that would form the core of Likbez met during the Euromaidan protests in December 2013 . Informally, the group of historians would be the group that would be part of the group .
 In 2013, most of them worked at the Institute of History or history departments in the capital’s universities .
 Thousands of protestors gathered on Maidan Nezalezhnosti in Kyiv to demand the resignation of the government .
 The violent dispersal of students by the police that happened in the morning of November 30, 2013, marked a point of no return to the average protestor .
 It became clear for this group that gathered ‘to protect their children’ that it was up to them to bring the change to the society where politicians cannot bring this change .
 In December 2013, historians felt that they became the subjects of history, and this sense empowered them to further actions . Then, in December 2013.
 The historians understood that history mattered not only for professional historians but also for people who wanted to know more about the past .
 Historians realized how little they could propose in terms of published books accessible for a wider readership .
 Historians on Maidan saw themselves as citizens who came to the main square of the capital when their country was in turmoil . At the same time they saw them as professionals who could use their profession for civic purposes .
 They worry about the same problems as their compatriots. They live in the same country and in the the same world .
 historians have access to information which is highly interesting and needed by a broader public . But historians are not given access to the information they need by the public .
 We are eager to share this knowledge and help our community to stand up and carry on through these hardships . That is why we're eager to shared this knowledge. That's why we are keen to share it with others .
 Halushko presents historians both as citizens and as intellectual elites who possess knowledge that can be shared .
 The emphasis on the hard time that the readers and historians live through adds to better understanding of the importance of history for the present challenges . The emphasis of hard time adds to the need for history to be understood .
 The author places historians in the prestigious position of national educators that bring enlightenment to the masses .
 Previously, he was a driving force in a smaller publishing project popularizing Ukrainian history written in Russian .
 Other colleagues were eager to do something in the spirit of Euromaidan after the protests ended . These ideas were now shared by other colleagues .
 The project was conceptualized as a tool for debunking myths and changing the views on history that were perceived by Likbez as incorrect . The project is designed to debunk these myths and change the view of history .
 Likbez historians provided narratives for those who were already looking for the narratives they wanted to hear . Lik bez historians provide narratives for people who want to change their minds .
 One can also speak about the language bias of the historians who associated language with inclination to believe in a certain ideology .
 The interest in material was dictated not so much by a language spoken but by the interest in a specific kind of narrative. In reality, the interest was dictated by the language spoken .
 Likbez's books are a demonstration of the fluidity of history and political processes . No country in the present can claim its exclusive right on certain territories .
 The securitization strategy develops a new way for professionals to write popular history narratives . Such an approach simultaneously addresses the problem of the present conflict .
 All Likbez books were published by Kharkiv based publisher Klub Simeinoho Dozvillia .
 The publisher printed 8,000 to 21,000 copies for each volume of History without Censorship . A significant number for the Ukrainian publishing market .
 Likbez scholars helped develop the project and helped strengthen their status as intellectuals in the society .
 Likbez began work with Kyiv’s Museum of History, where historians held weekly lectures . In 2016, he began work at the museum in Kyiv, Ukraine .
 Between 2015 and 2018, historians also gave lectures in other towns throughout Ukraine . The lectures were held in Ukraine .
 Historians presented the main aim of their activities as the enlightenment of the people and dissemination of historical knowledge that was perceived to be important for winning the ongoing war .
 Our task is to overcome the historical illiteracy so that there will be no people who are uneducated in history . We need to overcome historical illiterate so that we can make history more accessible .
 The Soviet newspeak ‘likbez’ is the name of a project to liquidation of illiteracy launched in the 1920s . The project gave the name to the project .
 The public is seen as bearers of incorrect history disseminated by the Soviet myths . The public has been seen as being in the wrong way by the public .
 This incorrect history needs correction in the eyes of Likbez historians, says historian . The incorrect history was written in the early 1900s .
 Likbez histories may seem simplified and lacking theoretical and conceptual discussion . The Lik bez histories, when read by professional historians, may appear simplified .
 The authors try to find a balance between scholarly writing and mass readership . It is obvious that aiming at the broad public, the authors are aiming for the public .
 Oksana Yurkova, the historian from the Institute of History of the Academy of Science, has worked for the project from the very beginning . All these books are first of all scholarly works because they undergo a strict scholarly review process .
 Likbez books do not follow traditional academic standards as they are written for mass readership . However, Lik bez books don't follow academic standards .
Traditional academic writing references are absent in the Likbez series . Most of the books provide a list of recommended literature .
 The themes which are tackled and the writing styles of the authors might differ in the same book . The authors' writing styles might differ from each other .
 Their profession becomes an empowering tool that allows them to take positions and act . Their profession is the empowering tool for people to take roles and take positions .
Main ideology which can be deciphered in all Likbez histories is the primacy of Ukrainian statehood and sovereignty . Main ideology is theprimacy of Ukraine's statehood.
 Historians think how the past can help protect sovereignty in the present .
 Historians turn to the view on history as magistra vitae, searching for examples that could motivate and encourage present generations .
 The past is framed as a matter of security, says the writer . The needs of the present come before the analytical striving in writing activist history narratives, he says .
Through securitization of the past, historians defend their narratives as something that can guarantee victory in the ongoing war . Through secur itization, historians have been able to guarantee victory.
 I will discuss these features in more details and show how they work for the purposes of securitization and popularization of history as well as how they reflect the postcolonizing process .
 Mykhailo Hrushevskyi published his history of Ukraine-Rus’ in ten volumes . He is the founder of modern Ukrainian historiography .
 Likbez published their series History without Censorship also in ten volumes . The series also includes ten volumes of the series .
 The Likbez historians try to inscribe Ukrainian history into the larger European and world history . They also try to add Ukrainian history to the larger world history.
 Their histories are shaped by the needs of present moment and should be read from the presentist perspective, says author .
History of Ukraine was created not in the past, but it happens in the present during extremely nervous and hard years of 2014–2015 .
 The independent state has finished its period of “looking for its Self’s Self. We realized that we are ready for these challenges, we said . The independent State was created in 1991 .
 Ukraine's people have been living on these lands for thousands of years . It was not yesterday that Ukraine had been born .
 They were changing their name and their state belonging, but they have not changed its essence and desire for independent life . They are still interested in independent life, they say .
 The Likbez historians do not provide the readers with explicit theoretical frames discussing postcolonial or anti-colonial perspectives . But my thorough reading of their books let me see their project as a realization of a postcolonial perspective .
The main imperative in postcolonizing history writing is to emphasize that the Ukrainian nation is constantly changing . The main imperative of the anti-colonial perspective was to emphasize Ukraine is a primordial nation .
 Likbez historians try to convince readers that dynamics and change are a driving force of history . Yet, in contrast to the past conceptualization of these threats, they say they are not .
 No threat can last forever and enemies of today can be partners in the future. Thus, no threat can be last forever .
 Likbez historians demonstrate this approach most vividly . Representations of the Soviet past by LikBez historians are most vividly shown .
 Three volumes of History without Censorship are devoted exclusively to the Soviet period . Unsurprisingly, three volumes of history are devoted solely to Soviet period.
Historians look at the period of 1917–1921 as the crucial moment of history . Ukraine had a chance either to take the Soviet path proposed by Bolsheviks or to build the independent nation .
 The main idea common to these books is that the Soviet past is gone and now Ukraine has a chance to get rid of the Soviet ghosts .
 The Soviet past is presented not as something alien to Ukrainian history . It is important to emphasize that the Soviet history is not as alien to Ukraine .
 Ukraine during the years of Soviet rule is presented as an agent of its own fate . Ukraine is presented by the Russian government as a country during the Soviet era .
Ukrainian People's Republic appeared a Ukrainian Socialist Republic . But in the part of the territory of Ukrainian People’s republic appeared a Ukraine Socialist Republic.
 The subjectivity of Ukraine is emphasized in the Soviet past, says the author . "We see a complex evaluation of theSoviet past," he says .
 The main problem for Likbez historians is not, though, the past but the present . The past is not the present, but the past is the present.
People who believe in the Soviet regime are the main public to whom they address their history . They regard the people who believe the advantages of the Soviet regimes as the main people . They say they are the most important people in the world .
 Pavlov: “These people may support Ukrainian statehood, they are patriots, but they believe in Soviet myths. As Pavlov stressed, “these people might support Ukrainian Statehood, but are not patriots.
 The main logics behind the volumes about the Soviet past are to show the disadvantages of the communist regime even if supported by many Ukrainians .
 Likbez historians did not speak a lot about such obvious threats as Russian military or separatists backed by Russia .
There is no distinction between Ukrainian and Russian speakers in this regard . There is no difference between the two countries.
 Mykola Riabchuk sees Ukrainian population as divided between majority of creoles who internalized colonial visions of themselves and minority of indigenous population .
 Soviet past is approached as a construction block in a long history of state and nation building . The Soviet past has been a building block in the past.
 Ukraine is presented as a subject owning its history, including history of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic . This middle way can be seen as a step from anti-colonial history writing to the postcolonizing process .
 Ukrainians, Crimean Tatars, Bulgarians and Hungarians, Poles, and Russians all form contemporary Ukraine . Ukrainians, Ukrainian Tatars and Bulgarians all form modern Ukraine .
 We cannot ignore thousands of years of our history because this is our reliable basement as a nation of the 21st century for building our common home .
 Crimean Tatars and Russians draw more attention than other nations, namely, Crimean Tatar and Russians .
 There is a certain discovery of Crimean Tatars in Ukrainian history, according to books .
 This trend is not only characteristic of this concrete history project, it is also characteristic of these concrete history projects .
 In general, in Ukraine after the annexation of Crimea there is a vivid interest in underlining the strong bond between Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars . Russia's annexing of Crimea was violated by Russia’s annexation of Ukraine .
 Crimean Tatars are the only aside of Ukrainians’ people of the contemporary Ukraine which had their own state history here . The Tatars were the only Ukrainian people who lived in Crimea .
 Today their ancestors in the Crimea which is annexed by Russia are simultaneously Tatar and Ukrainian . Today they are both Tatar, and their ancestors are both Ukrainian .
 The security crisis of today defines the way the history of Crimean Tatars is presented by historians . The history of the Crimean Tatar was presented by the historians .
 Likbez historians try to find a new and nuanced approach to the presentation of Russians . The Russian history of the Russian language is known as "LikbeZ"
Historians emphasize that history changes and vectors of Ukrainian development change as well . Thus, historians emphasize thathistory changes and vector change as also .
 There is nothing predestined in history, including relations between nations . There has been no such thing in history .
 Authors do not present the current war with Russia as having resulted from the eternal animosity between Russians and Ukrainians . In the same vein, the authors do not mention the current conflict with Russia .
 They stress that the present war is a phase in the development of an ever-changing history . They rather stress that it's a phase of the developing history .
 Russia in the Likbez paradigm is presented as the continuation of the improper Sovietness . Russia in Lik bez paradigm was presented as an example of improper Sovietism .
 Ukraine is presented as a country having a chance to get rid of the Soviet burden . Ukraine, on the contrary, is presented by the government as a nation that has a chance.
Time and again we see how important the Soviet past is in the works of Likbez . Time and again, we see the importance of the Soviet history in Lik bez .
 This is essentially the main Other against which the popular history narrative is written . This is basically the main other against which a popular history story is written. This is effectively the mainOther against which.
This is exactly the realm where the postcolonizing process takes place . This is exactly where the process happens, says the author .
 Likbez historians position Ukraine in the continuum where it goes its own way, distinct from the one proposed by former colonial powers .
 Russia is not presented as an eternal enemy, but as a neighbor with whom Ukraine has conflictual relations now . This situation can change provided the change of the political regime in Russia, according to the author .
 At the same time, these books must be of high scholarly standard, not amateurs . The books are written by professional historians, notAmateurs .
 The original idea of Likbez to debunk myths is reflected throughout the works of LIKbez historians . The original concept is reflected in the work of historians .
 This approach perfectly serves the entertaining purpose that in its turn helps make the project popular . This approach is a great way to make a project more fun .
 Likbez historians debunked myths from the Soviet past or current day Russia . Ukrainian historical myths are debunked as well, as well .
 To these myths belong stories based on traditional primordial imagination, which became popular in the 1990s, that traced Ukrainian nationhood from prehistoric times .
 At the beginning we tried to respond to many propagandistic anti-Ukrainian historical myths and did it quite successfully . At the start, we were trying to response to many propaganda myths and do it well .
 Some Ukrainian historical myths also are harmful, as they blur the line between reality and fantasy .
 We believe that information about Ukrainian past based on facts and not on fantasies or ideological premises will help contemporary Ukrainians better understand their own views on the past .
 Likbez historians try to formulate a more nuanced approach to history . Their emphasis on myth busting serves an entertainment purpose; hence, it also serves popularizing purposes .
 Likbez historians faced an important challenge of the contemporary world. We should bear in mind that in striving to popularize history, they faced a challenge of market .
 The fact that Likbez books are published by a commercial publisher, whose main aim is to gain profit, puts pressure on historians that they are not used to .
 The pressures were realized through demands to use certain covers, simplify language, or include illustrations which authors initially did not like .
 Scholars admitted that sometimes the final product was not quite the same as expected . But also that they should listen to the publisher's suggestions as they know the market better .
 Likbez books are not the only popular history books available in Ukraine, which is why they compete with other projects who have similar purposes and strategies .
 In the end, the published books come as result of negotiations and compromises made by historians and activists .
 Writing their books in a collective can be seen as a response to market demands as well as their willingness to adhere to academic standards .
Coauthors share collective responsibility for their texts . Such a form of publication is quicker, and at the same time coauthors share responsibility . The authors of the texts share responsibility for each other .
 Sometimes each author writes his or her chapter individually and serves as a peer-reviewer for colleagues’ chapters . Sometimes they write a series of chapters together, and sometimes they write their own chapters .
 Both academic standards and market requirements for fast publishing are met . In this way, both academic standards are met.
 The vast number of books published in a short period of time by the same cohort of authors . The high professional quality of these books proves the effectiveness of such a strategy .
 Likbez books are popular history narratives that the public wants to read . The history narratives presented in these books are the kind of history the public want to read.
 The least popular among the readers is the volume about the Second World War . The most popular volume of the book is about the war .
 This is the volume that aims to debunk the most vital of the Soviet myths . Remarkably, this is the most important volume that raises the most questions .
 The book on the Second World War, From Reichstag to Ivo Jima, finishes the History without Censorship series . The book is based on the history of World War II .
 The latter term refers to the Soviet depiction of Ukrainian nationalist groups who were fighting against Soviets during and after the war . The second term is also used to refer to Ukrainian nationalists fighting against the Soviets .
 In the Soviet Union, non-Russian nationalists who fought against Soviets were constructed as Nazi-collaborators . The Soviet Union was formed in the early 1950s .
 The distorted picture of Ukraine in the years of the Second World War also arrested the popular imaginary abroad . The distorted image of Ukraine also arrested a popular imaginary.
 In the German public sphere Ukraine is often presented through the Russian propaganda view as a Nazi collaborator . The Ukrainian victims are largely ignored, Hausmann and Penter argued .
 The UINP and Likbez want to fight against these narratives produced by Russian propaganda, but they are doing it in a counterproductive way, says CNN's John Sutter . The Russian government is trying to make a difference in the fight against Russian propaganda .
 The UINP and historians who adhere to the Institute’s ideological agenda strengthen the views disseminated by Russian propaganda . By glorifying Ukrainian nationalists and silencing their wrongdoings during the Holocaust, the UinP and the historians who follow the Institute's ideological agenda stronger the
 The Ukrainian-Polish massacre in 1943–44 is presented by Likbez in line with the conceptualization of Ukrainian historian Volodymyr Viatrovych . The conflict in which Ukrainians are presented almost exclusively as supporters of the nationalist movement under Bandera’
 Viatrovych held the position of the director of the UINP from 2014 to 2019 . He is the most politically engaged memorian .
 OUN members are presented exclusively as fighters for Ukrainian independence . He authored some of the chapters in the Likbez volume on the Second World War .
 The collaboration with Nazis and participation in Holocaust are ascribed only to the Melnykites faction of the OUN . The Bandera faction is presented as the heroic anti-Bolshevik movement for liberation .
 In the volumes on the Second World War, Ukraine is presented exclusively as a victim . The evaluation of history is made mainly from the vantage point of Western Ukraine .
 The volume on history of the Second World War is written not from the point of the subject undergoing the postcolonizing process . The subject that is tormented by anticolonial resentments.
 Likbez historians did not develop this topic further in their volumes, giving it to the elaboration of the UINP for whom it continued to be the most fruitful turf .
 The unpopularity of this volume among the readers might gesture to the public fatigue with the topic of war . The war is not something which takes place only on the pages of history books .
 The war became reality that directly touches the lives of many in Ukraine today . The war has become a reality in Ukraine.
 This article aimed to analyze what happens to history writing when it is written by activist historians in the context of an ongoing military conflict .
 Historians have much more nuanced relation to power than opposition or co-option . In line with the increased attention to agency in memory studies, this article demonstrates that historians have a more nuanced relationship to power .
 Likbez: Historians in times of troubles made history into a matter of national security and presented themselves as actors of the ongoing war . The case with Lik bez shows that historians in times.
 In turbulent times, historians started looking for new theoretical frames and ways of popularizing historical knowledge .
 Likbez historians tried to represent Ukraine as an independent actor in an ever-changing flow of history . Instead of continuing an anti-colonial trend of history writing and blaming the former imperial powers for all Ukrainian problems, they implemented a postcolonial approach .
 This turn can be compared to the approaches in history writing applied by the Baltic States . This turn is similar to those applied to the Baltic states .
In the Baltic case EU membership gave a feeling of safety, in which no return to the sphere of influence of a former imperial power was fathomable . In the Ukrainian case the war in the east of the country was seen as a point of no return into the sphere.
 Ukraine's vulnerable position during turbulent times gave hope for Ukraine’s subjectivity, says Likbez historians .
 securitization became the main strategy employed in popular history writing by Likbez historians . The strategy is used in popular histories by historians .
 In their works they present historical knowledge as an element of national security . In their work they present history knowledge as a factor of security .
This history narrative has a strong empowering potential for a society that looks for meaning in a suddenly shattered world . This history narrative is a strong empowerment potential for the society, says author .
 Activist historians provide narratives that fill in cracks opened by this shattering event .
 Their histories rearticulate the past violence and injustices in a new way that emphasizes change and fluctuation . The history of violence and injustice in the past is now more complex than ever .
 This is reflected in a shift from brother-brother ideology to neighbor-neighbor ideology, even if these neighbors are currently at war . This has been reflected in the shift in the past .
 The poem of Anastasia Dmytruk, “We Will Never Be Brothers,’ became viral on social media in early spring 2014 when Crimea was annexed by Russia .
 Likbez project meets when popularizing new historical narratives . These are the moods that Lik bez meets whenpopularizing new history narratives .
 Likbez historians were directed not only to reforming, rewriting, or reevaluating the history but also to bringing tangible change to the society . The work of historians was directed to reforming and rewriting the history .
 Some of Likbez historians even succeeded in working on reformation of state institutions, including the Armed Forces of Ukraine . Some of them succeeded in trying to create state institutions.
 Kyrylo Halushko has worked with the Public Council on National Unity at the presidential office since 2015 . He has been consulting on questions related to history and history education .
 In 2018, Vasyl Pavlov was officially employed as a leading expert in questions of patriotic education by the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine .
 Likbez was first in the realm of history writing, which began as one of the LikBez initiatives . The historian and his colleagues developed strategies for reformation of military education . Later were implemented by the Ukrainian Army .
 There was not direct demand from the side of the state, and historians had to work hard to be heard by state officials .
 Securitization of history transcended discursive practices and penetrated the field of politics . As result, securitized history transcends discursive Practices and penetrated politics .
 Likbez scholars underlined that their books are popular among soldiers . Lik bez scholars said their books were popular with soldiers .
Soldiers and teachers at military universities are among the main consumers of Likbez histories . Soldiers and teachers are one of the biggest consumers of the history of the military university .
Historians and society put high stakes on history in the present . Such merging of civil actions, political interest, and historians’ initiatives demonstrate that historians and society are putting high stakes.
 The past is presented as a crucial element for building the future, according to the author .
 The analysis of Likbez histories and activities demonstrates that these activist-historians differ from both memorians and propagandists, who act in service of authorities .
 The article discussed the books and the historians’ activities between 2014 and 2018 . The article also discussed the history of the past and present .
 This time frame is a distinctive period in the development of the Likbez project . The time frame was a distinctive time frame for the project .
 In spring 2019, Ukrainian people voted for the new president, Volodymyr Zelenskyi . The new president was elected by a majority of Ukrainians .
 It is too early to draw any conclusions in respect of new trends in the politics of history, but one can see some contours of these changes .
 Halushko, the leader of Likbez, declared that he was leaving the Public Council on National Unity at the presidential office .
 The Foundation for Baltic and East European Studies is financed by the Foundation forBalt and East Europe Studies . The group is based in the Baltic region .
 The author is grateful for the Prisma Ukraїna three-month research fellowship at the Forum for Transregional Studies in Berlin .
 The military conflict in eastern Ukraine started in summer 2014 following the Russian annexation of Crimea in spring of the same year . The conflict is also defined in academic writings by the euphemism ‘Ukrainian crisis’
 The conflict involves Ukrainian government forces, on the one hand, and local separatist groups and Russian military on the other .
Public historian is a public historian who pursues the aim to change the political and societal order . We speak rather about professionals engaged in heritage, preservation, and oral history .
 Anti-Semitism in Poland after Auschwitz, first in English and then in Polish, raised a wave of criticism .
 In Parliament they were presented in one package, which made the discussion of their relevance very complicated . However, in Parliament, it was presented in a package that made it very complicated.
 The Law on the Commemoration of the Victory over Nazism in the Second World War 1939-1945 . The Law of the Communist and National-Socialist Totalitarian Regimes in Ukraine and Ban on Propaganda of their Symbols .
 His main aim was to draw experts of the topics of history and consult Tempora Publishing House on history books worth translating and publishing in Ukraine .
 Likbez books are closest to the academic standards, according to the book's author .
 Perspectives on the Intersections of Politics, Activism and the Historical Profession, edited by Stefan Berger, 1–31 .
 Hybrid Media Practices and Narratives of Conflict, edited by Mervi Pantti, 3–18.
 In ‘Ukrainian – Crimean-Tatar Socio-Cultural Encounters,’ edited by Kratochvil Alexander .
 Anti-Semitism in Poland after Auschwitz; An Essay in Historical Interpretation . The Essay was published in Poland in 2009 .
 Voienna istoria Ukraiiny vid davnyny do siohodennia, edited by Kyrylo Halushko, 3–4. Voiennia istia Ukraeiiny.
 Pradavnia Ukraiina, Rus’i i pohodzhennia ukraiinysiv, edited by Kyrylo Halushko, 3–4 .
Russland, die Ukraine und der Krieg in Donbas, edited by Manfred Sapper and Volker Weichsel. Russland is the latest in a series of Ukraine and Ukraine .
 In a Laboratory of Transnational History: Ukraine and Recent Ukrainian Historiography, edited by Georgiy Kasianov and Philipp Ther, 7–24 .
Ukraina och informationskriget – journalistik mellan ideal och självcensur – is a journalistik.
Ukraiina ta ukraiintsi u Druhii Svitovii viini, edited by Yana Prymachenko, 5-12. Ukraiiniina is the name of the U.S.
 Heute, edited by Jörn Rüsen, Theo Grütter, and Klaus Füßmann, 3–26. Heute .
 Peremoha cherez porazky; Ukraiina u viinah i revolutsiiah 1914–1921 rokiv. Peremohma cherezporazky: Peremoho cherez Porazky . Peremogo cherez. poraz
 In Viina i mif edited by Oleksandr Zinchenko, Volodymyr Viatrovych, Maksym Maiorov, 1–11. In Viine i m if edited by Zincenko, Zincchenko, Viatrov, Maior
 Senior Researcher at the Institute of History of Ukraine of National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine and a Likbez leader . Lik bez leader.
 Senior Researcher at the Department of the History of Ukraine in 1920s-30s . Likbez member of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine .
 Leading researcher at the Institute of History of Ukraine, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine . Likbez member of Lik bez member .
 Zlety i padinnia kozats’koii derzhavy 1648–1783 . The Russian prince and Hetmans of All Rus were princes .
 Ukraiina u viinah i revolutsiiah 1914-1921 rokiv (To the Battle for Freedom) is the name of the U.S. Army's first battle of the day .
 Voienna istoria Ukraiiny vid davnyny do siohodennia (Ukraine the Battlefield) is a name for the Ukraine the Battlefield .
 Pradavnia Ukraiina, Rus’i i pohodzhennia ukraiinysiv (Shadows of Recollected Ancestors) is the name of the Russian-born family .
 Ukraiina pid skipetramy Romanovyh i Habsburhiv (In Claws of DoubleHeaded Eagles)
 Iluzii ta katastrofy “komunistychnoho raiiu’s’ 1917–1938 rokiv [Soviet Ukraine.’ The Soviet Ukraine is a Soviet republic .
 Ukraiina ta ukraiintsi u Druhii Svitovii viini . From Reichstag to Ivo Jima, IvoJima.