 The government that followed pledged to embrace pro-Western reforms, and an energized civil society supported its efforts .
 Ukraine's new government was forced to confront Russian armed interventions in southern and eastern Ukraine .
 Russia's occupation of Ukraine’s Crimea region in March 2014 and a protracted conflict in eastern Ukraine. These culminated in Russian occupation of Crimea region and the Ukraine conflict .
 Ukraine's government under President Petro Poroshenko has professed a commitment to economic reform, Western integration, and democratic norms . President Poroshenko's government has been waging a defensive conflict in Ukraine .
 Many observers believe the Poroshenko government has made impressive strides in its reform agenda . Many observers say the government is making progress in its reforms .
 Others consider that Ukraine’s reforms remain fragile and that the government has progressed slowly in certain areas .
International donors and domestic civil society organizations continue to encourage the Ukrainian government to implement necessary measures, including with regard to fighting corruption .
After an economic decline in 2014-2015, some signs of financial and economic stabilization have emerged . International assistance including a multibillion dollar International Monetary Fund loan package has emerged .
 Observers caution that economic growth depends on continuation of critical reforms . The economy will continue to grow, however, according to experts .
 The United States has long supported Ukraine’s pro-Western orientation and reform efforts . The U.S. has supported Ukraine's pro- Western orientation and reforms .
 It supports the restoration of Ukraine’s territorial integrity, including with respect to Crimea . It also supports implementation of the Minsk agreements that would establish a cease-fire and conflict settlement in eastern Ukraine .
 In 2014, the United States imposed sanctions on Russia for its actions in Ukraine . The U.S. in coordination with the European Union and others, imposed the sanctions .
 The United States is a leading contributor of foreign assistance to Ukraine . Over $300 million a year since FY2015 in nonmilitary, nonhumanitarian assistance, including over $300m a year in Ukraine .
 The United States also provides substantial military assistance to Ukraine . The U.S. also provides “appropriate security assistance and intelligence support’s” Ukraine .
 President Donald Trump and Ukrainian President Poroshenko have met twice, in June and September 2017 . Trump and Poroshenko met twice in June.
 The Administration requested relatively substantial economic and military assistance to Ukraine for FY2018 . The Administration requests relatively substantial financial assistance for FY 2018 .
 Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations elevates U.S. role in the conflict settlement process .
 Secretary Tillerson has stated repeatedly that Ukraine-related sanctions on Russia will remain in place “until Moscow reverses the actions that triggered them.”
 The United States Congress has actively participated in efforts to address the Ukraine conflict since its onset . The U.S. Congress has been involved in the effort since the conflict began .
 Many Members have condemned Russia’s annexation of Crimea and support for separatists in eastern Ukraine . Many have pushed to impose and retain sanctions against Russia for its actions .
 Congress has supported substantial economic and security assistance for Ukraine . Congress has also supported substantial financial and security aid for Ukraine.
 Kyiv Historically, Ukrainians trace their lineage to Population: 44 million the medieval Kievan Rus, an early Orthodox Ethnicity . Russian: 17%; Crimean Christian state that Russians also consider to Tatar: 0.5% be a core part of their heritage .
 In over a quarter-century of independence, Ukraine has had periodic swings toward greater and lesser democracy . Ukraine's independence has been seen as one of the country's most democratic states .
 Many observers have considered Ukraine's government to be a “hybrid’s regime with both democratic and nondemocratic elements . The Ukrainian government has been described as a "hybrid regime"
 In Ukraine, these events came to be known as the Revolution of Dignity . The events were known as "The Revolution of dignity"
 In February 2014, protests over the Ukrainian government’s decision to postpone an association agreement with the EU culminated in violence . The Revolution of Dignity in February 2014 culminated in the collapse of then-President Viktor Yanukovych's government, and his departure to Russia .
 Yanukovych agreed to a deal with the opposition that was to lead to an early presidential election . Before leaving Ukraine, Yanukovych had agreed to the deal .
 Yanukovych departed for eastern Ukraine amid signs of government defections . Ukraine’s parliament voted to remove Yanukovych from office .
 Many observers considered Yanukovych to be a corrupt and authoritarian president . He preferred to preserve power with Russia's economic and political assistance rather than pursue reforms .
 Yanukovych also appeared reluctant to fulfill a key demand of the EU, the EU . Tymoshenko was a former prime minister whom he defeated in the 2010 presidential election .
 She was freed from prison in February 2014, the day before Yanukovych was removed from office . She was released from prison on the same day she was freed .
 The government that replaced Yanukovych in 2014 pledged to embrace pro-Western reforms, and an energized civil society supported its efforts .
 Ukraine's new government had to confront Russian armed interventions in southern and eastern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian government's readiness to implement reforms had to be balanced with the need to move to a war footing with an underdeveloped military and to grapple with the economic consequences of conflict .
 Ukraine’s post-Euromaidan government took shape after presidential and parliamentary elections in May and October 2014 .
 Ukraine has a mixed system of governance in which the president shares power with a prime minister nominated by parliament . The president and prime minister share power with each other .
 The winner of the presidential election was Petro Poroshenko, a former official, businessman, and supporter of the Euromaidan protests . Poroshenko received 55% of the vote .
 Poroshenko pledged to move Ukraine closer to the West, fight corruption, and address the conflict in the eastern part of the country .
 After Yanukovych was elected president in 2010, he revoked the amendments and strengthened the presidency . He was then elected president .
 Yanukovych agreed to restore the 2004 reforms in February 2014 . As part of his agreement with the opposition in February 2013, Yanukovych signed a deal to restore reforms .
 The new Ukrainian government retained these reforms. Although the agreement was never implemented, the new government retained them .
 Background and United States Policy parliament elected equally through party lists and single-mandate races. Background and U.S. Policy parliament .
 The main victors were the Petro Poroshenko Bloc (21.8% of the vote and 31% of single-mandate seats) and the People's Front . Arseniy Yatsenyuk, a former government official turned protest leader, became prime minister .
 This coalition gave the incoming government a clear majority in parliament . This coalition gives the incoming Government a clearmajority in parliament.
 The Poroshenko Bloc, the People's Front, and a handful of independent deputies left the coalition by early 2016 . Due to various disagreements, the latter three parties left the Coalition by early2016 .
 In April 2016, an increasingly unpopular Yatsenyuk was replaced as prime minister by parliamentary chairman Volodymyr Groysman . He was a former mayor and Poroshenko's ally .
 Far-right nationalist groups won a handful of seats in the Euromaidan . Russian officials and media often sought to characterize them as key drivers of the country .
 The Poroshenko/Groysman government has made impressive strides in its reform agenda . Many observers believe the Poroshenko-Groysmen government is making progress .
 Others consider that Ukraine’s reforms remain fragile and that the government has progressed too slowly in certain areas .
 Some observers expressed concern that new reforms did not go far enough or could be coupled with other measures that may limit their effectiveness . Some observers said new reforms didn't go too far enough .
 Some observers have noted that a particular challenge to reform efforts stems from the influence of so-called “oligarchs,’ many of whom became wealthy in Ukraine’s free-wheeling economic environment prior to 2014 .
 The Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. The Institute of International Economics is based in Washington, DC . The institute is based at the Peterson Institute of Economics .
 Some observers consider these reforms fragile and subject to ongoing challenges . Some observers believe these reforms are fragile .
 Combating corruption has been a major focus of Ukrainian reform since 2014 . The Ukrainian government is trying to tackle corruption in the country .
 The first two constitute the law enforcement arm of Ukraine’s anti-corruption efforts . They are the first two of Ukraine's anti- corruption efforts .
 The NACP develops and implements anti-corruption policy, with a focus on prevention . The third institution, the NACP, develops and implement anti- corruption policy . NACP is the third institution to develop and implement the policy .
 NACP created electronic system for mandatory asset and income disclosures of government officials . Some observers consider the primary achievement of the NACP to be the creation of the system .
 The Ukrainian government has also initiated reforms related to the police, public procurement, civil service, and energy tariffs . The reforms are intended to help combat corruption .
 President Poroshenko agreed to establish a special Anti-Corruption Court in October 2017 . In October 2017, he agreed to established a special anti-corruption court .
 Many government officials still resist anti-corruption measures, observers say . Still, observers consider that corruption remains high.
 In public opinion polls, respondents rank corruption as one of the country’s most important issues .
 New laws have helped initiate a process to restructure municipalities and other localities . New laws empower them with greater authority, areas of responsibility, and increased budgets .
Around one-quarter of the anticipated local government units had formed, according to reports . The process of restructuring is for now, for now.
 A plan to constitutionally reform local government stalled in 2015 after protests against granting separatist regions special status turned violent . The plan would have addressed the status of separatist regions in eastern Ukraine .
 reforms have centered on increasing the independence of the judicial branch . Reforms have also reduced the scope for judicial corruption .
 reforms were also initiated in the Prosecutor General’s Office . Reforms included diminishing past powers of surveillance, establishing a system of inspector generals .
 Kateryna Boguslavska, “Full Disclosure: Tackling Public Corruption in Ukraine,’s Unimplemented Anti-Corruption Reform, ‘Ukraine Is in the Middle of a Counterrevolution Again.’
 In opinion polls, Ukrainian respondents express relatively low levels of support for the country's political leaders .
 In a June-July 2017 poll, 15%-17% of respondents expressed approval of the government . The poll was published in June- July 2017 .
 Eight parties from across the political spectrum had between 4% and 12% support . Among likely voters, eight parties had between 3% and 4% support for each party .
 Many observers consider that of all the post-Soviet states, Ukraine has been the most difficult for Russians to accept as fully independent . Russia-Ukraine conflict has been most difficult to accept.
 Russians traditionally have considered much of Ukraine to be a historical province of Russia and Ukrainians to be their close ethnic brethren . Many Russians traditionally consider much of the country to be an ethnic province.
 Most Ukrainians can speak Russian, whether as a secondary or primary language . Most Ukrainians are fluent in Russian .
 Ethnic Russians are estimated to make up 15%-20% of the population . They are mostly concentrated in the south and east, where ties to Russia are stronger .
 In Soviet times, eastern Ukraine became home to a heavy industrial sector that retained close economic ties to Russia after independence .
 Russia-Ukraine relationship suffered turbulence before 2014, with disputes over Ukraine’s ties to NATO and the EU . Ukraine's Crimea-based Black Sea Fleet and the transit of Russian natural gas via Ukraine to Europe .
Under ex-president Yanukovych, such disputes were largely papered over . Under ex-President Yanukovych, the disputes were mostly papeed over .
 Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia, postponing the conclusion of an Association Agreement . The deal would establish closer political and economic ties with the EU .
 This decision provoked the Euromaidan protests and, ultimately, Yanukovych’s removal from power . The decision provoked protests and the removal of Yanukovych from power.
 Crimea Ukraine’s conflict with Russia arose soon after Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014 .
 Moscow covertly deployed forces to Crimea after what many consider to have been an illegal referendum on secession in March 2014 . Russia declared that it was incorporating the region directly into the Russian Federation .
 Russian government officials characterized the change in power in Kyiv as a Western-backed “coup’ that could threaten the security of the Russian population in Crimea, eject Russia’s Black Sea Fleet from the region, and potentially even bring Ukraine into NATO . Moscow firmly opposed
 Russia has since significantly increased its military presence in Crimea . Russia has increased its presence in the Crimea .
 Observers estimate that up to 30,000 Russian troops are stationed in the region . Up to 20,000 troops are in the area .
 The bridge is scheduled to open by the end of 2018 . It includes a single passage for ships to traverse and could limit access to and from ports in eastern Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian government is seeking to uphold its maritime rights in international arbitration under the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea .
 Much of the international community does not recognize Russia’s annexation of Crimea .
 In December 2016, the General Assembly voted 70 to 26, with 77 countries abstaining . The resolution “condemn the temporary occupation’ of Crimea and reaffirmed nonrecognition of its annexation’s annexation.
 Moscow officially denies Russia’s involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine . Moscow denies Russia's involvement in Ukraine conflict .
 Most observers agree that the Russian government has unofficially deployed troops to fight . But they say it has also helped recruit other “volunteers,” and supplied Donbas separatists with weapons and equipment .
 The Minsk 5.3-5.3 cease-fire agreement was reached in the eastern Ukraine region of Donetsk and Luhansk . The agreement was signed by the Russian and Ukrainian governments .
 The protocol failed to end and punishment of persons involved in the conflict . However, the protocol failed.
 The parties met again in February 2015 and reached a more detailed cease-fire 7.7. 2015 . People based on a principle of “all for all’s” met again this year .
 Minsk-2. Safe delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need is based on an international mechanism . The agreement is known as Minsk 2 .
 Restoration of full social and economic links with affected areas . Heavy weapons and foreign troops and 9.7 million people affected by the war .
Full Ukrainian control over its border fighters, and full Ukrainian control of its with Russia alongside the conflict zone, beginning from border with Russia .
 Minsk-2. Withdrawal of all foreign armed groups, weapons, and weapons, despite commitments made by and mercenaries from Ukraine .
 The conflict’s intensity has disarmament of all illegal groups has subsided, the conflict's intensity has been reduced .
 The Ukraine conflict had led to at least 10,225 combat and civilian fatalities, OHCHR estimates . The conflict has also led to more than 10,000 deaths .
 Local elections in Donetsk and Luhansk also reported 1.6 districts and held according to OSCE standards . 18.18 13.3 million internally displaced persons . 18 13.9 million internally displacement persons .
Energy companies in separatist regions owned by Ukrainian oligarch Rinat Akhmetov recognized Ukrainian authority and paid taxes .
 separatist officials reportedly took control of the energy companies in January 2017 . Some Ukrainians launched an unofficial blockade against this trade .
 Ukrainian government officially suspended cargo traffic in March 2017 . In response, the separatists returned control to their proper owners .
 Background and U.S. Policy with GDP declining by almost 15% in 2009. Background and United States Policy with economy declining by nearly 15% .
 The economy stagnated in 20122013 and then declined with the outbreak of conflict in 2014 . After some growth, the economy stagnate in 2012 2013, then declined in 2014 and 2013 .
 Ukraine's continued economic growth depends on continuation of critical reforms. Observers caution, however, that Ukraine’s continued economic progress depends on continued reforms .
 IMF and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development have called on Ukraine to combat ‘rampant’ and “widespread’ corruption .
 Both have noted the importance of privatizing state-owned enterprises and allowing land sales . A moratorium has been imposed on land sales since 2001 .
 The World Bank estimates that the percentage of Ukrainians living in moderate poverty rose from 15% in 2014 to 22% in 2015 . The WorldBank estimates that a third of Ukrainians live inmoderate poverty .
 The official unemployment rate for the first three quarters of 2016 was around 10%. 25 Ukraine’s overall merchandise trade has declined since 2013 .
 Russia suspended its own free trade agreement with Ukraine in January 2016 . Further restrictions followed in 2014-2015, and Russia suspended the agreement in 2016 .
 Excluding occupied Crimea and separatist territories in eastern Ukraine, the total value of Ukraine’s merchandise exports declined 15% in 2014, 29% in 2015, and 5% in 2016 .
 Its main exports included iron and steel, cereals, fats and oils, electrical machinery, and ores . The company's main exports include iron, steel and cereals .
 Ukraine’s foreign direct investment began to recover in 20152016. After declines in 2013-2014, Ukraine's foreign direct investments began to grow .
 According to official statistics, total FDI in 2016 amounted to $4. billion . Total FDI was $4 billion .
 In 2016, Russia was reportedly the main source of FDI, followed by Cyprus and the United Kingdom .28 Energy . 28 Energy .
 Ukraine has significant energy resources, but has performed below its potential . Ukraine has traditionally operated in a environment of low domestic energy prices, subsidies, and high consumption .
Ukraine has traditionally depended on Russia for its natural gas supplies . Ukraine has traditionally relied on Russia to supply its gas supplies.
 Many observers argue that Russia has used price hikes, debt repayments, and energy cutoffs as leverage in various disputes with Ukrainian governments .
 Ukraine has reduced its dependence on Russian gas imports since 2015 . Since 2015, Ukraine has cut its reliance on Russian imports .
 By 2015, just 37% of Ukraine’s natural gas imports came from Russia . In 2016, Ukraine halted Russian gas imports entirely .
 Ukraine managed this reduction in Russian imports by importing gas from Slovakia, Poland and Hungary . In addition to reducing its gas consumption, Ukraine also managed to reduce its imports from Russia .
 Concerns have arisen among key stakeholders that energy reforms slowed in 2017 . observers have commended Ukraine for initial energy reforms .
 Four of five members of the supervisory board of Ukraine’s state-owned gas company, Naftogaz, resigned in 2017 . They cited delays in further reform and government interference in the gas company's operations .
 In recent years, Russia has sought to reduce the amount of its gas that flows through Ukraine to Europe . In September 2017, the EBRD, which provides loans to Naftogaz, said that further reforms will be necessary .
Around 40%-50% of Russian natural gas destined for Europe still transits Ukraine .
 This transit reportedly earns Ukraine around $2 billion or more a year . It reportedly earns the country $2billion or more per year .
 Russia is seeking to construct a parallel pipeline, Nord Stream 2, with the financial support of several European energy companies . Currently, Russia is trying to construct the parallel pipeline with the support of European energy firms .
 Ukrainian gas officials say Nord Stream 2 will reduce Russian gas transit through Ukraine . If the project moves forward, it could eliminate it entirely, they say .
 Moscow's dependence on Ukraine for gas transit would no longer be a constraining factor in its policies toward Ukraine . Some observers say this would not only lead to a loss of revenue for Ukraine, but also increase its vulnerability to Russia .
 The United States has long supported Ukraine’s pro-Western orientation and reform efforts . The U.S.-Ukraine Relations have long supported the country's pro-western orientation .
 The U.S. firmly supports Ukraine’s territorial integrity, including with respect to Crimea, as well as implementation of the Minsk agreements to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 President Trump and President Poroshenko have met twice, in June and September 2017 . President Trump has met twice with the Ukrainian president .
 The meetings focused on resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine, implementing reforms, and promoting economic growth .
 Ambassador to NATO Kurt Volker to the newly established position of U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations . Volker is a former ambassador to NATO .
 Secretary Tillerson has stated that Ukraine-related sanctions on Russia will remain in place ‘until Moscow reverses the actions that triggered them’
 The United States is Ukraine’s 10th-largest trading partner, with $1. billion in total merchandise trade in 2016 .
 Exports to Ukraine in 2016 totaled $1.1 billion (down from around $2 billion annually in the three years before the conflict) imports from Ukraine totaled $578 million in 2016 .41 in July 2017, President Trump and President Poroshenko agreed on the sale of United States coal
 The U.S. has been a leading contributor of foreign assistance to Ukraine . The United States has been leading contributor to foreign assistance.
 Nonmilitary, nonhumanitarian assistance in FY2014 amounted to around $80 million . In FY2015, the Senate Appropriations Committee recommended $315 million in such assistance .
 The Trump Administration’s FY2018 request for Ukraine was $201 million in nonmilitary, nonhumanitarian assistance .
 The House Appropriations Committee has recommended allocating $313 million in such assistance . The Senate Appropriations Committee also has recommended $323 million . The United States provides humanitarian assistance to Ukraine .
 In July 2016, the State Department noted that humanitarian assistance provided to Ukraine since 2014 totaled more than $135 million . The State Department said in July 2016 that the aid provided to the country since 2014 was $135m .
 H.R. 3362 was incorporated into the House in September 2017 . The House passed the bill in September.
 Background and U.S. Policy included a new Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative to provide ‘appropriate security assistance and intelligence support’ to help Ukraine defend against further aggression and support Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Congress appropriated $250 million for this initiative in FY2016 and appropriated an additional $150 million in FY2017 . Congress first appropriated $ 250 million for the initiative in fiscal 2016 .
 U.S. Secretary of Defense James Mattis said in August 2017 that the United States was “actively reviewing the question of lethal assistance. In August 2017, he said that the U. S. was ‘actively reviewing’ the issue .
 The United States has also supported Ukraine in the area of cybersecurity . The U.S. has also been supporting Ukraine in cybersecurity .
 United States interagency teams visited Ukraine in 2016 regarding December 2015 cyberattacks against Ukrainian power companies . U.S. inter agency teams visited the country in 2016 .
 In July 2016, the Department of State reported its intention to obligate $2. million to be used for energy resiliency planning and cybersecurity programs in Ukraine .
54 Congress and the Russia-Ukraine Conflict The U.S. Congress has actively participated in efforts to address the Ukraine conflict since its outbreak . The United States and Ukraine held an inaugural Bilateral Cybersecurity Dialogue in Kyiv in September 2017 .
 Many Members have condemned Russia’s annexation of Crimea and support for separatists in eastern Ukraine . Many have pushed to impose sanctions against Russia for its actions .
 Congress has provided considerable economic and security assistance to Ukraine . Congress has also provided considerableEconomic and Security assistance to the country .
 The act required or authorized a variety of expanded sanctions . It authorized increased nonmilitary and military assistance to Ukraine . It also authorized an expansion of RFE/RL and VOA broadcasting throughout the post-Soviet states .
 Much of this assistance has been provided through the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative . Since FY2016, much of this aid has been given through the Ukrainian Security assistance Initiative .
 Congress ultimately appropriated $150 million in FY2017 for the initiative . The initiative was the first time Congress had taken part in the program .
 For FY2018, the House has supported a presidential request for another $150 million . Senate action is pending .
 This act codifies sanctions on Russia provided for in Ukraine-related and cyber-related executive orders . It requires or recommends several new sanctions, and requires or recommend several more sanctions .
 Background and U.S. Policy any potential presidential move to ease or lift sanctions. Background and United States Policy any possible presidential move could be made .
 President Obama declared that Russia’s activities in Ukraine threatened the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of its neighbor . Obama issued decisions to impose economic sanctions on Russia .
 Kristin Archick, Dianne E Rennack, Kenneth Katzman, and Cory Welt are all on the panel . The panel also include CRS In Focus IF10614, EU Sanctions on Russia Related to the Ukraine Conflict, and CRS in Focus IF
 President Obama identified individuals and entities subject to economic restrictions for having undermined the stability of Ukraine, misappropriated its state assets, annexed Crimea to Russia, used illicit armed force in Ukraine .
 Among those designated are former government officials and de facto authorities in Crimea and the Donbas .
 Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014, as amended by P.L. 11544, requires sanctions that were previously discretionary on foreign persons who make ‘significant investment’ in deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale oil projects in Russia .
 The act also requires sanctions against Russian state-run arms exporter Rosoboronexport, Russian entities that transfer weapons to Ukraine and other specified states .
 The EU has imposed similar sanctions, though not identical, sanctions, that require unanimous agreement of all 28 EU member states . The EU's sanctions are not identical to those imposed by the EU .
 Most EU sanctions are imposed for a defined period of time, usually six months or a year, after which they require renewal to remain in place . Most European sanctions have been imposed for the duration of time .
 A number of other states, including Australia, Canada, Japan, Norway, and Switzerland, have also imposed Ukraine-related sanctions on Russia .
 The AA requires Ukraine to adopt EU legislation and standards in various areas . It exposes Ukrainian firms to competition from EU imports while providing access to EU markets .
 The European Parliament and the Ukrainian parliament ratified the AA in September 2014 but postponed implementation of the DCFTA until 2016 . The AA was ratified by the EU and Ukrainian parliament in 2014 .
 In April 2016, voters in the Netherlands rejected the AA, forcing the Dutch government to delay ratification . All EU members had to complete for the AA to fully come into effect .
 The EU also granted Ukrainian citizens visa-free travel starting in June 2017 . The Dutch parliament approved the agreement in July 2017 .
 The EU has provided substantial economic assistance to Ukraine since 2014 . In addition, the EU has given substantial economic aid to Ukraine .
Over 80% of macro-financial assistance loans have been disbursed . This includes €3. billion in macro- financial assistance loans, over 80% have been given .
 Assistance also includes €5. billion in financing from the European Investment Bank and the EBRD . NATO and Ukraine also have a strong history of partnership .
 NATO members agreed that Ukraine and Georgia would eventually become NATO members . The statement did not specify a timeline or road map for membership .
 In 2010, under ex-president Yanukovych, Ukraine adopted a “non-bloc’ status, rejecting aspirations of NATO membership . In 2012, NATO invited NATO to launch a Defense Education Enhancement Programme in 2012 .
 Ukraine's parliament rejected its “non-bloc” status after the onset of conflict in 2014 . In June 2017, it voted to make cooperation with NATO a foreign policy priority .
 Most observers do not expect Ukraine to come closer to NATO membership in the near future . NATO and Ukraine remain partners .
 NATO established six Trust Funds of two to three years’ duration to support Ukraine . In addition, the Trust Funds were set up to help Ukraine .
 NATO remains limited by differences among allies on whether to provide more substantive military support . Other things, including intelligence capabilities and weapons systems, remain limited .
 Ukraine continues to face a number of internal and external challenges . Almost four years after Ukraine’s Euromaidan protests and onset of conflict with Russia, Ukraine continues.