 The Nikopol and the Berdyansk gunboats of the Ukrainian Navy tugged to the Kerch Seaport . The Ukrainian Navy is based in the Ukraine .
 It is a very shallow inland sea not even the size of Lake Michigan . It is tucked away in a northern corner of the far larger Black Sea .
 Russia and Ukraine have been involved in a dramatic at-sea conflict over the past few days . The conflict has become the site of a dramatic conflict between the two countries .
 Russian warships in the Sea of Azov seized two Ukrainian gunboats and a tug, the Ukrainian navy has reported . Spetznatz — the Russian equivalent of U.S. Navy SEALS — was seized in November .
 The Russians impounded the sovereign warships and detained nearly 30 sailors . Kremlin spokesman says they are investigating the supposed Ukrainian incursion into their claimed territorial waters .
 All of this flows from the invasion of Ukraine by Russia by Russia in 2014 that led to Russia’s illegal annexation of the Crimean Peninsula .
 Russia needs to secure communications from the Russian mainland to the peninsula . To truly consolidate the annexation of Crimea, Russia needs totally secure communications .
 The Strait of Kerch is the narrow waterway between the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov . The best way to control that is to control the Strait is to keep it under control .
 President Trump prepares for a summit with Vladimir Putin at this week’s G20 meeting .
 The President's team has taken a strong stand against Russian bad behavior, particularly the annexation of Crimean .
 The U.S. has correctly led the imposition of economic sanctions that have had a serious impact on the Russian economy . The United States has been right to lead the sanctions, says Peter Bergen .
 Russia has led the charge against Russia’s repeated violations of the INF treaty, as well as the Russian military's dangerous operational practices against NATO warships and jets . They have also led the charges against Russia's repeated violations.
 Trump has given Russia a pass on its disruptive behavior internationally . But after his disastrous mid-summer press conference beside Putin, the President has given it a pass .
 The upcoming summit provides an opportunity to correct Trump's stance, both in private high-level meetings and in public .
 Russian behavior in Ukraine is clearly illegal under international law. Russian behavior is clearlyillegal under International law .
 The President must make clear that the annexation of Crimea is a crime, and that sanctions will continue until Russia modifies its stance . Russia will work with the international community to resolve the situation through the Minsk Protocol in 2014 .
 Ukraine is too large, important and nationalistic to permit a long-term annexation of a further chunk of their state . Allowing a frozen conflict, like Georgia and Moldovia, is untenable, says John Sutter .
 The President must show zero daylight between the U.S. and NATO and European allies on this issue . Putin will exploit the seams to continue toward achieving his ultimate strategic goal of unraveling the trans-Atlantic alliance .
 The President must also strongly affirm U.S. support for Ukraine in every dimension, including providing them with capable defensive armament .
 The Obama Administration dithered unnecessarily on this, emboldening Russia . The Trump national security team has been appropriately strong on this point .
 America should also provide appropriate levels of training and advising, using NATO as a vehicle to do so . U.S. should provide anti-air tactical systems, ammunition, radars and communications devices .
 NATO-Ukraine cooperation has an important role to play in this situation . NATO-Ukrainian cooperation has a key role in the Ukraine crisis .
 Ukrainians are moving toward a war footing in Ukraine . It can provide a reassuring sounding board for Ukrainians, who are understandably moving toward war footing .
 President Petro Poroshenko has successfully declared martial law for 30 days . He has energized his defense establishment . President Poroshenko's defense establishment is energized .
 Russian moves as potential thrust to fully consolidate control over Donbass region in southeast of Ukraine . He clearly sees the Russian move as possible thrust to consolidate control of the region .
 Putin may be calculating that, with the Mueller investigation in the U.S. coming to a head, the President and his team will be distracted .
 This gives us all the more reason to make NATO the centerpiece, and to not make this a U.S.-Russian confrontation, which will better protect all we’ve gained, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The President ought to make the point that it is in no one's interest to stumble backward into a full-blown Cold War, let alone have an actual war inside Ukraine .
 Putin's pragmatic side could defuse this crisis before it spirals into something we cannot control . Perhaps by appealing to Putin’s pragmatic side, we can defuse the crisis before we can control it .
 Decisionmakers incorrectly assume the stakes are lower because land territory isn't immediately involved . So many wars have begun with seemingly small actions at sea .
 Nobody had heard of that body of water either — until it pulled the U.S. into the war in Vietnam .