 Putin achieved a near record high of 86 percent approval in the months after annexing Crimea . Putin's approval of Crimea was a record high for Putin .
 He considers any concession on Crimea a redline he cannot cross without jeopardizing his hold on power . As a result, he considers any concessions on the Crimea redline a red line he can cross .
 majority of Ukrainians will not accept the loss of the peninsula . This position forecloses the possibility of reconciliation with Kiev for the foreseeable future .
 Russia sees a chance to return to its sphere of influence in Ukraine . Presidential and parliamentary elections fast approaching in Ukraine.
 The Kremlin wants to take advantage of the sharp political divide in Ukraine . In case of a possible change of power, Kiev must make concessions .
 Donbas, the separatist region in Ukraine's east that is totally controlled by Moscow, will remain Russia’s main bargaining chip in this game .
 Moscow views Ukraine’s upcoming presidential elections in late March as an opportunity to change the political course in Kiev .
 Russian optimism dates to 2004, when Ukrainians had displaced a different Moscow-friendly government through street protests known as the Orange Revolution .
 Ukraine's President Viktor Yushchenko governed for just five years before he was elected in 2010 . Yanukovych was the pro-Western beneficiary of that movement . He was elected President of Ukraine in 2010.
 The current Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko, has failed to deliver on voters’ hopes . The current president has not delivered on voters' hopes .
 Many Ukrainians believe he has done little to fight corruption or raise living standards . His approval ratings have been disastrously low since 2016 if not before . He polls well behind the other two leading candidates for president .
 Poroshenko has desperately tried to regain lost ground, for example by pressing for an autonomous Orthodox Church of Ukraine, independent from the Moscow Patriarchate . But his popularity remains low, and his popularity is low .
 Openly pro-Russian candidates are unpopular in Ukraine since the events of 2014 . Openly anti-Russian candidate candidates are also unpopular in the country .
 Yulia Tymoshenko is a seasoned and charismatic veteran of the Ukrainian political scene . She channels both populist and pro-European tendencies and has been highly critical of Poroshenko .
 The Kremlin treats Poroshenko more favorably than it does the incumbent president . Poroshenko has publicly criticizes Poroshenko's policy toward Russia as insufficiently rigorous .
 Putin knows her well from her role in negotiating a 2009 Russian-Ukrainian gas contract that turned out to be beneficial for Moscow .
 Tymoshenko’s cynicism and willingness to negotiate behind the scenes make her a good potential partner despite her anti-Russia rhetoric . In Putin's eyes, she's a good possible partner despite the anti-Russian rhetoric .
 She has expressed willingness to hold talks with Russia mediated by the U.S. and the UK . She has said she has spoken with Russia in the past.
 Volodymyr Zelenskiy, a comic actor and young populist, announced last month that he will also seek the presidency . He is injecting a degree of chance and unpredictability into the election, he says .
 Zelenskiy took the lead in January polls . He could well find himself in a second-round runoff with Tymoshenko .
 He has declared that he is ready to start direct negotiations with Russia to end the conflict . Both his personal and business background make him a likely favorite among Russian speakers in the country's southeast .
 He comes from the eastern region of Dnipro, Russia, and his television studio produces programming in Russian .
 Ukrainian journalists discovered that he holds a financial stake in the Russian film business .
 The long game requires paying attention to the Verkhovna Rada, or the parliament . For Russia, the long game is to pay attention not just to the Ukrainian presidency.
Since 2014, that party has been disbanded, its remnants swept into the much smaller and less effectual Opposition Bloc . Since 2014, the party has also been disbanded .
For the first time since Ukraine’s independence, national elections will not feature a powerful, pro-Russian force capable of winning .
Given the strong anti-Russian sentiments in Ukraine, open support from Moscow does candidates more harm than good, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Kremlin will likely try to enact its will by manipulating information and fomenting propaganda narratives that stoke division within Ukrainian society .
 Russian pro-government media outlets describe the newly independent Orthodox Church of Ukraine as a tool for the persecution of those who still look to the Moscow Patriarchate .
 Ukraine's elections take place within the context of continuing conflict in the country's east . Ukraine’s elections are held in the midst of ongoing conflict.
 Ukrainian army still skirmishes with pro-Russian separatists who enjoy Russia's full support . In Donbas, the Ukrainian government exercises little if any control, in the eastern region .
 The Minsk process, which includes agreements concluded by Ukraine and Russia with the participation of Germany and France, has reached a dead end . The process has also been concluded by Russia and Germany .
Self-proclaimed people's republics of Donetsk and Luhansk held elections that were not recognized by Ukraine . In the autumn of 2018, the self-proclaimed People's Republics of the cities of Donetsk.
The two countries have little to offer each other in possible negotiations . The two countries are unlikely to be able to reach an agreement .
 Ukraine fears that the reintegration of Donbas and its pro-Russian population will destabilize the country . The separatists' supporters would then be elected to the parliament .
 The continuation of the war in the east has also furnished Kiev’s politicians with an excuse to drag out reforms while asking for additional aid from the West . Kiev's politicians have also been asked for more aid from West .
For Russia, Donbas serves as an instrument through which to exert pressure on Ukraine . For Russia, it serves as a tool to pressure Ukraine on Ukraine.
 The authorities in unrecognized republics are completely under Kremlin control . They are ready to fulfill any instructions, whether to return to Ukraine or integrate their territories with Russia .
 Moscow floats the economies of the Donbas republics and provides many of the social programs that Ukraine withdrew when it declared these territories a zone of Russian occupation .
 confrontation between the two countries is likely to continue . Regardless of who wins the upcoming elections, confrontation will continue .
 The situation in the Sea of Azov is a good example of what the next standoff could look like . The situation is good example for what the future of the situation could be like, says CNN.
 Russia considers the Azov to be a part of its territorial waters . The Kerch Strait has become important since Moscow built a bridge across it connecting Crimea with continental Russia .
 Ukraine sees Russian control of Sea of Azov as a threat to its national interests . Russia could then block access to Ukrainian ports that are crucial to the country’s economy .
 Ukraine suspects Putin plans to seize these ports and their adjacent territories in order to establish a land corridor to Crimea and ensure the supply of water to the peninsula . Ukraine suspects that Putin wants to seize the ports and the adjacent territories to ensure water supply .
 Russia is concerned about NATO’s military presence in the Black Sea and the construction of a new Ukrainian military base in Berdyansk, one of the ports of Azov .
 On November 25, Russia fired on and captured three Ukrainian naval ships passing through the Kerch Strait . The ships were captured by Russia and Ukraine .
 Poroshenko declared martial law throughout the border areas and banned Russian men from entering Ukraine . Poroshenko declares martial law across border areas .
 The danger of a full-scale conflict remains, in part because of Putin’s impulsive leadership style . Putin would not be out of character for him to initiate a military operation to counter a decline in his domestic approval ratings .
 Putin is likely to seek to use support for Ukraine as a wedge to divide Western democracies . Putin is expected to continue on his confrontational course .
 Putin’s favorite thesis is that the countries that have imposed sanctions on his regime suffer far more from them than Russia does . Russia can easily compensate for all losses thanks to financial reserves accumulated from years of oil profits .
 He is likely to try to persuade European governments interested in renewing economic ties to buck Washington and abandon sanctions . He is thus likely to attempt to persuade Europe to abandon sanctions.
 Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republics remain quasi-independent states . It could choose to maintain the status quo, with the Luhans and Donetsk remaining quasi- independent states .
 Moscow would keep up its curent policy of pressure on Kiev . In this scenario, Moscow would continue to control the territory's elites .
 The territory is technically autonomous but functionally under Russian political control . It may eventually move to return Donbas to Ukraine, under the condition that the territory retain a special status .
 Ukrainian government would shoulder all the costs for the recovery of an enclave over which it would exercise no political control . This option is unacceptable for the Ukrainian government, which would shoulder the costs .
 Crimea would almost certainly result in new Western sanctions and a major escalation in the conflict . Alternatively, Russia could annex Donbas as it did Crimea, which would almost definitely result in Western sanctions .
 Putin will most likely choose to maintain the status quo, as this allows him to take unexpected steps on the Ukrainian chessboard . Since uncertainty and chaos are the main instruments of Putin’s policy, he will most probably choose to stay in the position .
 As Russians and Ukrainians tire of the constant tension between their countries, calls for reconciliation will grow .
 Moscow and Kiev have pursued policies since 2014 that have encouraged each public to blame the opposite side for all sins . Both have been criticized for their policies that encourage each side to blame each other .
Until the two countries reconcile, they will continue to find sources of conflict all around them . Until they reconcile, there will be conflict in the Sea of Azov .