 The State Department initially approved the sale in December and Pentagon gave its blessing in March . Trump himself was reluctant to arm Ukraine given the potential effect on the United States relationship with Russia .
 The burning question is whether anyone in the Trump administration suggested this course of action to Ukraine . The burning questions are whether anyone has suggested such a move .
 Ukraine is free to pursue whatever policies it deems necessary to defend itself from encroachments by Russia . Ukraine, of course, can pursue whatever policy it deems needed to defend its country .
 arms sales to interfere with the Mueller investigation would represent obstruction of justice on a truly epic scale . But to use arms sales would represent obstructing justice on an epic scale, he says .
 Ukraine already had plenty of motivation to help the Trump administration .
 Ukraine shuttered the investigations to curry Trump’s favor, it was only one of several efforts designed to garner American support .
 Ukraine has gone out of its way to butter up Trump since he took office . Concerned that Trump’s affection for Putin would translate into anti-Ukraine policies .
 Ukraine has promised U.S. construction firms contracts for future infrastructure projects in Donbass . Ukraine signed a $1 billion deal with GE Transportation for new locomotives, and hired former Republican National Committee chairman Haley Barbour to help Ukraine lobby the Trump administration .
 The sale of Javelin missiles to Ukraine reflects both poor judgment on the part of the Trump administration and a longstanding neglect of the potential negative consequences of U.S. arms sales .
 More broadly, the dangers generated by U.S. arms sales go well beyond Ukraine . The dangers of arms sales are more broadly, according to experts .
 Ukraine is one of many risky customers to whom the U.S. has sold advanced weapons over the past fifteen years . Ukraine is just one of several risky customers.
 The U.S. has turned a blind eye to what happens after the deals are done . The United States is in pursuit of short-term foreign policy influence and economic gains .
 Saudi Arabia has used American weapons in its disastrous intervention in Yemen . Iraq, whose army managed to provide the Islamic State with three army divisions’ worth of American tanks, armored vehicles, and infantry weapons . Nigeria, whose human rights record, internal conflicts, and overall state fragility call
 Time will tell if the smoke surrounding the sale of Javelin missiles to Ukraine stems from collusion to obstruct the Mueller investigation or simply misguided foreign policy making .
 Either way, arming Ukraine reflects a reckless approach to the use of arms sales that the Trump administration seems too eager to embrace .
 Nearly three years ago, Ukraine's Kremlin-backed president fled the country’s capital amidst massive anti-government protests .
 The series of events to follow would alter the geopolitical landscape of post-Soviet Eurasia, destabilize security within the wider region and pose a major challenge for U.S.-Russia relations .
 Russia's annexation of the Crimean peninsula in a brazen act transgressing the notion of Westphalian sovereignty . The annexation follows an unrecognized referendum in eastern Ukraine .
 The United States and the European Union responded by imposing sanctions on Russia . Two ceasefire agreements have failed to end a protracted and bloody conflict on the ground .
 The Trump administration has indicated a willingness to lift Russian sanctions in order to improve bilateral relations . The move would be unpopular in Congress .
 U.S. and Europe insist Russia must return control of Crimea to Ukraine . Russia refuses to consider a stipulation that Russia must take control of the Crimea .
 The Ukraine Crisis and the Ruinous Contest for Post-Soviet Eurasia will first examine how U.S.-Russian relations arrived at such a precarious point in the first place .
 The book’s authors, Timothy J Colton and Samuel Charap, argue that a series of grave strategic miscalculations have destabilized the Eurasian sphere .
 All governments must commit to patient negotiation aimed at finding mutually acceptable alternatives, Colton and Charap say . Regional and international security now deteriorated and all parties worse off .
 Rumors are flying in Washington that Donald Trump is seriously considering an executive order which would lift at least some of the current United States sanctions on Russia .
 The new president has ordered everything else this week, but details are sparse .
 If the executive order would indeed lift sanctions unilaterally, with no attempt at negotiation, Trump won't be sending a message of strength, but one of weakness .
 I've written extensively about the flaws of the sanctions regime on Russia, and even argued that they should be lifted before they calcify into a permanent impediment to improving relations with Russia .
 Nor is there good reason to believe that the sanctions will induce policy change in future .
The underlying logic behind sanctions is to cause enough economic pain to the target state that leaders are compelled to change their policies . The underlying logic is to make it harder for leaders to make changes to their policies.
 The Russian economy is in a terrible state, but most of that damage was caused by falling oil prices, not by sanctions .
 Vladimir Putin was even willing to hurt his own people further by initiating countersanctions against European agricultural products . The move served to substantially increase food prices for ordinary Russians .
 Academic literature finds sanctions are rarely successful on issues of ‘high salience,’ such as questions of war and peace .
 Sanctions may be a useful tool for signaling to other states that their behavior is unacceptable . But when linked to unrealistic goals, they place policy makers in a difficult situation .
 Lifting them may be seen as a sign of weakness, but there is little to be gained from leaving them in place . Lifting the animals may be a sign.
 The path of least resistance can therefore end in situations like the half-century Cuban Embargo . The path to the end of the Embargo can also be found in the U.S.
 All of this suggests that policymakers should be a lot more cautious about implementing sanctions in the first place .
 The impact of Russian disinformation on the outcome of the presidential election remains unclear . An investigation is ongoing into whether advisors to the Trump campaign had contacts with Moscow .
 Donald Trump’s willingness to seek a better relationship with Russia is a solid policy choice . But unilateral concessions of this sort will only serve to intensify the idea that he is somehow beholden to Moscow .
 Ultimately, understanding the flaws of sanctions can't explain how to resolve this dilemma .
 There is no good solution for today’s U.S.-Russian relations, just a series of poor choices, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russian leaders may not be willing to abandon Crimea or make other high profile concessions in exchange for the lifting of sanctions .
 The sanctions are causing some economic damage, enough that Russian leaders do want them lifted . But the sanctions are not enough to lift the sanctions .
 A process of negotiation proposes to lift most of the sanctions in exchange for concessions in other policy areas . Trump administration to end sanctions regime without making unilateral concession .
 For the man who wrote the Art of the Deal, this would surely be a better solution . For the person who wrote this would be better solution, he says .
 Since then the Western allies have imposed economic sanctions, but to little effect . Since then, they have imposed financial sanctions on Western allies .
 Crimea, Russian until six decades ago, is going back to Ukraine . No one believes Crimea, which was in Ukraine for six decades, is returning .
 The European Union called on other countries to join its ineffective boycott . Yet the EU called on others to join the boycott .
 The U.S. has done nothing against them. They aren’t going to declare economic war on a faraway nation which has not done anything against them .
 Washington is among the most fervent advocates of sanctions, but Europe is divided over the issue . Washington, with less commerce at stake, remains one of the most ardent advocates .
 Opposition has emerged to routine renewal in July of restrictions on Russia’s banking, energy, and military industries .
 Sanctions supporters insist that Russia more fully comply with the Minsk peace process and end support for the separatist campaign in Ukraine's east .
 European Union envoys agreed to extend sanctions on Russia on Friday . The sanctions follow Russia’s 2014 invasion of Crimea and aggression in Eastern Ukraine .
 The sanctions prevent some of Russia’s largest companies from raising capital in the West . They restrict the export of technology and technical services for unconventional oil and gas drilling .
 The ruble’s exchange rate has tracked global oil prices more closely than any new sanctions . Many of the actions taken by the Russian government, including the slashing of the state budget, are similar to those taken when oil prices fell during the 2008 financial crisis .
 sanctions have compounded the fall in oil prices, requiring Moscow to slash spending on health care, infrastructure, and government salaries . The sanctions have created economic hardship for ordinary Russians .
 The crash of the ruble has destroyed savings and increased monthly payments of those who hold mortgages denominated in foreign currencies . The crash has not only destroyed savings but also increased the monthly payments.
 Europe has estimated that the sanctions will cut growth by 0. percent of GDP in 2015 .
 continuing the sanctions on Russia could cost over 90 billion euros in export revenue and more than two million jobs over the next few years . The Austrian Institute of Economic Research says the sanctions could cost more than 2 million jobs .
 The sanctions are proving especially painful for countries with strong trade ties to Russia . The sanctions have been particularly painful for nations with strong relations with Russia .
 Germany, Russia's largest European partner, stands to lose almost 400,000 jobs . Germany's largest EU partner, Russia’s largest partner, has lost almost 1,500 jobs .
 The success of sanctions can be judged by a variety of standards, says John Sutter .
This is a blow for those – myself included – who seek restrained policy options to resolve the crisis in Ukraine . This is ablow for those - myself included - who seek restraint policy options .
 The U.S. is considering whether continuing sanctions on Russia is really the best option . It's probably time to consider whether there are more effective diplomatic or economic policy tools we can use instead .
 The Foreign Affairs article includes more data and policy recommendations, over at Foreign Affairs . You can read the whole article.
 To calculate inflation rates, I use dynamic purchasing power parity theory . To calculate those inflation rates.
 I computed the 92% rate by using black-market exchange rate data that the Johns Hopkins-Cato Institute Troubled Currencies Project has collected over the past year .
 On an annualized basis, this amounts to an inflation rate of 93% – almost exactly the same number I obtained when applying the scientific PPP methodology . This amounts to a 93% inflation rate.
 Ukraine's President Petro Poroshenko penned an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal on June 11 . President Poroshenko wrote the article as evidence of the Alice in Wonderland nature of Ukraine's current state of affairs .
 He is apparently unaware of the harsh realities facing the citizens of his country .
Natalie Jaresko was recently in Washington, D.C., where she used a new Ukrainian law as cover to threaten a sovereign debt default . He is also apparently unaware that his finance minister, Natalie Jareko, was in Washington .
 The reportage on these threats appeared in London's Financial Times on June 11 . The Wall Street Journal published President Poroshenko’s op-ed on the same day .
 Venezuela has the dubious honor of registering the world’s highest inflation rate . The country has the highest rate in the world .
 Since February 24th, the hryvnia has strengthened on the black market from 33.78 per United States dollar to 26. per U.S. dollar . The hryVnia has increased on theblack market since February 24.