 This report does not include areas controlled by Russian-backed separatist forces in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine or Russian-occupied Crimea .
 The country held presidential and legislative elections in 2014 . International and domestic observers considered both elections free and fair .
 Russian-backed separatists in Donbas engaged in abductions, torture, and unlawful detention . They employed child soldiers, stifled dissent, and restricted humanitarian aid .
 To a lesser extent, there were also reports of some of these practices.
Russian occupation authorities systematically targeted perceived dissidents for abuse and politically motivated prosecution . In Crimea, Russian occupation authorities targeted perceived dissidents.
 The country suffered from impunity for corruption and deficiencies in the administration of justice . The country suffers from impunity and deficiencies.
 The Prosecutor General’s Office and the judicial system proved largely unable to convict perpetrators of past or current major corruption .
 Russia’s occupation of Crimea and aggression in eastern Ukraine resulted in 1. million IDPs who faced continuing difficulties obtaining legal documents, education, pensions, and access to financial institutions and health care .
 During the year the government suspended all social payments for IDPs, pending verification of their presence in government-controlled territory . The move was ostensibly to combat fraudulent payments .
 There were limitations on workers’ right to strike, and failure to enforce effectively labor laws and occupational safety and health standards for the workplace . There also were limitations.
 The perpetrators of the 2014 Euromaidan shootings in Kyiv and riots in Odesa have not been held to account .
 Investigations into alleged human rights abuses related to Russia’s occupation of Crimea and the continuing aggression in the Donbas region remained incomplete due to lack of government control in those territories . Russia and Russian-backed separatists have refused to investigate abuse allegations .
 Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and other Unlawful or Politically Motivated Killings. There were several reports that the government or its agents committed arbitrary or unlawful killings .
 According to media reports, Kryve Ozero allegedly beat a man to death on August 24 . He allegedly responded to a domestic violence call .
 In response, the chief of the National Police disbanded a police station where the killing occurred . The killing occurred.
 On October 2, the detained officers were released on bail; the pretrial investigation continues . The pretrial probe continues .
 There were reports of politically motivated killings by nongovernment actors . The killings were reportedly politically motivated .
 On July 20, a car bomb in Kyiv killed Belarusian-born journalist, Pavel Sheremet, as he drove in a car belonging to his partner, Olena Prytula .
 Sheremet, a Russian citizen, worked for Ukrainska Pravda newspaper and Vesti radio station . He was critical of Ukrainian, Russian, and Belarusian authorities .
 Authorities released a video of two individuals placing the device under the car .
 As of year’s end, the investigation remained open and authorities had made no arrests .
 Yuriy Hrabovsky, a lawyer representing a detained Russian special forces soldier, disappeared in Odesa . Aleksandr Aleksander Aleksandrov was detained in March .
 The killing remained under investigation at the year's end, and authorities had made no arrests . The killing remains under investigation .
Human rights groups critical of the low number of convictions despite considerable evidence . Human rights groups were critical of low number.
 Human rights groups also criticized prosecutors for focusing on lowranking officials while taking little action to investigate government leaders believed to have been involved .
 Law enforcement agencies continue their investigation into the events in Odesa in 2014 . 48 persons died, including six government supporters and 42 persons who supported more autonomy for regions .
 Council of Europe report in 2015 found the government's investigation lacked independence . Prosecutor General’s Office and Ministry of Internal Affairs failed to conduct a thorough investigation .
Journalists accuse authorities of sabotaging the investigation to prevent the perpetrators from being brought to justice .
 Odesa police chief, Petro Lutsiuk, was fired from his position on May 4 . Prosecutor General’s Office later charged him with abuse of authority in connection with the events .
 There were multiple reports of politically motivated disappearances, particularly in relation to the conflict in the Donbas region .
 There were reports that police and other law enforcement officials abused and, at times, tortured persons in custody to obtain confessions . Courts cannot legally use as evidence in court proceedings confessions and statements under duress made to police by people in custody .
 In the Donbas region, there were reports that government and progovernment forces engaged in military operations at times committed human rights abuses, including torture .
 There were reports that Russian-backed separatist forces in Donetsk and Luhansk committed numerous abuses, including torture, to maintain control or for personal financial gain .
 Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch highlighted allegations of torture at SBU detention sites . The allegations include beatings, starvation, and electric shocks .
 The UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine gave an undated account of a “profederalism” activist who was allegedly tortured and pressured to sign a confession at an SBU facility .
 The government asserted that such ‘profederalist’ messaging was used by Russia to weaken Ukraine’s central government . The government said such “profederalism’ was used to weaken the central government.
 The man reported that during interrogation the SBU suffocated him with a plastic bag and beat him . The man said he was beaten and suffocated during interrogation .
 The SBU brought the man to the lobby of the SBU building to witness that authorities had also arrested his son . Afterwards, the man was brought to the building's lobby to witness the arrest .
 The father could hear his son scream as he was abused . His son was then brought to a neighboring cell, where the father heard his son's screams .
 15 staff members reportedly beat Viktor Kravchenko, 25, on August 23, according to reports .
 facility staff placed him in a disciplinary cell and denied his request for medical help .
 The country's human rights ombudsman sent a letter to the Prosecutor General’s Office and the Ministry of Defense expressing concern about military hazing . Vlad Khaisuk, a young soldier serving in a unit stationed in Stanytsia Luhanska, committed suicide on
 Khaisuk’s parents found videos on his smartphone of him being hazed and humiliated by other soldiers . His parents found the videos after his suicide .
 The Luhansk Department of the Military Prosecutor’s Office investigated and found no signs of military hazing . The military prosecutor's office found no evidence of hazing.
 At year's end, police in Stanytsia Luhanska were investigating the accident as a homicide .
 The HRMMU noted that it “continued to document cases of sexual violence, amounting to torture, of conflict-related detainees, both men and women. In its September report, theHRMMU said it ‘continued’ to document sexual violence .
 The HRMMU described a case where unidentified security services detained a man, took him to an abandoned building and interrogated him about the positions of armed groups .
 When he could not provide information, the perpetrators chained him to a metal cage . They inserted a ramrod into the man's urethra, causing him severe pain .
 The Prosecutor General’s Office forwarded 35 cases specifically alleging torture or degrading treatment involving law enforcement officers .
 Authorities imposed disciplinary actions against 20 officers and fired 10 of them . Authorities impose disciplinary actions on 20 officers .
 The Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union maintains that life sentences amounted to slow executions of prisoners because of the poor conditions of their imprisonment . The Union maintains life sentences amount to slow execution of prisoners .
 Authorities generally held adults and juveniles in separate facilities . There were reports that juveniles and adults were not separated in some pretrial detention facilities .
 Conditions in police temporary detention facilities and State Penitentiary Service pretrial detention facilities were harsher than in lowand medium-security prisons .
Despite a reduction in the number of inmates, overcrowding remained a problem in pretrial detention facilities . The number of prisoners has decreased in recent years .
 Inmates complained to the Ombudsman’s Office about illegal actions of the administration . They complained about systematic beatings, forced and unpaid labor .
 The monitoring team found that a convicted person kept in one of the disciplinary cells tried to commit suicide . He claimed that he was due to fear of physical violence by the prison administration .
 The local prosecutor’s office launched an investigation into the actions of the correctional facility administration . The facility administration is under investigation .
 An inmate of the Shepetivka correctional facility in Khmelnytskyi Oblast died of a traumatic brain injury . For example, on June 6, an inmate in the facility died of an injury inflicted by fellow inmates .
 The Association of Independent Monitors and the Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office say authorities failed to protect the lives and human rights of prisoners in areas close to the zone of operation against combined Russian and separatist forces in eastern Ukraine .
 As of September 1, 17 prisoners incarcerated in territories seized by Russianbacked separatist forces were transferred to penal facilities .
 The condition of prison facilities and places of unofficial detention in areas held by Russian-backed separatist forces was very poor .
 In most cases the places of detention were not suitable for even short-term detention .
 There were reports of shortages of food, water, heat, sanitation, and proper medical care .
 The Eastern Human Rights Group says abuse of prisoners was widespread in areas not controlled by the government .
 Prior to the conflict, more than 5,000 prisoners were held in the part of Luhansk Oblast under the control of Russian-backed separatists .
 The groups reported systemic abuses, such as torture, starvation, denial of medical care, and solitary confinement . The use of prisoners as slave labor to produce goods that, when sold, provided a direct source of personal income to Russianbacked separatist leaders .
 In areas controlled by Russian-backed separatist forces, authorities lacked central record keeping . Authorities lacked record keeping, leading to difficulties for prisoners and arbitrarily held detainees .
 Human rights groups reported instances in which authorities confiscated prisoners’ identification cards and failed to return them upon their release .
 Prisoners released by Russian-backed separatists often had no identification . Prisoners were released by the separatists had no ID.
 As of October 1, the ombudsman’s office received 1,114 complaints from prisoners and their relatives throughout the country .
 The most common complaints were regarding a lack of Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State . Most common complaint was regarding the lack of country reports on human rights practices .
 Rights groups reported that legal norms did not always provide for confidentiality of complaints . Rights groups said legal norms were not always providing for confidentiality .
 Government generally permitted independent monitoring of prisons and detention centers by international and local human rights groups . The government generally allowed independent monitoring.
 UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture suspended its visit to the country after being denied access to places in several parts of the country where it suspected the SBU was illegally depriving individuals of their liberty .
 On September 5, the SPT resumed its visit and was granted access to the facilities . The SPT has been granted access since September 5 .
 During the year the Ombudsperson’s Office together with representatives of civil society conducted monitoring visits to penitentiary facilities .
 Viktor Ashykhin was kidnapped from his hometown of Ukrainsk in 2014 and released in July . One of those detained was released from prison in July.
 The SBU is responsible for all state security, nonmilitary intelligence, and counterintelligence matters . It is also responsible for state security and non military intelligence .
 Civilian authorities generally had control over law enforcement agencies . But rarely took action to punish abuses committed by security forces .
 HRMMU says law enforcement abuses by law enforcement remain a significant problem . Impunity for abuses by police remains a major problem, HRMMu says .
 The HRMMU attributed the problem to “pressure on the judiciary, inability and unwillingness of the Office of the Prosecutor General and office of the Military Prosecutor to investigate’s abuses’
 The HRMMU noted that authorities were unwilling to investigate allegations of torture . Victims were detained on grounds related to national security or were seen as proseparatist .
Human rights groups criticized the lack of progress in investigations of alleged crimes in areas retaken by Ukraine from Russian-backed separatists .
 In particular, investigations of alleged crimes committed by Russian-backed separatist forces in Slovyansk and Kramatorsk in 2014 appeared stalled .
 Human rights groups believed that many of the local law enforcement personnel in both cities collaborated with Russianbacked separatists when they controlled these cities .
Members of the Verkhovna Rada have authority to conduct investigations and public hearings into law enforcement problems . Under the law members of the Rada can conduct investigations.
 The human rights ombudsman may also initiate investigations into abuses by security forces . The Human Rights ombudsman could also be investigating security forces abuses .
 The attackers pushed protesters from the square using fire extinguishers and tear gas and destroyed their camp . The attackers used fire extinguisher and teargas to push protesters out of the square .
 Witnesses say police watched and did nothing to prevent clashes . Police say they did nothing.
 Authorities kept suspects under house arrest and occasionally held them incommunicado . Some suspects were held in some instances for several weeks .
 According to the Ministry of Justice, 60,500 persons received free legal aid .
 The law provides for bail, but many defendants could not pay the required amounts . Many defendants were not able to pay bail .
 Prosecutors must prove restrictions are the minimum needed to ensure suspects will appear at hearings and not interfere with criminal proceedings . Prosecutors must also prove that suspects will not be involved in criminal proceedings.
 The SBU apprehended a married couple in Odesa and reportedly held the couple incommunicado at an SBU compound for 20 hours before recording their detention .
 SBU reportedly subjected them to threats, sleep deprivation, interrogation without a lawyer present, and denied requests for legal counsel . SBU also reportedly subjected to threats and sleep deprivation .
HRMMU expressed concern over mass arrests in government-controlled portions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts . The HRMMU said mass arrests were reported in the region .
 These oblasts are subject to the Law on Combatting Terrorism, which allows authorities to make arrests with lower standard of proof than allowed under the criminal procedure code, leading in some cases to arbitrary arrest .
 citizens have the right to challenge an arrest in court or by appeal to a prosecutor to obtain prompt release in cases of unlawful detention . Under the law citizens can challenge an arrested in court.
 The Verkhovna Rada passed a judicial reform package in June . Courts were inefficient and remained vulnerable to political pressure and corruption, the Rada says .
 On June 2, parliament adopted amendments to the constitution regarding the judiciary .
 The amendments give new powers to the High Council of Justice . The majority of High Council members must be judges, the amendments say .
 Parliament and the president no longer have decisive roles in these processes, which limit potential interference with the judiciary . Parliament and president no more have decisive role in the process .
 The president retains the right to decide on the transfer of judges for two years . For example, the president retains a right to decision on judges' transfer of Judges .
 On September 30, the Law on Judiciary and Status of Judges came into effect, facilitating implementation of the above constitutional amendments .
 The law introduces a three-tier system of courts, with the Supreme Court as the highest judicial body . The Supreme Court holds the authority to rescind lower courts’ judgments .
Public Integrity Council is a new consultative body called the Public Integrity Council . It provides for wider civil society engagement in the selection and assessment of judges through a new body .
 The law allows anyone to initiate disciplinary proceedings against a judge before the High Council of Justice and imposes anticorruption measures on judges .
 As of October 1, the Prosecutor General’s Office had brought 16 cases against judges to court .
 Judges continued to complain about weak separation of powers between the executive and judicial branches of government .
 Other factors impeded the right to a fair trial, such as lengthy court proceedings, including inadequate funding, and the inability of courts to enforce rulings .
An unoccupied car belonging to lawyer Oleksandr Shadrin exploded in Kharkiv on January 26 . For example, an unoccupied vehicle belonging to the lawyer exploded in the car .
 Shadrin had been working on a number of high-profile cases involving “proseparatist’s’ defendants .
 The Ukrainian Bar Association issued an open letter of concern about the incident involving Shadrin’s car . Other cases in which the safety of attorneys was threatened were also threatened .
 In a similar incident on February 2 in Kyiv, an unoccupied car belonging to another lawyer, Andriy Fedur, exploded . In the same incident, a lawyer's car exploded in a car parked in the car of another lawyer .
 Fedur had been defending the accused murderers of journalists Oles Buzyna and Heorgiy Gongadze . Fedur was also defending the alleged murderers of the journalists .
 The law also allows defendants access to government-held evidence, to present witnesses and evidence, and the right to appeal . The law allows defendants to confront witnesses against them, and to present evidence .
 Law applies to all defendants regardless of ethnicity, gender, or age . The law applies to any defendant regardless of age, ethnicity, or ethnicity .
 Human rights groups reported that officials occasionally monitored meetings between defense attorneys and their clients .
 Blogger Ruslan Kotsaba sentenced to threeand-a-half years in prison . He was accused of impeding the work of the armed forces with his calls to ignore the military draft .
 Authorities arrested Kotsaba in 2015, and human rights groups deemed him a political prisoner . Authorities arrested him in 2015 .
 On July 24, an appeals court overturned the conviction, freeing Kotsaba after 18 months in detention . The conviction was overturned by the appeals court in July .
 Individuals may appeal to the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 . U.S. Department of State: Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Human Rights. UKRAINE 14 human rights ombudsman at any time .
 Law enforcement agencies sometimes conducted searches without a proper warrant . In practice, law enforcement agencies often conducted search without warrant .
 The newspaper Ukrainska Pravda published an open appeal to the president and heads of the SBU, the National Police, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs .
 The newspaper demanded to know why, how, and on whose authority the surveillance had taken place .
 The official SBU response said that national security legislation prohibited the disclosure of information sought by Ukrainska Pravda. g.g. The officialSBU response.
 Russia controls the level of violence in eastern Ukraine . It largely ignores the September 2014 ceasefire and subsequent attempts to reestablish the ceasefire .
 Russia has continued to arm, train, lead, and fight alongside separatists . Russian-backed separatists have methodically obstructed and threatened international monitors throughout the conflict .
 The UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights issued periodic reports of human rights abuses committed in the Donbas region by combined Russianseparatist and by government forces .
 As of August 17, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe fielded 1,102 persons supporting a special monitoring mission . The mission issued daily reports on the situation in most major cities .
 As of September 15, fighting had killed at least 9,578 persons, including civilians, government armed forces, and members of armed groups .
 Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts have been controlled by Russian-backed separatists since the start of the conflict . More than three million residents have left areas of Donetsk andLuhanskOblasts .
 As of November 15, the Ministry of Social Policy had registered 1.7 million IDPs . Civil society groups believed the actual number to be lower .
 According to UNHCR there were approximately 1. million Ukrainian refugees in other countries, including approximately one million in the Russian Federation .
 Media and human rights groups continued to report widespread human rights abuses in areas held by Russian-backed separatist forces .
 The HRMMU noted a ‘collapse of law and order’ in such areas as well as “serious human rights abuses,” including killings and torture . The HR MMU noted that such abuses include killings, torture .
 Russian-backed separatist forces fired on the village of Zolote-4 in the Donetsk Oblast .
 The HRMMU, the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, and human rights groups did not report any extrajudicial killings by government forces during the year . The OSCE special Monitoring Mission and Human Rights groups didn't report extrajudicial deaths .
 There were no reports by HRMMU or human rights organizations of extrajudicial killings of civilians by combined Russian-separatist forces .
 The HRMMU identified unreported cases of extrajudicial killings from previous years that authorities had not yet investigated . The HR MMU identified unpreported  cases of extrajudicial killings from previous years .
 Three drunken members of the Russianbacked separatist “7th separate motorized rifle brigade’ robbed, then shot and killed a resident of the village of Komsomolsk, Luhansk Oblast .
 Russian-backed separatist authorities reportedly dismissed the men from their positions to conceal their involvement in the killing .
 A video appeared on the internet showing a Russian fighter whipping Donbas resident with an electrical cord . Alexei Frumkin was tied to a post . The video was posted February 17 .
 The combined Russian and separatist battalion that released the video claimed that “Olkhon’s killed Frumkin immediately after the video was shot. The video was released by a combined Russian, separatist battalion .
 Frumkin had supported Russian-backed separatists but had vanished in the autumn of 2014 . His fate had been unknown until the video was released .
 Dozens of individuals subjected to summary executions and killings, or died of torture and ill-treatment in custody .
Human rights groups criticized the government for not keeping an effective database of missing persons . Human rights groups say the government should have kept a database for missing people .
 Russian-backed separatists had no such system and no effective means of investigating missing persons cases . Russian- backed separatists have no system to investigate missing persons.
 According to human rights groups, approximately 1,000 bodies in government-controlled cemeteries and morgues remained unidentified as a result of fighting, mostly from 2014 .
 HRMMU says authorities lacked coordination among law enforcement bodies in determining the whereabouts of missing persons and the identification of remains .
 Government forces, Russian-backed-separatist forces, and criminal elements engaged in abductions . The abductions are reported to have taken place in Russia and Russia .
 The HRMMU noted a pattern of arbitrary and Country Reports on Human Rights Practices . 17 incommunicado detention by government law enforcement bodies (mainly by the SBU)
 HRW and AI released a report, You Don't Exist, on July 21, which documented nine alleged cases of enforced disappearances by the SBU .
 The report highlighted the case of Konstantin Beskorovayni, a local official from the town of Konstinovka, Donetsk Oblast .
 Beskorovayni was allegedly subjected to enforced disappearance by the SBU . He was held incommunicado for 15 months at an SBU facility in Kharkiv before being released on the condition that he not speak about his detention .
 During his detention SBU officials repeatedly denied to Beskorovayni’s family and human rights organizations that he was in custody .
 HRW and AI released a statement on August 28, saying 13 individuals had been released from SBU facility in Kharkiv . HRW said that since their initial report in July, 13 individuals have been released .
 The NGOs believed that at least five persons remained confined at the site . The NGOs believe at least 5 people remain at the scene .
Local police closed their "missing persons" cases without further investigation . They noted that once individuals had been released, local police simply closed their “missing persons’ cases .
 Human rights groups report that Russian-backed separatists routinely kidnapped persons for political purposes, to settle vendettas or for ransom .
 The HRMMU documented an increase in disappearances at checkpoints controlled by Russian-backed separatist forces . TheHRMMU also documented a rise in disappearance at checkpoints.
 A former armed group member went missing in Novoluhanske, while travelling from government-controlled territory . He had been detained by government forces .
 His mother later found that Russianbacked separatists had detained him at a checkpoint, transported him to Horlivka . He was later transferred to “police custody’ in Donetsk . His mother found that he had been detained by the separatists .
 Russian-backed separatists abducted religious historian and president of the Center for Religious Studies and International Spiritual Relations, Ihor Kozlovsky, allegedly in retaliation for his pro-Ukrainian postings on social media .
 The abductors confiscated keys to Kozlovsky’s apartment, which they then searched twice . They removed equipment, documents, and a valuable collection of antique objects .
 As of late November, Kozlovsky was being held in one of the separatists’ informal detention centers in Donetsk .
 Russian-backed separatists also abducted journalists attempting to cover the conflict . The conflict has been raging in Russia for years .
 Maria Varfolomeyeva was abducted in March in Luhansk, Ukraine . She was released in a prisoner exchange after 14 months of captivity .
 Nadiya Savchenko, a military pilot and member of the Verkhovna Rada, was abducted from eastern Ukraine in 2014 . Savchenko was sentenced to 22 years in prison for his part in the case .
 Government and Russian-backed separatist forces reportedly abused and tortured civilians and soldiers in detention facilities . Government and Russia-backed separatists reportedly abused civilians, soldiers and civilians .
 The HRMMU received reports that government forces committed human rights violations, allegedly including forced deprivation of liberty and torture . The HRMU received the reports .
 In September report, HRMMU noted 70 percent of cases documented by OHCHR contained allegations of torture, mistreatment, and incommunicado detention by SBU .
 The September report did not provide data on the total number of such cases . It did not give a total of the cases .
 There were reports that Russian-backed separatist forces systematically committed numerous abuses, including torture, under their control .
 According to international organizations and NGOs, abuses included beatings, torture, public humiliation, and sexual violence . The U.S. Department of State says 19 forced labor, psychological and physical torture, among other abuses .
 The HRMMU expressed repeated concern about reports of torture taking place in detention facilities controlled by Russian-backed separatists .
 HRMMU's June report documented multiple new accounts of mock executions, severe beatings, and intentional deprivation of medical care from 2015 . For example, the report documented several new accounts.
 The SBU published a set of interviews with 11 individuals who alleged that they had been tortured while in the custody of Russian-backed separatists . On September 23, in connection with the SPT’s second visit to Ukraine.
 The SBU also published a list of eight alleged torture sites in Donbas that it reported were controlled by Russian-backed separatists . The list includes eight alleged tortured sites in the region .
 HRMMU documents cases on both sides of the line of contact of sexual and gender-based violence of conflict-related detainees, both men and women .
 The Justice for Peace in Donbas human rights coalition reported cases of gender-based violence, in particular rape and attempted rape .
 The HRMMU was unable to obtain first-hand accounts of sexual violence in such areas . But it reported that it had received multiple secondary accounts . TheHRMMU said it had been unable to get such accounts .
 A man detained by militants between March and April told the HRMMU about two women who were reportedly abducted at a checkpoint . The men were reportedly incarcerated in a room next to the man's .
 The detainee heard armed men harassing the women and attempting to rape them . Two days later, the women were relocated .
 The HRMMU reported in June that “mines contaminate large areas of agricultural land in east Ukraine, often in areas which are poorly marked, near roads and surrounding civilian areas .
 This has resulted in civilians being killed and maimed, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 . 20 often while walking to their homes and fields, according to the report .
 23,000 people crossed the contact line every day between February and May . These risks are particularly acute for persons living in towns and settlements near the contact lines .
 Donbas SOS says 27 square miles of territory in Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts are in need of humanitarian demining .
 UN Children’s Fund could not confirm the presence of child soldiers in the country . There were no media reports.
 17 people between the ages of 15 and 18 had fought with Russian-backed separatist forces since the beginning of the conflict .
 Russian-backed separatist news sources continued to cite the voluntary recruitment of children as young as 12 into the armed groups .
 The head of the SBU’s Antiterrorism Center, Vitaliy Malykov, described the Russian-backed separatist St. St. Petersburg .
 George the Victor battalion, in which he alleged that children between the ages of 12 and 16 were serving, claimed children were serving .
 A three-month-long study by the Justice for Peace in Donbas coalition found that Russian aggression in the region has significantly increased the risk of children participating in armed conflict .
 The group’s analysis of open sources and interviews revealed 41 individual cases of recruitment of children into armed formations .
 Of these, most were boys 16 to 17 years old participating in armed formations in territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions controlled by Russian-backed separatists . Most of these were boys aged 16-17.
Prosecutors from the Netherlands, Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, and Ukraine presented the results of their investigation of the 2014 downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17 .
 The report largely confirmed the already widely documented Russian government role in the deployment of the missile system, a Buk or SA-11, and the subsequent cover-up .
 Prosecutors traced Russia's role in deploying the missile system into Ukraine and its attempt to hide its role after the disaster . Dutch prosecutors traced Russia’s role in deployment of the missiles into Ukraine .
 In 2015 government authorities introduced measures to expedite the delivery of humanitarian aid to areas controlled by Russian-backed separatist forces .
 Russianbacked separatists in Donetsk Oblast have restricted government humanitarian aid as well as aid from international humanitarian organizations . Russian backed separatists in the region have been fighting Russian government forces for years .
 As a result persons remaining in territories held by Russian-backed separatists experienced large price increases for everyday consumables, especially meat and fresh vegetables .
 Human rights groups report severe shortages of medicine and medical supplies in territory not controlled by the government .
 Russian-backed separatists continued to receive convoys of Russian “humanitarian aid,” Ukrainian officials believed . Ukrainian government officials believed they contained weapons and supplies for combined Russian and separatist forces .
 The report also described 15 attacks on operating schools that were not being used as positions by the military .
 Treatment for persons living with HIV and tuberculosis was disrupted in the east of the country . Fighting interrupted crucial medical supplies for people living with the disease .
 More than 6,000 people living with HIV in the region struggled with a shortage of medicine and doctors . The region is struggling with the shortage of doctors and medicine .
 The constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press, but authorities did not always respect these rights . Authorities did notalways respect this rights .
 The government introduced measures that banned or blocked information, media outlets, or individual journalists deemed a threat to national security .
 Other problematic practices continued to affect media freedom, including selfcensorship, so-called jeansa payments to journalists for favorable news reports .
 In the Donbas region, Russian-backed separatists suppressed freedom of speech and press through harassment, intimidation, abductions and assaults on journalists and media outlets .
 Some individuals in areas not under Russian occupation or Russian-backed separatist control could criticize the government publicly and privately .
 The law criminalizes the display of communist and Nazi symbols, although there have been no prosecutions .
 The law prohibits statements that threaten the country’s territorial integrity, promote war, instigate racial or religious conflict, or support Russian aggression .
 The National Television and Radio Council issued a warning to Kherson-based radio station AKS for statements suggesting that Crimean Tatars were involved in terrorism . The warning was issued on September 15 .
 If a station receives a second warning, it could lose its broadcasting license . The station could also lose its broadcast license if it receives another warning .
 The Verkhovna Rada passed a bill to restrict imports of certain Russian books with "anti-Ukrainian content" that violated Ukrainian law . The bill was passed December 9 .
 Privately owned media often presented readers and viewers a “biased pluralism’s’ views of their owners, favorable coverage of their allies, and criticizing political and business rivals .
 The 10 most popular television stations were owned by businessmen whose primary business was not in media . The most popular TV stations are owned by men whose main business was in the media .
 The public television broadcaster was established in 2015 and planned to be fully operational by January 2017 . The public TV broadcaster was set to become fully operational in 2017 .
 Zurab Alasania resigned from his position in protest regarding a number of obstacles to establishing the channel’s operations . The head of the public broadcaster resigned in protest on November 1 .
 The practice of jeansa, or publishing unsubstantiated news articles for a fee, continued to be widespread . The practice was widespread.
 15 percent of all published articles in Mykolaiv Oblast were political or commercial jeansa . For example, the highest proportion of jeansa in regional media was found in print outlets .
 Violence against journalists remained a problem in the country, though attacks on journalists dropped for the second year .
 Human rights groups and journalists have criticized government inaction in solving crimes . Government inaction has given rise to a culture of impunity .
 There were 30 reports of attacks on journalists, half as many as in 2015, according to the Institute of Mass Information . Nearly a 10th as many attacks were reported as in 2014, the institute says .
 As in 2015, the majority of attacks were perpetrated by private, not state, actors . The majority of the attacks were by private.
 There were 42 incidents of threats against and harassment of journalists in 2015, up from 36 in 2015 . In 2015, there were 36 incidents of harassment against journalists .
 The Institute of Mass Information and editors of major independent news outlets noted online harassment of journalists by societal actors . They said the government had the tacit support of the government .
 Some media professionals received death threats and were subjected to significant online harassment . Some affected media professionals subsequently received death threatened .
 There were multiple incidents of violence and harassment against the television channel INTER . INTER is perceived to have a pro-Russian editorial policy .
 In January, protesters spray-painted “Kremlin mouthpiece’s ‘kremlin mouthpieces’ on INTER's offices and threw rocks through its windows .
On February 25, volunteer Azov Battalion fighters blocked journalists’ access to INTER’s offices . INTER broadcasters were inadvertently recorded criticizing the “heavenly hundred,” demonstrators killed during the Euromaidan protests .
 On August 4, Myrotvorets published hacked email correspondence purporting to show that an INTER TV journalist had coordinated the contents of an article with Russianbacked separatist leaders .
 On September 4, approximately 15 to 20 masked persons entered INTER’s offices, setting fire to the building, destroying equipment, and trapping employees in the smoke-filled building .
 As a result, some staff members were hospitalized, including one with a spinal injury .
 Authorities arrested six persons at the scene . An investigation into the attack by the SBU Investigative Department continued .
 Five unidentified persons threw Molotov cocktails at INTER’s headquarters on November 21 . On November 21, five unidentified people threw MolOTov cocktails.
 Authorities opened an investigation into the incident, which continued at year’s end .
Authorities detained but later released two suspects in the 2015 killing in Kyiv . Oles Buzina was perceived as pro-Russian, who was perceived to be pro- Russian .
 There were multiple reports of attacks on journalists investigating government corruption . There were also reports that journalists were attacked by government officials .
 On May 24, three masked men fled in a car after beating Anatoliy Ostapenko . The journalist is affiliated with the independent media outlet Hromadske Zaporizhzhya .
 Ostapenko was working on several investigations linking local authorities in Zaporizhzhya to corruption .
 The Institute for Mass Information recorded seven incidents of censorship of individual publications, down from 12 in 2015 . The Institute of Mass Information reported seven incidents in 2015.
 Both independent and state-owned media periodically engaged in self-censorship when reporting stories that might expose political allies to criticism . Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 U.S. Department of State.
 Viktor Shokin announced he would sue the investigative journalism television program “Schemes’s” over its claims to have uncovered evidence of his corruption . Shokin owns luxury property registered in the names of family members, he said .
 Authorities took measures to prohibit, regulate, and occasionally censor information deemed a national security threat .
 The government continued the practice of banning specific works by pro-Russian actors, film directors, and singers . The government also imposed sanctions on pro- Russian journalists .
 On May 31, the president signed a decree imposing visa bans on 17 Russian journalists . Several dozen other journalists were sanctioned previously .
 The government continued to block Russian television channels from broadcasting in the country . The decision was based on a 2014 decision by the National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council based on the perceived danger of Russian propaganda .
 As of year’s end, only six Russian channels were permitted to broadcast . Only 83 channels were able to broadcast in the country at the start of 2014 .
 National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council has issued 23 warnings to Ukrainian cable providers for violating the ban on certain Russian channels .
 Media professionals continued to experience pressure from SBU and armed forces when reporting on sensitive issues, such as military losses .
 The SBU asked the SBU to suspend the accreditation of journalists representing two Ukrainian and one Russian media outlets that were reporting from Avdiivka .
 The journalists had released a video considered by the ATO headquarters to violate the rules for reporting from a conflict area . The video revealed soldiers' faces, locations, and weaponry .
 Ukrainian Hromadske journalists removed the video from their YouTube channel . Russian journalist, Yulia Polukhina, published the material in Novaya Gazeta .
 Hromadske published an abridged version of the video about three weeks later . After receiving concurrence, Hromadke published a version of it .
 The HRMMU considered the response of the ATO headquarters to be disproportionate to the violation of the violation . ATO's response to the incident was considered disproportionate.
 Mariya Stolyarova, a Russian journalist, was deported from Russia on February 24 . She was banned from re-entering the country for five years .
 The SBU conducted an investigation regarding an obscene statement Stolyarova made on air during a broadcast of material related to the “heavenly hundred’s protesters who were killed during the Euromaidan demonstrations .
 Law enforcement officers questioned Stolyarova’s stay on territory controlled by Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine . Law enforcement officials also questioned her alleged coordination of storylines with separatists .
 The HRMMU says armed groups are directly influencing and shaping the content in local media . They require favorable coverage as the cost of retaining registration to operate .
 Kyiv-based blogger and activist, Volodymyr Fomichev, charged with unlawful possession of weapons . He was detained on January 4 .
 Fomichev’s family insisted the conviction was baseless and the result of a forced confession . The conviction was made after a confession was made by his family .
 On February 4, parliament passed a law criminalizing the illegal seizure of materials collected, processed, and prepared by Country Reports on Human Rights Practices . 27 journalists or of technical devices they use in their professional activities .
 Law also introduces penalty of up to three years’ imprisonment for unlawfully denying journalists access to information .
 49 percent of persons in the country used the internet in 2015, according to the International Telecommunication Union .
 Users of Facebook and VKontakte sometimes had their access temporarily blocked for innocuous or political posts . Other users mischaracterized as ‘hate speech’ and flagged as terms of service violations .
Ukrainian authorities have become less tolerant of online expression perceived as critical of Ukraine’s position in the conflict, Freedom House says . The government has been especially active this year in sanctioning social media users for ‘separatist’ and ‘extremist�
 The constitution provides citizens with the right to freedom of assembly, and the government generally respected this right .
 Most assemblies were peaceful and at times accompanied by a very large police presence to maintain order . Most assemblies in the UK were peaceful .
 The HRMMU noted an overall improvement in the ability of the National Police to provide security for demonstrations . The National Police are better at providing security for demonstrators .
 Police arrested eight men, charged them with disobeying police, interrogated them without lawyers present . They did not bring them before the court within three hours, as required by the law .
 The detainees spent the night sleeping on the floor of a small cell with only one mattress and a wooden bench .
 The head of police in the Donetsk Oblast allegedly insulted and threatened them before their release . They were brought back to a police station where they were allegedly insulted .
 The HRMMU also noted that the only demonstrations permitted in these areas were those in support of local authorities . The only demonstrations allowed were those apparently organized by the armed groups .
 The constitution and law provide for freedom of association, and the government generally respected this right .
 Residents told the HRMMU they were being prosecuted by the “ministry of state security’ for their pro-Ukrainian views or previous affiliation with Ukrainian NGOs . Residents informed theHRMMU that they are being prosecuted.
 The HRMMU also noted an increase in civil society organizations run by the armed groups . The armed groups appeared to have compulsory membership for certain persons, such as public sector employees .
 The government cooperated with the Office of UNHCR and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection and assistance to internally displaced persons .
 International and domestic organizations reported the system Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 . The system did not operate effectively, according to the report .
 The government and Russian-backed separatist forces strictly controlled the freedom of movement between government and separatist territories in the Donbas region .
 Five crossing points existed, but only four were in operation for much of the year . Only four crossing points exist, and five crossing points were used .
 Between May and August, an average of 26,000 to 32,000 individuals crossed the line daily . The HRMMU says the average number of people crossing the line each day is between 26,00 and 30,000 .
 People formed long lines at all operating transit corridors and had to wait for up to 36 hours with no or limited access to water, medical aid, toilets, and shelter in case of shelling or extreme weather .
 HRMMU’s March report noted that two elderly persons died at government checkpoints due to lack of timely medical care . September report noted three deaths for the same reason .
 The HRMMU's June report noted that, on April 27, four civilians were killed and eight injured at a crossing point near Olenivka in the “Donetsk People's Republic’s Republic,’
 Movement across the line of contact was limited to four crossing points in Donetsk Oblast and one in Luhansk Oblast . Four crossing points were closed due to nearby fighting .
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission believed the wooden structure was unsafe . The crossing point at Stanytsia Luhanska traversed a temporary wooden structure that was believed unsafe .
 On August 16, more than 1,000 persons were observed at the same crossing point . Medical officials claimed 21 persons were treated for heatrelated illnesses .
 In 2015 the SBU introduced a pass system involving an online application process to control movement into government-controlled territory .
 Human rights groups were concerned that many people in nongovernment-controlled territory did not have access to the internet to obtain such passes . Many people in Nongovernment controlled territory were not allowed access to internet .
 The order imposed significant hardships on persons crossing into government-controlled territory . It ceased distribution in the territory controlled by Russian-backed separatists in 2014 .
HRMMU voiced concern about reports of corruption by checkpoint personnel on both sides . The HRMMU repeatedly voiced concerns about corruption .
 Russian-backed separatists continued to hinder freedom of movement in the eastern part of the country during the year .
 The crossing checkpoint in Stanytsia Luhanska was closed due to shelling by Russian-backed separatist forces . As of December, it was open only for pedestrians .
 Russian-backed separatists have also prevented civilians from crossing at the Zolote checkpoint in Luhansk oblast . The checkpoint is a checkpoint in the city of Luhinsk .
 The government and Russian occupation authorities subjected individuals crossing between Russian-occupied Crimea and the mainland to strict passport controls at the administrative boundary .
 The three crossing points between Russian-occupied Crimea and mainland Ukraine were closed on several occasions in early August . The crossing points created long lines of individuals prevented from freely moving across the administrative boundary .
 As of August 15, the movement of vehicles and persons fully resumed but slowed due to enhanced security measures . The movement of cars and persons was fully resumed.
 As of November 15, there were more than 1. million registered internally displaced persons due to Russia’s aggression in eastern Ukraine .
 The largest number of IDPs resided in areas immediately surrounding the conflict zones, in government-controlled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts . The largest of the IDPs lived in the Kharkiv, Dnipropetrovsk, and Zaporizhzh
 Many resided in areas close to the line of contact in hope that they would be able to return home . Many reside in areas near to the lines of contact .
 The government granted social entitlements only to those who had registered as IDPs . Government granted social benefits only to people who registered as IDs .
 According to the law, the government should provide IDPs with housing . But authorities had not taken effective steps to do so, says the law .
 On February 16, the Ministry of Social Policy instructed its regional offices and local departments to suspend all social payments for IDPs . The move is ostensibly to combat fraudulent Country Reports on Human Rights Practices .
 HRMMU provided regional administrations with lists of individuals whose social entitlements should be revoked pending verification .
 The HRMMU reviewed a list that the SBU submitted to the regional administration in Kharkiv and determined that it was developed from information in theSBU database on individuals who received permits to cross the contact line . The HR MMU reviewed the list and determined the list was developed
 On June 8, the government adopted amendments to resolutions on IDPs to allow for automatic termination of benefits . The changes can be made depending on the grounds for termination .
 The HRMMU, the human rights ombudsperson, the Council of Europe, and other domestic and international human rights and humanitarian groups criticized these amendments . The amendments were made by the Human Rights and Human Rights Commission .
 The government applied the IDP verification procedure extremely broadly. According to the HRMMU, the government applied it extremely broadly .
 The suspensions affected approximately 85 percent of IDPs residing in government-controlled areas . 97 percent of those residing in areas under the control of Russian-backed separatists .
 HRMMU interviewed a female IDP with disabilities in Kramatorsk, Kramatork, who was also the single parent of a 13-year-old daughter .
 All of her social payments had also been cut, including her disability pension . She incidentally discovered that all of her other social payments were also cut .
 HRMMU: IDP integration remained impeded by the lack of a state strategy and the absence of financial resources, leading to IDPs’ economic and social marginalization .
 UN agencies reported that the influx of IDPs led to tensions arising from competition for resources . UN agencies said the influx led to tension between IDPs.
 Critics accused internally displaced men of evading military service . Competition rose for housing, employment, and educational opportunities in Kyiv and Lviv .
 A shortage of employment opportunities and the generally weak economy particularly affected IDPs . Many IDPs live in inadequate housing, such as collective centers and other temporary accommodation .
 Other IDPs stayed Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State .
 UN agencies expressed concern about instances of eviction of IDPs from collective centers . UN agencies express concern about cases of eviction from the collective centers.
 22 elderly IDPs, including two disabled persons, were evicted from the Kuialnyk sanatorium in Odesa . On September 29, 22 IDPs were evictions from theKuialnyK sanatorium .
 Management of the sanatorium suspended utilities on September 26 due to nonpayment of bills . A representative from the Odesa regional administration stated that the management of the Sanatorium had suspended utilities .
 While collective center accommodation was only intended as a temporary solution, many IDPs remained for extended periods . Many IDPs were only intended to provide temporary accommodation .
 There were reports of government officials expressing discriminatory views toward IDPs .
 Minister of Internal Affairs Avakov publicly attributed an increase in the crime rate to an inflow of IDPs . The increase in crime rate was attributed to a public outcry .
 Romani activists expressed concern that some Roma in eastern areas could not afford to flee conflict areas . Others had no choice but to leave their homes, they said .
 In September 2015 the Kyiv Administrative Court of Appeal overturned a National Bank decision that Crimean IDPs were nonresidents . The decision had restricted access to banking and financial services for those fleeing the Russian occupation .
 The country is a transit and destination country for asylum seekers and refugees . It is principally from Afghanistan, Somalia, and Syria .
 In other instances government officials declined to accept asylum applications without a legal basis, leaving asylum seekers without documentation and vulnerable to frequent police stops, fines, detention, and exploitation .
 International observers noted that the government did not provide resources for interpreters . They said the government created opportunities for corruption and undermined the fairness of asylum application procedures .
 Authorities provided language instruction for asylum seekers only in Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Odesa .
 refugees and those seeking complementary protection could receive residence registration at homeless shelters for up to six months . The State Migration Service says refugees could receive registration at shelters for six months.
 As of November 1, seven unaccompanied migrant children were registered . Five of the children expressed a desire to apply for refugee status .
 According to UNHCR, there were 35,179 persons in the country under its statelessness mandate as of mid-2015 .
 At the end of the year, there were 5,343 stateless persons residing in the country .
 On July 17, parliamentary by-elections were conducted in seven constituencies . The elections were held in seven parliamentary constituencies .
 In 2014 citizens elected Petro Poroshenko president in an election considered free and fair by international and domestic observers . The election was considered free by international observers .
 The country held early parliamentary elections that observers considered free and fair . Later that year the country held elections that were also considered free.
 On July 17, citizens in seven constituencies voted in parliamentary by-elections . Citizens in seven constituency voted in by-election elections .
 OSCE observer mission says elections were organized and democratic but influenced by economic interests . OSCE mission: Elections were organized, democratic and democratic . The elections were held in June 2014 .
 Some candidates started campaigning prematurely, leading to unfair advantages for certain candidates and parties . OPORA monitored elections in the country .
 OPORA considered the elections to be free and fair with electoral irregularities that were not systemic . The elections were held in a peaceful environment .
 IDPs were unable to vote in local elections unless they changed their registration to their new place of residence . IDPs can't vote unless they change their registration. IDPs could only vote in elections if they had changed their registered to a new residence .
 President Poroshenko signed a bill that allows political parties to wait until after an election to select which members from a party list will take seats in the Verkhovna Rada .
 The law shifts the power of selecting deputies from the electorate to the leadership of political parties . The law was widely criticized by domestic and international election monitoring groups .
 There are no laws limiting the participation of women and members of minorities in the political process and women and minorities did so, says the author .
 The law provides criminal penalties for corruption, but authorities did not effectively implement the law . Many officials engaged in corrupt practices with impunity, according to the law.
 The number of reports of government corruption was low, but corruption remained pervasive at all levels in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government and in society .
 During the year multiple high-level officials who had been brought into the government to oversee anticorruption reform processes resigned due to efforts to impede their work .
 Minister of Economy Aivaras Abromavicius resigned in February . He was followed by some members of his team .
 Abromavicius stated in his resignation letter that corrupt officials had blocked systematic reform and were attempting to gain influence over state enterprises . Abromvicius said he was trying to gain control of state enterprises.
 Authorities tried 31 corruption cases involving 70 persons, including judges, prosecutors, and state officers, but many were for minor violations .
 The Verkhovna Rada stripped Member of Parliament Oleksandr Onyshchenko of immunity from prosecution in July under suspicion of corruption and embezzlement .
 At year’s end he remained a fugitive outside the country, and the investigation continued .
 Civil society criticized the Prosecutor General’s Office and judicial system for failing to hold high-level officials to account for corruption .
 One hundred twenty-eight persons were sentenced to prison . Of these individuals 33 were serving sentences, while the rest had appeals pending . One hundred 20-eight were sentenced.
 As of July all three cases were undergoing appeals, and the defendants had yet to begin serving their sentences . All three cases are undergoing appeals .
 Several members of the Verkhovna Rada were stripped of immunity for prosecution during the year . Members are immune from prosecution .
 The NAPC is responsible for the development of national anticorruption policies, monitoring national compliance with anticorrupt legislation, and verifying asset declarations of high officials .
 The law designates NABU as the lead investigative agency for allegations of corruption by senior government officials . The law also designates the president, members of the Cabinet of Ministers and local governors .
 NABU is responsible only for investigating corruption offenses committed after its creation in 2015 . The organization was created in 2015 and is responsible for investigating allegations of corruption offenses .
 There were reports that the Prosecutor General's Office took steps during the year to hinder NABU’s ability to investigate high-level corruption .
 On August 5, an investigative group from the Prosecutor General’s Office raided the NABU headquarters in Kyiv . The group alleges that NABu had illegally wiretapped its employees .
 Prosecutor General’s Office staff allegedly unlawfully detained and beat two NABU detectives who they asserted were engaged in wiretapping . On August 12, Prosecutor General's Office staff 'unlawfully detained' and beat the detectives .
 On September 20, three Prosecutor General’s Office employees were suspended pending the outcome of an internal investigation . The investigation continued at the year's end .
 implementation of a 2014 law on "lustration" was 99 percent completed, Justice Ministry says . Justice Ministry: implementation of the law on “lustration’s” was 99% completed .
 Some 700,000 civil servants and state officials were on the list for lustration . The list includes state officials and civil servants .
 The checks resulted in the dismissal of approximately 1,000 state officials . The checks were conducted by state officials.
 80 percent of state officials from the Yanukovych era were discharged from their posts, according to a parliamentary committee .
 Law enforcement and judicial agencies avoided full compliance with the law . Law enforcement, judicial agencies, however, avoid full compliance .
 The judiciary lustrated only 40 judges, eight of whom contested the decision in court and were restored to their positions .
 NACP is responsible for reviewing financial declarations and monitoring the income and expenditures of high-level officials . By law, the NACP has to review financial declarations.
 On August 15, the government officially launched an asset e-declaration system . The system was launched on August 15 .
 More than 120,000 officials had submitted edeclarations, indicating near total compliance . By the conclusion Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State .
 The results were made publicly available, provoking public outcry about the lavish lifestyles of many public officials .
 The NAPC reviews the declarations and refers suspected corruption cases to the NABU for further action . By law the N APC reviews and refers the declarations .
Some observers questioned whether the NAPC had the capacity to fulfill this function . Some observers questioned, however, whether theNAPC was able to fulfill it .
 Law officials must respond to regular requests within five days and within 20 days to requests for large amounts of data . By law officials must response to regular request within five weeks .
 Implementation of the law on public access to government information and training of officials on the regulations governing such access remained inadequate .
 The government invited human rights groups to participate in monitoring activities, drafting legislation, and adopting administrative rules .
 International and domestic human rights groups collaborated with the government to draft the National Human Rights Strategy and related action plan in 2015 .
 During the year civil society closely monitored implementation of the action plan . Civil society expressed concern about government progress on the plan .
 Human rights groups describe particular government resistance to implementing points in the plan that related to the rights of IDPs .
 Some activities marked as completed were implemented only partially or not in substance . The HRMMU stated that some activities were not fully completed .
 The Ministry of Justice, the Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman’s, and civil society groups participated in open hearings in December to mark the one-year anniversary of the action plan .
 Nongovernmental representatives reported slow progress and weak intragovernmental coordination . Both government representatives and human rights activists indicated progress in justice sector reform and social services .
 Russian authorities and separatists routinely denied human rights groups access to territories they controlled in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . Russian authorities routinely denied domestic and international human rights group access to territory they controlled .
 Valeriya Lutkovska served as parliamentary ombudsman for human rights during the year . Observers considered her office an effective promoter of human rights .
 The office was a partner with leading domestic human rights groups and an advocate on behalf of Crimean Tatars, IDPs, Roma, persons with disabilities, LGBTI individuals, and prisoners .
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State . Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 41 Sexual assault and rape continued to be significant but underreported problems .
 Russian aggression in the Donbas region led to a dramatic surge in violence against women across the country .
 IDPs reported instances of rape and sexual abuse; many claimed to have fled because they feared sexual abuse . Many claimed to be victims of rape or sexual abuse.
 Police issued approximately 38,000 domestic violence warnings and protection orders during a six-month period . The Ministry for Social Policy says police issued approximately 40,000 warnings and orders .
 Through September more than 24,000 individuals called the hotline for assistance . 35 percent of the calls related to domestic or sexual violence were related to sexual violence .
 La Strada says more than 49 percent of calls related to psychological violence are related to violence .
 During the year officials identified 19 centers for social and psychological help . Nine centers for psychological and legal help for women who suffered from domestic violence .
 Many nongovernment shelters closed due to lack of funding. NGOs operated additional centers for victims of domestic violence in several regions . Women’s rights groups noted that many shelters closed.
 Each center could accommodate approximately 30 women and children, which was often inadequate . Each center was often overcrowded and often too small .
 The law provides that women enjoy the same rights as men, including under family, religious, personal status, labor, property, and inheritance laws, and are entitled to equal pay for equal work .
 Registration of children born in Crimea or areas in the east controlled by Russianbacked separatists remained difficult . Registration of Crimea or parts of the east remains difficult .
 Russian-backed separatist "authorities" routinely kept such paperwork if parents registered children in territories under their control . It's difficult for the child to obtain a Ukrainian birth certificate, making it difficult for them to obtain it .
 Authorities do not recognize documents issued by Russian-occupied Crimean or Russian-backed separatist entities . They sometimes refuse to issue birth certificates to children born in those areas .
 As of September 30, the Ministry of Internal Affairs reported 4,817 crimes against children .
 Parliament’s ombudsman for human rights noted the imperfection of mechanisms to protect children who survived violence .
 The Office of the Parliamentary Ombudsman for Human Rights includes a representative for children’s rights, nondiscrimination, and gender equality .
 A major consequence of Russian aggression in the Donbas was its effect on children . The Donbas is a key part of the Russian military campaign against Russia .
 In January the law on Protection of Childhood was amended to include a provision supporting children affected by the armed conflict . In January it was amended.
 UNICEF has Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 United States Department of State . The conflict affected 1. million children, including approximately 230,000 forced from their homes .
 Children living in areas controlled by Russian-backed separatists did not receive nutritional and shelter assistance . Children living on the outskirts of Russia did not get nutritional and Shelter assistance .
 Human rights groups reported that children who experienced the conflict or fled from territory controlled by Russianbacked separatists suffered psychological trauma .
UNICEF reported that 200,000 children in the Donbas needed psychological rehabilitation . About 580,000 urgently needed aid, according to UNICEF .
 A court may grant a child as young as 16 permission to marry . If it finds marriage to be in the child’s interest, a court could grant the child permission .
 Romani rights groups reported early marriages involving girls under the age of 18 were common in the Romani community .
 The same offense committed against a child under the age of 14 is punishable by imprisonment for five to eight years . The same offenses are punishable by five-to-eight years in prison .
 The International Organization for Migration reported that children from socially disadvantaged families and those in state custody continued to be at high risk of trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation .
 Human rights groups believed this number was low, as children who fled without their parents cannot register as IDPs Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 .
 Approximately 90 percent of such children ended in the schools because of their parents' poverty, their inability to raise children, or the child's developmental disorders .
 In recent years the government implemented policies to address the abandonment of children and their reintegration with their biological families .
 The number of children deprived of parental care decreased, according to the study .
 Human rights groups and media reported unsafe, inhuman, and sometimes life-threatening conditions in some institutions . Some institutions have been described as unsafe and inhuman .
 Children institutionalized in state-run orphanages were at times vulnerable to trafficking . Children institutionalised in state run orphanages are vulnerable to traffickers, say experts .
 Observers noted the judicial system lacked expertise to work effectively with minors . The legal process for juveniles emphasized punishment over rehabilitation over rehabilitation .
 The Department of State's Annual Report on International Parental Child Abduction is published at travel.com . See the State Department’s annual report on international child abduction .
 Approximately 30,000 Jewish persons lived in the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 . VAAD approximately 30,00 Jewish people lived in Ukraine before Russian aggression .
 Jewish groups estimated between 10,000 and 15,000 Jewish residents lived in Crimea before Russia’s attempted annexation .
Institutional anti-Semitism was rare, and VAAD stated that attacks were isolated and carried out by individuals rather than organized groups .
 VAAD claimed that negative attitudes towards Jews and Judaism continued to be low . Some individuals espoused anti-Semitic beliefs .
 On December 21, unknown individuals vandalized the site with a pig’s head and blood .
 Authorities opened an investigation into the incident and immediately condemned it . The incident occurred in a hotel room in the hotel in the city of San Francisco . The hotel is located in the centre of the city's central area .
 In July authorities named a street in Kyiv after former Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists leader Stepan Bandera .
 At the same time, authorities also named a street in Kyiv in honor of Janusz Korczak, a Polish-Jewish writer who died in Auschwitz .
 One case of suspected anti-Semitic violence was recorded during the year, compared to one in 2015 . Four such cases in 2014, and four in 2013, according to the National Minority Rights Monitoring Group .
 The NMRMG identified 18 cases of anti-Semitic vandalism during the year, as compared to 22 in 2015 and 23 in 2014 . The N MRMG identified 22 cases of vandalism in 2015, and 23 cases in 2014.
 On January 13, arsonists damaged a Jewish cemetery in Kolomiya, following similar attacks in 2015 . The cemetery was damaged by arsonists in January .
 On March 4, unknown persons set fire to a wreath left by the Israeli minister of justice at the Babyn Yar memorial .
 In May, on Israel’s national memorial day for the Holocaust, an unknown group of persons burned an Israeli flag at the Babyn Yar memorial .
 There were reportedly several anti-Semitic incidents targeting the memorial during the year . The memorial is located in New York City .
 A commemoration ceremony marking the 75th anniversary of the Babyn Yar massacre . 33,771 Jews were killed in two days during the Nazi German occupation .
 The law requires the government to provide access to public venues and opportunities for involvement in public, educational, cultural, and sporting activities for persons with disabilities .
 There were reports of societal discrimination against persons with disabilities in places of public accommodation .
 A young man in Lviv, Ukraine, has been denied membership in a fitness club since 2014 . For example, a young man who used a wheelchair had been repeatedly denied membership .
 The club's management gave several reasons for its refusal, including that his wheelchair could spread disease in the facility . The man's disability could scare off other patrons.
 48 NGOs noted the government was unable to provide outpatient care to persons with disabilities . The government is forcing families to place children and sometimes adults with disabilities in state institutions .
 The state cared for more than 70,000 of the country’s estimated 150,000 children with disabilities . The state lacked the legal framework and funds to deinstitutionalize them .
 Persons with disabilities in areas controlled by Russian-backed separatists in the east of the country suffered from a lack of appropriate care .
 Government monitors observed incidents of involuntary seclusion and application of physical restraints to persons with mental disabilities at psychiatric and neuropsychiatric institutions of the Ministry of Social Policy .
On September 7, parliament adopted legislation to harmonize the country’s law with international standards with respect to the rights of persons with disabilities . The legislation was adopted by parliament on September 7 .
 Overall xenophobic incidents declined slightly during the year . 49 crimes observed that overall xenophobic cases declined slightly .
 The law criminalizes deliberate actions to incite hatred or discrimination based on nationality, race, or religion . It includes insulting the national honor or dignity of citizens in connection with their religious and political beliefs .
Authorities did not prosecute any of the criminal proceedings under the laws on racial, national, or religious offenses . Authorities did not charge any of those offenses .
 Authorities registered 58 criminal investigations involving racial, national, or religious hatred during the first nine months of the year . The Prosecutor General’s Office said the investigations involved racial, National, or Religious hatred .
 The International Organization for Migration reported as of October 31, 10 documented cases of violence against racial or ethnic minorities that involved 17 victims .
 Victims were from Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Jordan, Nigeria, and Syria, as well as citizens of Tajik, Jewish, and Muslim descent .
 Most of the incidents occurred in Dnipropetrovsk, Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Odesa . The incidents were reported in the cities of Kyiv and Kyiv .
 There were cases of vandalism, including arson, targeting Jewish and Romani property in the Dnipropetrovsk, Cherkasy, and Zakarpattya Oblasts .
 A participant in a racist attack at a Dynamo Kyiv football match has been sentenced to two years in prison . The victim was a participant in the racist attack .
 Romani rights groups estimated the Romani population at between 200,000 and 400,000 . Romani people are estimated to be between 200-400,000.
 50 settlements were mainly located in Zakarpattya, Poltava, Cherkasy, Volyn, Dnipropetrovsk, and Odesa Oblasts .
 There were reports of societal violence against Roma during the year, including cases in which police declined to intervene to stop violence .
 On August 27, police failed to stop a mob from attacking a Romani settlement near Loshchynivka, Odesa Oblast . The mob vandalized Romani homes and set at least one on fire .
 Police arrested a man of Romani heritage in connection with the killing and rape of a local nine-year-old girl . The mob formed in reaction to the news that police arrested the man .
Local authorities announced a plan to evict Roma from their homes forcibly but cancelled the plans after the majority of recently arrived Roma fled of their own accord .
 Odesa’s regional governor, Mikhail Saakashvili, appeared to condone the evictions . He said, “I fully share the outrage of the residents of Loshchynivka…there is massive drug-dealing,’
 There were several reports that police arbitrarily detained Romani individuals, at times beating or mistreating them .
 The European Roma Rights Center reported that it had not led to significant improvements for Roma . The government in 2013 adopted a seven-year action plan to protect and integrate Roma into society .
 The government did not allocate funds for the plan’s implementation, according to human rights groups .
 24 percent of Roma have never had any schooling, according to parliament’s ombudsman for human rights . 1 percent of Romani population had a university degree .
 Romani women’s foundation, Chiricli, erected barriers to prevent issuing passports to Roma .
 Authorities hampered Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 . 51 access to education for persons who lacked documents and segregated Romani children into special schools or lower-quality classrooms .
 Many Roma fled settlements in areas controlled by Russian-backed separatists and moved elsewhere in the country .
 According to Chiricli approximately 10,000 Roma were among the most vulnerable members of the country's IDP community .
 Acts of Violence, Discrimination, and Other Abuses Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity . The labor code prohibits workplace discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity .
 LGBTI groups, along with international and domestic human rights organizations, criticized the lack of such language in the National Human Rights Strategy . The action plan included provisions for incorporating LGBTI rights .
 Hooligans assaulted two persons in Odesa after calling them a derogatory slur . For example, on February 28, two people were assaulted after calling the slur a slur .
 homophobic threats from right-wing nationalist groups continued, but their presence at festivals and marches was often limited to several dozen counterprotesters .
Lead politicians and ministers condemned attacks on LGBTI gatherings and individuals . Local officials sometimes voiced opposition to LGBTI rights and failed to protect LGBTI persons .
Overall, LGBTI groups enjoyed greater freedom to assemble than in past years . Overall, LGBT I groups enjoyed more freedom than in previous years .
 Security forces and local officials deployed adequate security forces to prevent violence and protect conferences and marches . In most cases security forces andLocal officials deployed enough security forces.
Security forces provided protection to an equality march in Kyiv on June 6 and a pride march in Odesa on August 11 . For example, security forces provided security forces to an Equality march inKyiv .
 More than 6,000 security personnel deployed in case of equality march . More than 2,000 marchers were protected by security personnel .
 Police also adequately protected equality festivals in Kyiv and Zaporizhzhya in May and September .
 During an equality festival in Kyiv, right-wing groups telephoned a bomb threat .
Security forces cleared the building, allowing the event to continue .
 One notable exception was the Lviv equality festival on March 19 . The Lviv Equality festival was held in Lviv, Ukraine .
Hotels and conference spaces refused to honor reservations made by the festival, allegedly under pressure from city officials . City officials then banned all public gatherings .
Security officials allowed right-wing radicals to threaten participants at the festival . After the festival relocated to another hotel, security officials allowed the radicals to threat participants .
Security forces evacuated participants on buses and took no action to prevent attacks from radicals . The conference was cancelled after a bomb threat was cancelled .
 Security forces failed to take action against right-wing groups that “went on safari,” seeking persons suspected of being LGBTI for attack throughout the next day .
 According to civil society groups, assailants injured five persons after the festival .
 Nash Mir stated that while the number of incidents increased, there were no reports of murder or grievous harm done to LGBTI persons in the first half of the year . Nash Mir said that while there were a number of cases of LGBTI people being killed or injured,
 Crimes and discrimination against LGBTI persons remained underreported, however . Law enforcement authorities only opened 17 cases related to such acts .
 Nash Mir stated that extortion remained a problem and anti-LGBTI groups employed social media to entrap LGBTI persons . Nash Mir said extortion remains a problem .
 Transgender persons continued to face discrimination and stereotyping in media, according to the U.S. Transgender persons continue to face Discrimination and stereotyped in media .
 Medical policies towards transgendered persons improved somewhat, as individuals no longer had to undergo sex reassignment surgery to change their names and genders officially and could do so with counseling and hormone therapy .
 This procedure was approved by the Ministry of Health and registered with the ministry of Justice during the year . The procedure was also registered with Ministry of Justice .
 Regulations still prevent reassignment for married individuals and those with minor children . Rules still prevent re-assignment for couples with children .
 Transgender persons claimed to have difficulty obtaining official documents reflecting their gender . Transgender persons claim to have been unable to obtain official documents.
 LGBTI persons in Russian-occupied Crimea and parts of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts under the control of Russianbacked separatists were very poor, according to Nash Mir .
Violence and intimidation against LGBTI persons in territories controlled by Russianbacked separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts was widespread and encouraged by Russian and Russian-backed authorities .
 The Occupy Pedophilia movement was active and tolerated by local and Russian Country Reports on Human Rights Practices . According to the report, the Occupy Pedophile movement wasactive and tolerated .
 The group used social media to identify LGBTI persons and then abused them physically and verbally . The group also abused them verbally and physically .
 A foreign victim was beaten and forced to perform degrading acts, according to the report .
 The report also claimed that Russianbacked separatists forced suspected LGBTI persons to dig trenches for military fortifications if ransoms were not paid .
 There was overall improvement during the year in social attitudes towards homosexuality . There was also a decline in homophobic rhetoric from churches and leading political figures .
 Seven Verkhovna Rada members participated in the June equality march in Kyiv .
 Authorities prevented many children infected with HIV/AIDS from attending kindergartens or schools . Many children were not allowed to attend schools or schools.
 Most at-risk adolescents faced higher risk of contracting HIV/AIDs as well as additional barriers to accessing information and services for its prevention and treatment . The most at- risk adolescents faced a higher chance of contracting the disease .
 The law also provides for the right of most workers to form and join independent unions, to bargain collectively, and to conduct legal strikes . The law is designed to allow workers to take part in legal strikes and form independent unions .
 Legal recourse is available for reinstatement, back wages, and punitive damages . Observers described court enforcement as arbitrary and unpredictable .
 Unions reported significant bureaucratic hurdles in the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 . The U.S. Department of State reported significant obstacles in the country reports .
 Efforts to reform legal entity registration complicated registration specifically for trade unions . Efforts for trade union groups have been unsuccessful .
 The legal procedure to initiate a strike was overly complex and effectively prohibited strike action in practice . It contributed to increasing numbers of informal industrial actions .
 By law industrial disputes should follow procedures of consideration, conciliation, and labor arbitration that parties can draw out for months .
 Only after the exhaustion of this process are workers able to vote to strike, which courts may still block . Only after this is exhaustion, workers can vote for strike .
 The right to strike is also restricted by the requirement that a large percentage of the workforce must vote in favor of a strike before it may be called . A large number of general workers’ meeting delegates or 50 percent of workers in an enterprise must vote for strike .
 Poorly defined legal grounds for striking allowed the government the possibility to deny the right to strike due to national security or to protect the health or liberties of citizens .
 The law prohibits strikes by overly broad categories of workers, including personnel in the Prosecutor General’s Office, the judiciary, the armed forces, the security services, law enforcement agencies, and the transportation sector .
 The European Court of Human Rights adjudicated restrictions in the transportation sector in 2014 . In 2014 the court declared restrictions on strikes in the sector illegal .
 The decision required the government to amend legislation in conformity with the ruling . But, as of December, it had not done so .
 Law on Transport regulates the strikes in the transport sector and allows strikes in case of nonfulfillment of administrative duties by employer .
Independent unions are not affiliated with the Federation of Trade Unions of Ukraine . Legal hurdles also made it difficult for independent unions to take part in tripartite negotiations, participate in social insurance programs .
 These legal hurdles, set in place by outdated laws and an obsolete labor code, further entrenched the FPU . Smaller independent unions are unable to act effectively when representing their members .
Throughout the year the labor inspection service continued to be functionally suspended due to an incomplete reorganization . Throughout the year, the service was functionally suspended because of a reorganization.
 Observers disputed the independence of unions from government or employer control . The unions' independence has been disputed by some .
 Authorities deny unions not affiliated with the FPU a share of disputed trade union assets . The dispute dates back more than a decade, it has been claimed .
 There were cases where workers who renounced membership in an FPU-affiliated union faced loss of pay, undesirable work assignments, and dismissal .
 Several pieces of legislation passed during the year weakened protection of freedom of association, including a law complicating trade union registration .
Independent union representatives continued to be subjected to violence and intimidation . Independent union representatives were subjected to intimidation and violence .
 Elena Maslova was beaten on her way home from work . In January she was the deputy head of the Kryvyi Rih, Dnipropetrovsk chapter of the Independent Trade Union of Miners of Ukraine .
 NPGU president, Mykhaylo Volinets, claimed the attack was in response to Maslova’s union activities . NPGu president claims attack was a response to union activities.
 The union reported that authorities have not identified any perpetrators and did not investigate the attack . Authorities have not named any perpetrators .
 In February the president of the Novovolinsk chapter of the NPGU, Anatoliy Muhomedzhanov, was beaten .
 The trade union alleged that multiple witnesses saw who beat him . Police did not pursue the incident, the union said .
Arrears and corruption issues exacerbated industrial relations and led to numerous protests . Arrears, corruption and other issues led to many protests .
 NPGU leader in Selidovo and Novogrodifka, Victor Trifonov, set himself on fire during a sit-in in the Kyiv building of the Ministry of Energy and Coal of Ukraine .
 Government officials accused trade union members of siding with separatists in the east of the country . In response government officials accused union members.
 In September the president of the Free Health-care Workers Union, Oleg Panasenko, reported that unknown persons destroyed a union protest camp at the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 .
 Penalties for violations ranged from three to 15 years imprisonment . Resources, inspections, and remediation were inadequate to provide for enforcement .
 93 percent of the victims had been subjected to labor exploitation, according to the report .
 There were reports of trafficking of women, men, and children for labor . There were also reports of children being trafficked .
 Traffickers subjected some foreign nationals to forced labor in construction, agriculture, manufacturing, and domestic work . The lumber industry, nursing, and street begging.
 The government made minor efforts to prevent or eliminate forced labor, citing a lack of budgetary resources . Traffickers subjected some children to forced labor .
 Children who are 15 years of age may perform undefined ‘light work’ with a parent’s consent . The issue is open to interpretation by employers and opening the system to abuse .
 The law allows children to do some forms of “nonhazardous work beginning at 14 as part of an apprenticeship in the context of vocational training .
 The government did not effectively enforce the law due to a lack of resources within the Ministry of Social Policy . A continued moratorium on surprise labor inspections for much of the year was also put in place .
Penalties for violations ranged from small fines for illegitimate employment to prison sentences for sexual exploitation of a child . Penalties ranged from fines for illicit employment or other labor law violations to jail sentences for child exploitation .
 The most frequent violations of child labor laws related to work in hazardous conditions, long workdays, failure to maintain work records, and delayed salary payments . The most common violations are long work days and delayed payments .
 As of September 20, the State Service on Labor had conducted 2,547 inspections . They examined compliance with child labor laws .
 The businesses inspected included 17 agricultural enterprises, 24 trade companies, 35 service providers, and 36 companies in other sectors . The businesses were inspected by the government .
 Discrimination with Respect to Employment and Occupation prohibits discrimination in the workplace based on race, color, political, religious, religious and other beliefs .
 Penalties include a fine of up to 50 tax-free minimum incomes, correctional labor for up to two years or restraint of liberty for a term up to five years . The fine includes a fine for a period up to three years .
 U.S. Department of State says 58 actions were committed by an organized group of persons or if they caused death or other grave consequences . Such actions accompanied by violence are punishable by correctional labor for a term of up to two years, imprisonment for up to five years .
 According to the Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office, men earned on average 29. percent more than women .
 Domestic and international observers noted that women held few elected or appointed offices at the national and regional levels . Women held few elections or appointments at national and Regional levels .
 The monthly minimum wage was 1,378 hryvnias from January 1 through April 30 . It rose to 1,450 hry vnias on May 1 and 1,600 on December 1. Acceptable Conditions of Work is accepted by employers .
 As of January 1, 2017, the minimum wage for private-sector workers is to increase to 3,200 hryvnias . The 2017 draft budget will be released on January 1 .
 The hourly minimum wage was 8.29 hryvnias from January through April and rose to 8.69 on May 1 and to 9.29 on December 1 . The hourly wage was8.29hryvNias on December 2 and 8.59
 Some workers in the informal sector received wages below the established minimum . Some workers received wages under the minimum .
 The poverty income level rose during the year from 1,330 hryvnias per month to 1,399 in the year . The poverty level rose in the same year from a year to a year. The poverty rate rose by 1,400 in a year,
 The labor law provides for a maximum 40-hour workweek, with a minimum 42hour period of rest per week and at least 24 days of paid vacation per year . The law requires a minimum of 42 hours a week and 24 days a year .
 A lack of legal remedies, bureaucratic wrangling, and corruption in public and private enterprises, often blocked efforts to recover overdue wages, leading to significant wage theft . A lack to legal remedies and bureaucratic wrangled, and Corruption in public, private enterprises.
 Total wage arrears in the country rose during the year to 1. billion hryvnias ($70 million) as of September 1 .
 More than half of the debt was in the Luhansk (23.2 percent), Donetsk, and Kharkiv regions . More than 50 percent of the debts were in Donetsk and Donetsk .
 The law and associated regulations contain occupational safety and health standards . Employers frequently ignored them due to the lack of enforcement mechanisms and the government’s failure to hold employers accountable for unsafe conditions .
 Employers in metal and mining industries often violated the rule and retaliated against workers by pressuring them to quit, NGO says .
 The government did not effectively enforce minimum wage, hours of work, and occupational safety and health standards in all sectors, including informal economy .
 It is impossible to determine whether penalties were enough to deter violations as with little to no inspection regime . It was difficult for the government to detect violations, according to the author .
 The government has had a moratorium in place on surprise inspections since 2014 . The goal is to cut the number of required inspections and certifications .
 The moratorium constrained the government’s ability to enforce labor laws effectively .
 The State Labor Service and its predecessor, the State Labor Inspectorate, had to obtain permission from the Cabinet of Ministers to conduct an inspection . During this period authorities required a lengthy interagency process .
 Labor inspections could also occur at a company’s request or upon the formal request of the investigator in the framework of criminal proceedings against a company .
Wage arrears, nonpayment of overtime, operational safety problems, and health complaints were common in the mining industry .
 There were 3,168 occupational injuries for all employment types, which was 0. percent above the same period in 2015 . Also through September there were 2,000 occupational injuries.
 Workers faced unsafe situations in areas outside government control in Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts . Workers faced an unsafe situation in areas out of government control .
 Despite Russian aggression close to industrial areas in the Donbas region, enterprises continued to operate through December .
 Fighting resulted in physical damage to mines and plants through loss of power, destroyed transformers, and reportedly intentional flooding of mines by combined Russian-separatist forces .
 Russian law has de facto applied in Ukraine’s Crimea since the Russian occupation and purported ‘annexation’ of the peninsula .
 A local authority installed by the Russian government and led by Sergey Aksyonov as “prime minister’ of the “state council of the republic of Crimea’s’ administered occupied Crimea .
 Russia’s nationwide parliamentary elections included seats allocated for occupied Crimea . The move was widely condemned by the international community .
 Russian security services continued to consolidate control over Crimea and restrict human rights . Russian security forces continued to consolidate control over the Crimea .
 Occupation authorities imposed and disproportionately applied repressive Russian Federation laws on the Ukrainian territory of Crimea .
 The most significant human rights problems in Crimea during the year related directly to the Russian occupation of Crimea . Crimea was the most significant area of Crimea in the Crimea region .
 Russian security services engaged in an extensive campaign of intimidation to suppress dissent and opposition to the occupation that employed kidnappings, disappearances, physical abuse, political prosecution, and interrogations by security forces .
 Occupation authorities deprived members of certain groups, particularly ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars, of fundamental civil liberties, including freedom to express their nationality and ethnicity .
 Crimean Tatar Mejlis, a democratically elected body representing the Crimean people, was banned on May 12 . Russian authorities claimed it was an extremist organization, and prohibited all meetings, gatherings, or financial activities of the group .
Russian authorities have imposed Russian citizenship on all residents of Crimea . They also subjected persons who refused Russian citizenship to discrimination in accessing education, health care, and employment .
 U.S. Department of State: 62 private individuals from celebrating their national and cultural heritage . They also interfered with freedom of expression and assembly, criminalizing display of cultural and national symbols .
 Russian authorities engaged in a widespread campaign to suppress free speech and media in Crimea . Russian authorities engage in a wide-ranging campaign to suppression of free speech.
 Occupation authorities questioned, detained, and charged with extremism . The few remaining independent journalists who worked independently worked independently . They often merely for expressing their belief that Crimea remained part of Ukraine .
 Russian-installed authorities took few steps to investigate or prosecute officials or individuals who committed human rights abuses .
 Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and other Unlawful or Politically Motivated Killings Russian occupation authorities did not adequately investigate cases of abductions and killings of Crimean residents from 2014 and 2015 .
 As of October 1, 28 persons had disappeared since the occupation of Crimea, including 12 later found dead . According to the Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, 28 people had disappeared .
 Russian occupation authorities did not adequately investigate the deaths and disappearances of Russian occupation workers .
 Police often refused to register reports of disappearances and intimidated those who tried to report a disappearance . Human rights groups say police often intimidated and threatened those who reported a disappearance.
 Ukrainian government and human rights groups believed Russian security forces kidnapped the individuals for opposing Russia’s occupation to instill fear in the population and prevent dissent .
 Ervin Ibragimov, a member of the Bakhchisaray Mejlis, was kidnapped on May 24 . He was kidnapped by uniformed men after stopping his car on a road in the Crimean Tatars .
 Footage shows men forcing Ibragimov into a car and departing .
 Crimea Human Rights Group says the men wore uniforms of the Ministry of Internal Affairs’ traffic police .
 Ibragimov told friends that he had noticed a car waiting outside his house that later followed him during the day . A week before he disappeared, he told friends he had seen a car outside his home that followed him .
 Ibragimov had planned to travel to the town of Sudak on May 25 to attend the court hearing of a group of Crimean Tatars charged for holding an “unauthorized’s gathering on May 18 to mark Crimean Tatar Deportation Remembrance Day .
 Ibragimov’s employment record book and passport were found near a bar in Bakhchisaray .
 Crimea Human Rights Group excludes possibility of political motivation for disappearance or state involvement . occupation authorities opened an investigation into the case .
 There were widespread reports that Russian authorities in Crimea abused residents who opposed the occupation .
 Ukrainian blogger and activist, Yuri Ilchenko, escaped from house arrest in Sevastopol, Ukraine . Ilchenko fled across the administrative boundary to government-controlled Ukraine .
 Ilchenko had been awaiting trial on extremism charges from February 2015 for his online writings expressing his opposition to the occupation of Crimea . Ilchenko was awaiting trial for his anti- Crimea writings .
 Ilchenko and his parents Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 U.S. Department of State . 64 claimed to be the first individuals in Sevastopol formally to decline taking Russian citizenship .
 In August he gave several accounts to the press describing his mistreatment during detention in a pretrial facility in Simferopol . He was detained from February 2015 through June 2 .
 Ilchenko claims security officials repeatedly beat him and collaborated with other inmates to continue beatings and threats while he was in detention . He claims they coerced him into taking Russian citizenship, and to punish him for speaking Ukrainian .
 He claimed they forced him to remain awake for days and beat him when he fell asleep in retaliation for refusing to wear a “St.’s’S’.
 Ilchenko claimed occupation authorities denied him clothing, bedding, and medical care . Ilchenko claims he was denied medical care and clothing .
Occupation authorities threatened individuals with violence or imprisonment if they did not testify in court against individuals that authorities believed were opposed to the occupation . Human rights monitors reported that occupation authorities also threatened people with violence.
 Prison and detention center conditions reportedly remained harsh and overcrowded . The conditions are said to have remained harsh .
 Crimea lacked sufficient prison facilities and there were twice as many inmates as there were cells necessary to house them . In June the director of the Russian Federal Prison System stated that Crimea lacked enough prison facilities .
 OSCE report on Crimea says health care in prisons has deteriorated since occupation began . Health care has deteriorated in prisons since the occupation began, report says .
 prisoners in the Simferopol pretrial detention facility lacked proper food, sanitation, and health care. Yuri Ilchenko reported that prisoners lacked food and sanitation .
 Crimea Human Rights Group says four Crimean Tatars were detained in February on politically motivated “terrorism’s charges . They were living in cells in a Simferopol pretrial facility that were infested with fleas and bedbugs .
 The 2015 OSCE/ODIHR report says persons incarcerated during the Russian occupation did not have the opportunity to retain Ukrainian citizenship .
 Russian authorities compelled all individuals who were in prison or pretrial facilities when the occupation began to accept Russian citizenship . Russian authorities forced all individuals to accept Russia's citizenship .
 The Human Rights Ombudsman's Offices of Ukraine and Russia were working on a solution that would allow some prisoners to return to Ukraine . The solution would let some prisoners return to the Ukraine .
 Occupation authorities permitted “human rights ombudsman’s’ visit prisoners, but human rights activists regarded Lubina not as an independent actor but as representing the interests of occupation authorities .
 Arbitrary Arrest or Detention Occupation authorities arbitrarily detained protesters, activists, and journalists for opposing the Russian occupation .
 Police and Security Apparatus Russian government agencies apply and enforced Russian law in Crimea . Ministry of Internal Affairs, the FSB, the Federal Investigative Committee, and the Office of the Prosecutor General applied and enforce Russian law .
 Former Ukrainian Ministry of Interior officers allegedly linked to local organized crime . "self-defense forces" reportedly continued to operate and commit abuses, reports say .
 These forces often acted with impunity in intimidating perceived occupation opponents . These forces were involved in extrajudicial detentions and arbitrary confiscation of property .
 The "self-defense forces" under the authority of the “national police,” their members continued to commit abuses . They received state funding for their activities as well as other rewards, such as beachfront property and service medals .
Members of “selfdefense’s forces allegedly beat two residents of the village of Shchelkino . For example, on December 8, members of ‘self defense’ forces allegedly beaten two residents .
 Police arriving at the scene declined to arrest members of the self-defense forces .
 There were reports that Russian occupation authorities made arbitrary arrests . There were also reports that Crimean Tatars were targeted .
 Ilmi Umerov, a member of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, was arrested May 12 . He was accused of “undermining the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation’s’ Crimea .
 Umerov, who suffered from health problems, has since been taken from court hearings in poor health . He has been taken out of court hearings.
 Umerov was forcibly subjected to psychiatric hospitalization, ostensibly for an examination, exacerbating his health problems . On August 18, he was forcibly forced to be hospitalized .
 occupation authorities released him from the hospital following international publicity over the case . He was released on September 7 .
 As of October 25, occupation authorities had arrested 19 Crimean residents . They were accused of belonging to Hizb-ut-Tahrir, a pan-Islamic organization prohibited in Russia but not Ukraine .
 Human rights groups believed occupation authorities intended to intimidate the Crimean Tatars . They believed authorities wanted to discredit the Mejlis leadership and instill fear in the local population .
Russian authorities continue to detain Akhtem Chiygoz, the deputy leader of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis . Russian authorities continued to detain him .
 Russian authorities arrested Chiygoz in January 2015 and charged him with ‘inciting a mass riot’ during protests he organized at the Crimean parliament . The protests were disrupted by pro-Russian activists, resulting in clashes between the groups .
 Russia did not exercise control over Crimea at the time . Subsequently, occupation authorities prosecuted individuals alleged to have participated in the protest .
 Crimean Tatar leaders working to defuse tensions in hopes of avoiding clashes with counterprotesters . Video footage shows Chiygoz and other Crimean Tatari leaders trying to avoid clashes .
 Occupation authorities refused to investigate acts of violence committed by pro-Russian ‘protesters’ who were likely working for Russian security services, independent observers say .
 On December 12, authorities extended Chiygoz’s detention until April 2017 .
 Throughout the year Russian authorities conducted mass arrests designed to humiliate and intimidate Crimean Tatars .
 On April 1, Russian security forces detained 35 men, mostly Crimean Tatars, in Pionierske . They took them to a “center to combat extremism,” and collected DNA samples from them .
 Human rights groups claim Russian security forces attempted to recruit some as police informants . Human rights group says some Russian police informants were recruited .
 On May 7, Russian security forces detained another 35 Muslims, many of whom were Crimean Tatars, at a market in Simferopol, Russia .
 Russia transferred Crimean cases to Russia’s legal system and changed the venue of prosecution for some detainees .
 Human rights groups identified several dozen Crimean residents as political prisoners held in either Crimea or Russia . The Crimean residents are believed to be political prisoners .
 Oleg Sentsov, Oleksiy Chirniy, Ilmi Umerov, Akhtem Chiygoz, Ali Asanov, Mustafa Dehermedzhy, Mykola Semena, Andrii Kolomiets, and others .
 As of October 26, 67 Crimean Tatar children of a parent have been deprived of their parent's children . The children were deprived because of politically motivated imprisonment since the start of the occupation .
 Russian occupation authorities raided Crimean Tatar villages in the Yalta and Bakhchisaray regions . On February 11 and 12, Russian occupation officials raided Crimean villages .
 Crimea Human Rights Group says men with guns and in balaclavas burst into homes . In some cases, they broke through doors or windows, despite encountering no resistance from residents .
 Authorities conducted several raids on Crimean Tatar homes in the Alyushta region . Between April 16 and 20, authorities conducted raids on the homes .
 Police entered Crimean Tatar homes and demanded to know how many people lived in the house . They went shopping, where their children studied, and who sold drugs in the village .
Hundreds of Crimean Tatars were invited to “interviews’ where authorities played back the interviewees’ telephone conversations and read their email aloud . The interviewees' telephone conversations were played back by authorities .
 The FSB interviewed a doctor in a Feodosia hospital in July after a colleague denounced him for privately expressing proUkrainian views .
Posters in the hospital hallways advertised an FSB hotline . The doctor stated that posters in the hallways advertise an F SB hotline .
 The eavesdropping and visits by security personnel create an environment in which persons are afraid to voice any opinion contrary to the occupation authorities, even in private, says the author .
 The Russian FSB sent a notice to all post offices in Crimea containing a list of individuals deemed “extremist” but which was in fact a list. The FSB said to report to the FSB any correspondence sent by these individuals .
 Erol Abdulzhelilov, grandson of Crimean Tatar leader Mustafa Jemilev, was questioned on February 2 . He was questioned by Russian migration and security officials .
 Yevgeny Kostenko, brother of Oleksander, was imprisoned on political grounds . He refused to answer questions on February 18 .
 Emir-Ussein Kuku is a Crimean Tatar activist . His children were pressured to make statements about Kuku that could be used to strip him of his parental rights .
 Russian officials cut power and natural gas to the homes of Crimean Tatar Mejlis members in retaliation .
 Freedom of Speech and Press Occupation authorities significantly restricted freedom of speech and press, and subjected dissenting voices to harassment and prosecution .
 They refused to register independent print and broadcast media outlets, forcing them to cease operations . The media outlets were forced to cease their operations .
 Human rights groups say the FSB engaged in widespread surveillance of social media, telephones, and electronic communication . The FSB routinely summoned individuals for “discussions’ for voicing or posting opposition to the Russian occupation .
 occupation authorities in Yalta charged Larysa Kitaiska with extremism because of social media posting that they believed to be anti-Russian .
 Kitaiska had left Crimea for mainland Ukraine after the occupation began . She had temporarily returned to resolve a property matter when she was charged .
 Kitaiska left Crimea shortly after she was charged . She maintained that occupation authorities brought the case in retaliation for her pro-Ukrainian views .
 armed security forces raided the home of Suleyman Kadyrov, a member of the Feodosia Mejlis . The raid was because of a March Facebook posting that Crimea remains a part of Ukraine . The post said Crimea remains part of the Ukraine .
 Occupation authorities refused to register most independent media outlets . They forced them to close in 2015 .
 Krymska Svitlytsya, the only Ukrainian-language newspaper remaining in Crimea, ceased publication on March 25 .
 Zair Akadyrov was detained as he covered the trial of the “February 26’ group of political prisoners . He was taken to a police precinct for questioning .
 Crimea's "prosecutor general" of Crimea charged Mykola Semena with “undermining Russian territorial integrity via mass media’s mass media,” a criminal offense punishable up to five years in prison .
 Russian security forces hacked into Semena's computer to prove he had written articles critical of the occupation . Semena was detained twice in 2015, and human rights groups believed he had been hacked .
 Authorities placed Semena, who was in poor health, under house arrest in April . He was under the condition that he not leave Crimea .
 A judge denied Semena’s request to seek medical treatment in government-controlled Ukraine .
 Alexi Sapov, editor of Argumenty Nedeli-Krym. On June 14, Russian occupation authorities arrested him .
 Sapov was one of the last reporters to cover the trials of Crimean Tatars .
 Sapov was previously a journalist in Vladimir, Russia, where his reporting led to accusations that he had blackmailed a member of the Russian parliament .
 There were numerous cases of Russian security forces or police harassing independent media and detaining journalists in connection with their work .
 Igor Burdyga is a Ukrainian journalist covering the anniversary of the deportation of Crimean Tatars . He was detained by Russian authorities on May 11 .
 Burdyga was detained for his journalistic work, accused him of being a member of the Ukrainian nationalist group Right Sector . He had been involved in the demolition of electrical power lines in Ukraine that supplied Crimea .
 Authorities released Burdyga and he left Crimea after seven hours of detention . He was detained in Crimea for seven hours .
 Following Russia's occupation of Crimea, journalists overwhelmingly resorted to self-censorship to continue reporting .
 Russian occupation authorities banned most Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar-language broadcasts, replacing the content with Russian programming . Most Ukrainian and Crimea Tatar broadcasts were banned .
 Russian authorities forbade songs by Ukrainian singers, such as Ruslana and Jamala, from playing on Crimean radio stations . Human rights groups reported that Russian authorities banned songs by Ukraine singers .
 Residents of Crimea are interrogated for posting pro-Ukrainian opinions on Facebook or in blogs .
Lilia Bujurova received a warning from security forces about postings she made on social media that Crimea was part of Ukraine .
 Serhiy Vasylchenko, a local anarchist, was sentenced to 10 days in jail for “extremism’s’. He made calls on social media to boycott the Russian Duma elections in Crimea .
 Russian authorities blocked internet sites they considered “extremist’s” sites throughout the year . But that in fact provided mainstream reporting about the situation in Crimea .
In February they blocked the sites of Ukrainska Pravda, censor.net, and Apostrophe.net . For example, in February the sites were blocked by the censors of both sites .
 Russian authorities in Crimea engaged in a widespread campaign to suppress Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian languages. Academic Freedom and Cultural Events were held in Crimea .
 Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian are Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 U.S. Department of State . Ukraine and Crimea have 72 official languages .
 Crimean Tatars continue to use the Cyrillic, as opposed to the Latin, alphabet . The Mejlis reported that authorities continued to pressure Tatars to use it .
 Authorities interviewed students about their opinions on Ukraine's sovereignty over Crimea .
 Authorities singled out Crimean Tatar boys for questioning, witnesses said . FSB officers said they would conduct similar investigations in the future .
 Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association Freedom of Assembly Organizations representing minority communities reported gross and widespread harassment and intimidation by occupation authorities .
 On March 1, authorities in Simferopol refused to allow the commemoration of Taras Shevchenko, the national poet of Ukraine .
 Simferopol authorities issued a blanket prohibition on public gatherings not organized by the government from March 7 to March 22 . The ban goes on March 9 .
 Occupation authorities prohibited gatherings and meetings to commemorate the 72nd anniversary of the 1944 Soviet mass deportation of Crimean Tatars on May 18 .
 Ilmi Umerov received a preemptive warning from police not to organize any type of gathering . On May 17, IlmiUmerov was told not to attend any type.
 Crimean Tatar students were banned from attending U.S. human rights events in the past .
 Crimean Tatar communities did not seek permission for gatherings as they assumed that occupation authorities would forbid them . The Mejlis reported that Crimean Tatari communities didn't seek permission.
Authorities arrested Crimean Tatars displaying flags and other symbols . At least one person in Bakhchysarai, four in the Kirovsky District, and four in Sudak .
 On August 20, a group named The Deceived of Crimea gathered in Simferopol to protest rampant corruption in Crimea following Russia's occupation in 2014 .
 Authorities prohibited protesters from assembling for a demonstration planned to coincide with a visit by President Putin of Russia .
 There were reports of occupation authorities using coercive methods to provide for participation at pro-”government rallies .
 Duma candidate shared on social media a photograph of an order authorities sent to municipal government offices in Feodosia . Those unable to attend a rally must write an explanatory note to their superiors .
 occupation authorities charged and fined individuals for allegedly violating public assembly rules in retaliation for gathering to witness security force raids .
 Court fined at least five Crimean Tatars for gathering to witness security force raids on neighboring homes in Bakhchisarai .
 Crimean Tatar leaders claim the charges were designed to intimidate Crimean Tatars into passively remaining in their homes during raids . Crimean Tatari leaders say the charges are meant to intimidate them into passive remaining .
 Freedom of Association Occupation authorities broadly restricted freedom of association for individuals that opposed the occupation .
 Crimean Tatar Mejlis is an elected body of Crimean Tatars that the Ukrainian government legally recognizes . On February 15, the “prosecutor general of Crimea’s Crimea filed a motion to ban the Crimean Tatars . The Ukrainian government recognizes the Crimean
 On April 13, the prosecutor general provisionally banned the Mejlis pending a court decision . The Russian Ministry of Justice upheld the decision on April 18 .
 On April 26, a Russian occupation court declared the Mejlis an extremist organization for continuing to recognize Ukrainian sovereignty in Crimea . U.S. Department of State Department of state declared Mejlis a extremist organization .
 The Russian Supreme Court upheld the lower court’s decision on September 29 . The lower court's decision was upheld by a lower court in September .
 The ban forbids Mejlis organized meetings or demonstrations, sharply restricts its financial activities . The ban also prohibits the display of the Melis flag and symbols .
 Mejlis was led by a central council of 33 members, its organization extended to towns and villages . Up to 2,000 local members of Mejli groups were under threat, according to a report .
 In late September authorities fined at least eight Mejlis members for allegedly taking part in a meeting of an illegal organization . The meeting took place at the home of Ilmi Umerov on September 22 .
 Crimean Tatar leader Refat Chubarov had gathered to wish him a happy birthday via Skype . Authorities monitored the meeting and determined that it constituted a meeting of the banned Mejlis .
 Russian authorities summoned Nariman Jelal, the highest ranking member of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, on February 11 . They want him to detail the activities of the Crimea TatarMejlis and his future travel plans .
 Russian authorities raided groups and institutions associated with Ukrainian culture . Authorities raided groups associated with Ukraine's culture .
 Many of the seized materials dealt with the Holodomor, a famine produced by Soviet authorities in 1932 and 1933 . The famine led to the deaths of millions of Ukrainians .
 Leonid Kuzmin is a member of the Ukrainian Cultural Association . He was questioned by authorities on July 18 .
 Authorities compelled Kuzmin to sign a nondisclosure agreement, forbidding discussion of the grounds for his questioning . Authorities compelled him to sign the agreement .
 Russian occupation authorities carried out numerous raids on Crimean Tatar cultural and spiritual institutions . Russian occupation officials carried out many raids on cultural institutions in Crimea .
 On January 27, Russian police raided the Crimean Tatar children’s center Elif in Dzhankoi, seizing books and materials .
 On January 28, police raided the Islamic Cultural Center in Simferopol, again seizing books and materials . Police raided the center again on January 28 .
 Russian laws imposed on Crimea prohibit any group that receives foreign funding and engages in “political activity” to register as a “foreign agent’s” The term is a term that connotes treason or espionage .
 The law Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 had a chilling effect on their activities . Authorities had not included any Crimean NGOs on the list .
 Russian authorities routinely detained adult males at the administrative boundary for additional questioning, human rights groups say . They also threatened to seize passports and documents, seizing telephones and memory cards, they say .
 Crimean residents travelling on Ukrainian passports were required to complete migration paperwork when crossing the administrative boundary between Kherson Oblast and occupied Crimea . Crimean residents travelled on Ukraine passports.
 As of April 1, Russian authorities forbade Crimean residents with Ukrainian license plates from driving out of Crimea . All Crimean residents must obtain Russian driver licenses .
 Ukrainian journalist Anastasia Ringis attempted to visit her parents in Crimea on February 25 . Russian authorities prohibited her from entry until 2020 .
 Russian occupation authorities banned Kherson residents Rustem Gugurik, Bekir Gugulik, and Bilyal Seytumerov from admission to Crimea for five years .
 Occupation authorities also prohibited entry into Crimea by Mustafa Jemilev and Refat Chubarov .
 Authorities forcibly relocated stateless persons in retaliation for their political activism . There were reports that authorities forcibly relocated people in retaliation.
 Crimean Tatar activist Nedim Khalilov had initiated a court case against occupation authorities, which sought to have Russia’s occupation of Crimea declared illegal .
 Khalilov possessed only a Soviet identity document, which stated that his place of birth was Uzbekistan . The document also stated that he had a birth place in Uzbekistan.
 He had obtained neither Ukrainian nor Russian citizenship on ideological grounds . He was born in Ukraine, but had no Russian citizenship .
At year's end, Khalilov was still awaiting deportation to Uzbekistan, where he had no relatives, housing, or other support . After a brief court hearing, occupation authorities forcibly deported him.
 Russian occupation authorities require all residents of Crimea to be Russian citizens . All residents in Crimea are Russian citizens.
 Those who refuse Russian citizenship may be subjected to arbitrary expulsion . Russian citizens may be subject to an arbitrary expulsion.
 Israeli and Ukrainian citizenships were expelled from Kerch in February .
 Authorities denied those who refused Russian citizenship access to government employment, education, and health care, among other limitations . Also denied access to bank accounts, health care and insurance, among others .
 One media report detailed the case of a woman in Yevpatoria who could not have stitches removed because she had not accepted Russian citizenship .
 A displaced person from the Donbas could not receive treatment for a dog bite . In another case, a displaced person could not be treated for a bite .
 Crimea Human Rights Group fined Voyazhkrym 35,000 rubles for employing a Ukrainian . The company was fined on April 8 .
 Authorities fined the Fregat shipbuilding company in Kerch 250,000 rubles for employing a Ukrainian .
 In some cases, Crimean residents were forced to surrender their Ukrainian passports . Many countries did not recognize passports issued by Russian occupation authorities .
 Ukrainians who retained Ukrainian citizenship must register passports or be subjected to fines or imprisonment .
 The Mejlis and local NGOs, such as Krym Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, believed the actual figure could be as high as 100,000 as most IDPs remained unregistered .
 Many fled out of fear that occupation authorities would target them for abuse because of their work as political activists or journalists . Many fled from the occupation in fear of being targeted by occupation authorities for abuse .
 Many professionals left Crimea because Russian occupation authorities required them to apply for Russian professional licenses and adopt Russian procedures in their work .
 Russian occupation authorities have prevented residents from voting in Ukrainian national and local elections since Crimea’s occupation began in 2014 .
 Crimea Human Rights Group recorded incidents where occupation authorities coerced residents into voting in the elections . The Crimea Human rights group recorded incidents.
 More than half of the funding for transportation infrastructure during the year was misspent or unaccounted for, according to media reports . funds for infrastructure in Crimea were being funneled to the Kerch bridge project .
 Human rights sources also reported misspent or stolen medical services funds adversely affected the provision of health care under Russian occupation . Human rights Sources also reported missing or stolen funds for medical services .
 There were no known requirements for Russian occupation authorities or their agents to file, verify, or make public any income or asset disclosure statements .
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 U.S. Department of State . Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 78 Section 5 .
 During the year Ukrainian government instituted process whereby births in Crimea could be recognized with documents issued by occupation authorities .
 Russian authorities continued to permit kidnapping of orphans in Crimea and transporting them across the border into Russia for adoption .
 Crimean Tatars are an ethnic group native to Crimea, dating most recently to the Crimean Khanate of the 15th century . The Tatars have been in Crimea for more than a century .
 There were reports that government officials openly advocated discrimination and violence against Crimean Tatars .
 Crimean Tatar villages have been asked to restore their historic place names . A member of the “parliament’s ‘parliament,’ Natalya Kryzhko threatened to “load on barges and drown them in the Black Sea’
 Russian security services routinely monitored prayers at mosques for any mention that Crimea remains part of Ukraine .
 Crimean Tatars reported that Russian occupation authorities threatened the custom of home funeral services . They have compiled lists of gravediggers and Muslim leaders and compiled lists.
 A court convicted Vladimir Baluch of insulting an official during an investigation into a stolen automobile . The Crimean Human Rights Group says Baluch was convicted on June 10 .
 Baluch maintained the charges were in retaliation for his displays of Ukrainian ethnic symbols and opposition to the occupation . Baluch maintains the charges are in retaliation.
 The FSB raided Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 U.S. Department of State . The agency raided 80 Baluch’s home after he posted a sign ‘renaming’ his street in honor of the “heavenly hundred’
 Baluch insists agents planted explosives and arrested Baluch . FSB claims to have found explosives during the raid .
 In 2015 security forces detained and beat Baluch for flying a Ukrainian flag at his home . Baluch was also beaten by security forces for flying the Ukrainian flag .
 Occupation authorities harassed and intimidated members of the churches . They used court proceedings to force the UOC-KP to leave properties it had rented for years .
 The UOC-KP was compelled to vacate part of the St. O'KP in January 16 court decision .
 Church officials report regular and systematic surveillance of UOC-KP churches and parishioners . Church officials reported regular and systemic surveillance of churches and Parishioners.
 Much of the LGBTI community fled Crimea after the Russian occupation began, activists say .
 Those who remained in fear of verbal and physical abuse due to their sexual orientation. Those who remain live in fear for verbal andphysical abuse .
Report commissioned by the Ukrainian Center for Civil Liberties and Memorial’s Antidiscrimination Center . Occupy Pedophilia is active in Crimea .
 The group used social media to lure suspected LGBTI persons to locations where they are humiliated, filmed, and beaten . The group also posted pictures of themselves on Facebook and Twitter .
 According to one report, a group of six men patrolling a park beat two individuals in Simferopol .
 Individuals were accosted and abused for wearing nonconformist clothing, on the assumption that they must be LGBTI persons .
 Human rights groups stated that these groups operated with the tacit support of local authorities, who did not investigate such crimes .
 Russian occupation authorities prohibited any LGBTI groups from holding public events in Crimea . The Crimea region is in the Crimea region .
 An LGBTI activist in Sevastopol announced plans to hold a peaceful protest on April 25 .
 Sergei Aksyonov, head of the occupation authorities in Crimea, stated that authorities would prevent any such assembly .
 "self-defense" forces threatened to expel LGBTI individuals from Crimea forcibly . Subsequently, “self- defense forces’s’ threats were made against LGBTI people from Crimea .
 Pro-Russian authorities threatened to nationalize property owned by Ukrainian labor unions in Crimea .