 United Nations S/PV. Security Council Seventy-fourth year 8461 st meeting Tuesday, 12 February 2019 .
 Mr Heusgen Mr Djani Mr Alotaibi Mr Duclos Ms. Morrison Gonzalez Mr Delattre Mr. Gonzalez Mr. HeusGen Djani Ms. DuClos . Mr. Delatt re-elected Mr. Declos .
 The Russian Federation's Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council . This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches.
 Mr Miroslav Jenca is the Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central Asia and the Americas . He is the head of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs .
 Ursula Mueller is Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator . His Excellency Mr Ertugrul Apakan is Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine . Martin Sajdik is Special Representative
 Mr Apakan and Mr Sajdik are joining the meeting via video-teleconference from Minsk .
 In resolution 2202, which was unanimously adopted on 17 February 2015, the Security Council endorsed the package of measures . The Security Council called on all parties to fully implement the measures .
 In presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12, of 6 June 2018, reaffirmed the centrality of the Minsk agreements .
 The Minsk agreements remain the only agreed framework for a negotiated peace in eastern Ukraine . Four years after their adoption, the Minsk agreement remains the only agreement .
 The Minsk framework remains largely unimplemented, including its key security and political aspects . Minsk's diplomatic efforts continue, but the Minsk agreement remains largely unimpressed .
 Negotiations appear to have lost momentum, with the main stakeholders either unable and/or unwilling to reach an agreement on the key steps forward, or being distracted from focusing on the implementation of agreed steps .
 I would like to recall that detailed discussions on the implementation of the provisions of the Minsk agreements have been taking place in separate forums . The United Nations is not a participant in the discussions, in which the United Nations does not participate .
 The Secretary-General has been consistent in stressing the U.N. strong support for the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other key actors in seeking a peaceful settlement in eastern Ukraine .
 The Secretary-General has also called for revitalizing efforts in these negotiation formats and bilateral channels .
 The conflict in eastern Ukraine is neither dormant nor frozen. As consistently highlighted by incidents over the past five years, the conflict is not dormant or frozen .
 It is a conflict in the heart of Europe that continues to claim victims. It is also a conflict that has claimed many victims .
 There has been a total of over a dozen ceasefire recommitments since the start of the conflict . The five recommitment to the ceasefire by the main stakeholders in the Trilateral Contact Group format last year .
Military advance positions on both sides of the contact line are coming closer to each other in the so called grey areas . Heavy weapons and their deployment in the proximity of the line are a reality .
 This week, another round of discussions within the Trilateral Contact Group will take place in Minsk .
 It is the United Nations sincere hope and expectation that the relevant parties will reach tangible outcomes at these meetings and implement decisions in good faith and without delay .
 There has been an overall reduction in violence since 2014, including in the number of civilian deaths, casualties and destruction continue on an almost weekly basis .
 An estimated 1. million people remain internally displaced. At the same time, an estimated 1 million people are internally displaced .
 There is an urgent need to agree on additional measures that would make the ceasefire sustainable and irreversible . There is a need for more measures to make the truce sustainable, irreversible and sustainable .
 The priority of the parties should be to withdraw heavy weapons from populated areas, disengage forces and protect critical civilian infrastructure . The priority should be, without delay, to withdrawheavy weapons.
 The United Nations remains fully committed to playing its role in continuing to provide humanitarian assistance, human rights monitoring and development support . The U.N. continues to play a role in providing humanitarian assistance.
 The scale and urgency of needs arising from the conflict remain immense . The scale of the conflict remains immense .
 Over half a million people live within five kilometres of the contact line . They are most exposed to periodic shelling, gunfire, landmines and unexploded ordnance .
 The area around the contact line remains one of the most mine-contaminated areas in the world .
 Council called for by the Council in its presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12 of 6 June 2018 . It is essential that the international community step up efforts to help meet the humanitarian needs on the ground .
 The U.N. will continue to spare no effort to fulfil its responsibilities in the delivery of humanitarian assistance and the monitoring of human rights . The United Nations will also continue to provide humanitarian assistance .
 U.N. humanitarian efforts on the ground should not be politicized or instrumentalized by any side, I wish to underline . However, it is also essential that the United Nations humanitarian efforts are not politicized .
 This year, the conflict in eastern Ukraine will enter its sixth year . There should be no illusions — while negotiations may have become protracted, this conflict remains today an active threat to international peace and security .
 It would be misleading to think that time by itself will bring about solutions. It is misleading to believe that time is the best way to solve problems .
 The United Nations once again calls for swift progress in the implementation of the Minsk agreements . The Security Council's expectations are echoed by the United Nations .
 The United Nations also urges all parties to avoid any unilateral steps that could deepen the divide or depart from the Minsk agreements .
 The conflict in Ukraine is first and foremost affecting the Ukrainian people . It is also taking place in a context of increasing challenges to the international peace and security framework .
 The conflict continues to test the credibility of international and regional organizations . The conflict is still a major challenge to international organizations .
 Secretary-General stressed need to prevent emergence of new crises and to resolve existing conflicts in the region . In his address to the Council two years ago on conflicts in Europe (see S/PV.7886)
 The SecretaryGeneral again singled out the conflict in Ukraine as one of the key challenges that continues to confront the international community .
 Member States need to work together in the interest of regional stability, says the U.S.
 The United Nations underlines the need to fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine . The U.N. says Ukraine should be respected within its internationally recognized borders .
 The Ukraine conflict has been raging for more than a decade . Ukraine has been the focus of the conflict for years . The conflict has killed more than 100,000 people in the past year .
 The Security Council brief the Security Council on the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine .
 More than 3,300 civilians have been killed and up to 9,000 injured since the conflict began in 2014 . More than 2,000 people have been injured in the conflict since 2014 .
 In 2019, 3. million people will need humanitarian assistance and protection service . Many of whom are elderly, women and children will need assistance .
 They have lost their livelihoods and their limited resources have been exhausted by now . They have been forced to rely on their own resources .
 Critical civilian infrastructure continues to be damaged or disrupted, according to a report .
 In 2018 alone, 89 incidents affected water and sanitation facilities . In the past 12 months, 12 water workers have been injured due to hostilities and landmine explosions .
Water is flowing to millions of people on both sides of the contact line . They were simply trying to do their work, ensuring that water continues to flow .
 The parties to the conflict must take all feasible precautions to avoid, and in any event minimize civilian harm .
 International humanitarian law must be upheld to protect civilians and critical civilian infrastructure at all times, everywhere and by all parties .
 There has been progress, but I appeal once again for more to be done on both sides . There have been progress in both sides, but there has been more progress than ever .
 In the entire Luhansk oblast, civilians can cross the contact line through only one checkpoint . The pedestrian bridge is the pedestrian bridge of Stanytsia Luhanska .
With freezing temperatures during Ukraine’s winter, it is critical that essential services at crossing points be improved . People continue to wait several hours to cross the contact line .
 Already this year, 10 people — most of them elderly — have died at checkpoints . Most of them have been elderly .
 Elderly people account for more than half of the crossings and face long-standing barriers to access their pensions . ElderlyPeople account for over half the crossings .
 I have called on the Government of Ukraine to adopt a national mine-action framework . I have also called for the Government to adopt the country's mine- action framework .
 A mine-action law was recently adopted. Today I am pleased to report that a mine- action law is recently adopted .
 That now needs to pave the way for urgently scaling up mine-action efforts . That needs to be urgently scaled up mine action efforts .
Landmine and explosive-hazard explosions caused approximately 43 per cent of all civilian casualties in 2018 . Landmine and explosives caused about 43% of civilian casualties .
Humanitarians today have slightly more access to civilians in need than a year ago . Humanitarians have more access than ever, particularly in areas beyond Government control . humanitarian access is often unpredictable.
 The Council welcomed the work of United Nations agencies in order to address the tragic humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine . The Council will recall the Council on 6 June 2018 .
 Humanitarians are making a real difference by providing aid on both sides of the contact line . Despite access challenges, a complex operating environment and limited funding, humanitarians have made a difference .
 They continue to be guided by the universally recognized principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence . They are guided by universally recognized Principles of humanity and impartiality .
 In 2018, humanitarians reached some 1. million of the most vulnerable people with critical assistance . In 2018 alone, humanitarianians reached 1.1 million people in need of help .
 Ukraine Humanitarian Pooled Fund to address acute needs that are least funded . We are establishing an innovative funding mechanism to support the 2019 humanitarian response plan .
 The Emergency Relief Coordinator approved a $6 million allocation last month from the Central Emergency Response Fund . The fund is part of an envelope for underfunded crises .
 Over 60 per cent of last year’s humanitarian response plan was not funded . Over 60% of the humanitarian response plans were not funded.
 Some civilians who desperately needed assistance were unable to receive food, water and sanitation, healthcare and medicines, as well as protection services . As a consequence, some civilians who needed assistance had been unable to get food and water .
 This year we require $162 million to provide aid to 2. million people through the 2019 humanitarian response plan . This year, we need $162million to provide assistance to 2 million people .
 The plan focuses on protecting affected people and restoring their access to livelihoods, essential services and critical structures .
 humanitarian assistance continues to be critical as a result of conflict . We aim to meet people’s needs through more sustainable efforts .
 Civilians along the contact line have suffered the physical and emotional consequences of repeated, often intense, hostilities .
 Shelling, sniper-fire and landmines have become a daily reality for millions .
Men, women and children have suffered every day for over five years. Let us remember that behind the figures mentioned are families — men, women, and children .
 Many are struggling to access schools, hospitals, hospitals and other essential services . Many are still struggling to get access to schools and hospitals .
 To the resilient people of Ukraine, I wish to say that we have not forgotten them, says Ukraine's leader .
 We will continue to do everything we can to alleviate their daily suffering, and to call for lasting peace . We will be doing everything we could to help them, and we will call for peace, we say .
 The Security Council will brief the Security Council on the security situation in eastern Ukraine . Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin is expected to make a statement on the situation .
 I will provide members with an update on the challenges in the implementation of the Minsk agreements . In particular the package of measures as we mark a year since its signing .
 A significant decrease in the number of ceasefire violations. That resulted in a demonstration that, if there is will, violence can be stopped . That has led to a significant decrease.
 Areas where violence has been most intense remain concentrated around the Avdiivka-Yasynuvata-Donetsk airport area . The Popasna-Pervomaisk-Zolote area, areas east and northeast of Mariupol and areas south of Svitl
 The Trilateral Contact Group will meet tomorrow in Minsk, Belarus .
 There must be progress in identifying measures to strengthen the ceasefire. There must also be progress to identify measures.
 The disengagement of forces and hardware, agreed in the framework decision of September 2016, has not occurred . It has not been agreed.
 On the contrary, we have observed a re-engagement in the Petrivske and Zolote disengagement areas .
 Measures to improve conditions for those living in or close to conflict-affected areas are urgently needed . Measures that can improve conditions are needed, say experts .
 The full withdrawal of heavy weapons, beginning with populated areas, should be a priority . The full withdraw of heavyweapons should be the priority, says author .
 Concrete, positive steps in the field of humanitarian mine action, particularly around schools, kindergartens and entry-exit checkpoints, are needed. Concrete steps are needed, says the author of the book .
 That could help prevent further civilian casualties from mines and unexploded ordnance . That could also help prevent more civilian casualties.
Raising awareness of those dangers is important, especially among children . Raising awareness is important for children .
 The Donetsk filtration station and the pumping station in Vasylivka have continued to occur . Regrettably, incidents affecting sites of critical infrastructure, such as the station, have occurred .
Men and women who work in those sites for the benefit of their communities are at risk . They cause damage and endanger the lives of the brave men and women .
 SMM continues to facilitate dialogue to enable the repair and maintenance of critical civilian infrastructure . The SMM has been in charge of repairing and maintaining critical infrastructure for years .
 Thousands of people undertake long journeys every day. To carry on with their lives, thousands of people do long journeys .
 The conflict has forced many to use the few entry-exit checkpoints to access basic services, receive pensions and visit family members separated by the conflict .
 We observe the consequences of the long queues in sub-zero temperatures, particularly for the elderly . The elderly are among the worst affected by the cold weather .
 Since December, SMM has recorded 14 cases of people who died from natural causes while waiting at checkpoints . The SMM recorded 14 people who were waiting at checkpoint in December .
 Steps must be taken to facilitate access for medical staff to the grey zone between these checkpoints to provide assistance for civilians . Steps must also be taken.
 Crossing conditions must be improved and more such checkpoints should be opened, in particular in the Luhansk region. Crossing conditions should be improved, says a spokesman .
 Slovak Foreign Minister Lajcak highlighted the precarious conditions of civilians crossing the damaged bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska .
 Action is needed to ensure that the necessary repairs to the bridge become possible . The bridge is in need to be repaired to make repairs possible .
 The Mission continues to monitor and report on developments taking place in a complex security environment . The Mission is based in London.
 SMM unarmed aerial vehicles continue to be targeted and signal interference with their flights persists . SMM unmanned aerial vehicles are still being targeted and Signal interference continues .
 Challenges to freedom of movement remain, in particular in areas outside Government control in the southern Donetsk region .
 The OSCE is the responsibility of the sides to make good on their commitments and ensure effective monitoring and verification by the OSCE . It is a commitment they made in the package of measures .
 The Mission will continue to support and facilitate the implementation of the Minsk agreements . The Mission has been in charge of supporting and facilitating Minsk negotiations .
 The SMM will also continue to monitor and report on the security situation, according to its mandate . It will facilitate dialogue to reduce tensions and promote stabilization and normalization .
In that context, we have enhanced our patrolling activities to monitor the possible effects on the socioeconomic situation and potential implications related to developments in the Sea of Azov .
 I also wish to express my gratitude for the close cooperation with United Nations agencies in Ukraine, both in Kyiv and in the field .
 In closing, I would like to acknowledge the work of my colleagues, the SMM members, and the dedicated men and women with whom I have the honour to work .
 I wish to thank my colleague and friend, Ambassador Sajdik, for his close cooperation . I also wish to also thank my colleagues and friend for their close cooperation, I say .
Ambassador Apakan will brief the Council from Minsk on the evening before another negotiation round of the Trilateral Contact Group and the four working groups established by the Minsk agreements will take place .
 The Minsk mechanisms function on a regular basis, according to the author . There are many different questions to be discussed and problems, also of a current nature, to be solved .
 The Trilateral Contact Group unites Russia and Ukraine and the Special Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . The General Assembly is currently in its seventy-second session .
 The Minsk platform foresees the participation of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in meetings . The platform is also used in meetings between the two regions .
 Normandy four have enshrined oversight by the Normandy four over Minsk deliberations . Resolution 2202, of 17 February 2015, welcomed the declaration adopted by the four leaders .
 The fourth anniversary of the signing of the Minsk agreements was today . I said a solution to the conflict has not come nearer .
 Austrian OSCE chairmanship in 2017 helped reduce number of civilians casualties by more than half in 2018 . OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and international humanitarian organizations helped reduce the number of casualties .
 The Trilateral Contact Group could adopt decisions in the security field, as required by the Minsk agreements . Ambassador Apakan’s able guidance of the security working group, for which I am very grateful, he says .
 Positive developments could also be achieved in the economic field, especially with respect to water deliveries and payments in the Luhansk region .
In 2018, we observed encouraging efforts with regard to maintaining mobile telecommunications across the line of contact . The elderly are especially vital for receiving their pensions on accounts in Governmentcontrolled territory .
 The prolongation of the special status of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine until the end of this year was an important political achievement .
 The conduct of the so-called elections on 11 November 2018 in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions has not helped strengthen the underlying spirit of the Minsk agreements, namely, the unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 No disengagement has taken place so far in Stanytsia Luhanska, which is one of the disengagement zones that the sides had previously agreed on .
 The access to the bridge on the northern bank of the Seversky Donets River, near Stanytsia Luhanska, remains unrepaired . It has absolutely dire consequences, in particular for the elderly .
 There has been no exchange of conflict-related detainees since the end of 2017 . No exchange of detainees has been held since 2017 .
 I encourage the sides to allow the latter, with the help of its tireless coordinator Pierre Morel, to widen the scope of its discussions . I encourage both sides to let the latter allow the two sides to discuss .
 I have worked more than three and a half years with the Minsk process. I have now worked more more than 3 and ahalf years with Minsk .
 The full implementation of the Minsk agreements is essential to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 I now give the floor to those members of the Council who wish to make statements . I now gives the floor. I now giving the floor for those members who want to make statement .
 The meeting was held in order to discuss the implementation of a document that is important to the settlement of the internal Ukrainian crisis .
 It was signed four years ago on 12 February 2015 by representatives of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Ukraine, Russia, the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic .
 As an annex, it is an integral part of resolution 2202, of 17 February 2015, which endorsed it in its very first paragraph . We have every reason to bring up this issue in the United Nations, since as an annex.
 support for the implementation of the Minsk package was again affirmed in a Security Council presidential statement of 6 June 2018 .
 Some colleagues on the Council labour under the illusion, but on this topic especially, they are uncomfortable discussing the subject of Ukraine .
 Western countries first orchestrated an anti-Government coup in Ukraine and then gave Kyiv carte blanche to do absolutely anything on the pretext of dealing with what it calls the Russian threat and aggression .
 The then President of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, signed an agreement with the opposition on a peaceful settlement of the crisis . On 21 February it will be exactly five years since the moment when in the presence of high representatives of the European Union, Germany, Poland and France will be
 He was almost immediately deceived and ultimately forced to leave Ukraine . He was nearly immediately deceived by Ukraine .
 Ukraine would not have ended up as a rawmaterials farm supplying the EU’s markets with cheap labour . Perhaps if he had acted as the current Ukrainian authorities do, or, say, like the leaders of the democratic countries .
 The protesters were armed and determined to seize power at any cost, including bloody incitement . As we now know for certain, the protesters werearmed and determined.
 The U.S. is the true puppet master of these entire Maidan theatrics, he says . The West is responsible for everything that has happened and is happening, as does the United States .
 The West has absolutely no interest in Ukraine itself, its future or the welfare of its citizens . It is obvious to us that the West has nothing to do with Ukraine .
 Its sole interest is in the country’s capacity as a pawn in a geopolitical confrontation with Russia .
 Four years ago, it seemed as if the international community and the parties to the Ukrainian conflict were of one mind as to what the formula for a settlement should be .
 In May 2018, during a Council meeting convened by our Polish colleagues, we went over the Minsk package of measures in the greatest possible detail . I will therefore not do that today, and I will not do it today .
 Do not repeat that rote line that Russia should implement the Minsk agreements . Do not Repeat that line that Russian should implement Minsk agreement .
 Kyiv is sabotaging the Minsk agreements and it is Moscow they are trying to make pay the price for that. As we have said many times, the absurdity is that it is Kyiv that is sabotageaging the agreements .
 The order of implementation of each step is of key significance, says the author . To reiterate the most important point once again, the arrangement of the steps referred to in the resolution is not accidental .
 The implementation of paragraph 9, on the transfer to Ukraine of control of the border with Russia in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, will be possible only after all the other conditions have been implemented, he says .
 Kyiv has consistently and knowingly failed to implement the Minsk agreements and has sabotaged them, we have full grounds for saying . Western partners have covered up all of its unlawful actions, we say. Unfortunately, however, we've full grounds to say that Kyiv have consistently failed to
 Viktor Medvedchuk is one of the leaders of the Ukrainian opposition . He had declared his candidacy for the presidential elections to be held on 31 March . The presidential elections are scheduled for March 31 .
 The indictment was his call for holding direct dialogue between Kyiv and Donbas . The reason for the indictment was the call for the region special status within Ukraine .
 implementing the Minsk agreements in Ukraine today is tantamount to treason and subject to criminal prosecution . In other words, implementing the agreement in Ukraine would be a criminal offense .
 Minsk agreements' insistence on direct dialogue with Luhansk and Donetsk People's Republics brings Kyiv out in an allergic reaction .
Western colleagues pretend not to notice, thereby displaying their carefully cultivated double standards . But our Western colleagues pretend to be unaware of their double standards.
In every other conflict on the Security Council’s agenda, we are all united in insisting that the opposing parties have to sit down at the negotiating table with the goal of ending their confrontation or their military action and launching a political process .
 It is creating a constitutional committee with the participation of the Government and opposition . It is arriving at an agreement on the establishment of a Syrian-owned and -led political process .
 Everyone here applauded the Stockholm Agreement reached between the Yemeni Government and Ansar Allah . The agreement was reached between Yemen's government and the Yemeni government .
We are all nervously keeping our fingers crossed and praying that this still fragile agreement can be implemented . And now we are all anxiously keeping their fingers crossed .
 The Central African Republic's aim was to reconcile some hitherto irreconcilable parties . We all welcomed the Khartoum agreement .
 The goal of any peace process, and no one will disagree with me, is to reach a political rather than a military solution to a conflict . The goal is to end the conflict through direct talks between the conflicting parties .
 No one else here cares to try. I can answer that question myself, especially since no one else is trying to try . I can't answer it myself .
 Kyiv authorities’ disingenuous chosen paradigm — “This is not a civil conflict. This is happening because the Kyiv Authorities’s disingenuous choice of paradigm is ‘this is not an civil conflict’ “
 Ukraine's President Poroshenko is doing a great deal to war, and that is what he is doing, says the Ukrainian President .
 Ukraine's woes and misfortunes are the legacy of Russia's occupation of Ukraine. It turns out that all of Ukraine’s woes are the result of the past three centuries .
 A new, falsified version of history is being created at accelerated speed, cobbled together from all the skeletons in its cupboard .
 The other party to the conflict is not their own citizens but an aggressor country, according to them . The Minsk agreements can be torn up and thrown in the trash too .
 There is no need for Ukraine to talk to those of its citizens who live in Donetsk and Luhansk .
Residents of Donetsk and Luhansk have not observed the presence of this so-called aggressor . But some residents have not seen the presence among them of this aggressor.
 Kyiv has not protested against their de facto authorities and they are not begging Kyiv to save them . They are not protesting against the authorities and are not asking Kyiv for help .
 Kyiv authorities’ entire primitive construct — primitive, but effective — is Kyiv . The Kyiv government says it is a "primitive construct"
 It is effective because our Western colleagues are complicit in it. And it's effective because it is effective. It is also effective because we are complicit with it, says author .
 Kyiv has not respected the ceasefire agreement and has moved deep into the grey zone . President Poroshenko’s adviser Yuriy Biryukov recently confirmed the move .
 Things have reached a point where the positions of the parties in some areas are dangerously close .
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has confirmed the arrival in Donbas of new units with Ukrainian tanks and artillery .
 Kyiv has been trying to marginalize the mechanisms of the Trilateral Contact Group and launch a second round of discussions on issues that have already been agreed on . Kyiv also has been persistently evading its political commitments, including political commitments .
 President Poroshenko has declared that the Minsk format does not exist . The Minsk agreements for the proclaimed republics of Donbas and that they should disappear .
 The result of the total indulgence with which Western Governments have met any action by Kyiv has been the creation of a continuing atmosphere of lawlessness . hatred of Russia is kindled and dissent is brutally suppressed .
 Kyiv's unwillingness to adhere strictly to OSCE standards has become increasingly obvious over the past few years . Kyiv’s unwillingness to comply with the standards has been increasingly obvious .
 Everyone in this Chamber has been trying to ignore that, partly because it is genuinely difficult to find one's way in Ukraine’s surrealistic internal politics without a translation or first-hand information . The Chamber has continued to trot out the tired cliches about democratic choice and
Ukrainian authorities are knowingly ignoring all the flagrant violations of democratic norms, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: "What they are really doing is knowingly ignoring" the violations .
 For those who do not know about it, I should explain that this site contains personal information about people whom Kyiv nationalists do not like . The site is in violation of rules on the protection of personal information .
 That amounts to giving people the black spot or putting them on a hit list . That amount of giving people a black spot is giving them a chance to be on the list .
 The list includes personal information about politicians from Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary .
 ODIHR is supposed to be the gold standard for monitoring elections . These kinds of steps on the part of Kyiv are yet another gross violation of its international commitments .
 Maidan authorities' decision not to open polling stations in Russia has deprived millions of Ukrainians of the opportunity to vote there, which calls into question the upcoming elections’ transparency and objectivity . This is also the place to mention that the Maidan Authorities’ decision not
Almost 4 million people of Donbas will have no chance of voting either . Nearly 10 per cent of Ukraine’s total population of 42. million will not have a vote .
 Kyiv authorities weeping their hypocritical tears for them. Because they are certainly not needed by the current Kyiv Authorities, they are not needed to weep .
For Kyiv they long ago became self-supporting pawns in its unscrupulous political games . For Kyiv, they have long ago become self-supported pawns for political purposes .
 Kyiv has imposed an economic, transportation, energy, energy and social blockade on Donbas . It's a concern for its citizens, we should point out .
 Kyiv's Western mentors will discuss Ukraine's democratic development in the Chamber of the Ukrainian Parliament .
 Orthodox churches are being openly seized with the assistance of the legislative and executive authorities . Of course, it should also include the situation of religious freedom in Ukraine .
Ukrainian authorities have forgotten the separation between Church and State that exists in civilized countries . This principle is guaranteed in Ukraine’s Constitution .
 The key obstacle to resolving the crisis is the lack of a clear response from Western countries to Kyiv’s unwillingness to implement the package of measures that has been there for four years now .
 Kyiv is venturing new provocations that threaten only to worsen the situation and ruin the peace process . As a result, Kyiv has been venturing a new provocation that threatens only to worsened the situation .
 Ukrainian authorities will urge Ukrainian authorities to scrupulously implement their international commitments .
Kyiv must finally understand that the implementation of the Minsk package of measures is the only chance for peace and for resolving the conflict in Ukraine . Kyiv must also understand that it is only chance to resolve the conflict.
 We want to warn Kyiv and its sponsors that they should forget about hopes for a plan B . We want everyone to forget about plans B, especially if anyone entertains any illusions about military means for resolving the conflict .
 I was left with the impression that it was Ukraine that had invaded Russia, not Russia that invaded Ukraine .
 I would particularly like to thank Mr Apakan for his five years or more of work with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine .
 What the monitors have accomplished in extremely difficult circumstances over those years is incredible. What they have accomplished is incredible, says the team .
 I would also like to thank Mr Sajdik, who once again expressed his commitment to the Minsk process, the Trilateral Contact Group and the working groups .
 I would like to remind Mr Nebenzia that direct meetings are actually taking place in those working groups, he says .
 When I heard that our Russian friends had put this subject on the agenda, I did not feel uncomfortable either . In fact quite the contrary, says CNN's John Sutter .
Four years after the signing of the Minsk agreements, I believe it is quite right that we should discuss the situation .
 At the time Ukraine still had nuclear weapons, it gave them up in exchange for Russia’s guarantee of its territorial integrity and sovereignty .
We have seen what has happened since then with regard to its sovereignty and territorial integrity, and what that means for disarmament worldwide and for the rulesbased international order and international law . We have seen the situation since then.
 The Treaty between the Russian Federation and Ukraine on Cooperation in the Use of the Sea of Azov is the most recent text in which it is clear that the freedom of navigation is guaranteed .
 Ukrainian marines who relied on the freedom of navigation in the Sea of Azov are imprisoned to this day . This is a violation of international law, according to the Ukrainian military .
 Vassily has said that it was an internal coup to overthrow the Government . Over the years, our Russian friends have said.
 Russian soldiers were directly involved in the occupation of Luhansk and of Donetsk . Russian soldiers are directly involved, both in the occupied areas .
 Putin ordered security services to retake Crimea in February 2014 . There is a documentary that clearly states that, on 23 February 2014, President Putin ordered the security services.
 In 2014 and 2015, there was a great deal of criticism on social media in Russia . Many Russian soldiers had been killed, and many were killed .
 In August 2014, Russia banned the Committee of Soldiers’ Mothers of St. St. Petersburg . Then, in August 2014.
 President Putin banned reports about the death of members of the Defence Ministry in peace time . Subsequently, in a decree issued in May 2015, President Putin also banned reports of the death .
 I do not know if it is a privilege, but I was in Minsk and in negotiations for approximately 16 hours . I was also in negotiations with the Russian government for about 16 hours.
 The main discussion was focused on when the ceasefire would take place . The main topic was on the issue of when a ceasefire would happen .
 The members of the Normandy format, in particular the non-Russians, insisted on an early ceasefire .
 In the end, the ceasefire was agreed on the morning of 12 February 2015, following some back and forth .
 The first paragraph stipulates an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire as of 15 February 2015 . The first paragraphs also stipulates a comprehensive ceasefire .
 The ceasefire never happened, because the Russian military was actually right and they were unable to reach Debaltseve at the time .
 Russian troops continued until they finally occupied Debaltseve . Instead of having a ceasefire, they continued to occupy the area .
 The original sin committed when it comes to the implementation of the Minsk agreements . The Minsk agreement is the first time the agreement has been implemented .
 Together with my French colleague at the time, I visited Ukraine several times . Together with her French colleague, I also visited Ukraine many times .
 We spoke with the members of Parliament about adopting laws and so on . We went to the Rada and spoke with members of parliament about adopting law .
 Russia has committed the original sin of not honouring the ceasefire . There was no trust that Russia would do its part after having committed theOriginal sin .
Ambassador Apakan highlighted that the Minsk package pertaining to free access to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine does not have free access .
 Russian-supported elections on 11 November last year again demonstrated that Russia is not ready to adhere to the Minsk package . The elections were held in Russia's capital, Moscow's capital.
 The Rada adopted a number of important elements of the Minsk agreements . There is distrust in Ukraine but, nevertheless, the Rada has adopted some of the important elements .
 There was a first reading of the constitutional amendments on decentralization . The amendments were introduced in the first round of constitutional amendments .
 It was extremely difficult to convince the members of the Rada and receive the necessary support . It was very hard to convince them to give the necessary help .
 Germany, together with France, will continue to be active and to support in the Normandy format all efforts to broker a ceasefire and reach a solution . Germany and France, together, will still be active. Germany, along with France.
 We are ready to support the idea of a United Nations mission, which was discussed . We are also ready to back a U.N. mission.
 The mandate for it was proposed by Russia and states that U.N. peacekeepers should protect the Special Monitoring Mission . The mandate was also proposed by the Russian government .
For it to have free access and be able to move around freely would require just one phone call from the Russian President . I think that is a joke; for it to be free access to the world would require a phone call.
 The U.N. has to have a serious mission. We are ready for the United Nations, but it has to be serious . The United Nations is ready to take on the challenge .
 Let me briefly turn to the worst outcome of what happened in Ukraine — the humanitarian situation in Crimea and Donbas . Let me turn to a worst outcome. Let me brief turn to what happened.
 I think what should be done now is to consider the humanitarian issues . I think that is the best way to deal with the crisis is to look at the situation in the future .
 The Stanytsia Luhanska pedestrian bridge was mentioned by all of the briefers . I do not understand why it is not possible to have an agreement between Ukraine and Russia on the bridge, it was mentioned .
 There are reports about the situation there and how old people have to cross it . There are also reports about how young people are being treated by police .
 Ukrainian Ambassador says everything will be done to ensure that the bridge again becomes operational . I would ask the Ukrainian Ambassador, in view of his statement, to make a commitment .
The essential infrastructure should be spared and repaired, as mentioned previously . The essential infrastructure needs to be repaired and repaired .
 The Minsk agreements have been severely criticized. The original sin occurred in their implementation of the agreements . There is every reason for such criticism.
 Normandy format remains committed to the agreements and we want them to be successful . The Normandy format is committed to a successful agreement .
 We are ready to work on the issue, not least for the benefit of the people who are suffering terribly . We are also ready to help the people suffering terribly, says the author .
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenca and Assistant Secretary- General Ursula Mueller thank each other for their briefings .
 I would also like to welcome my former colleagues, Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan and Ambassador Martin Sajdik, and to thank them for their insightful briefings on the implementation of resolution 2202 , the Minsk agreements and the situation in eastern Ukraine .
 The United Nations was established in order to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war . The United States was established to protect succeeding generations.
 The Council takes the initiative to identify threats to peace and security . It calls on States parties to a conflict to settle their differences through peaceful means .
 This meeting falls on the fourth anniversary of the Minsk agreements, which provide a road map to settle the conflict in Ukraine .
 There continue to be violations of the ceasefire with weapons that should have been withdrawn under the agreements . However, there continue to have been violations.
More violence is still present in an environment characterized by insecurity and a lack of trust . Those weapons are still present, according to CNN.com .
 We call on all parties to immediately cease hostilities and commit themselves to fully respecting the ceasefire and refraining from provocations that could lead to more tension . We also call on the parties to immediate cease hostilities .
 We renew our support for the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders, as well as non-interference in its internal affairs, we say .
 We hope that all parties concerned will fully implement resolution 2202 . The Minsk agreements and presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12 of 6 June 2018 .
 U.N. calls on parties to achieve a comprehensive and balanced solution to this issue through dialogue . It is stipulated in Article 33 of the United Nations Charter .
 We commend the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and its efforts to facilitate a dialogue among the parties.
 We call on Ukraine and the Russian Federation to activate a dialogue between them and take confidence-building measures to show greater political will . We want to revitalize a lasting and comprehensive negotiation process.
 The crisis in the eastern part of Ukraine is now in its fifth year . The crisis is in its sixth year .
 The consequences are becoming increasingly serious owing to daily hostilities, which have an impact on the infrastructure and undermine the daily life of the people in the region . The consequences of the daily hostilities are becoming more serious .
 The conflict also affects more than 5 million people, of whom 3. million people are in need of urgent humanitarian assistance and protection .
 In addition, there are 1. million internally displaced persons, according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs .
 The humanitarian situation remains precarious due to many obstacles impeding relief work and lack of funding for the humanitarian response plan . The humanitarian crisis remains precarious.
 The situation in eastern Ukraine is still unstable despite some improvements . The situation is still stable despite improvements in the region .
 We stress the importance of providing humanitarian assistance to all the affected areas in order to improve the living conditions of the population there . We stress that the need to provide humanitarian assistance for all affected areas .
 In conclusion, we urgently call for a peaceful solution to the crisis in the eastern part of Ukraine . The Security Council resolutions and the agreements signed by the parties involved.
 The Minsk agreements represent the only agreed framework to settle the crisis in the region . That includes the Minsk agreement, which represents the only agreement on a framework .
 I would like to thank Miroslav Jenca, Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan and Ambassador Martin Sajdik for their comprehensive briefings .
 Minsk agreements need full implementation of the Minsk agreement by all the signatories involved . We always underline the need for full Implementation of the agreement .
 It must be remembered who the victim is and who the aggressor is in this case . The victim's identity must be known .
 Russia has fallen prey to Russia’s aggressive foreign policy that is failing to comply with the Minsk agreements . Despite what we may hear today, much ill will be required to suggest that it is the country that has fallen victim to the country .
 It is Russia that allowed the illegal elections conducted last November in the so-called separatist regions in Donbas . The elections constitute a gross violation of the Minsk agreements .
 The OSCE must be allowed to permanently monitor the Ukrainian-Russian State border . The Russian-Ukrainian border is Ukraine's border with Ukraine .
 Russian aggression against Ukraine remains a security threat to the whole region . Russian aggression is still a security risk to the entire region .
 The conflict in and around Ukraine is not a domestic Ukrainian crisis, says the Council . As we have already stated in the Council on several occasions, it is not the domestic crisis .
 Russian aggression is a consequence of the Russian aggression against a sovereign State . It is often depicted by the aggressor, a brotherly nation .
 That aggression undermines the core principles enshrined in the Charter of the U.N. The United Nations.
 Poland fully supports Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, including its maritime areas . Poland also supports Ukraine's sovereignty, territorial integrity and maritime areas.
 Russia’s unjustified use of military force against Ukrainian ships and naval personnel on 25 November . It took place against the backdrop of increasing militarization in the area .
 We call on Russia to ensure unhindered access to Ukrainian ports and navigational rights in the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait .
 The Ukrainian vessels and their crew members have been detained in Ukraine . The vessels are being held in Ukraine by the Ukrainian government .
 Russia must stop destabilizing the socioeconomic situation in eastern Ukraine through unjustified discriminatory inspections of vessels bound for and originating in the ports of Berdyansk and Mariupol . Russia must not destabilize the country's socioeconomic situation through discriminatory inspections .
 Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea, an integral part of Ukraine, is a glaring example of the violation of the principles of international law .
 Crimea referendum was held on 16 March 2014, when the illegal referendum deciding the status of Crimea was held . That was true in March 2014 and it continues to be true today .
 Russia’s claims of sovereignty or sovereign rights in maritime areas belonging to the Crimean peninsula have no legal basis whatsoever . Russia's claim of sovereignty and sovereign rights has no basis whatsoever.
 Ukraine's decision to institute arbitration proceedings against Russia under the United National Convention on the Law of the Sea is a step that will hopefully lead to a peaceful resolution of its disputes with Russia .
 Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller has provided a picture of the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine . We see the need to take immediate action to ease the difficult humanitarian situation.
 First, it requires Russia to allow international humanitarian organizations to operate freely in the areas of Donbas controlled by militants . Second, it needs Russia to let international humanitarian groups operate freely .
 The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is aware that humanitarian aid and protection need to be provided to approximately 3 million people .
 The civilian infrastructure is also being targeted and intentionally destroyed . The civilian population is being targeted by the government .
 The Russiabacked forces refuse to make basic improvements to the crossing facilities at the entry-exit checkpoints . Thousands of civilians wait for hours to meet their basic needs such as seeing family members, and to collect medicine and food .
 The Special Monitoring Mission is reporting a threefold increase in deaths by natural causes at checkpoints . In comparison to the previous year, the number of deaths is threefold .
 In mid-December last year, local pipelines in Donetsk were shelled and damaged . About 43,000 Toretsk inhabitants, including about 5,000 children in 21 educational facilities, were affected .
 Water supplies were resumed after five days when the parties to the conflict agreed to hold fire on the water supply infrastructure for the repair of damaged pipelines . Water supply infrastructure was damaged by the conflict .
 The water workers found themselves under heavy fire on 25 December . Despite safety guarantees, the water workers were under fire .
 Poland has been providing humanitarian aid to internally displaced people in eastern Ukraine . Poland has also been providing aid to the most vulnerable local population .
 Ukraine is a priority State for Poland’s development assistance and will remain one as long as our partners recognize the need for it. Ukraine will remain a priority state for Poland's development assistance .
 The Constitution of Ukraine introduces its European and Euro-Atlantic integration perspective . In conclusion on a positive note, we recognize the latest amendments .
Broad support is reflected both in the Ukrainian Parliament and on the Ukrainian streets . Broad support in Ukraine is reflected in the Parliament and in the streets .
Despite all the uncertainties that will arise at some point, we are sure that a lot can be built on that support . Despite all the uncertainty, there is a lot to build on.
 We stand shoulder to shoulder with our friends to overcome any obstacles . We stand shoulders to shoulder. We are committed to helping others to overcome obstacles .
 I thank Assistant Secretaries-General Jenca and Mueller and Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik for their briefings . I thank them for their calls for the full implementation of the Minsk agreements .
 Withdrawing its military troops from eastern Ukraine and Crimea is the only acceptable outcome, and the only one we should accept, says the president .
 We do not, and will not, recognize the Kremlin’s purported annexation of Crimea . We will not recognize the Crimea annexation .
 We will never accept anything less than the full restoration of Ukraine’s control over its own territory, whether in eastern Ukraine or Crimea, including its territorial waters .
 Our Donbasrelated sanctions will remain in place until Russia fully implements the Minsk agreements . Russia will not be able to implement the agreements until Russia implements the agreements .
 Crimea-related sanctions will continue until Russia returns the peninsula to Ukrainian control . Our Crimea- related sanctions will also continue until Russian return to Ukraine control .
 Russia has clearly failed to honour and implement them. This is ironic given that Russia has not honoured and implemented them . Russia has been criticised for not honouring and implementing them .
 Russia continues to arm, train, lead and fight alongside its proxy forces in eastern Ukraine, in direct contravention of its commitments under the Minsk agreements . The Minsk agreement includes establishing an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire .
 Russia has flouted its commitments from the very beginning of the agreements, using military forces under its control to capture new territory . Russia's military forces have been under the control of the Russian military since the start of the agreement .
 Ukraine, France, Germany and the U.S. remain committed to supporting their full implementation of the Minsk agreements . Russia has ignored or undermined the agreements, but the United States remains committed to support them .
 Ukrainian Government’s continued commitment to peaceful resolution of the conflict . The full implementation of the Minsk agreements is expected to be completed .
 Ukraine has demonstrated commitment by taking steps, including by extending the law on the special status for Russia-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine . Ukraine has shown commitment by extending law on special status.
 Russia reverts to distracting attention from its unmistakable and unjustifiable central role in fomenting the conflict . For its part, instead of using the Minsk agreements as the path towards the resolution of the conflict, Russia is distracting attention to its unjustified central role .
 Moscow disingenuously argues for a protection force that would use expensive international forces to cement the status quo and end up protecting Russia’s proxies .
 In November Russia prevented Ukrainian vessels from passing through the Kerch Strait, firing upon and seizing the vessels and personnel . In a serious escalation — and another violation of international law — in November Russia stopped Ukrainian vessels passing through.
 We again call on Russia to release the detainees, return the Ukrainian ships and end its restrictions on international shipping transiting to Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov .
 The United States stands with the European Union and its member States against Russia for its unacceptable conduct in Crimea, eastern Ukraine and the Black Sea . The U.S. stands with Europe and its members, and many other countries, against Russia .
 We will continue to stand with the people of Ukraine against Russian aggression, says Ukraine's president .
 The Council calls on Russia to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders .
 I would like to begin by thanking Equatorial Guinea for convening this very important meeting . I would also like to thank the country's president and the president of the country .
 Indonesia reaffirms its principle and consistent position that respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine is a fundamental principle of relations among nations. First, Indonesia reaffirm its principle of respect for sovereignty.
 Indonesia calls upon the conflicting parties to fully adhere to and implement the Minsk agreements in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations . Indonesia calls on both sides to adhere to the agreement .
 Minsk agreements are vital to ensuring safe access to and delivery, storage and distribution of humanitarian assistance to those in need . The Minsk agreement is also vital to ensure safe access and storage of humanitarian aid . The agreement is based on an international mechanism .
 Indonesia encourages the withdrawal of all heavy weapons by the States concerned by equal distances in order to create a security zone . Indonesia is underlining the imperative for sustained peaceful actions .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Trilateral Contact Group are involved in the implementation of the agreements .
 OSCE calls for effective monitoring and verification of the ceasefire regime and withdrawal of heavy weapons .
 Indonesia reiterates its call on all the parties concerned to exercise utmost restraint, manage the crisis responsibly, promote a peaceful settlement and uphold respect for international law . Thirdly, Indonesia calls for all parties to exercise the utmost restraint .
 We stress the importance of dialogue and diplomacy among the States concerned to resolve the ongoing problems .
 Indonesia encourages the States to take the necessary measures to de-escalate tensions . Indonesia urges the U.S. to take steps to prevent further tensions .
 We are against any actions that exacerbate hostilities and deteriorate the already fragile situation on the ground. We're against any action that exacerbates hostilities, we say .
 We believe sincerely in the value of dialogue and the need to settle disputes amicably . We might come from afar and from a different geographical region, but we believe sincerely .
 Indonesia further calls on the Security Council to fully shoulder its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security . Indonesia also calls for the United Nations to shoulder the responsibility for maintaining international peace .
 Indonesia will fully support all constructive efforts aimed at resolving the conflict in Ukraine peacefully . For its part, Indonesia will support the efforts in accordance with international law and Charter principles .
 The U.N. Security Council must abide by each State Member of the United Nations, he says . The Security Council should be on this issue or on others, he adds .
 China has listened to briefings by Assistant Secretary General Jenca, Assistant Secretary-General Mueller and the Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
 The Minsk agreement was signed and subsequently endorsed by the Security Council . Four years ago, the Minsk deal was signed .
 The agreement has played a critical role in the political mediation of the Ukrainian crisis . It has been described as a 'critical role' in mediation of Ukraine's crisis .
Over the past four years, all parties have held the agreement in high regard . Several mechanisms relating to the implementation of the agreement have largely been functioning well .
 Many of the provisions of the agreement are yet to be fully and effectively implemented . Regrettably, many of the elements of the deal are still not fully implemented .
 The political mediation process of the Ukrainian crisis has come to a standstill . There is no effective guarantee of the safety of civilian lives and property in the conflict area .
 China calls on all parties concerned to effectively implement the agreement . China is committed to the general direction of a political settlement .
 A fundamental, long-term solution of the Ukrainian issue requires that on the one hand the legitimate rights, interests and aspirations of all regions and ethnic groups in Ukraine be fully accommodated . On the other hand, attention also be paid to addressing the reasonable concerns of all parties involved in order
 China has maintained an objective and impartial position on the Ukrainian crisis . China has consistently maintained a position on Ukraine .
 We have always believed that the crisis cannot be solved through force and that dialogue and negotiation is the only way out . The crisis can't be solved by force, says the U.S.
 China will remain committed to playing a constructive role in the political settlement of the crisis . China will continue to play aconstructive role in political settlement.
 I wish to thank the briefers, Mr Miroslav Jenca, Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central Asia and the Americas .
 There remains an urgent need for the immediate cessation of hostilities in eastern Ukraine. It is very clear from the briefings we have heard that there remains a need for an immediate cessation. It's very clear that there is a need to end hostilities in east Ukraine .
 The continued violation of the ceasefire, including the presence of heavy weapons and their use, is of serious concern . The continued violations of the Minsk agreements are of serious concerns .
 The ongoing tension and conflict are exacerbating the dire humanitarian conditions on the ground . It is also of great concern that the ongoing tension is exacerbating a dire humanitarian situation .
 The parties need to ensure that there is an urgent de-escalation of tension through the implementation of the Minsk agreements . The situation is conducive to the alleviation of the humanitarian crisis, says the author .
 It remains necessary for all parties to fully implement all of their respective commitments under the Minsk agreements . In this regard, it remains necessary to fully implementation all of its respective commitments .
 At this point, the Minsk agreements, including the package of measures agreed under Minsk II, provide the most promising road map for peace . The Minsk agreement is the most significant step toward peace .
 It is also of critical importance that the parties refrain from actions that could be viewed as provocative and that could further impede a peaceful resolution of the situation in line with the Minsk agreements .
 The Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe should be allowed unhindered access to monitor and verify compliance with Minsk agreements, in line with its mandate .
 South Africa encourages the various parties to strengthen all political efforts to produce a sustainable and peaceful solution . South Africa wants all political parties to support a peaceful solution.
 In conclusion, we listened very carefully to the remarks made by some of our colleagues on Ukraine .
 The meeting marks four years since the signing of the Minsk agreements . We welcome the convening of this meeting .
 Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenca gave an informative briefing . We thank him for his informative briefing.
 This anniversary, far from being a date to celebrate, must motivate parties to renew their commitment to implementing the agreements .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe has expressed its appreciation for Ursula Mueller and Ambassadors Ertugrul Apakan and Martin Sajdik .
 Peru believes the Minsk agreements constitute the legal basis for achieving a political solution to put an end to the conflict in the eastern part of Ukraine . Peru believes that the agreements constitute a legal basis to end the conflict .
 The Council backed a package of measures for their full implementation in February 2015 . In that regard, we support the package.
We encourage stakeholders involved to uphold fully these commitments . We encourage stakeholders to uphold full commitments .
 The Normandy format and in the Trilateral Contact Group to facilitate dialogue between the parties and to contribute to restoring peace in Ukraine and regional stability. In this regard, we wish to welcome the efforts made under the Normandy format .
 The ceasefire agreed on by the parties and backed by the Council . Heavy artillery is often located near populated areas .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission has recalled its representatives .
 In January alone the mission registered more than 16,000 ceasefire violations . Many weapons that should have been withdrawn and that are prohibited under international law, such as anti-personnel mines .
 We are also concerned about the serious consequences of that situation for the country’s governance and development, especially those living on either side of the line of contact, we say .
 In just five years, more than 3,300 civilians have died in the conflict . More than 9,000 people have been injured by the conflict in the past five years .
 We therefore reiterate the need to ensure that this aid is delivered unhindered and under international supervision .
 U.N. supports efforts to alleviate the suffering of the civilian population affected by the conflict . U.S. ambassador to Ukraine: "We commend the work of the international community"
 U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to provide assistance to the 2. million people living in extremely vulnerable conditions .
 Ukrainian Government over the entire conflict zone, says U.N. Secretary of State .
 I thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr Miroslav Jenca . I thank him for his work.
 Ursula Mueller, Ertugrul Apakan and Martin Sajdik give insightful briefings on the crisis that Ukraine has endured for almost five years .
 The Ukrainian conflict remains one of the deadliest on the European continent today . Some may forget it.
 A total of 12,800 people have died since April 2014 in the Donbas, including 3,300 civilians . The Donbas are the largest city in the region .
 The situation on the line of contact remains as tense as ever . Despite commitments to respecting the ceasefire, the situation remains tense asever .
 Ukraine is now the third most mined area in the world, after Iraq and Afghanistan . It will take several decades to clear it, and it will take many decades to do it .
 France and Germany have spared no effort in the so-called Normandy format to bring the parties closer together, says German colleague . The Normandy format has been used to facilitate the full implementation of the Minsk agreements by the latter .
 Three points deserve our full attention. In order to achieve that objective, three points deserve the full attention .
Much remains to be done to improve security conditions, including respecting the ceasefire and withdrawing heavy weapons from the line of contact .
 We regret the lack of political will to implement commitments that were made at the highest level . We regret that we have not been able to implement the commitments made by politicians .
 France reiterates its concern about Russia’s illegal use of military force in the Kerch Strait .
 The Russian coast guard in the Sea of Azov has carried out excessive inspections since last spring . Equally worrying are the excessive inspections that have been carried out by the coast guard .
 24 illegally detained Ukrainian seamen to be released immediately and without condition . There is a greater need than ever for commercial and military ships to enjoy safe and free passage .
In the context of open conflict in eastern Ukraine and tensions related to the illegal annexation of Crimea, the civilian population is on the front line .
 Ukraine is facing one of the largest humanitarian crises of the past 10 years . Ukraine has been in the midst of the biggest humanitarian crises in the last decade .
 In total, 3. million women and men, particularly the most vulnerable older persons, depend on humanitarian assistance . Nearly 10 per cent of the population, including women, rely on aid .
 France once again calls on the parties to facilitate the crossing of the line of contact by civilian populations and spare them the suffering associated with waiting in inhuman conditions .
 More than 10 people have died in recent weeks due to the extremely harsh crossing and waiting conditions on both sides of the line of contact .
Every effort must be made to ensure safe and unhindered access for humanitarian organizations and United Nations agencies, particularly in the territory controlled by separatist entities .
 The Security Council called for the United Nations to take action to respond appropriately to the humanitarian crisis .
 We fully support the initiative, and we fully support it. That initiative is a step towards greater awareness, we say . We support it, and it's a step to greater awareness.
 The crisis is first and foremost the responsibility of the parties, especially Russia . Russia is responsible for the crisis, according to the author .
 The Minsk agreements were signed under the Minsk agreement . The agreement was reached in the wake of the conflict between the two countries . The U.S. military says it is concerned about a civilian population caught between heavy weapons and mines .
 Contrary to what we heard some minutes ago, the actual conflict is not the product of a Western plot .
 There is an aggressor country and a country that is subject to that aggression . There is also an aggressive country and an aggressive nation .
 The OSCE Mission plays a central role in achieving that objective and resolving the crisis . OSCE: The outstanding work of which we commend is the outstanding work .
 We urge the parties, in particular the separatist entities, to allow observers to move freely throughout Ukraine to the Russian-Ukrainian border .
 France is supporting Ukraine in a bid to return to a lasting peace . The French government is working to restore the peace in Ukraine . France has been in the midst of a long-running conflict with Ukraine .
 The Russian Ambassador spoke at length and in colourful and imaginative language about many other actors . But he said nothing about Russia’s role in the role .
 The German Ambassador was an eyewitness to the Minsk agreements . He gave his account of the events of the time and Russia's actions .
 The United Kingdom welcomes the opportunity to discuss the repeated violations of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity at the hands of Russia .
 Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine is not limited to the Donbas and Crimea . Russia's aggression is not only limited to Crimea and Donbas .
 Russia seeks to undercut Ukraine at every opportunity, undermining the ceasefire, supplying the separatists with weapons and calling illegitimate elections . Russia also calls illegitimate elections all in breach of the Minsk agreements .
 Ukrainian civilians have been killed in Ukraine since the start of the conflict . The deaths of Ukrainian civilians are a tragic tragedy .
 In the five years since this conflict began, more than 12,800 people have lost their lives . As the French Ambassador said, in the five year since the conflict began more than 10,000 people have died .
 Almost 25,000 people have been injured, and 3. million people are in need of humanitarian assistance . 3 million people need humanitarian assistance, according to the UN .
 Despite the parties recommitment to the ceasefire on 29 December 2018, violations are increasing . There continues to be military activity in the disengagement zones .
 The Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe is unable to carry out its mandate . However, our understanding of the situation within non-Government-controlled territory is limited .
 Russia has refused to support the Special Monitoring Mission . Russia is unable to do so because of Russia’s repeated refusal to support it .
 That threatens the ceasefire and ultimately the security of Ukraine and the wider region . That threatens Ukraine and its security of the region .
 Russia has yet to provide an explanation for the downing of an SMM long-range unmanned aircraft near the Ukraine-Russia border, outside Ukraine Government control .
 Just last week, the SMM twice observed the use of the Russian electronic jamming system Zhitel in the Donbas .
 I would ask the Russian Ambassador to ensure his country’s support for the Special Monitoring Mission and to allow its personnel to observe .
 A further example of Russian attempts to destabilize Ukraine is the illegitimate elections in the non-Government-controlled territories of the so-called Fuhansk People's Republic and Donetsk People’s Republic in November 2018 .
 That represents a clear breach of the Minsk agreements and unnecessarily increases tensions, says the author . "That represents aclear breach" of the agreements, he says .
 Russia could use its influence on the Russian-backed separatists to encourage them to comply with their Minsk commitments . Russia could also use its considerable influence to encourage the separatists to comply .
 Russia fuels the conflict by supplying weapons and personnel to the armed formations . Instead, Russia fuels it by supplying arms and personnel.
 Next month marks the fifth anniversary of the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia . It is worth reminding ourselves of the facts .
 The Security Council voted on draft resolution S/2014/189, which reaffirmed the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine . The resolution noted that Ukraine had not authorized the referendum and that it had no validity .
 We object to the illegal annexation of Crimea not only because it is illegal, but because it's illegal. We object in the Crimea to the annexation.
 We also object to it owing to the Russian Government’s appalling treatment of many of those who live there .
 U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights to visit Crimea continues to refuse to visit Russia . U.S. calls in relevant General Assembly resolutions for the United Nations.
 We, international community, must stand united and call on Russia to release all political prisoners . We need unrestricted access for human rights monitoring organizations immediately, we say .
 Russian authorities admitted to using force in the Black Sea to seize three Ukrainian naval vessels . Three Ukrainian servicemen were injured by Russian forces in November .
 The actions are not in conformity with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea . They are a blatant attempt to destabilize Ukraine by harming the economic activities of Berdyansk and Mariupol .
 They represent a serious challenge to the international rules-based order. They represent an international challenge to international rules.
 The international community must continue to stand united and remain focused on Russia’s behaviour and its attempts to integrate Crimea into Russia . Russia is building a bridge across the Kerch Strait.
 The United Kingdom's full support for Ukraine's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, says the U.S.
 We look forward to discussing the situation in Ukraine further at the forthcoming General Assembly debate on 20 February . We will discuss the situation at the General Assembly next month .
 Russian Ambassador's enthusiasm for Security Council meetings on Ukraine . He will look forward next time to hearing about what Russia will be doing to meet its obligations .
 The Secretary of State has been in charge of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . He says he is grateful for the briefings .
 Large-scale violent clashes have subsided since the Minsk agreements, we note . Four years since the conclusion of the M Belarus agreements, the violence has subsided .
 ceasefire violations continue almost every day, resulting in deaths and injuries . However, we also note that ceasefire violations are also occurring within the civilian population .
 The implementation of the agreements’ key provisions remains a dead letter, even though it represents the only means to achieve a lasting political solution to the conflict .
 We call on both sides to fully and swiftly implement the Minsk agreements, pursuant to resolution 2202 , and to honour their commitments .
 We support the efforts of the Trilateral Contact Group, as well as those under the Normandy format, to that end . We also support efforts to end the trilateral contact group .
 Russia is providing financial and military support to armed groups . We call on Russia to immediately stop fuelling the conflict by supporting armed groups.
We call on Russia to use its influence on those armed formations to encourage them to fully respect their commitments under the Minsk agreements . We call on Russian to use their influence on armed formations.
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine has been unable to properly carry out its monitoring and reporting tasks there . We regret that obstacles have prevented the mission from properly carrying out its tasks .
 We strongly encourage the parties to the conflict to respect the Mission’s mandate and allow it safe and unhindered access to all Ukrainian territory, including along the border between Ukraine and Russia .
 The lack of progress in the implementation of the Minsk agreements is being felt on the ground . The Minsk agreement has not been implemented in the past two years .
 We remain deeply concerned about reports of Russian military equipment and personnel present in areas controlled by armed formations . We remain very concerned.
 The presence of heavy weapons, in contravention of the Minsk agreements, continues to pose a threat to civilian population on both sides of the line of contact .
We call for the complete withdrawal of those weapons and the disengagement of troops from those areas . We call for a complete withdrawal from those weapons .
 Ukrainian authorities extend special status law for Donbas region . Donbas is one of the cornerstones of the Minsk agreements .
 Belgium condemns the November 2018 holding of elections in the rebel Donetsk and Luhansk regions . On the other hand, Belgium also condemns the elections in November 2018 .
 Those elections violate both the letter and the spirit of the Minsk agreements . Those elections violated both the letters and thespirit of the agreements .
 We urge all parties to allow full, continuous and unhindered access in accordance with humanitarian principles . We urge the parties to let all parties have access to the public without restrictions .
 We are particularly concerned about the fact that critical civilian infrastructure, such as that associated with water supply, is being targeted . We are also concerned that critical military infrastructure such as the water supply.
 3. million people are in need of assistance and protection owing to the widespread presence of mines, increasing psychological trauma and lack of access to basic services .
 We share a deep concern about their suffering and underscore the importance of the multi-year humanitarian response plan for 2019-2020 . We also underscore the need for a multi- year humanitarian response.
 In conclusion, we reaffirm our unwavering commitment to the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 We do not recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia, which we consider to be contrary to international law . We therefore do notrecognize the illegal annexing of Crimea .
 Recent tensions in the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait due to Russian actions have only widened the gap between the two sides .
 The only way to bridge that gap is through dialogue, which we wholeheartedly encourage . The onlyway to bridge the gap is to engage in dialogue, and we encourage it .
 My delegation welcomes today’s informative meeting on the situation in Ukraine . The meeting will be held in Kiev .
 We also thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenca and Ambassador Apakan for their briefings .
Today's meeting coincides with the fourth anniversary of the Minsk agreements . The Minsk agreement was signed on 12 February 2015 .
 The Minsk agreements, in the Normandy format, set out not only the commitments of each party, but also a precise timetable for implementation .
 The delegation notes with regret the lack of progress in the implementation of the agreements . It is due to differing interpretations of the sequencing of the measures to be taken .
 The situation continues to be marked by recurring ceasefire violations and obstructions to the movement of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine .
 The Kerch Strait incident in November 2018 is a major obstacle to the implementation of the Minsk agreements . The international community's efforts to ensure the sustainable return of peace and stability in the region are thwarted .
 The deterioration of the security situation in Ukraine continues to cause many casualties . The destruction of civilian infrastructure essential for the provision of basic social services to civilians .
 Ukrainian president calls on Ukrainian stakeholders to fully implement the Minsk agreements . Ukrainian government has always been in favour of the peaceful resolution of crises through dialogue .
 Cote d’Ivoire supports the efforts of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and Joint Centre for Control and Coordination to de-escalate the conflict .
 It calls on the parties to the conflict to take all appropriate measures to ease the situation . The Joint Centre for Control and Coordination should play its role in monitoring the ceasefire .
 Cote d’Ivoire reiterates its support for all efforts to find a political solution to the crisis in Ukraine .
 Minsk agreements and resolution 2202 endorsed them . It encourages all stakeholders to respect their commitments to effectively implement the agreements .
 First of all, we thank our invited speakers for their important briefings . We also thank our speakers.
 The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity to encourage all actors on the ground to pursue their efforts to bring peace to Ukraine .
 It is very timely to reiterate our country’s commitment to respecting the best practices of international law and the principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations . The U.N. is committed to contributing to the maintenance of international peace and security .
 Four years after Minsk agreements, major challenges continue to be reported on the ground . With regard to the implementation of the Minsk agreement, Minsk deals continue to remain in place .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine reported 9,500 ceasefire violations between 24 and 27 January this year .
 The Dominican Republic understands that despite all of the setbacks and continued violations of the Minsk agreements, those agreements constitute the legal basis for achieving a political solution that will put an end to the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 Council endorsed package of measures endorsed by the Council in 2015 in order to achieve the effective implementation of the agreements .
In that regard, we encourage the resumption of the prisoner exchange as an expression of the goodwill of the parties to move the peace process forward .
 The parties welcome the statements made by the parties in support of the implementation of the Minsk agreements . They hope that the conditions will be met for the establishment of a joint United Nations and OSCE peacebuilding mission in the conflict zone .
 The conflict is a source of concern for international peace and security, in particular for the region . We also take this opportunity to encourage the parties to heed the call for a ceasefire .
 The U.N. has committed to building sustainable peace for the Ukrainian people . We welcome the solidarity of the international community .
We must continue supporting all actions to improve access to assistance and basic services for the most vulnerable . We must continue to support all actions. We must also support access to basic services.
 Ukraine's delegation takes opportunity to express commitment to defending Ukraine's independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty . Ukraine is part of the United Nations' mandate to protect its sovereignty .
 We encourage respect for the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes . We express our rejection of any violation of international norms, international law and international humanitarian law .
 We join efforts to ensure that those violating such international provisions are brought to justice . We also join effort to ensure those violating these provisions are prosecuted .
Fourth anniversary of Minsk agreements marks fourth anniversary of the Minsk agreement . Parties should maintain dialogue in the current Normandy format and Trilateral Contact Group .
 We call for concerted efforts to make significant progress towards stability and peace in Ukraine . We also call for more progress towards peace and security in Ukraine.
 I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Equatorial Guinea. I will now make the statement in his capacity as a representative of equatorial Guinea . I will then make a Statement in my Capacity as the Representative of Equator Guinea .
 At the outset, we thank Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenca and Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik for their comprehensive briefings .
 The Minsk agreements were signed on 12 February 2015, exactly four years ago . They were signed by the leaders of Ukraine, Germany, Russia and France in an effort to end the war .
 Four years later not even one provision of the Minsk agreements has been fully implemented . Regrettably, four years after the agreement, no provision has been implemented .
 The Minsk agreements remain the basis for the international community’s commitment to finding a peaceful solution to the conflict . We remind the parties that the only way to achieve peace and stability in the region is through the full implementation of the agreements .
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine reports ongoing violations of the ceasefire in the areas of Donetsk and Luhansk . An increase in tensions and the exacerbation of the situation in the east of the country .
 Reducing tensions and violence in the region in the east of the country must remain one of the main priorities for a peaceful solution to the crisis . Reducing tension and violence must remain a main priority for the region .
 The path to stability in Donbas is still long but it cannot be achieved if the parties do not show the political will with that first step . It is not the first step to achieve stability in the region.
 Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group and other key actors. We also urge them to continue to make use of the means established to help resolve the conflict .
 Cooperation, efforts and political will are essential to achieving a peaceful and political solution to the crisis. Cooperation and political efforts are essential.
 We also appreciate the work and efforts of the humanitarian workers on the ground and the support of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and his team .
We call on the parties to take the necessary steps to comply with international obligations to respect international humanitarian law and human rights .
 A solution to the crisis in the region can be achieved only by peaceful means through direct, frank and inclusive negotiations . A lasting and just solution will help strengthen harmonious relations among Ukraine’s different ethnic groups .
 A sustainable solution to the crisis in Ukraine can only be political. As we have said on other occasions, a sustainable solution is not political .
 The international community must therefore focus its efforts to that end . The International community must also focus on that end.
 The Security Council is holding a discussion of an issue of the utmost concern to us . I would like to start by expressing my delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr President .
 We are profoundly grateful for their devoted efforts to assist my country . We're profoundly grateful to them for their efforts to help my country.
 Ukraine's new members spoke in support of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty . The Security Council members expressed their gratitude to the new members .
 Russian delegation may make it a customary practice to call for thematic meetings related to the Russian-Ukrainian conflict . Council members should keep in mind while making preparations for the upcoming months .
 A week from now there will be a General Assembly debate on that date . But perhaps someone will come up with the idea of having a discussion also in the Security Council .
 The day of 16 March marks the holding of the infamous so-called referendum in Crimea . The Crimea referendum was held in Crimea in March 2014 .
 On 27 March 2014, the General Assembly adopted resolution 68/262, asserting that the so-called referendum had no validity and could not form the basis for any alteration of the status of Crimea . The General Assembly also said that the referendum was not valid .
 The Russian side is consistently pushing the narrative of the peaceful nature of events in Crimea .
 I will cite just one episode from 2014 for the Council’s consideration for the council's consideration . The Council will consider the issue from 2014 .
 Ukrainian warrant officer Serhiy Kokurin, a native of Crimea, was shot in the heart by two bullets during an assault on the Ukrainian cartographic station near Simferopol .
 The Russian forces shot down a Ukrainian transport aircraft over the Luhansk airport on 14 June . 40 Ukrainian paratroopers and nine crew members were killed .
 The day of 17 July marks the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 . It was another terrorist attack by Russia .
 The document was signed by the Ambassador of the Russian Federation to Ukraine, Mikhail Zurabov . For the record, on the Russian side, the document was written by the ambassador to Ukraine .
 That is with regard to whether Russia is a party to the conflict or whether it has nothing to do with the conflict in Ukraine . That is the issue as to whether Russian is a part of the conflict .
 Russia blocked the adoption of the decision to extend the mandate of the OSCE observer mission at the Russian checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk to the entire uncontrolled part of the Ukrainian-Russian border .
 The recent holding in late November 2018 by the administration of the Russian occupation of another illegal election in the occupied areas added insult to injury .
 It was a clear and deliberate provocation to undermine the Minsk agreements, says the Russian Foreign Minister . It was clear and deliberately provocation, he says, to undermine Minsk.
 The Russian navy attacked Ukraine’s two armoured boats and a tugboat in the Azov Sea . The day of 25 November 2018 marks another significant development .
 Russian forces shelled a checkpoint near the town of Volnovakha on 13 January 2015 .
 Russian forces randomly shelled the outskirts of Mariupol, killing 31 civilians . Later the same month, on 24 January, the Russian forces killed 31 civilians.
 The Stanytsia Luhanska crossing point was visited by Ukraine's Loreign Minister of Ukraine and the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office .
 Ukrainian Minister of course repeated commitment of the Ukrainian side to the opening of the checkpoint . But, as members may know, there is a bridge connecting the two sides .
 Ukrainian side needs access to the area and to the bridge for that, but to date that has been denied by the other side . The Ukrainian side has also been denied access to a bridge .
 The Minsk agreement was signed in 2010, but the agreement was not signed in 2012 . The agreement was reached in 2012, but it was not reached until 2014 . The deal was reached after the two sides agreed to reach an agreement in 2010 .
 Russian representative misinterpreted Minsk agreements by Russian representative . Russian representative's interpretation of Minsk agreement is well-known .
 Russia is only Russia and its ongoing military activity in the occupied territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, as well as in Crimea .
 The Russian side proposes a very selective approach to the implementation of the Minsk agreements, emphasizing political elements in its own interpretation . The Russian and Russian sides propose very selective approaches to implementation of Minsk agreement .
 The U.S. completely ignores its own obligations in the security and humanitarian spheres . However, it completely ignores their own obligations .
 The armed force of 35,000 in occupied Donbas is supported by over 2,100 Russian regular military, mostly in command and control positions .
 The total number of Russian offensive strike group personnel along the Russian-Ukrainian border is 87,750 . The groups are near the occupied territories of Donbas and Crimea .
 Russia violated its commitments almost instantly following the signing of the Minsk documents . Russian representative decided to quote some of the provisions of the agreements .
 Minsk package of measures had been signed by the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and Prance . In particular, Russian forces attacked and seized the city of Debaltseve on 16 to 18 Lebruary 2015 .
 From 2015 on, Russia has effectively sabotaged the implementation of ceasefire agreements 18 times . Russia has also failed to implement ceasefire agreements in the past two years .
 During this period there were over 54,000 cases of ceasefire violations . During this time there were more than 50,000 ceasefire violations during this period .
 In almost 6,000 cases the Russian forces used weapon systems prohibited by the Minsk agreements . In almost 7,000 instances, the weapons systems were used by Russia .
 Ukraine has withdrawn all the prescribed weapons as per paragraph 2 of the package of measures for the implementation of the Minsk agreements . The withdrawal is part of the Package of Measures for implementation of Minsk agreement .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission provides detailed inventory lists of such weapons . We regularly provide the OSCE special monitoring mission with detailed inventory Lists .
 There are numerous and regular cases of blatant violations of stationing heavy weapons by the other side in the immediate vicinity of the actual contact line .
 There has been no progress in negotiations about creating a heavy-weapon-free area near Mariupol .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission offers an additional insight into the presence of Russian weapon systems . Russian military, including radio reconnaissance systems, four different electronic warfare systems, the latest radars and jamming stations in the occupied territories of Ukraine .
 The OSCE Mission has agreed to monitor and verify the monitoring and verification of the measures . The measures are part of a package of measures that will be implemented by the European Union .
 Ukraine provides maximum support possible to OSCE Special Monitoring Mission . OSCE is deployed in Ukraine at the invitation of its Government .
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission reported just one case of a Mission convoy being stopped by the Ukrainian forces .
 37 cases of limiting the freedom of movement of the OSCE monitors . There have been 37 cases.
 In 2016 and 2017 all OSCE Special Monitoring Mission long-range unmanned aerial vehicles were shot down over the occupied territories . The OSCE special monitoring mission was shot down in 2016 and2017 .
 A peacekeeping operation under U.N. auspices can bring peace to Ukraine. That is why we still believe that a peacekeepers operation under United Nations auspices could bring peace .
 Ukraine it is a matter of principle that any decision on establishing a peacekeeping operation in Donbas extend its mandate over the entire occupied territory . For Ukraine, any decision to establish a peacekeepers operation in the territory extends its mandate .
 Any peacekeeping operation should be based on key U.N. peacekeeping principles, first and foremost, impartiality, even-handedness and neutrality .
 We call on Russia to give up its attempts to misuse the U.N. peacekeeping toolbox in Donbas . Russia has been trying to legitimize the gains of aggression in the region .
 The only way for Russia to prove its declared willingness towards de-escalation is to stop the talk and walk the walk . Russia is to join Ukraine and partners in constructive work on a peacekeeping operation, says Russian official .
 It must be a full-fledged mission, deployed to all Russia-occupied areas of Donbas, including along the Ukrainian-Russian border . It must also be deployed to the uncontrolled segment of the Ukraine-Russian State border .
 Russian firm intention of 1993 to conduct itself as a civilized State has not, unfortunately, evolved into a principled and consistent policy . Russian invasions in Georgia in 2008 and in Ukraine in 2014 clearly reveal, writes Peter Bergen .
 The State is fond of accusing others of “He^oroBOpocnocodHOCTb’s’, which is a Russian word that means being incapable of fulfilling one's contractual obligations .
 The Russians are trying to convince everyone that black is white and white is black . It can be quite fascinating to see the Russians declaring one thing, doing the complete opposite .
Tomorrow the Trilateral Contact Group will hold what is already its 103rd meeting .
 Minsk process participants have desperately tried to convince Russia to at least agree to exchange prisoners, including all for all . For many months, the Minsk Process participants have unsuccessfully tried to persuade Russia to agree to the exchange .
 Ukraine has sent 13 official written proposals with different formulas for exchanging prisoners and detainees in Russia and the occupied territories for Russian citizens in Ukraine . Ukraine has been sentenced for crimes against my country's territorial integrity and sovereignty .
 Russia is sending a clear signal to all its soldiers fighting in Ukraine that it will do nothing to bring them back home . We care about our people, and Russia is send a clear message, says CNN.com .
 Three Ukrainians have been captured and held in Donetsk for nearly four years now . The issue at stake in Minsk tomorrow is the fate of three Ukrainians who have been held for almost four years .
 Bohdan Pantyushenko, Oleksandr Korynkov and Serhiy Hlondar have three-year-old daughter . Their names are Bohdan, Olekandr Karynkov, and SerHIy HLondar, whose daughter has never
Let us make our meeting meaningful and jointly call on Russia to release them. Let us make their meeting meaningful, jointly call for Russia to released them .
 The representative of the Russian Federation has asked to make a further statement . The representative has asked for further information .
 I would naturally like to comment on some of the remarks that we have heard here today . I'm not sure if I would like to speak out about some of these remarks .
 Ukrainian colleague says he went to a great deal of trouble to substitute the Russian military for separatists in Donbas . I am not going to get into a direct argument with my Ukrainian colleague .
 Russia is tying Russia to the non-implementation of the Minsk agreements. It is a disingenuous but effective approach, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says it is a way to tie Russia to Minsk agreement .
 I could see what he was doing there, and we will come back to it again, I said . I could hear what he had been doing there. I could also see what I was doing, and it will be back again.
 Ukraine's representative said nothing about Kyiv’s failure to implement point after point of Minsk agreements . Kyiv's representative will come back to that as well .
 We heard nothing new today, just the same tired mantras that we have been hearing for years now . We hear nothing new.
 That is sad, because we have spent the greater part of our statement on it, says the company . That's sad, as we've spent the more part of it on it. It's sad that we have not been able to make a statement about it .
 The Council is still willing to do anything to cover for its proteges whatever they do . Despite that, the Council is not willing to cover any of their proteges .
Russia, Russia, Russia and Russia are all the countries we have heard today . Russia is one of the most powerful countries in the world. Russia is also the most populous country in Russia .
 Ukraine has barely been mentioned in the context of the Minsk agreements, and virtually no one has mentioned the 4 million residents of Donbas .
 The Council does not count them as people, so as to avoid asking about their opinion of what is happening in south-eastern Ukraine .
 There is no provision in the OSCE’s mandate that says that Russia and Ukraine should be disengage in this conflict . The OSCE should be working to disengage Russian and Ukraine in this war, it says .
 A new chapter has emerged in our Council meetings in the form of our dialogues with our friend Christoph Heusgen, the Permanent Representative of Germany .
 I'm delighted with his initiative and would like to comment on some of his remarks . I am delighted with the initiative. I am also pleased with some of the comments .
 The author of the Minsk agreement is one of the authors of the agreement . He is also one of two authors of a series of agreements between Belarus and Russia .
 My friend Christoph said, probably in a Freudian slip, that in 2015 Russia took Minsk .
 I do know that Russia took Berlin, but that was a long time ago, and before that we liberated Minsk . I'm not sure what happened to Minsk, but I'm sure it was before that .
 Interference is how our Western colleagues do things, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: We are seeing a clear example of today in one country in Latin America .
 Christoph tried very hard to insert Russia into his statement, both to the point and not . Whether intentionally or not, I incline to the former — my friend Christoph tries very hard.
 Even when he was talking about repairing a bridge it came out as if it was something that Ukraine should agree on with Russia .
 My friend Christoph said that our proposal for a Security Council resolution was a joke . His friend said that the proposal for the Security Council Resolution was a joking joke .
 The OSCE Monitoring Mission is protecting the OSCE monitoring mission in the region . The mission is also in travelling throughout the region. I would like to remind him that it is a joke that President Putin discussed with Chancellor Merkel .
 A great deal has been said about Russia’s occupation of Donbas and the presence there of the Russian military .
 The Permanent Representative of Ukraine showered us with statistics in that regard . Today the Permanent representative of Ukraine showed up with statistics .
 I would like to take advantage of the presence here, not here, but with us, to ask them if they have seen many Russian forces in Donbas . If they are familiar with the figures that the Permanent Representative of Ukraine shared with us today, they can confirm them .
 We have heard a lot about the disengagement of heavy weaponry . We have also heard a a lot today about the engagement of heavy weapons .
 At one point an agreement was reached through the mediation of the OSCE . disengagement would take place after the first seven days of quiet on the line of contact .
 The OSCE Mission has confirmed that there have been dozens of days of quiet on the line of contact . There have been no contact since the start of the week .
 Ukrainian colleagues would say, “No, our numbers are different,’ they would say . At which point, they would be saying, ‘No,Our numbers are Different.’
 Ukraine's role in the Trilateral Contact Group and its sub-groups could have been questioned . We could have questioned many other aspects, including Ukraine’s role in its role.
We could have talked about how it is sabotaging the processes on the political, economic and humanitarian and other fronts, but then I fear we would be here all night . And we could have discussed how it's sabotaging processes on political,Economic and humanitarian fronts .
 Ukraine’s territorial integrity and independence was implicitly cast into question today . We recognize Ukraine's territorial integrity.
 Ukraine has only itself to blame for the fact that Crimea escaped it in March 2014 . Crimea escaped from Ukraine in 2014 .
 The situation in the Donbas region would be much worse if it had not done so. The situation would be worse than it is in the region today if it hadn't done so .
In general, I find it laughable to listen to stories about what is going on in Crimea from people who have never been there . In general, it's laughable to hear stories about the dire situation and suffering of its inhabitants .
 He also asserted that we do not allow monitoring missions to enter Crimea . He also said that we don't let monitoring missions into Crimea .
 Council members have seen Ukraine’s commitment to implementing the Minsk agreements. What I would like to know is where many Council members are seeing the commitment .
 If they can delete that, they will then clearly see that those who are not implementing the Minsk agreements are the very people who are directly party to them . The Minsk agreement was signed in December 2013 .
 We are ready to celebrate every date that we are asked to observe, and we too have something to say about that . We are prepared to celebrate. We are not just celebrating every date, but we are celebrating every day .
 The Ukrainian government says it is happy to take advantage of any opportunity to discuss the situation in Ukraine . "Life will present us with those opportunities," he says .
 Ukraine's representative has asked to make a further statement . I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine, who has asked for a further comment .
 Russian colleague says he has heard nothing new in statement by his Russian colleague . "I too have heard no new in the statement by my Russian colleague," he says .
 The issue of Crimea is once again part of the Security Council’s discussions. First, I am very glad that the issue is now part of a Security Council discussions .
 It is the first time that I have not heard my colleague say that Crimea is not an issue. It is first time I have heard my colleagues say that Crimean is not a issue .
 Russian delegation's new favourite topic is the upcoming holding of presidential elections in Ukraine . There certainly is one new element in the Russian delegation’s rhetoric .
 Sometimes I think that the results of Ukraine’s presidential elections are even more important to Russians than their own are .
 Ukrainian ambassador to Moscow was Ambassador to Moscow in 2012 . 12,000 Ukrainian citizens voted all over Russia during the last Ukrainian elections .
 4 million people in the Donbas region will be unable to vote in the presidential elections . If he would like them to vote under the barrels of Russian guns, perhaps they could vote .
 The latest opus was published yesterday in the Russian Nezavisimaya Gazeta . Mr Vladislav Surkov's name, I believe, is well known, at least around this table .
 Ukrainian Ambassador and Russian colleague plead to consider the 4 million people in Donbas . I heard the pleas from both the Ukrainian ambassador and our Russian colleague .
 The group is determined to work on fixing the bridge in Stanytsia Luhanska . The bridge was built in the 1990s .
 The International Committee of the Red Cross is ready to do it immediately. If they could do just that one thing — engage there and get the bridge done, he says . "We really will have achieved something during these three hours"
 The Russian Federation representative of the Russian Federation has been asked to respond to the comments . I now give the floor to Mr Apakan to respond. I now gives the floor.
 SMM reports accounts of illegal activities, fighting, shelling and other ceasefire violations . If one goes through the SMM report one can observe accounts of fighting, fighting and shelling .
 I would not like to make any comments here that would go beyond the scope of our reports, because the reports are based on established facts, and our teams are patrolling, monitoring and producing reports .
 Reports of people in uniforms claiming to be from Russian Federation and other countries, as well as mercenaries . We have received reports of people wearing uniforms from other countries .
 The Special Monitoring Mission has reported its observations of vehicles bearing Russian flags . But it has not identified their origin .
 There has been no reference in these reports to military units. I have to say that, in order to avoid any misunderstanding, there is no reference to any military reports to the military .
 I am referring to reports and not making any personal observation or judgment. I am not making a personal observation, I'm referring to the reports . I am talking to reports, not to make a personal judgment .
 These are the elements that we have reported over the course of four or five years . The elements that have been reported are the ones that have changed in the past four years .
 The Mission has reiterated that they are nothing new and have been reiterated on several occasions by the Mission . They are not new and they are not a new thing .