 The republics had declared their independence fearing another coup . Following the events of August’s failed coup, the republics declared independence .
 The CIS announced that the new organization would be open to all republics of the former Soviet Union . The new organization is open to other nations sharing the same goals .
 The CIS charter stated that all the members were sovereign and independent nations and thereby effectively abolished the Soviet Union . The CIS Charter stated that the members of all the member nations were sovereign.
On 21 December 1991, the leaders of eight additional former Soviet Republics signed the Alma-Ata Protocol . The number of participating countries in the CIS is now 11 .
 The CIS and Soviet Union also legally co-existed briefly with each other until 26 December 1991, when Soviet President Gorbachev stepped down . The Soviet Union officially dissolving the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Ivan Korotchenya became Executive Secretary of the CIS on the same day . This was followed by Ivan Korotschenya becoming Executive Secretary. This was the first time the CIS had been in charge .
 Eduard Shevardnadze was overthrown in Georgia; Viktor Yushchenko was elected in Ukraine . Askar Akayev was toppled in Kyrgyzstan .
 Georgia withdrew from the Council of Defense Ministers in February 2006 . It remained a full member of the CIS until August 2009, one year after officially withdrawing in the aftermath of the Russo-Georgian War .
 The presidents of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan skipped the October 2009 meeting of the CIS . Each had their own issues and disagreements with the Russian Federation .
 The Creation Agreement remained the main constituent document of the CIS until January 1993 . The CIS Charter was adopted by the CIS in January 1993.
 Georgia would need to legally withdraw from the Creation Agreement, as Georgia did previously .
 On 14 March 2014, a bill was introduced to Ukraine’s parliament to denounce their ratification of the CIS Creation Agreement . It was never approved .
 Following the 2014 parliamentary election, a new bill to denounce the CIS agreement was introduced . A new bill was introduced following the 2014 election .
 Ukraine has had no representatives in the CIS Executive Committee building. Since that month, Ukraine has no representatives.
 CIS secretariat had not received formal notice from Ukraine of its withdrawal from the CIS . The process will take 1 year following notice being given .
 On 19 May 2018, President Poroshenko signed a decree formally ending Ukraine’s participation in CIS statutory bodies .
 The CIS secretariat stated that it will continue inviting Ukraine to participate . The CISsecretariat said that it would continue inviting Ukrainian to participate.
 Ukraine has said it intends to review its participation in all CIS agreements . Ukraine has further stated that it will only continue in those that are in its interests .
 The CIS secretariat stated that they will keep inviting Ukraine to participate in CIS activities . The secretariat said they will continue to invite Ukraine.
 legislative initiatives to denounce the agreement on the creation of CIS were tabled in Moldova’s parliament on 25 March 2014 . They were not approved by Moldova's parliament .
 Commonwealth of Independent States Free Trade Area . CIS initiatives were formed mostly as independent multilateral agreements, and not as internal CIS agreements .
 Ukraine became an associate member state of the CIS Economic Union in 1994 and Turkmenistan in 2005 . Ukraine also became a member of CIS in 1994, and Turkmanistan in 2004 .
 The Interparliamentary Assembly was established in 27 March 1992 in Kazakhstan . It was formed in March 1992 .
 CIS leaders signed the eventually ratified by nine parliaments on 26 May 1995 . CIS leaders sign the eventually ratification by nineParliaments .
 The Assembly is actively involved in the development of integration processes in the CIS . It also sends observers to the national elections .
 The Assembly held its 32nd Plenary meeting in Saint Petersburg on 14 May 2009 . The Assembly was held in the city of Saint Petersburg .
 CIS members, especially in Central Asia, continue to have among the world’s poorest human rights records . CIS members are among the poorest in the world .
 Many activists point to the 2005 Andijan massacre in Uzbekistan to show that there has been almost no improvement in human rights since the collapse of the Soviet Union in Central Asia .
 The consolidation of power by President Vladimir Putin has resulted in a steady decline in previous years in Russia . Russia has seen a decline in the modest progress of previous years.
 The Commonwealth of Independent States continues to face serious challenges in meeting even basic international standards . The Commonwealth continues to faces serious challenges.
 The CIS Charter establishes the Council of Ministers of Defense, which is vested with the task of coordinating military cooperation of the CIS member states .
 The CIS Council of the Heads of State develops conceptual approaches to the questions of military and defense policy of the member states .
 Council's work on approximation of legal acts in the area of defense and military development . Also important is the Council’s work on approximating the legal acts .
 The headquarters has now moved to 101,000, and 41 Leningradsky Prospekt has now been taken over by another Russian MOD agency .
 The CIS is known to have mediated some regional hostilities between the "Stan countries" in Central Asia . The CIS has been involved in some of the region's most violent conflicts .
 Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev proposed that CIS members take up a digitization agenda to modernize CIS economies .
 Yushchenko has shown renewed interest in Ukrainian membership in the European Union . Such membership would be incompatible with the envisioned common economic space .
 The same elections were pronounced by the OSCE to have failed international standards for democratic elections . The OSCE said the same elections had failed to meet international standards .
 CIS observers hailed the Kyrgyz parliamentary elections of 2005 as ‘well-organised, free, and fair’ The opposition called the election a rigged parliamentary election .
 OSCE reported that the elections fell short of international standards in many areas . In contrast, the OSCE said that the election was held in many countries .
 2010 local elections in Ukraine were organised well, according to Interparliamentary Assembly . International observers of the Interpar Parliamentary Assembly said the 2010 elections were well organised .
 Russia has been urging that the Russian language receive official status in all of the CIS member states . Russia has also been urging the language to be given official status.
 Russian is also considered an official language in the region of Transnistria and the autonomous region of Gagauzia in Moldova .
 Viktor Yanukovych, the Moscow-supported presidential candidate in the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election, declared his intention to make Russian an official second language of Ukraine . Yanukovych was the controversial presidential candidate.
 The Western-supported candidate Viktor Yushchenko, the winner, did not do so . However, the Western- supported candidate did not.
 At the time of the Soviet Union’s dissolution in December 1991, its sports teams had been invited to or qualified for various sports events .
 The ‘Unified Team’ competed in the 1992 Winter Olympics and 1992 Summer Olympics . A CIS association football team competed in UEFA Euro 1992 .
 A CIS bandy team played some friendlies in January 1992 and made its last appearance at the 1992 Russian Government Cup . It also played against the new Russia national bandy side in 1992 .
 The Soviet Union bandy championship for 1991–1992 was rebranded as a CIS championship . The Soviet Republic bandy championships were rebranded in 1992 .