 Americans have been shielded from evidence that the 2014 ouster of democratically elected President Viktor Yanukovych was a U.S.-supported coup d’etat spearheaded by violent neo-Nazi extremists .
 The mainstream U.S. media has essentially banned those deviant facts from the public discourse . But most Americans probably haven't heard any of that evidence revealing a coup .
 If they are mentioned at all, they are lumped together with "fake news" amid the reassuring hope that soon there will be algorithms to purge such troublesome information from the Internet .
 Putin recognizes that many Ukrainians felt that an association with the European Union could help solve their problems . Many Ukrainians felt an association could help them solve their issues .
 Ukraine stood to lose some $160 billion. But that created a problem for Russia because of the absence of tariffs between Russia and Ukraine .
 Yanukovych decided to postpone the E.U. agreement so he could iron out that problem . Protests erupted when he decided to delay the deal so he can iron out the problem .
 Putin’s narrative deviates from what the U.S. government and mainstream media tell the American people. But from that point on, Putin”s narrative Deviates from that.
 Putin: "Yanukovych didn’t give an order to use weapons against civilians" U.S. claims to blame Yanukovych for Maidan protests .
 Western partners, including the United States, asked us to influence him so that he did not give any orders to use weapons . And incidentally, our Western partners asked him to influence his actions so he didn't use weapons.
 opposition to clear squares and administrative buildings. They promised to do everything for the opposition. And they promised to clear the squares and buildings .
 Yanukovych and opposition leaders on Feb. signed an accord, brokered and guaranteed by three European governments . In the meantime, a reduction of Yanukovych’s powers was reduced .
 The opposition has moved to Crimea from Crimea to try to settle the conflict by democratic legal means . The opposition says it will not be allowed to leave Crimea .
 It became clear that if he were taken he would be killed if he was taken . But that never happened and it became clear he would have been killed .
 Putin noted how the new regime in Kiev immediately sought to limit use of the Russian language . Extreme nationalist elements have moved against eastern provinces known as the Donbass .
 Putin: "First, there were attempts at arresting them using the police, but the police defected to their side quite quickly"
 Special Forces started to use Special Forces and in the night, people were snatched and taken to prison . Then the central authorities started using Special Forces .
 In the U.S. mainstream media, the crisis was blamed entirely on Putin and Russia . In the United States mainstream media.
 Putin’s account deviated sharply from what Americans have been told . Crimea is a peninsula in the Black Sea that was historically part of Russia . It was also a major Russian naval base at Sevastopol .
 There was even a threat that violence would be perpetrated by nationalists against Crimea, according to a report .
 The Parliament of Crimea had to be able to assemble and effect actions in accordance with the law . The Parliament had to facilitate the work of the parliament of Crimea .
 We did not engage in any hostilities. Yes, we created conditions for people to go to polling stations, but we didn't engage in hostilities . We created conditions to allow people to visit polling stations .
 More than 90 per cent of the Crimean population turned out to vote . The Parliament addressed the Russian parliament, asking to incorporate it into the Russian Federation .
 The USS Donald Cook turned back when Russian aircraft buzzed the ship and Russia activated its shoreline defense systems . Putin shed light on a little-noticed confrontation involving a U.S. destroyer .
 Putin didn't see confrontation with U.S. destroyers as grave as that. But Putin didn’t see confrontation as grave, he said .
 The Bastion is a coastal defense system known as the Bastion . It's the most sophisticated, our cutting-edge systems for the coastal defense .
 The Captain was a courageous officer to boot, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he showed much restraint, but he showed great restraint . He says he is a responsible man, and a courageous Officer to boot .
 It doesn’t at all mean that it would have been attacked by our missiles, but we had to show them that our coast was protected by missile systems .
 The U.S. mainstream media feels that it must protect the American people from alternative views even as the risks of nuclear confrontation escalate . It also remains a question why the U. S. media feels it must protection the American public from alternative view .