 Pavel Yurevich Gubarev is the People's Governor of the Donetsk People's Republic . He is the Commander of the Donbass People's Militia, and former political prisoner .
 Gubarev is a Russian nationalist and Pan-Slavist . He led hundreds of pro-Russian activists who liberated the Donetsk Regional State Administration Building . He declared independence from Ukraine on March 3, 2014 .
 On March 6 he was arrested by the Security Service of Ukraine, and is currently incarcerated on charges of separatism and seizure of power . He faced up to 10 years in prison, but was freed after two months in a prisoner exchange .
 Pavel is married to Ekaterina Gubareva, with whom he has two sons and a daughter . He also has a daughter and two sons .
 Gubarev is a former member of the Russian movement Russian National Unity . He is an affiliate of the World Union of National Socialists .
 The Euromaidan movement forced Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych from office and propelled a pro-EUSSR, U.S. puppet regime into power in western Ukraine . An eruption of Russian nationalism ensued in the east .
Gubarev would rise from an unknown to the face of resistance to the heavily Jewish regime in Kiev . In the brief interval between the Russian occupation of Crimea and the region's formal accession as a federal subject of Russia, GubareV would rise .
 Gubarev addresses supporters of the People's Republic before they retake the RSA March 5 . He admonishes supporters to refrain from violence while admonishing supporters to avoid violence .
 A bomb scare forced Gubarev and the rest of the provisional government to evacuate on March 5 . It is the third day of holding sway within the Donetsk RSA .
Ukrainian flag was restored. The event, possibly a stratagem devised by Taruta, allowed forces loyal to Kiev to reoccupy the RSA .
 Gubarev addressed them, declaring: "We are determined to erect our people's power in the Donetsk region" GUBarev said he was determined to build power in Donetsk .
About 1,000 supporters of a united Ukraine clashed with a larger crowd of some 5,000 fans . The crowd was backed by ultras loyal to the FC Shakhtar Donetsk soccer team . After a bloodless struggle lasting hours, they retook the building .
 Gubarev's family fled for the Russian Federation following his arrest . Two weeks later his wife returned to Donetsk and became a leader in the independence movement herself .
 In late April, Gubarev went on a hunger strike to protest the military's assault on Slavyansk . In April, he went on the hunger strike in protest of the military assault .
 On March 8 between 1,500 and 3,000 people rallied in favor of a referendum on the region's future . In favor of Gubarev's release, the referendum was held on March 8 .
 On March 16 through the 17th, an estimated 4,000 protesters rallied for Gubarev's release . They attacked the Donetsk SBU headquarters .
 50,000 signatures had been gathered from around Donetsk Oblast requesting Gubarev's freedom .
Another major rally was held in Donetsk on March 23, numbering about 5,000 . Another major rally in Donetsk was held on March 22, March 23 .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov called for Gubarev's release and expressed concern for his health . U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry is on the matter .
 Gubarev was among three Ukraine-held prisoners released in exchange for three officers of the SBU's elite Alpha force . On May 7, he was one of three prisoners released.
 Gubarev was repatriated to DPR-controlled Sloviansk after his release . He was released from his home country .
 Gubarev resumed his role as Head of State after his return to Donetsk People's Republic . He shared effective power with Denis Pushilin, Chairman of the Supreme Soviet , Head of Government during Gubararev's captivity .
 Gubarev remains the symbolic leader of the DPR and remains a prominent spokesman in the media . Political and military decisions have mostly passed to Pushilin.
 New Russia held its first congress on May 22, outlining its vision for the region . Headquartered in Donetsk, New Russia is based in Donetsk .
 New Russia aims to unite the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics, along with Ukraine-controlled Kharkiv, Kherson, Dnipropetrovsk, Mykolaiv and Zaporizhia into the Federal State of New Russia .
 The federation grants a special status to Russian Orthodoxy while not harassing other religions . The federation will place emphasis on social justice .
 Andrew's cross resembles the Confederate battle flag, and was likely designed by Gubarev himself as it appeared on his Facebook page months before .
 According to Gubarev the federation of the two republics occured on May 24 . LPR Governor Valery Bolotov said the agreements are not yet concluded .
 Pro-Russian Gubarev, a symbol of east Ukraine separatism Digital Journal, is a symbol for east Ukraine separatists .
 Far-Right Forces are Influencing Russia's actions in Crimea, the New Republic .