Vyacheslav LIKHACHEV July 2016 Russia/NEI Center The Institut français des relations internationales is a research center and a forum for debate on major international political issues .
 Headed by Thierry de Montbrial since its founding in 1979, Ifri is a non-governmental, non-profit organization .
 Ifri sets its own research agenda, publishing its findings regularly for a global audience . As an independent think tank, Ifri publishes its research findings regularly .
 Ifri stands out as one of the rare French think tanks to have positioned itself at the heart of the European and broader international debate .
 The opinions expressed in this text are the responsibility of the author alone . The author is responsible for the author's opinions .
 These policy-oriented papers deal with strategic, political and economic issues .
 His area of interest includes right-wing radicalism in Russia and Ukraine, as well as hate-crimes and xenophobia . He also has a history of anti-government extremism in Russia .
 Since 2003, he has edited and compiled the yearly reports of the EuroAsian Jewish Congress on anti-Semitism in the post-Soviet space .
 The armed conflict that broke out in the Donbass in the spring of 2014 drew in right-wing radicals, on the Ukrainian as well as Russian side .
 Organised ultra-nationalist groups and individual activists established their own units of volunteers or joined existing ones .
 The ideology, political traditions and general track record of these rightwing extremists meant it was both natural and inevitable that they would take an active part in the conflict . The ideology and political traditions of these extremists meant that it was neither natural or inevitable.
 The role of right-wing radicals on both sides has on the whole been exaggerated in the media and in public discussion .
 The general course of the conflict, meanwhile, caused the importance of far rightgroups on both sides to decline .
 Stigmatising one's enemies as “fascists’ became an important way of discrediting them and mobilising one’s ‘own’ audience from the very beginning of the conflict .
In the context of a ‘hybrid war’ in which the information campaign does not simply accompany and justify violence but also contributes to producing it . The importance of such labels in intensifying the confrontation shouldn't be taken lightly .
 By engaging in propaganda or simply failing to do their jobs properly, the media spread false narratives, blow things out of proportion and paint a picture of events that leaves a lot to be desired .
 It is important to understand what role far-right radicals really did play in the RussianUkrainian conflict .
Military operations were at their most active for just a year, from spring 2014 to spring 2015 . Military operations were the most active in the past year, according to CNN .
 The situation in the conflict zone has been Translated from Russian by Cameron Johnston .
 Far Right in eastern Ukraine affected and continues to affect society and politics in Russia and Ukraine . Vyacheslav Likhachev affected and affected by far right in Ukraine .
Ultra-nationalist groups and their adherents receive weapons and experience, grow more organised and build up social capital . By participating in the conflict, ultra-nationalists get weapons and experiences .
 Whatever public support they now enjoy is clearly attributable to them being perceived as “defenders of their homeland’s homeland, not bearers of a far-right ideology .
L lionising individual ideologues indirectly helps to legitimise their ideology in public discourse as a whole, which naturally arouses fear among observers . Nevertheless, lionising individuals is a good way to legitimising their ideology.
 In Russia, there is no free political process and the Kremlin suppresses competition by monopolising imperial and revanchist language, this question is less relevant .
3.3. They proved unable to win any significant electoral support and failed to exert any sizeable ideological influence over society and the ruling elites . They failed to gain any significant political support .
Statehood was not achieved thanks to the nationalists’ efforts. What is more is more, statehood is not achieved due to nationalists' efforts .
 They were unable to implant their representatives in the political elite and seemed doomed to a marginal existence . They were even unable to get their representatives.
 The inability to offer society a programme that moved with the times made the crisis among far-right radicals even worse .
 Most Ukrainian ultranationalists gave the impression of being outdated . With its appeals to strengthen the role of the Ukrainian language and to separate the Ukrainian Orthodox Church from the Moscow patriarchate, the ideological platform of most Ukrainian ultransationalists .
 Classic nationalist prescriptions appropriate to the birth of an independent state were their stock in trade .
 The spectre of Russian imperialism, which far-right activists used to scare Ukrainians, did 3.4 million people . It was the first time Russian imperialism was seen in Ukraine .
 Vyacheslav Likhachev not look in the least frightening in the 1990s. Far Right in eastern Ukraine is not the least scary in the 90s .
 The radical right demanded changes to the linguistic, cultural and religious status quo that had emerged from the collapse of the Soviet Union .
Far-right activists showed all too clearly that they were out of date . Claiming descent from the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists 5 might have won the sympathy of some people in Ukraine’s Western regions .
 Attempts to use these slogans to fire up a population that was intent on surviving in difficult economic conditions failed .
 Borrowing anti-immigrant slogans from Western Europe and applying them to Ukraine just would not do .
 Violence and street scuffles with the police and political opponents might have attracted a racist teenage subculture . The subculture was trying to imitate Western and especially Russian Nazi-skinheads .
After Viktor Yanukovych came to power in 2010, the situation changed rapidly . However, after Viktor Yanukovych was elected, it has changed rapidly.
 The ‘Kharkhov agreements’ led many people to fear for Ukraine’s national security and sovereignty . V Yanukovych took steps to extend the Russian Black Sea Fleet .
 Before, the radical-nationalist idea that the fight for real independence was still happening appeared to be an anachronism . But as the context changed, it became topical again .
 At a time when the confrontation between society and the authorities was escalating quickly, many saw the radical nationalists as uncompromising, thus credible opponents .
 Oleh Tyahnybok’s radical right-wing party ‘All-Ukrainian Union Svoboda’ in the elections to the Ukrainian parliament at the end of 2012 . This is what explains the unprecedented success of the party .
 Svoboda easily surpassed the election threshold and formed its own parliamentary faction . With 10.44% of the vote, Svobodia easily surpassed its election threshold .
 The government announced it would not sign the Association Agreement with the European Union . It began as a reaction to the government issuing a public statement announcing the decision .
 The "Revolution of Dignity" ended with victory for the Maidan, Ukraine . The Maidan is called a "revolution in Ukraine"
 The political opposition literally went from the streets into the offices of executive power .
 Some Ukrainians believe there was a power vacuum in the Ukraine . That resulted in a period of administrative chaos .
 This impression was only deepened by the resistance of regional elites. This impression is only deepening by the resistence of regional leaders .
 When the Maidan broke out, Svoboda was one of three opposition parties in parliament . It was only natural that it took place within the protest movement .
 It would be wrong to say that, confronted with the authorities, Svoboda’s leaders or members acted more radically than others .
 Oleh Tyahnybok was no more decisive than the leaders of the liberal opposition . Svoboda activists were simply part of the mass of protesters .
 Three members of the party were counted among the ‘heavenly hundred heroes’ who were killed by the police when they fired on protesters on 20 February 2014 .
After the Maidan's victory, Svoboda played its part in creating the first post-revolutionary government alongside other opposition forces .
 In early elections to the Verkhovna Rada in 2014, the party did not surpass the election threshold and lost its representation in the executive . The party was elected to the executive.
 The “Stepan Bandera All-Ukrainian Organization ‘Tryzub’”8 movement was led by Dmytro Yarosh . It had first appeared in November 2013 as a motley coalition of radical nationalist groups .
 Right Sector became notorious when it took responsibility for clashes with police on Grushevsky Street in January 2014 .
 An activist belonging to the Ukrainian National Assembly, one of the oldest far-right organisations in the country, was one of those who died in the protests .
 Right Sector transformed into a political party in spring 2014 . Right Sector received widespread attention in the Ukrainian and Russian media . It remained an extremely weak association, riddled with internal conflicts and scandals .
 The party's attitude towards the new, post-revolutionary, authorities was among the most disputed issues . The question of the party’s working practices also caused serious disagreements .
 Right Sector leaders had their own strong political ambitions and never accepted D Yarosh’s leadership .
 The Social-National Assembly under the leadership of Andriy Biletsky broke away from Right Sector . The group was one of the most radical groups in the initial informal coalition .
 He was ready to set up constructive dialogue with the authorities and support them against external aggression . He was for his part, ready to setting up a constructive dialogue .
 Unlike D Yarosh, most members of the conflict-riven party had ended up very willing to switch to radical 7.7 .
In Soviet propaganda, all supporters of Ukrainian independence were called ‘Banderians’ and the OUN was demonized . In Soviet propaganda. All supporters of Ukraine independence were “Banderian’s”
 In April 2014, Right Sector had almost caught up with the ruling United Russia party in the number of times it was mentioned in the media . The party had been mentioned 19.05 thousand and 18.000 points respectively .
 Dmytro Yarosh announced plans to create a new movement in February 2016 . In February 2016, he announced plans for the movement .
 Ukrainian far right proved generally incapable of creating a common platform. Therefore, Ukrainian farright proved generally unable to create acommon platform .
 Ukrainian authorities formed after the revolution’s victory and the following parliamentary and presidential elections . Failure was due to personal ambitions taking over, competition inside a narrow segment of society and struggle for influence, popularity and funding .
 With the outbreak of war in Eastern Ukraine, Right Sector, S.N.A., UNA, Svoboda and some of the other radical far-right groups established formations of armed volunteers .
 D Yarosh says he feels comfortable being at war because he has prepared for it for 20 years . ‘I feel quite comfortable’ he said .
 For years, many far-right activists devoted much more effort to military training and sport than to political activity per se .
 Immediately after the triumph of the revolution in Kiev, pro-Russian opponents of the new government began to stage street protests .
 Yanukovych’s government assembled with the help of administrative resources in order to feign public support and suppress the protests .
 Several far-right activists, for different reasons, joined the government to forcefully suppress the protests .
Unlike national radicals/farright radicals fighting for the Maidan, they didn't act as one united protesting force .
 Most of those who opposed the Maidan were affiliated either to different degrees of 11 . Most of them were affiliated with a certain ideology .
 Military and sports training for personnel was virtually the only thing Yarosh's “Tryzub’s ‘Patriot of Ukraine’ movements did. Military and sport training was virtually only thing that Yarosh” and Biletsky’S
Almost from the very beginning, Russians took part in the protests and in violent demonstrations against the new “revolutionary government in Ukraine’s cities .
 Armed detachments of Russians had earlier taken part in the occupation of Crimea . They began to seize the capitals of districts in Donetsk province on 12 April 2014 .
Anti-terror operation forces liberated more than two thirds of the provinces of Donetsk and Lugansk in 2014 .
 Ukraine lost control of a long stretch of its state border. But as a result of the Russian army’s intervention and cross-border shelling 16.
 At the end of August 2014, an invasion by Russian army subunits halted the Ukrainian armed forces’ advance . The demarcation line stabilised and the Ukrainian military's advance was halted .
 From spring of 2015 onwards, the clashes lost much of their intensity and full-blown military operations had almost ceased by autumn . isolated skirmishes persist, but isolated skirmish persist .
 In the first weeks after the triumph of the revolution, radical nationalists had been prominent in street clashes with “AntiMaidan” demonstrators and pro-Russian or “separatist’s’ groups .
 Once military operations began in earnest, many of them took whatever chance they could get to rush to the front, without paying much attention to which 14 of them did . But once military operations started in earnest.
 Several organisations set about establishing their own volunteer formations . Several organisations, however, set about setting up their own formations .
 Doing so allowed them to remain relatively independent, fight as pre-prepared units and make use of their presence in the rear to raise money .
 You could simply start fighting without receiving legal status . You could just start fighting with no legal status.
 Right Sector took this path by setting up the Ukrainian Volunteer Corps . Several battalions of which are still not officially recognised two years after the beginning of the war .
 The integration of several far-right formations into the structure of Ukrainian military forces was hampered by these formations’ reluctance to lose their autonomy and independence . They distrust in both military command and the country’s authorities in general .
 The media has seriously exaggerated the role of volunteers in the anti-terrorist operation . The mere fact that these volunteer formations materialised had a propaganda value in the first weeks of the conflict .
 They did not actually play a significant role during the military operations . They were not involved in any major military operations.
 It was the regular army and special police units that bore the brunt of the war . It was only natural given the scale of the hostilities, involving rocket artillery batteries and armoured vehicles .
 Dmytro Reznichenko went to fight in the Donbass Territorial Defence Battalion instead of waiting for the leadership of the Svoboda-aligned youth group C14 to establish its own unit . He had earlier been convicted of taking part in clashes with members of the security services outside
 D Korchinsky and his followers went to fight in the Shakhtyorsk Territorial Defence Battalion and so on . They were involved in the fight against the Russian army .
 Radical nationalists were also present at an individual level in the “Aidar” and “Shakhtyorsk’s” battalions, as well as in a number of National Guard subunits .
 fighters with party experience constituted a tiny minority, even in units set up by far-right activists themselves . It is notable that fighters with Party experience constitute a small minority .
 The core of leaders and activists was immediately surrounded by a wider circle of newcomers who sympathised with their nationalist ideology and were attracted by the extremists’ robust rhetoric while still on the Maidan .
 Once the war began, a third and still wider circle of support coalesced around those who came to see the nationalists as a resolute force . The nationalists are now seen as ready to repel the invaders .
This last group did not hold far right views, at least in the beginning . This last group didn't hold far left views, but in the start of the year .
 "Azov" or Right Sector’s Ukrainian Volunteer Corps was simply a way to fight for their country and make the biggest impact .
There is even evidence that some left-wing activists went to fight in these units . There is even proof that some of the activists were involved in the fight .
 New recruits to these units were indoctrinated with radical nationalist views, including xenophobia .
 The most successful of all the Ukrainian right-wing radicals in the anti-terror operation turned out to be the “Azov battalion, created by Andriy Biletsky in May 2014 .
 As early as March to April, supporters of Biletsky clashed with pro-Russian protesters, mostly on the streets of Kharkiv .
 Azov was taken under the wing of the Interior Ministry and rebranded as a special purpose unit . Azov then helped to liberate Mariupol from the separatists .
 Azov became a regiment in the autumn of 2014, and was reassigned 21 .
 Azov is the best volunteer unit in the eyes of the Interior Ministry's leadership . High standards for training troops, strict discipline, extensive PR and good logistics, funded by donations .
 The regiment carried on using the old symbol of the S.N.A, the “wolfsangel” displayed by neo-Nazis around the world .
 The regiment’s emblems also feature the occult Nazi symbol, the “black sun” , a circular swastika radiating multiple beams .
 Others, like Right Sector’s Ukrainian Volunteer Corps, boasted many members and won public recognition for fighting on difficult sectors of the front . But they did not even manage to legalise their status within the armed forces .
 This failure was mostly due to the lack of management skills in the group . The failure was mainly due to a lack ofmanagement skills .
 Some fighters and small subunits within Right Sector’s Ukrainian Volunteer Corps won fame not for their heroism at the front, but for banditry and extremist behaviour .
 Political Struggle On the front, then, far-right groups were able to present themselves as separate players worthy of significance .
 The anti-terror operation allowed them to shape their image as defenders of Ukraine .
 The radical nationalists failed to convert their hard-won social capital into electoral support . Rare individual exceptions aside, however, the nationalists failed utterly to convert social capital to electoral support.
 Oleh Tyahnybok and Dmytro Yarosh took tenth and eleventh place respectively with 1.16% and 0.7% of the vote .
 Neither Tyahnybok nor Yarosh was able to convince voters that they were “defenders of the homeland in the face of armed aggression’ While campaigning, they were able to tell voters they were not ‘defenders.’
 The example of Oleh Lyashko showed that such image could help candidates to win votes .
 The war witnessed no rise in popularity for radical nationalist political forces . The war saw no rise for radical nationalists .
 Oleh Tyahnybok had fared better in the elections of 2010, when he won 1.43% of the vote . This was before Svoboda had gained support for opposing the Yanukovych regime .
Ultra right-wing groups stopped being regarded as a necessary “counterweight to the “anti-national’ regime, as they had been in 2010-2013 .
 Svoboda failed to exceed the election threshold with 4.71% of the vote and lost its standing as a parliamentary fraction .
 Right Sector garnered a mere 1.8% of the vote in these elections . Dmytro Yarosh was duly elected in a single mandate electoral district decided by majority vote .
 Trends in electoral preferences after the elections show that Svoboda continued to lose support . Right Sector has strengthened its position, while Right Sector is strengthening its position .
 The population more often associates Right Sector with fighting in the antiterror operation than it does Svoboda . As far as one can judge, their fortunes have differed .
 A Biletsky is regularly exploiting the name of the Azov regiment . He is setting up branches of his civic organisation across the country . He has broadcast his intention to form a political party around Azov .
 Azov managed to steer clear of division and reputational damage linked with its fighters’ behaviour . Thanks to strong discipline, good management and its leaders’ authority, Azov has, unlike its competitors Right Sector and Svoboda.
 The radical right’s taste for unbounded extremism or simple criminality discredits it in the eyes of society .
 Many crimes committed by far-right activists did not receive such close attention . That adds up to many cases of other crimes that were committed by the far-left .
 Right-wing radicals now have military experience and weapons, not to 27 . The new generation of right-wingers now have weapons and experience .
Far-right groups are a serious problem for Ukraine’s fledgling democracy, despite their paltry levels of support . Together, these factors mean that far-right group are aserious problem for the fledgling democracy .
 The influential neo-Eurasianist thinker Aleksandr Dugin has stated that Ukraine represents a grave danger for the whole of Eurasia . Many ethno-nationalist parties have also proclaimed that it is necessary to unite Russia, Ukraine and Belarus .
 Ukrainians, Belorussians and Russians are in fact one nation . It was a commonplace among Russian far-right figures.
 The claim was repeated consistently in the programmes of the Russian National Unity movement . This claim has been repeated consistently.
 Russian nationalists regularly exploited the post-imperial thesis of Russian people being “divided’ by the new borders .
 Russian national radicals are often involved in staking territorial claims and taking steps to stir up proRussian activism in Russian-speaking regions .
 As early as 2005, the Donetsk People's Republic invented the symbolism that would later gain ‘official’ status in the Donbass . They propagated the ideology of proRussian separatism in theDonbass .
33 EYU activists have been accused of abusing state symbols and other crimes . In 2008, the group said its goal was “to carry out a people’s revolution in Ukraine”
 The actions of the young Russian Federation bore an uncanny resemblance to Germany after the First World War . This partly lay behind the spread of a “Weimar Russia’s” metaphor .
For Russian radical nationalists, the ideology of imperial restoration was not an abstract theory . For Russian radicals, it was not a theory .
 For years, these organisations symbolically rejected the geopolitical status quo that had emerged from the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Ukrainian state symbols were desecrating Ukraine state symbols in 2014 . The annexation of Crimea and Crimea spurred these groups to change their modus operandi .
 In the mid-1990s, Eduard Limonov was expelled from 32-year-old party . In the 1990s, the party’s leader was expelled for his actions .
 The party brochure was published under the editorship of the party's leader Vladimir Zhirinovsky .
 The National Bolshevik Leader outlined a plan describing with surprising accuracy the events that would kick-start the so-called ‘Russian spring’ 15 years later .
Around 2,000 people used 'Other Russia' structures to go to fight in the Donbass in 2014-2015 .
 The party set up its own units, “international brigades, which earned their stripes in the summer of 2014 . The party was set up in 2014 .
 ‘The Other Russia’ probably joined the separatist uprising after it had already begun due to ideological motivation and political habit .
37 mimicking revolts by Ukrainian citizens themselves. We might cautiously hypothesise that other groups were cooperating closely with Russian secret services .
 RNU party played a very particular role in exacerbating the conflict in its first weeks and months . RNU played a particular role.
 Alexander Barkashov, a former military who founded the RNU in 1990, is the leader of the movement . The first ‘separatist people’s governor’ of Donetsk province, Pavel Gubarev, had also been a member of the RN U.
 In May 2014, A Barkashov also instructed the local activists about how and when they should carry out a “referendum’s independence” on independence .
 In 2013, he was charged with beating up an Uzbek man as well as establishing an extremist group . He was also charged with setting up the extremist group in 2013 .
 The FSB promised that the existing charges would be dropped and he would receive financial aid and political backing . If he agreed, he would get financial aid, political backing and financial aid .
Valov refused, fled to Ukraine and later participated in the anti-terror operation as part of the Azov battalion . Valov refused to flee to Ukraine. Valov was part of a battalion that fought against terror .
 Others apparently accepted the secret services’ generous offer when placed in similar circumstances . Others, however, accepted the generous offer.
 Others, for reasons that remain obscure to outsiders, were never punished for crimes that they had committed . Others, like others, were not punished.
 These figures began to appear among pro-Russian activists as early as the end of February-beginning of March 2014 .
 Aleksei Khudyakov was spotted in Donetsk on 5 March . He was the former leader of the organisation “Moscow Shield’s‘Moscow Shield' He was also seen in Donetsk .
 He had recently appeared in Russia on criminal charges of conducting an armed raid on a migrant workers’ hostel but was amnestied . He was recently arrested in Russia and charged with armed raid.
 During the war in the Donbass, RNU altered the symbol on its chevrons, dispensing with the modified swastika that it had always used in the past .
 The round eight-pronged swastika appeared on the badges of the neo-Nazi "Rusich" and "Ratibor" units within the “Batman” Rapid Response Group, and the ‘Svarozhichi’ battalion within the
 The fact that many far-right fighters were serving in the military shortly before the conflict began also supports the supposition that the radical nationalists’ activities on Ukrainian territory were coordinated with the Russian secret services .
 Anton Raevsky, a member of the Black Hundreds, may serve as a prime example . The Black Hundreds are a group of Black Hundreds .
 In March 2014, he was working with his brothers-in-arms to prepare a pro-Russian armed uprising in Odessa . He joined up with other fighters in the Donbass in March 2014 .
 Alexei Milchakov, known for his brutal reprisals against injured Ukrainian servicemen, may also serve as an example . The neoNazi from St Petersburg, Russia, might also be a example of a neoNazi .
 Milchakov got involved in the conflict once military operations had already begun . He apparently entered the Ukrainian territory at the head of the pre-formed and armed “Rusich’s assault sabotagereconconnaissance unit .
Members of far-right groups played a much greater role on the Russian side of the conflict than on the Ukrainian side, especially at the beginning .
 The anti-terror operation would have proceeded at roughly the same speed whether Azov and DUK PS were involved or not . We might speculate that the anti- terror operation would've proceeded at the same time .
 It is hardly likely that the Kremlininspired “separatist’s rebellion would have played out in the way it did had Russian extreme nationalists not taken part .
 Russian far-right groups became less important in the Donbass . With the passage of time, far- right groups became more important .
 As quasi-state structures took hold in Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics, the need for Russian radical nationalists began to disappear .
 A Milchakov headed to the Donbass immediately after serving in the Pskov assault landing division . He was a member of the Russian army.
 Fighters from Russian special unit “Grom’ were also identified among the Rusich fighters . Fighters from the Russian special units “grom” were also named .
 The Russian army ensured the puppet regimes to survive. By its almost over intervention in the conflict, the Russian army enabled the puppet regime to survive .
 From August 2014 onwards, Kiev failed to show any real willingness to use force to regain control of the occupied territory . From August 2013 onwards, there were no real signs of any willingness to return to the occupied area .
 The self-proclaimed DNR and LNR were able to calmly go about the business of monopolising power and preserving the status quo . The front was acting in effect as the border of the “separatist’s regions, stabilised and the leadership of the self-
For holders of Russian imperial ideology, any ceasefire with Ukraine was unwelcome and even unthinkable . For holders of a Russian imperial Ideology, it was unwelcome, even if only temporary and poorly observed .
 At the very least, their goal was to “liberate’s’ 47 from the “Banderites’ 48.” 48 and at their most ambitious, they sought to take Kiev and Lviv .
 The radical nationalists became a hindrance to the new elites of the DNR and LNR, as well as to their backers in the Kremlin .
 DNR and LNR’s armed forces began to impose control on independent detachments or those claiming to be independent . Beginning in late 2014, the centralised structures of the D NR and L NR's armed forces started to become centralised .
 The Novorossiysk province was the region of northern Black Sea coast attached to the Russian Empire as a result of Russian -Turkish wars . The province was part of the Russian empire's Black Sea region .
 The concept of ‘Novorossiya’ was used to emphasize Russia’s historical membership to Russia of the south-eastern regions of modern Ukraine . The necessity to expand the pro-Russian separatist movement beyond the Donbass was also used in 2014 speeches.
 Some sources in Donetsk stated that the degree to which the DNR's armed forces are centralised should not be overstated .
Clashes between field commanders and their men for spheres of influence and resources . On the contrary, clashes between detachments ended in the more centralised and organised ones .
 In some cases, imposing control meant killing the detachments’ commanders or arresting their leaders and some of the men .
 In the beginning, fighters who publicly refused to answer to the leadership of the self-proclaimed republics were removed . In the start, they were removed from the group .
 The DNR and LNR made an effort to centralise the armed units in spring 2015 and by summertime, it was happening across the board .
 The information available suggests that this centralisation was directed by Russian officers and secret service agents .
 Independent units were refashioned as separate sub units . They lost their autonomy and were merged into the “separatists’ regular armed forces .
 Several high-profile field commanders, such as the “Rusich leader and neo-Nazi Alexei Milchakov, packed up and returned to Russia . The "Rusich" leader and "Neo-Nazi" leader is known for his work in Russia .
 Russian far-right activists have become popular among much of the population at home . By taking part in the war against Ukraine, Russia has become popular with many Russians .
 Men like Milchakov, who used to be little known outside a small band of neo-Nazis, are now prominent public figures . The men are known for their anti-Nazi views .
 Former Donbass fighters have little opportunity to convert their status as “heroes’ into anything more substantial . Since the political process in Russia is neither free nor competitive, they have little chance to turn their status into a more substantial role .
 Igor ‘Strelkov’ Girkin is the most prominent of these men . He continues to inspire support for the separatists in Russia .
 Former FSB Special Forces officer supports the ideology of Russian imperial nationalism . First detachment to cross the Russian-Ukrainian border, weapons in hand, seized Slavyansk on 12 April 2014 .
 Novorossiya is mostly a network of activists who help supply the DNR and LNR with equipment from logistical nodes . Strelkov has 51, although Strelk has 51 .
 Aleksandr Bednov was leader of the “Batman’s rapid reaction unit which contained Russian neoNazis . The most vivid example was the killing in the LNR on 1 January 2015 of Bednov .
 Russian citizens were among Bednov’s followers who were killed alongside him .
 Another notorious example was the killing of the commander of the Prizrak battalion, Aleksey Mozgovoy, on 23 May 2015 .
 Most commentators tend to believe that the LNR authorities were responsible for the reprisals . It is not entirely clear who was behind these reprisALS .
Bednov and Mozgovoy were Ukrainian citizens, but made ample use of Russian nationalist symbols . Bednov was also a Russian citizen .
 This club includes well-known ideologues from the ranks of the modern Russian nationalists . Eduard Limonov, Egor Kholmogorov, Konstantin Krylov and others .
 support for ‘Novorossiya’ has been an important factor in the unification of Russia’s nationalists is not open to doubt . It is too early to speculate about the Committee's political prospects .
 Cossacks engaged in exceptional violence, sadism, banditry and looting in the DNR and LNR . This explains why the arrest and killing of extremists was accepted by local people .
 By the autumn of 2015, the most radical Russian units had stopped playing a significant role as an independent force on “separatist-controlled territories’s territories.
 Declarations about the exceptional role of the Russian Orthodox Church58 are an important feature of official documents, public speeches and the puppet regimes' most influential media .
 Russian national movement based on the 25 January Committee under the leadership of Igor Strelkov was announced on 28 May 2016 .
 The Russian Interior Ministry refuses to try to clarify the circumstances in which Russian citizens died during internal clashes in the DNR and LNR and to help free fighters arrested by the “separatist” leadership .
62 had been all but wiped out on DNR territory by 2015 . At the beginning of the conflict, the terrorist expelled gypsies from towns that they had seized in Donetsk province .
 46% of religious communities registered in Donetsk province belonged to protestant denominations . More than in any other Ukrainian province .
 Many Protestants supported the sovereignty and territorial int egrity of the Ukrainian state and declared that they wanted peace . The separatists were hounded by the Protestants who wanted peace.
 Persecution of Protestants was also motivated by the Orthodox fundamentalism of the occupiers . The Protestants were associated with the West and America .
In the spring and summer of 2014, the conflict has often been exaggerated . But they did play their part in the first few months of the conflict .
 Russia’s use of rightwing radicals on the side of the “separatists’ in Donetsk and Lugansk provinces was more important militarily and politically than the involvement of Ukrainian far-right activists in the anti-terrorist operation .
 The importance of farright groups on both sides has declined over time. The conflict developed in such a way, moreover, that the importance offarright groups has declined .
 DNR and LNR have also helped to push far-right groups from the mainstream into the margins . The direction in which politics is moving in Ukraine and in the unrecognised, pro-Russian and “separatist’s”
 The DNR and LNR regimes have assumed a conservative, right-wing complexion and different types of xenophobia play a considerable role in their official ideology and rhetoric .
Radical nationalists lost support as elections came and went in winter 2014 .
 The overall situation in Ukraine remains difficult and unstable, however, and disillusionment with the authorities is growing . The overall condition in Ukraine is still difficult, but the situation is still unstable .
Radical nationalists who earned a heroic reputation fighting in the anti-terror operation now have the chance to expand their influence .
 Azov commander Andriy Biletsky and former leader of Right Sector, Dmytro Yarosh, showed how this might be achieved . Azov's former leader and former head of Right sector, D mytro Yarash, said this could be possible .
 populists could take advantage of a desire for revenge and they are most likely to do so if the conflict in the Donbass flares up once more .
 To prevent far-right forces from expanding their influence in Ukraine, the government must effectively combat the military threat and Russian propaganda . The government must succeed with its reforms, develop the Ukrainian economy and bolster state structures . European values must take hold in Ukrainian society, says the