 Sergey Valeryevich o.b.1972 Aksyonov was elected ‘Prime Minister of Crimea’ in the Crimean Verkhovna Rada on 27 17.3.2014 Aksonov February 2014 .
 Konstantinov played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the ‘referendum’ against territorial integrity of Ukraine and called on voters to vote in favour of Crimean Independence .
 Temirgaliev was Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea . He played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the “referendum against territorial integrity of Ukraine”
 Pyotr Anatoliyovych Zima was appointed as the new head of the Crimean Security Service on 3 March 2014 . Zima by “Prime Minister’s Aksyonov and accepted this appointment .
Former SBU officers of Crimea have proclaimed the formation of an independent Security Service of Crimea .
 Bushmin publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Sergachiisky Russian forces in Ukraine . Bushmin, Evgeni o.b..10.1958 in Deputy Speaker of the Russian Federation.
 On 1 March 2014, publicly supported in the Federation 21.3.2014 Ivanova Shepetovka, Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine .
 Yurievich Solntsevo was an organiser of the process in Crimea 21.3.2014 . He was an organizer of the event in Crimea . He says local Crimean communities were mobilised.
 The Russian 21.3.4-year-old Electoral system for signing referendum results. Responsible under the Russian21.3-2014 Electoral system .
 Commission 5/36 N Name Identifying Reasons Date of information listing 31. The date of information is listed as 31 .
2014 Savelyev Leningrad Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation . The annexation of the annexed Autonomous 29.4.4 years ago is responsible for the integration of the region into Russia .
 Olga Fedorovna was born 7.5.1962 in Member of the Russian Federation Council from the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea .
 Neverov Tashtagol, USSR integrate the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation . Russia is responsible for initiating legislation to 29.4.4 .
 Valery Vasilevich was Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, First Deputy Minister 29.4.2014 Gerasimov Kazan of Defence of the Russia Federation, General of the Army .
 Gennadevich active part in seizure of state buildings in Donetsk region . He took 29.4.4 years to take part in the seizure .
 Viktorovich Volodin oversaw the integration of the annexed Crimea region of Crimea into the Russian Alekseevka, Federation . Responsible for 12.5.5 years in overseeing political integration of Crimea .
2014 Kozyura Zaporozhye systematic and expedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Crimea . Responsible for the 12.5.5 years of passports issued for Crimea .
 Ponomarev called on Vladimir Putin to send in Russian 12.5.5 2014 Ponomariov troops to protect the city . He later asked him to supply weapons .
 Bezler of Ukraine's Office in Donetsk region building seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs' district station in Horlivka . He took control of the Security Service 12.5.5%.
 The 'government of the People' s Republic of Luhansk’ 67. It is responsible for the separatist ‘governmental’ activities of the so called ‘Government of the people’s s Republic.’
 Oleksiy MOZGOVY is one of the leaders of armed groups in Eastern Ukraine . He is responsible for training separatists to fight against Ukrainian government forces .
 Rashid Gumarovich was a member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation . He was involved in shaping the policy of Russian Government threatening Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Boris Vyacheslavovich was a member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation . He was born on 15.12.12 in Moscow, Russia .
 As a member of the 25.7.2014 GRYZLOV in Vladivostok Security Council, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity and independence of Ukraine .
 Sergei Orestovoch 1954 Commander of the Fifth Service of the FSB, Federal Security Service of Russian 25.7.7 .
 Mikhail Vladimirovich Born on 10.7.1981 Member of the State Duma..7.2014 DEGTYAREV in Kuibyshev on 23.5.2014 .
 Ekaterina GUBAREVA born on 5.7.1983 in her capacity of so called ‘Minister of Foreign Affairs’ She is responsible of defending the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’
 Her bank account is used to finance illegal armed separatist groups . In addition, her bank account has been used to fund illegal armed separatists .
 The self-described ‘president’ of the so-called ‘Republic of Novorossiya’ has called on 25.7.2014 KAUROV Odessa Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine . Valery Vladimirovich born on 2.4.
 Serhii Anatoliyovych born on 23.6.6 years ago . Serhius Anatolyovych was born on 24.7 years ago in Ukraine . He is responsible for actions which undermine or threaten 25.7.7 .
 Zdriliuk has supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Alexey Alexeyevich was first Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Administration . He is responsible for instructing 30.7.7 million people to take a line favourable with separatists in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea .
 Arkady Romanovich Born on 15.12.12 . Mr Rotenberg is a long-time acquaintance of President Putin and his former judo sparring partner .
 He has developed his fortune during President Putin's tenure in Russia . He has had a fortune during his tenure.
 He has been favoured by Russian decision-makers in the award of important contracts by the Russian State or by Stateowned enterprises . He has also been favoured in the awards of important contract contracts by Russian state-owned firms .
 Konstantin Valerevich Born on 3.7.1974 in Mr Malofeev is closely linked to Ukrainian separatists in Eastern Ulkraine and Crimea .
 MALOFEEV Puschino is former employer of Mr Borodai, so-called Prime Minister of the ‘Donetsk People's’ He met with Mr Aksyonov during the period of Crimean annexation process .
 He is a co-founder of the so30.7.2014 KOVALCHUK in Leningrad (St called Ozero Dacha) He is also a founder of theso30.8.7, a society bringing together an influential group of individuals .
 Ozero Dacha is a co-founder of the so30.7.2014 SHAMALOV . He is the founder of the co-operative society, which brings together an influential group of individuals .
 Miroslav Vladimirovich 21.1.1983 in Commander of the Donbass People's Militia .
 RUDENKO Debalcevo has said that they will continue their fighting in the rest of the country . He has inter alia stated that he will continue 12.9.9 years in the fight .
 In his statements, he has 12.9.9 years in prison . He has spoken about the militias' readiness to conduct a guerrilla war and their seizure of weapon systems .
Georgiy L'vovich Born on 19.11.1154 So called ‘Deputy Prime Minister’ of Crimea and Plenipotentiary Representative of Crimea to 12.9.9 2014 MURADOV President Putin .
 Mikhail Sergeyevich born on 23.5.5 years ago . So called ‘First Deputy PM’ of Crimea .
 Sheremet played a key role in the 16 March referendum in Crimea on unification with Russia . The 12.9.2014 SHEREMET in Dzhankoy organization and implementation of the 16March referendum on unification .
 Yuri Leonidovich born on 2.2.1948 in Deputy Speaker of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation on 1 March 2014 12.9 .
 Vladimir Volfovich Born on 10.6.1964 Member of the Council of the State Duma; leader of the LDPR party .
 He actively supported the use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea . He supported the 12.9.8-year-old ZHIRINOVSKY in Eidelshtein .
 Vladimir Abdualiyevich was born on 11.8.8 years old . He is the Deputy Speaker of the State Duma .
 Viktor Petrovich Born on 19.8.8 years old . He is the chairman of the Union of the Russian and Foreign Cossack Forces . He was the deputy of 12.9.9 years ago .
 Leonid Ivanovich born on 6.8.8 years ago . He was the first deputy Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the State Duma .
 Vladimir Stepanovich born on 5.4.1948 . He is the First Deputy Chairman of the Committee on Relations with CIS Countries, Eurasian Integration 12.9 .
 Oleg Vladimirovich born on 21.3.3 in Orel/Rudny . First Deputy Chairman of the Committee on Relations with CIS Countries, Eurasian Integration 12.9.9 .
 Svetlana Sergeevna Born on 7.1. 1972 in First Deputy Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, State Duma . Born in Moscow, Russia, in 1972 .
 Aleksey Vasilevich Born on 11.2.2, 1968 Major-general of the Russian Army .
 He is the commander of the 76th airborne division in Ukraine . He has been involved in the Russian military presence on the territory of Ukraine .
 Hа   21/36 N Name Identifying Reasons Date of information listing 118. Hац 21/36N Name Identify Reasons Date. Hљs 21/ 36 N Name identifies the date of information .
 Alexander Mikhailovich Born on 8.2.1963 in State Duma Deputy, Chair of the StateDuma Commission on Legislative Provisions for 12.9.9 2014 BABAKOV Chisinau Development of the Military-Industrial Complex of the Russian Federation .
 He is a prominent member of ‘United Russia’ and a businessman with heavy investments in Ukraine and in Crimea .
 In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has actively supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and to further destabilise Ukraine, he says .
 Airapetyan or Larysa "elections" are in breach of Ukrainian law and therefore illegal . The elections are in violation of the law, according to the Ukrainian law .
 She has actively supported policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and to further destabilise Ukraine .
 Yury elections are in breach of Ukrainian law and therefore illegal . Sivokonenko, Yury election was held in Yury, Ukraine .
 Syvokonenko has actively supported actions and policies which undermine Ukraine's sovereignty and independence . He has also supported actions which undermine territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine .
 Ukraine elections are in breach of Ukrainian law and therefore illegal . Oleksandr Kofman has actively supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 'Lugansk People's Republic' was established on 27 April 2014 . So called ‘lugansk The so called ’s Republic’ was established in March 2014 .
 So called 'Donetsk The so called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ was declared on 7 April 2014 .
 International Union of The ‘Great Don army’ established the ‘Cossack National Guard’ It is responsible for fighting against the Ukrainian 25.7.2014 Public Associations government forces in Eastern Ukraine .
Lugansk Self-defence militia of Lugansk is responsible for training separatists to fight against the Ukrainian government forces .
 'Army of the Illegal armed separatist group' is considered to be one of the most important in Eastern Ukraine . Responsible for occupying building of Security Service in Lugansk region .
 separatist ‘governmental’ activities of the so called ‘government of the People’s s Republic of Luhansk’ 10.
 'Donbass Illegal armed separatist group responsible for fighting against the Ukrainian government forces in the Eastern 25.7.2014 People's Militia' Ukraine, thus threatening stability or security of Ukraine .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . State ferry enterprise is owned by the state ferry enterprise .
 Gosudarstvenoye predpriyatiye Kerchenskaya paromnaya pereprava 31/36 N Name Reasons Date of listing 13.3 .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . State enterprise was transferred to a state enterprise .
 State enterprise ‘Kerch The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law’
 Gosudarstvenoye predpriyatiye ‘Universal-Avia’ 32/36 N Name Reasons Date of listing 16. The date is based on a list of 16.
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . Resort ‘Nizhnyaya’ is a resort in the Ukraine .
 Crimean enterprise was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . The ownership of the entity was transferred Contrary to the Ukraine law .
 State concern ‘National The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law. State concern’
 The enterprise is effectively confiscated by the Crimean ‘authorities’ Gosudarstvenoye predpriyatiye ‘Agrofirma Magarach’ nacionalnogo instituta vinograda i vina ‘Magar
 State enterprise ‘Factory The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law. State enterprise 'Factory The Ownership of the entities was transferred Contrary to the law'
 It manufactures anti-aircraft weaponry including surface-to-air 30.7.7 . It supplies to the Russian army .
 The Russian authorities have been providing heavy weaponry to separatists in Eastern Ukraine . The separatists are contributing to the destabilization of Ukraine .
 These weapons are used by the ALMAZ-ANTEY CORP; separatists, including for shooting down airplanes . The weapons are also used by separatists .
 DOBROLET aka Dobrolet is a subsidiary of a Russian state-owned airline .
 Since the illegal annexation of Crimea Dobrolet has so far had 30.7.7 flights between Moscow and Simferopol . DOBROLYOT exclusively operated flights between the two cities .
 Luganschine has actively supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and to further destabilise Ukraine .