 Attitudes among Ukrainians towards Russia are beginning to harden, says one observer at the Brookings Institution . The country deepens its link to Europe while severing ties with its eastern neighbour .
 The aggression that Russia unleashed against Ukraine in 2014 is now well into its fifth year . Russia's aggression against Ukraine is now in its fourth year in a row .
 Moscow has shown no readiness to end the conflict it keeps simmering in the Donbas region in eastern Ukraine, let alone .
 A year ago a UN peacekeeping force might offer a path out of the Donbas morass have dimmed. Hopes of a year ago that a UN force could offer a way out of Donbas were dimmed .
 It appears the Kremlin will wait another year, until after the presidential and parliamentary elections in Ukraine, to reconsider its policy .
 attitudes among Ukrainians toward Russia continue to harden . In the meantime, attitudes toward Russia remain harden.
 The country is deepening its links to Europe while severing ties to its eastern neighbour . The country has been deepening its ties to Europe since 2008 .
 The longer that Moscow holds off on changing its policy, the more the already wide gulf between Ukraine and Russia will grow . The longer Russia holds off, the longer it will grow.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin denied they were the Russian military . Putin denies they were Russian military.
 He admitted that they were and awarded their commanders commendations for the seizure . Weeks later, he admitted that he was and awarded them .
 Little green men appeared again in Donbas, triggering a conflict that has now claimed more than 10,000 lives . The conflict has now killed more than ten,000 people .
 Moscow has tried to minimise its visible footprint in the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk ‘People’s Republics’ Those entities survive only due to Russian assistance .
 The Minsk II agreement, brokered in 2015 by German Chancellor Angela Merkel and then-French President Francois Hollande, aimed to end the fighting and provide a path to a settlement of the Donbas conflict .
 The ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy arms away from the line of contact have yet to be implemented . More than three years later, its first two provisions are still not implemented . The ceasefire is still in place .
 Most attribute blame for failure to Russia and Russian proxy forces . Most blame Russia and proxy forces.
September generated hope that a way to resolve the conflict could be found . September generated hope for a way of resolving the conflict .
 Putin suggested that Russia might agree to a UN peacekeeping force . Russian officials envisaged it operating only along the line of conflict and limited to providing protection for OSC monitors .
 OSCE officials privately indicated that armed escorts would put their monitors at greater risk . That kind of mandate seemed overly narrow, and OSCE official said it would put monitors at risk .
 Ukrainian officials have indicated readiness to consider a UN peacekeeping force . Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said it could relatively quickly expand its area of operations to cover all of occupied Donbas .
 A peacekeeping force, perhaps complemented by an interim international administration, offers a means to ensure a peaceful and orderly transition of Donbas back to Ukrainian sovereignty .
 It also offers the Kremlin a face-saving way to extract itself from a conflict that has no goal or end in sight . It is also a way to extracting itself from the conflict.
 Some analysts have speculated that Mr Putin might look for a way out after he won re-election in March .
Five months have gone by since the Russian president's inauguration . That election, however, is long past, and five months have been gone by .
 The Kremlin has decided to wait until after next year’s elections in Ukraine to use the peacekeeping plan .
 Ukraine's 2019 calendar has a presidential ballot on Mar 31 and Rada elections no later than October . Ukraine’s 2019 calendar includes presidential elections on March 31 and October 31 .
 The Kremlin undoubtedly will seek to influence both elections with money, supportive electronic media, active social media, and cyber operations . The Kremlin will try to influence the election with money and electronic media .
 The few openly pro-Russian faces that remain in Ukraine, such as Victor Medvedchuk, also will likely help out . The few pro- Russian faces in Ukraine are likely to help out.
 Russia’s occupation of Crimea and part of the Donbas means that a significant portion of the electorate that in the past has been pro-Russian will not be voting .
 Russian interference may make Ukrainian elections more chaotic . Russian interference thus may make the elections more chaos .
 Rada will not deliver a pro-Russian president or sizable pro- Russian bloc in the Rada . It will not, however, deliver a Pro-Russian President or a sizable anti-Russian bloc .
 Ukraine is steadily moving away from Russia. While the Kremlin continues the simmering conflict in Donbas and waits for change in Kyiv, Ukraine is moving away .
 A June survey by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology showed 47 per cent of Ukrainians favouring integration with the European Union . 12 per cent supported joining the Russian-led Eurasian Economic Union .
 Russian language was once used as commonly as Ukrainian . Many today have made the political choice to use Ukrainian .
 The Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kyiv Patriarchate is once the largest in numbers of adherents and parishes . It has in recent years lost followers to the Ukrainian Orthodox Patriarchate .
 The Ukrainian church is expected to gain independent recognition from Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople this fall .
Russian Orthodox Church bitterly opposes this but appears to have little leverage to stop it . The Russian Orthodox Church seems to be having little leverage.
 The European Union has displaced Russia to become Kyiv’s largest trading partner .
 Ukraine-EU trade made up more than 40 per cent of Ukraine’s total in 2017 . The EU trade is the largest part of Ukraine's total trade in the country .
 The decline in energy trade has accounted for a big part of the overall drop in Ukraine-Russia trade . The decline is part of a drop in the overall decline in the energy trade .
 Ukraine today imports no natural gas directly from Russia . 75 per cent of Ukraine's natural gas came from Russia or Central Asia via Russia .
 Any Russian-origin gas that Ukraine now uses comes from Central Europe . Ukraine now has no Russian- origin gas .
 Ukraine is becoming more connected in other ways with the West and less so with Russia . Ukraine is more connected to the West than Russia .
 In September, Ryanair announced connecting flights between Kyiv and 12 European cities .
 Ukraine's transportation minister suggested ending rail and bus links between the two countries as well . Ukraine’s transportation minister, citing Russia”s continuing aggression, this summer suggested ending the links .
 The Kremlin could choose to adopt a course aimed at settling the conflict in Donbas .
 The gulf between Ukraine and Russia continues to widen. As it continues its present approach, the gulf between the two countries continues to grow .
 Moscow’s policy makes restoration of good, stable, neighbourly relations a more difficult and difficult task . The two will remain neighbours in a geographic sense .
 One has to question whether a policy that drives Ukraine away and presses it closer to the West really is in Russia’s interest .