 Ukraine's voters go to the polls on October 26, 2014 . Ukraine's future of a significant part of Europe will be at stake .
 Ukraine is Ukraine's first country since the Soviet Union collapsed more than two decades ago . Many expected Ukraine to do better than Russia in the years to come .
 During the first decade of the new century, Russia benefited from the combined effect of an old hydrocarbon industry that privatization in the 1990s had made more efficient and high oil prices .
 The reversal of sought-after economic diversification, and the reduction of “modernization, to little more than a slogan, caused no immediate concern . "Modernization" was a slogan.
 Ukraine became the worst managed of all the post-Soviet states, with cronyism and corruption thwarting productive capacity . By contrast, Ukraine fell further and further behind other post-communist countries in transition .
 The hoped-for break with the past did not occur, as political infighting among the country's new leaders blocked the implementation of any serious reform agenda .
 2004 was also a bitter failure for Russian President Vladimir Putin, who tried to bring his favored presidential candidate, Viktor Yanukovych, to power in Kyiv by supporting massive vote manipulation . But 2004 was a bitter failed for Putin, and his favored candidate was Viktor Yanukovych .
 The failure was a bitter blow to the Kremlin, one that was neither forgiven nor forgotten . The failure is not forgiven or forgotten, according to the Russian government .
 In 2010, the Orange Revolution’s failure brought Yanukovych to power in a free and fair election . In 2012 Putin selected himself for a third presidential term in Russia .
 Ukraine had been negotiating with the European Union for a free-trade and association agreement since 2007 . These talks were completed in early 2012 .
 The proposed pact with the EU was not compatible with Putin’s Eurasia project . It was not entirely compatible with the existing free-trade agreement between Ukraine and Russia .
 Yanukovych's renunciation of the EU agreement, the popular uprising that ousted him in response, two invasions by Russia, and thousands of people killed in the country’s eastern Donbas region – is history .
 The Kremlin is seeking more than the annexation of Crimea and control over the Donbas rust belt . Its aim is to prevent Ukraine from going West, force it to turn East, and quash any risk within Russia’s wider orbit of further revolutions .
 The EU and the U.S. view Putin’s efforts to challenge and undermine the core principles of European security and international law .
 A weakened Russia will still be a strong power in its immediate neighborhood. But even a weakened Russia is still a strong force in the immediate neighborhood .
 Ukraine is only the strength and determination of Ukraine that can block Russia’s revisionist ambitions .
 Ukraine plagued by corruption and cronyism, and heavily burdened by Russian aggression and destabilization, is no easy task . But to strengthen Ukraine is not easy task, and to strengthen the country is a tough task .
 The election on Sunday must give rise to a government that is truly determined to bring radical reform to the country . The election will be held on Sunday .
 Such a government must be able to count on the strong and determined support of the wider international community, says the author .
 A revised and reinforced International Monetary Fund package is imperative if the necessary reforms are to be enacted . The IMF package is needed to be updated and reinforced .
 The country’s irrational energy policy, based on immensely wasteful subsidies to consumers, must be fundamentally altered .
 The agreement with the EU must be used to drive the reform process forward, says the EU . The EU must use the agreement to help drive the process forward .
 If this agenda succeeds, the Kremlin’s revisionist bid will be blocked . There might even be an opening for a new and urgently needed wave of reform in Russia itself .
 If reform fails, there is little doubt that the Kremlin will continue its policies until it reaches its aims in Kyiv . But if reform fails there will be little doubt.
 Russia may seek to compensate for economic failure with further revisionist behavior . Russia might hunker down into a siege mentality, with the risk that the Kremlin might seek to compensate for economic failures .
 Anyone familiar with the aggressively nationalist posturing of Russian state-controlled media nowadays knows the danger of this .
 The real danger for Europe could arise. It is in these circumstances that the real danger could arise, says David Cameron .
 Revisionism might turn into outright revanchism as the Kremlin seeks to counter-balance internal weakness .
 By that time, it might be too late to stop a slide toward a wider confrontation . It may be too soon to stop.
 Ukraine is a strong and democratic Ukraine from decades of failure. That is why the emergence of a strong, democratic Ukraine is needed now, says the author .
 The election this Sunday is crucial for Ukraine, but it also holds the key to encouraging the transformation of Russia into a true member of the democratic European family .
 Carl Bildt was Sweden’s foreign minister from 2006 to October 2014 . He was Prime Minister from 1991 to 1994, when he negotiated Sweden's EU accession .