 R ussian President Vladimir Putin’s evolving policies toward Ukraine have surprised almost everyone .
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovich's ouster in February 2014 was seen as illegitimate . He considered the ouster to be illegitimate, another example of what he portrayed as Westernorchestrated regime changes .
 He also viewed Ukraine's definitive tilt toward the West as a challenge to Russia's power and control in its traditional sphere of influence .
 Special operations forces known as “little green men’s in Ukraine and ‘polite people’ in Russia. First came the shock of Moscow's annexation of Crimea, using special operations forces .
Political scientist John Mearsheimer explains Putin's reaction to the possible expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to include Ukraine .
 The post-Cold War NATO enlargement process started in the mid-1990s with invitations issued to Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic . Official talk about extending NATO to include Ukraine began in 2008 .
 Mearsheimer argued that Putin's dread over the possible loss of Russia’s naval base in the Crimean port of Sevastopol explained his 2014 gambit .
 There was nothing obvious that should have triggered this particular choice on Putin’s part, and no one had predicted it in advance .
 She can be reached at Km2225@columbia.edu, or find her on Twitter @KimberlyMarten.com .
 No one in NATO was seriously considering inviting Ukraine to join the alliance anytime soon, given the abysmal state of Kyiv’s economy and corruption .
 A 2010 agreement with Ukraine guaranteed Russian access to the Sevastopol base through 2042 . Kyiv strongly benefitted from heavily subsidized Russian natural gas supplies it received in return .
 Ukrainian opposition leaders had long threatened to annul the agreement . Kyiv had little incentive to abrogate it unilaterally, and gas prices remained a powerful bargaining tool for Moscow .
 Putin without question pushed Kyiv more closely into NATO's orbit, rather than securing its future cooperation with Moscow . By taking Crimea's predominantly Russian ethnic voters out of Ukraine, he lost a political tool of influence.
 Putin gave a triumphal speech before a joint session of the Russian parliament on March 18, 2014 . Following this annexation, Putin gave an address before the joint session .
 Putin's choice was particularly confounding because it seemed to presage threats to neighboring states . Estonia, Latvia, Kazakhstan, and Moldova, all of which have significant Russian ethnic minority populations, reacted negatively at a time .
 Russian military support for separatists in the eastern Ukrainian provinces of Donetsk and Lugansk . The Donbas region is known informally as the Donbas .
 The last time a census was taken, in 2001, was the last time ethnic Russians were in the majority of the population . In 2001, ethnic Russians formed only a predominant minority, not the majority .
Experts speculate that Putin's real goal was to create another ‘frozen conflict’ (like those in South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Transdniester, and Nagorgno-Karabakh)
 A September 5, 2014, ceasefire agreement reached in Minsk with the support of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . The agreement was inspired by Putin’s notes jotted on a plane trip to Mongolia8 .
 The evidence indicates Russia increased its supply of advanced equipment and weaponry to the rebels . By January 2015, a new winter offensive was underway against Ukrainian forces .
 The fighting in the east is not really a Ukrainian civil war, he says . It is aimed at resolving issues outlined in the Minsk accords, such as local autonomy .
 He claimed NATO was a NATO attempt to use the Ukrainian military as a “foreign legion’s” against the interests of the Ukrainian people . Instead, he claimed, this was aNAT attempt to threaten Russian sovereignty and security .
 Russian state media purported to show a U.S. soldier involved in the fighting in the Donetsk port city of Mariupol . Simultaneously, the Russian state news purported to have shown a U States soldier involved .
 Putin was laying the groundwork for a Russian escalation, perhaps to create a landbridge to the Crimean peninsula . Crimea had been economically devastated since being cut off from its only land border with Ukraine following the Russian annexation of 2014 .
 There is no way to know the answer to these questions until events in Russian Moscow play themselves out .
 Putin the Unpredictable U.S. and Western leaders would love to know what Putin's “endgame’s ‘end game’ is .
 When one match is over, the judoka moves on to the next, sizing up the new opponent and starting over again . The judoka starts over again.
 He credits judo for giving him discipline after a boyhood spent as a street fighter .
 He starred in a film about it while serving as Prime Minister under the presidency of Dmitry Medvedev in 2008 .
 Putin spoke in the film about the history of Russian victories in judo . He demonstrated some of his favorite moves .
 Putin told his security detail to stay well behind him after the funeral of his judo coach Anatoly Rachin . Putin said he could take a lone, if televised, walk of mourning .
 Putin's childhood judo buddy, Arkady Rotenberg, skyrocketed up the list of Russian billionaires . The Gazprom statecontrolled natural gas conglomerate sold off subsidiaries to him .
 Putin awarded Rotenberg’s company construction contracts totaling over $7 billion for the 2014 Sochi Olympics . In January 2015, Putin gave him the contract for building the Kerch bridge planned for spanning the waters between Russia and Crimea .
 Putin’s life is immersed in the world of judo, and a judo master doesn’t need an endgame .
 Instead a judoka responds in the moment to the vicissitudes of a changing environment .
 The only goal is to be the last one standing at the end of the tournament, come what may be the final one .
 Putin’s predilection for unexpected moves. It is not only immersion in the world of judo that shapes Putin's predilections for unexpected Moves .
 Putin credits the KGB with giving him the life-changing opportunity to transform himself from a mediocre student to a hardworking scholar .
 Russia experts Fiona Hill and Clifford Gaddy believe he was first a case officer, skilled at turning foreigners toward Moscow’s ends .
 He temporarily resigned from official state service to work for the mayor of St. Louis . He then added financial investigation skills to his intelligence portfolio during the 1990s .
 He has rewarded old friends, as his colleagues from the KGB and follow-on FSB have received high-ranking positions in government . He has been at the top of stateowned industrial conglomerates in the oil, nuclear energy, and defense sectors .
 The KGB would have trained Putin well in the arts of masking and deception, contributing to his talent for unpredictability . Putin is known for his ability to mask and deception .
 The current Russian political system makes all of connect to the leader through informal ties, not by well-defined institutions . This is because decisions are made by opaque political networks .
 Decisions made not within well-defined constitutional bodies or bureaucratic institutions, but behind closed doors by unknown individuals . Decisions are made not in well- defined constitutional bodies, but in secret .
 Authority comes through personal connections, cemented through family, neighborhood, and prior school or work experiences . Authority comes from personal connections.
 Russia sets Russia apart from its European or North American counterparts . Russia's personal patronage system is the extent and depth of its personal system .
Leaders in every realm of Russian politics, business, and society have an obligation to protect and promote their personal clients in the network .
 Networks receive fortification from long-standing emotional ties whose power far exceeds the expediency of immediate self-interest . Networks receive Fortification from emotional ties.
 Putin may increasingly be seeking advice from only a handful of people, especially his old KGB and FSB cronies . There are reports that, over time, Putin's own personal circle has narrowed .
 The surprising nature of his policy choices might reflect the incomplete information he has at his fingertips, if he is turning away from a broader range of expert advisers .
 Weeks argues, personalist dictatorships over the world over face this problem . Weeks argues.
 No one wants to serve as the bearer of bad news that contradicts the boss's views or challenges the wisdom of the leader’s choices .
 The informal network system has been in place in Russia for many years, perhaps even centuries . But far from being just an artifact of Putin’s personality or of the current tense climate in Russia, it is not .
 This was a stylistic holdover from the politics of the tsarist era . While the people involved and their philosophies had radically changed, this was a holdover .
 Russia for many of 2013 in Syria was the “September surprise’s” Russia in Syria. One prime example of this outside of Ukraine was the "September surprise" Russia in 2013 in the region .
 The United States was considering launching an air strike in response to overwhelming evidence that the regime of Bashar al-Assad had used chemical weapons against Syria’s own population .
 The remarkable thing about Lavrov’s announcement is that up until that point, Russia had consistently resisted all attempts by other members of the U.N. Security Council to impose any sanctions or even any criticism against the Syrian regime for its attacks against civilians .
 Moscow spearheading plan to send Western inspectors into Syria under UNSC oversight . Russia itself had helped arm regime with conventional weapons .
 There was no apparent debate about the decision in the Russian press or by Russian experts in the area .
 The opaque Russian system produces surprise policy decisions, but we can make some predictions about how the system should operate, based on the logic of patron-client politics .
Political scientist Henry Hale emphasizes that leaders in patron-client network systems must constantly signal their strength .
 Putin photographed while shirtless on horseback, shooting tranquilizer dart guns at tigers, or discovering ancient Greek vases while deep-sea diving . This helps explain why Putin is relentlessly photographed while wearing a suit .
 These stunts are part of a concerted effort to send a strong signal to both the public and his network associates that he is a fit, vigorous, take-charge strongman .
Early on, in his first term as president, Putin reached out to the West .
 President Bush argued Russia faced a similar danger from Islamist rebels in the North Caucasus . He attempted to find common cause with President Bush over the fight against Islamist extremism after September 11, 2001 .
 Putin commented to the Russian press that both Western actions were “no tragedy,” as long as they were not followed by militarization of those territories . Instead, Putin commented that both actions were "no tragedy," as well as that of the territories .
 Putin's outreach efforts soon cooled, largely because he felt disrespected by the West . Putin’s outreach efforts quickly cooled, mostly because he was disrespected.
 Putin seemed particularly irked by two U.S. actions that failed to recognize what he thought should represent Russia’s leading role in international affairs .
 Bush’s December 2001 unilateral abrogation of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty was a centerpiece of U.S. arms control during the Cold War .
 The U.S. invasion of Iraq in March 2003 without UNSC approval, in the face of a likely Russian veto of the action . Second, and even more important, was the United States invade of Iraq without UN Security Council approval .
 As Russian power went into decline after the Soviet collapse, its veto in the UNSC remained its one clear lever of global influence .
 The U.S. and Russia continued to find some common ground during the interregnum of Dmitry Medvedev's presidency . The relationship from then on was often fraught .
 Putin returned for a third stint as president in 2012, following massive political protests in Russia . The protests began over vote fraud claims in the 2011 legislative Duma elections .
 Putin portrayed these protests as U.S.-inspired and -coordinated, and from that point on the West seemed to become Putin’s personal foe .
 This helps explain the ferocity of Putin’s reactions to the events in Kyiv in late 2013 and early 2014 . This is the first time Putin has been seen to react to events in the region .
 Ukraine played a central role in Russia’s conception of its own great Ukraine in the face of pressure . It is likely politically security concern for post-Soviet Russia .
 Russia's expansion of the Russian empire into “Novorossiya’ in the late 18th century marked the true emergence of Russia as a force to be reckoned with on the European stage .
 This means it is likely politically impossible for Putin to compromise in Ukraine in the face of Western economic sanctions or other pressures . This means that it is unlikely for Russia to compromise.
Post-Soviet states have all had school or workplace networks of one sort or another, not far removed from Moscow in past decades . This will prove especially true when they deal with those in other post- Soviet states .
 Even those too young to have been directly connected in Soviet times are connected by ties stemming from their families or older colleagues .
 This certainly applies to the relationship between Putin and Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko . Putin and Poroshenko have a close relationship .
 Poroshenko was also a talented judo enthusiast in Soviet times . He never reached Putin’s mastery level .
 Viktor Medvedchuk represented the rebels in early peace talks with the government in Kyiv . He ran against Poroshenko in the March 2014 presidential elections in Ukraine .
Medvedchuk popped up again at the so-called Minsk II negotiations in February 2015 . Putin is the godfather of one of Medvedchuk’s daughters, one of his daughters .
 Putin and Poroshenko's personal networks and their betrayal. In other words, there also hangs an emotional whiff of personal networks, their betrayal .
 Russian personalization of interactions beyond the post-Soviet space is a heavy load of emotional weight and expectations . Given this, we should expect to see a Russian personalizing of interactions with other nations .
 Putin’s relations with U.S. leaders have certainly had an unusual tenor . Putin's relations with United States leaders have been unusual .
 Putin even tried to cut side deals with Bush, offering Bush's friend and campaign supporter Don Evans a position in the oil industry .
 Medvedev got along well with Obama, happily eating cheeseburgers with him on a visit to Washington . Putin's relations with the Obama administration have been consistently frosty .
 U.S. Ambassador Michael McFaul was treated when Putin resumed the Russian presidency in mid-2012 . McFaul's treatment was the terrible way he was treated .
 The negativity extended even further in Putin’s personal interactions with Obama . Putin's personal interaction with Obama also extended further .
 Putin has consistently seemed to look down on Obama, portraying him to the Russian press in 2012 as a weak leader . Putin has repeatedly looked down on the president, saying he could not control his own government .
 Putin was reportedly ‘infuriated’ when Obama called him out publicly . Obama said Putin looked “like the bored kid in the back of the classroom’ in their negotiations over Syria .
 leaders who must focus on providing patronage and protection to their clients should avoid taking actions that risk major losses, especially losses to their personal networks . A third prediction about how leaders should act in patron-client systems may seem to make little sense .
 Putin's behavior risked damage to his personal image and stature as well as his network’s well-being .
 Putin’s rashness in Ukraine appears to be one of the engines of the Western sanctions regime . Putin's personal network has been directly targeted by the U.S. and European Union .
 Putin may have believed that he was taking low-risk actions in Ukraine . But he may actually have believed he was doing low- risk actions in the country .
 In eastern Ukraine, creating a frozen conflict with the help of informal militias followed a model used successfully in other post-Soviet cases, as noted earlier .
 Putin might reasonably have calculated that Western attention would turn away quickly, as it had following Russia’s 2008 Georgia war . The sanctions regime would never last, given divergences in U.S. and European economic interests and what he saw as the disarray of Obama’
 Putin's seeming errors in this case may be explained by two events that could not have been foreseen in advance and that lay completely beyond Putin’s control . If this is correct, then Putin”s seeming errors may be explanation for the errors .
 A local militia commander in Donetsk fired an anti-aircraft missile at a Malaysian civilian airliner in July 2014 . First was the shocking and horrifying decision of a local militia leader in Donetsk to fire the missile .
 A majority of the passengers on the flight were Dutch citizens . It was this event that helped propel the unexpected unity and longevity of EU sanctions .
 The second unexpected event was the sudden plummet of global oil prices in late 2014, after what had been a more modest long-term decline .
 The sharp drop magnified the effects of sanctions on the oil export-dependent Russian state budget . The drop provoked a collapse in the value of the ruble .
 Putin was quick to accuse the U.S. of orchestrating oil prices in order to harm Russia . Putin said the United States was orchestrating the price hike .
 Saudi Arabia and its partners in the Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries not to limit their own production levels in the face of expanding global market supplies . But evidence indicates that the price dive was due to the decision by Saudi Arabia .
 OPEC members apparently decided lower prices might drive out competition from higher-cost U.S. shale and other “tight oil’s” sources .
 IS funding came largely from captured Iraqi oil wells . If there was any broader political target of their actions beyond U.S. shale oil, it may have been Islamic State extremists .
 It remains to be seen whether Western pressure, either from sanctions or from whatever comes next, will be sufficient to cause Putin's coalition to crack .
 It is worth exploring the logic of what such a crack would require . But it is worth examining the logic.
 Patron-client systems can be very stable over long P atron-client periods of time . Patron- client systems can also be stable.
 Members of various sub-networks must agree that not only is it time to switch their allegiance away from their former chief patron, but must also agree on the new replacement patron . Members of periods of time.
 This requires sending and receiving clear signals about who that stronger and more capable individual might be, says John Sutter .
 The current patron (in this case, Putin) is a known entity who has demonstrated his ability to continuously distribute resources to a wide variety of clients . Putin is known to keep internal competitions in check and in balance .
 In the worst case, the result could look like a chaotic mafia war, with rival groups fighting for control .
 Putin and his closest supporters are tied to KGB and FSB networks . In Russia, the situation is even more perilous, because Putin is tied to FSB network .
 This means that they have access to information that could destroy any potential rival, either through public humiliation or through prosecution and imprisonment . This means they could be able to destroy a potential rival by public humiliation and imprisonment.
 Aleksei Navalnyi's brother was sentenced to three years of hard labor in a case that seemed fabricated for political reasons . These weapons can be used against opponents but against their family members .
Members of the security services did not hesitate to use the weapons of the state against each other . We know from Soviet history, especially during the blood purges of Joseph Stalin in the 1930s .
 It would take a brave challenger indeed to take on Putin, and the rival would need enormous competence to signal the move successfully . Putin would need to hold on to powerful Russian networks the way Putin has done .
 Toppling a police state requires an even greater concentration of collective action, this time across a huge swath of the population, says the author . "This time of this time, we need more collective action," he says .
 The recent events of the Arab Spring in Egypt show how even a seemingly successful revolt can be parlous .
 If security forces disapprove of a newly installed leader, their inaction could allow a new version of the old regime to return . Large numbers of citizens are killed in the process of even peacefully agitating for change .
 As scholars Erica Chenoweth and Maria J Stephan argue, popular protest can serve as a very successful method of regime change . But only when it is meticulously organized, they say .
 Poland's Solidarity movement has established an entire parallel institutional structure . It succeeds best in cases like Poland, where the Solidarity Movement established a parallel structure .
 Such well-coordinated private action is highly unlikely in the current Russian police state . The majority of the Russian population seems still to favor Putin and his strong-arm tactics .
 Witness the inability of anyone to predict the end of the Cold War, or the onset of the Arab Spring . Witness the lack of any prediction of the Middle East .
 The logic of patron-client systems means that no one should count on the collapse of Putin’s regime anytime soon .
 The incentive structure does not favor it, unless the Russian economy tanks so badly over the long term that risky action becomes profitable .
There is far from any assurance that whoever replaced Putin would be a liberal democrat .
 Russian President Boris Yeltsin waged a bloody battle against violent nationalists in October 1993 . The last time a coup attempt occurred in Moscow was in August 1991 .
 Putin is highly unlikely to give up anything he and his supporters have already achieved . First, Putin's supporters have A s long as Putin already achieved. First, it's highly unlikely he will give up.
 Crimea remains in control, constituent part of Russia . It is virtually unimaginable that he would change his mind about Crimea being in control .
 He has portrayed the conflict in Ukraine as a struggle against NATO encroachment on Russia . It is not likely that he would allow the insurgents of Donetsk and Lugansk to be defeated .
 As long as he remains in control, the best that Kyiv can likely hope for is a stalemate . The best for Kyiv is to stay in control of the situation .
 Insistence that Russia roll back its presence, or even that rebels retreat to territorial lines of Minsk agreement, will likely be a non-starter .
 The West should not assume that more pressure on Putin will convince him even to stop his forward movement in Ukraine . Second, the West shouldn't assume more pressure is on him to stop moving forward .
 Sending new weapons to Ukraine, for example, will most likely lead him to ramp up countering support for the Donbas rebels . He would interpret such a move as a new challenge to Russia's place in the world that demanded a response .
 Russian military intervention in Ukraine is now necessary to preserve Russian sovereignty against NATO expansion on its borders . He could even use such an escalation, in combination with his recent rhetorical shift, to explain to the Russian public why it is necessary .
 This would likely result in a more intense war of attrition on Ukrainian territory . This would be more intense than any other war in Ukraine. This would probably result in more intense warfare on Ukraine .
 Russia could be removed from the SWIFT system of international transfers . This also means that any stepping up of sanctions against Russia would become in its own way a war of attrition .
Third, as long as hope remains in Russia that Western pressure is temporary, it seems possible that the European Union will fall into discord over sanctions . It seems likely that big Western petroleum companies will successfully lobby for their removal, or that Western companies will succeed .
 The difficulties facing collective action in Russia at both the network and the public level are immense . The personal risks of such action are enormous, and personal risks are enormous .
 The KGB/FSB network he elevated would likely come roaring back, without any guarantee of the foreign policy direction it would take in the future .
 Putin is full of surprises, so he might shock the world with sudden cooperation with the West .
 The opacity of the Russian system may mean that a liberal-democratic cabal is cooking up plans for a successful coup that no one will see coming .
 U.S. and other Western leaders would have to admit that Putin will get away with breaking international law in his seizure of Crimea and destabilization of Donbas .
 It is unclear that the rest of Ukraine would remain at stable peace if this were to occur . Pro-Western nationalist militias would have every incentive to try to unseat Poroshenko’s regime if Kyiv approved this arrangement .
 The West would have to provide at least an implicit security guarantee to Kyiv in any case . Neither the U.S. nor NATO as a whole has seemed willing to do this .
 The only clear alternative for ending the grinding low-level conflict between Russia and Ukraine in the Donbas would be to wage a Western proxy war in Ukraine .
It would be such a significant and controversial event in the heart of central Europe that it would risk permanently breaking apart the NATO alliance . It would be a significant event in central Europe .
 extreme nationalists in Russia would portray this as an existential threat to Russia’s continued survival. If the costs of waging such a war were eventually to destabilize the Russian leadership, we must also recognize that we must recognize that extreme nationalists would portray it as a threat to Russian leadership .
Washington must make clear that the U.S. nuclear umbrella will maintain the borders and security of the Baltic states and Poland in particular . Washington must make sure that the nuclear umbrella is still in place .
 Ukraine as a unified sovereign nation will likely face a tragic fate . It is a sad reality that a new version of the Cold War in Europe will stay with us for the foreseeable future, says Peter Bergen .
 The Ukrainian language text of the agreement is reprinted in “Dogovir Yanukovicha i Medvedeva pro Bazuvaniia Flotu do 2042 roku.’s’ language text is printed in the Ukrainian language .
 Leon Aron claimed that the shift began with Putin’s statements in 2012 that Russian language and ethnic contributions played the major role in defining the cultural state of Russia .
 Putin's 2012 statement was not tied to any apparent foreign policy aims . Putin’s 2012 statement, however, wasn’t tied to foreign policy.