 The current level of rather distanced relations between the European Union and Russia started to take shape five years ago . The EU and Russia have been at odds for years.
 Russia’s continuing disregard for international law, aggression against Ukraine, and hostile activities against Western countries have resulted in policies of sanctions and other restrictions . Russia's continuing disregard of international law has resulted in sanctions, other restrictions.
 Russia is one of the main sources of instability both in the neighborhood and among member states . It has also induced the discussion about the need to revise cooperation strategies with Russia .
 The first event that inaugurated this new era in EU-Russia relations was the illegal annexation of Crimea . The Crimea annexation was the first event in the new era of European relations .
 This paper aims to analyze how the EU reacted to this major breach of international law and how the Crimean factor has influenced the relations between the European Union and Russia over the past five years .
 A man touches pictures of dead people on the Maidan Square, in downtown Kiev, Ukraine .
 The events that led to the occupation and the annexation of the peninsula started in late February 2014 . The bloody shootings on Kyiv’s Maidan Square changed the odds for the Ukrainian revolution .
 In the days following the shootings, President Viktor Yanukovych left Kyiv, which was interpreted as a withdrawal from presidential duties in an unconstitutional manner .
 Yanukovych was removed from office and scheduled early presidential elections in late May . The Verkhovna Rada removed Yanukovych from office on February 22 .
 The Rada appointed a new speaker and a new government in subsequent days . The closest allies of Yanukovych from the parliament and government fled the country .
 Ukraine faced both a vacuum of power and a severe political crisis . Starting from February 20 to February 27, the new government was approved by the Rada .
 The first periods of unrest began right after the Maidan shootings that shook Kyiv . The first period of unrest started right after.
 In the days that followed, protesters questioned the legitimacy of the new Kyiv authorities and referendums on succession from Ukraine in favor of Russia began taking place .
 In the following days ‘little green men’ who were really Russian military men without insignia began the full-fledged military take-over of the peninsula .
 Russia has strongly denied the involvement of its military and special forces in the annexation of Crimea . But later Putin himself confirmed that the intervention took place .
 Putin: "I did not hide the fact that our goal was to ensure proper conditions for the people of Crimea to be able to freely express their will" Putin said: "In my conversations with my foreign colleagues I did not hiding the fact"
 The situation in Crimea is now unfolding in southeastern Ukraine, Ukraine . The Ukrainian military says it has taken necessary measures to prevent the situation from unfolding .
 We didn't want any tanks, any nationalist combat units or people with extreme views armed with automatic weapons . We didn’t want any tankers, any nationalists or people who have extreme views .
Russian servicemen did back the Crimean self-defence forces . Of course, the Russian servicemen didn't .
 Crimea's referendum on Crimea’s status was executed under Russian military occupation . That means that the referendum is not viewed as legal and binding. That means the referendum was held under Russian occupation .
 Russia is using it to legitimize the annexation which was finalized on March 18 . The Treaty on Accession of the Republic of Crimea to Russia was signed in the Kremlin by Aksyonov and Putin .
 This was the final act in the swift military takeover operation of Crimea by Russia . Russia has taken over Crimea in the Crimea region .
 The EU's reaction to the annexation of Crimea is very much worth reminding the special element of the takeover operation,e. information operation .
 Alongside physical presence, Russians have strongly dominated the information space creating a very blurred and mixed image of the Crimean events .
 Russian army's leading role in annexation was clear from the very beginning, but only in later years the full picture and nature of Russian actions were fully understood . Russians themselves no longer hiding the army’s leading role.
 Russian media tried to hide its true nature behind the “little green men’s, local movements, referendum, protection of the rights of Russian speakers .
 The situation in Crimea was first addressed by the EU during the extraordinary meeting of the EU Heads of State on March 6, 2014 .
 The EU leaders condemned Russia's unprovoked violation of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity . They called on Russia to immediately withdraw its armed forces and allow immediate access for international monitors .
 EU leaders still called for negotiations between Ukraine and Russia and for a peaceful resolution of the crisis . EU leaders recognize Russia's responsibility in unrests in Crimea .
 No restrictive measures were announced . The only response pertained to the suspension of bilateral talks on visa matters .
 The next meeting that discussed developments in Crimea took place on March 20, already after the referendum and the signing of the Accession treaty in the Kremlin .
 EU leaders announced new personal sanctions, bans and asset freezes . They added 12 new names Russian and Crimean officials to the list of 21 officials already targeted by ministers .
 The European Council cancelled a planned EU-Russia summit and noted that member states will not hold any bilateral regular summits with Russia .
 The EU has introduced restrictions on economic relations with Crimea . In late June 2014, the EU introduced restrictions.
 EU's attention shifted from Crimea to Donbas, with further escalation of military conflict in Eastern Ukraine . EU’s attention shifted to Crimea and Donbas.
 MH17 was shot down over Eastern Ukraine, the invasion of the Russian army in Eastern Ukraine and violations of the Minsk Agreement . All official statements included the Crimean case .
 The EU later included more names of Crimean politicians to sanction list . 3 Russian companies that transferred gas turbines to Crimea and 6 entities involved in the construction of Kerch bridge .
 In late November 2018, a new Crimean crisis challenged the international community . In late 2018, the Crimean crisis challenges the world community .
 Russian coast guard ships opened fire on a group of vessels of the Ukrainian Navy in international waters as they were leaving the Kerch Strait . The Ukrainian Navy has been accused of attacking Russian vessels in the past .
 24 Ukrainian sailors were detained and transferred to Moscow and commercial shipping through the Kerch Strait was blocked for a few days .
 EU diplomats agreed to sanction Russian individuals involved in the detention of Ukrainian sailors . However serious the incident was only in mid February, almost three months after the event .
 The EU's response to Crimea's annexation has renewed old discussions about the adequacy of steps taken by the EU in the face of the Russian annexation of Crimea . This belated and soft reaction has renewed old discussions regarding theadequacy of the EU's steps .
 The EU sanctions against Russia did not bring any of the desired results . Five years after the annexation, it is clear that the sanctions used by the EU towards Russia were not successful .
 Neither has stopped the annexation nor restrained Russia from takingfurther aggressive steps . Neither has it stopped the annexed or restrained Russia.
 The EU has not reviewed its initial sanctions policy even after Russian officials have publicly confirmed Crimea was taken over after the military operation . The EU hasn't reviewed its first sanctions policy since the operation .
 Sanctions that were introduced against Russia after the downing of MH17 and violations of Minsk Agreement are significantly broader and tougher . Sanctions against Russia are significantly wider and tougher than those introduced after MH17 .
Back in 2014, the situation in both Crimea and Kyiv was very chaotic . The nature of events remained unclear while they were unfolding .
Ukrainian vessels attacked Ukrainian vessels in 2018 . The vessels were attacked by the Ukrainian Navy in 2018.
 The EU did not recognize it as an open act of aggression and waited for almost three months to announce sanctions against those responsible for this event . Still, the EU didn't recognize it. Still, it was not until now that sanctions were announced .
 The EU's sanctions policy against Russia for the illegal annexation of Crimea remains soft . The EU’s sanctions against Russia remain soft .
 EU has not introduced broad economic sanctions against Russia after the annexation of Crimea . EU hasn't sanctioned top officials and businessmen in Russia .
 Crimea did not become a game-changer in the relations between the EU and Russia . It is also clear that Crimea itself did not becoming a game of play in the relationship .
 It was rather the inciting event in a series of sequential gross violations on behalf of Russia . It was not the inciting incident in aseries of sequential Gross violations .