 Earl Robinson was a Communist who was later blacklisted during the McCarthy period . He was a member of the Communist Party .
 Sinatra had befriended a number of blacklisted writers during the McCarthy period . He openly dined with them to publically show his support for them .
 The greatest humanitarian crisis in the world today is happening in Yemen, the U.N. says .
 The civilian population is being killed in great numbers, according to the UN . Over 7 million people could perish from starvation, and over 18 million will die without humanitarian assistance .
Long-time CIA analyst thought he was on track with his message, and bothered telling him while he was in the world, gave him great encouragement .
 At that time, the United States and South Africa were supporting the UNITA counterrevolutionary forces against the revolutionary Angolan government .
 David Greene, a fellow Pittsburgher, does a story about the 2008 RussiaGeorgia conflict .
 This is more difficult than it may seem at first blush, says John Sutter . The belief that the U.S. is a uniquely benign actor in the world, he says . Sutter: It's difficult to believe in the myth of American Exceptionalism .
 The U.S. has been accused of Russia's actions in the past 50 or so years . John Sutter: "This belief is wholly unwarranted"
 If the U.S. democratic system is so fragile and brittle that it could be impacted by the machinations of “internet trolls,’s ‘internet trolls’ This says volumes about the poor state of our own democratic institutions .
 There is a strong tendency to focus on the failures of others rather than of ourselves, says John Sutter . Sutter: "I think what often happens when we talk about the types of issues raised in this book"
 We have much more control over our own country than we do over others, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It is truly democratic"
 The U.S. continues to reaffirm the Monroe Doctrine, pursuant to which it views Latin America as its “backyard,’s ‘backyard’ It can intervene at any time to protect what it views as its interests .
 Nicaragua brought a case against the U.S. before the ICJ in the mid-1980s . The ICJ was created by the UN Charter for the peaceful resolution of international disputes .
 Webb was right, even more right than he knew, but even to this day, the job done on him by the mainstream media lingers in the public’s mind . Many believe the Contra cocaine story was not true .
After WWII, the United States decided to partner with the most unsavory forces in the world . The United States would partner with right-wing dictatorships, terrorist groups, and even neo-Nazis .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union was the worst thing that ever happened to the United States . Former Assistant Secretary of the Treasury under President Reagan, Paul Craig Roberts, has said it often .
 The other consequence was a change of mind in socialist India and communist China . The U.S. economy is now struggling to bear the enormous war debt .
 Clinton ended the entitlement to cash benefits which the poor had been given by prior legislation . Bill Clinton replaced it with legislation that put a 5-year lifetime limit on cash aid to the poor .
 Nelson Mandela credits the victory at Cuito Cuanavale for bringing the South African government to the bargaining table . The CIA helped capture and imprison Nelson Mandela in 19627 and remained on the United States terrorist list until 2008 .
 This is a little inconvenient episode that you will rarely study in school . This is the first time you've been in school for a year .
 It has been equally sad for me to see the West, and particularly the US, so gleefully dance on the grave of the Russian people in particular . The West is gleefully dancing on thegrave of the lofty hopes of Russian people, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The belief that our country is uniquely good, democratic and freedom-loving, is motivated by the purest and best motives . The belief is that anything we do in the world, no matter how incidentally harmful, is motivation for the best motives, says author .
 The truth is that “American Exceptionalism’ is a false religion, and is not borne out by even a cursory examination of U.S. history, particularly post-WWII .
 Obama ordered the successful drone killing of 16-year-old Abdulrahman al-Awlaki, an American citizen, as well as another innocent American citizen named Samir Kahn .
 The Democrats who long ago ceded to Obama the right to kill at will abroad are shamefully raising no opposition to any of this, and neither does the press .
 Gessen doesn't believe that the Chechen leader Kadryrov may have ordered the killings of Politkovskaya and Nemtsov . Gessen does not believe that this lets Putin off the hook, but still, this does not make Putin a "killer"
 Chicago Tribune: "t would be unfair to ascribe crimes Kadyrov may have ordered or committed directly to Putin" John Sutter: "It would, however, be unfair" to ascribes crimes to Putin .
 The U.S. continues to wage wars of aggression in many more countries throughout the planet . Much more on this later, but suffice it to say that if we assume the very worst of Putin in regard to these wars, they pale in comparison to those of Putin .
 The Red Army would go on to liberate death camps, most notably Auschwitz . Auschwitz, Stutthof, Sachsenhausen and Ravensbrueck would also be liberated .
 Among the executed were many religious martyrs, and there were mass slaughters as well, consistently supported or initiated by Washington . There were also many religiousmartyrs, and many were executed .
 A disproportionate amount of tax revenue is sucked right back into the military-industrial complex . The working class and poor are left on their own to suffer, while the rich and the working class suffer .
 General Sullivan followed Washington’s orders faithfully, as did many US military leaders to come, committing possibly one of the greatest genocides in history .
 Marciano notes that this aroused the very first anti-war protests against the American intervention in Vietnam . This time by United States sailors who could not stomach the hypocrisy of what the United States was doing and whom they were doing it with .
 One might believe that the US, in the Spirit of ’76, would welcome and support an independence victory .
 The war was also expanded to the then-very peaceful country of Cambodia, creating one million refugees out of six million inhabitants . The U.S. would first oppose but then support when the Vietnamese invaded Cambodia .
 Eric Hobsbawm: “ince the fall of the Berlin Wall, we once again live in an era of genocide and compulsory mass population transfers, as in parts of Africa, southeastern Europe and Asia .
 Russia voted in favor of the Security Council Resolution authorizing force to expel Iraq from Kuwait . This invasion was carried out with the reluctant assent of the Soviet Union .
 The bombing was clearly designated to break a whole country and its population for a long time to come .
 Madeleine Albright, then Secretary of State, would later express regret for saying this, but never expressed regret for aggressively supporting the policy which resulted in these deaths .
 The U.S. made sure it was so, and the United States did so .
 Vladimir Putin has helped Russia rise from its knees and become an independent nation and world actor again . The United States galls the U.S. most about Vladimir Putin is not how authoritarian and un-democratic they view him to be .
 The first city I visited was Barrancabermeyja, an oil town which, at that time, was quite progressive in many ways, including being the site of the wonderful Popular Feminist Organization .
 Agency for International Development is owned and controlled by paramilitary forces . paramilitary forces also make money through drug trafficking .
 US Army Special Warfare team visited Colombia to help refine Plan Lazo, a new counterinsurgency strategy . General Ruiz was drafting a new strategy for the US Army .
 U.S. policy-makers are condonation for the suffering of Colombian people at the hands of the right-wing paramilitaries, the United States says . In short, it reveals a highlevel of tolerance of, and Condonation by U.
 On Sept. 1973, General Augusto Pinochet led a violent coup against the elected government of President Salvador Allende . The coup brought an end to democratic rule in that country for the next sixteen-plus years .
 The CIA agreed with the assessment that the kidnapping of Schneider was necessary . It provided weapons for the kidnapping operation, and so it provided weapons .
 The United States sent $75 million in emergency military assistance to Rwanda in 1994 . The Clinton administration was instead actively lobbying to withdraw UN forces from the country .
 Rwanda would use that military assistance, and continued military training from the US, to invade the DRC, from the East in 1996 and 1998 . Rwanda would also use military assistance from the U.S. in 1996, and then again in 1998 .
 Clinton supported Rwanda and Uganda in moving against him in 1998 . He was successfully removed at the very end of the Clinton Administration in January of 1991 .
 The Garifunas are being forced off their land in large numbers by real estate developers and others who covet their land . The case of Honduras is worth considering in light of the current concerns about Russia .
There is little said about the extraordinary kalling of journalists in Honduras post-coup . As much concern is expressed about the fate of journalists.
 Gorbachev made it clear to these governments that if they had trouble holding on to power, they should not expect the USSR to come along .
 Gorbachev acceded to Germany's western alignment and the United States would limit NATO's expansion . Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, the Baltic states and other formerly East Bloc countries were admitted to NATO membership in 1999 . Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Romania
 U.S. and NATO actions constituted a grave breach of trust with post-Soviet Russia, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: These actions must be viewed as objectively provocative of Russia .
 Khrushchev agreed within a matter of days to take the missiles out of Cuba in return for the secret promise that the US would take them out of Turkey months later .
 The United States did not relent in its continued milking of the ‘Soviet threat’ to justify its military build-up . Russia’s quick responsiveness to the U.S. demand to leave Cuba has been quick .
 The flame of war could burst out across the whole of Europe. However, one regards the US/NATO bombings in the former Yugoslavia in 1995 and then again in 1999 .
 "e will continue to promote the development of greater interoperability between Ukrainian and NATO forces," NATO says .
 Despite Tyahnybok’s openly neo-Nazi and anti-Semitic philosophy, Senator John McCain has proudly rallied alongside him in Kiev .
 Nuland states: "I think Yats is the guy ... .” as if it were for the U.S. to hand-pick the new government .
 Putin and Russia would feel very threatened by these events, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen: Putin, Russia feel threatened by Ukraine crisis .
Pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine have declared their own “People’s Republics,’ of course harkening back to the old Soviet Union . The result was that pro-Russian separatist in Ukraine, without any prompting or support from Vladimir Putin .
 The Azov men use the neo-Nazi Wolfsangel symbol on their banner . Members of the battalion are openly white supremacists, or anti-Semites .
 Few have bothered to look into this curious lead, and few seem to care . But again, few have been bothered by the curious lead .
Both the EU and US called this referendum a sham and refused to honor it . Polls show that Crimeans, including the Tartar minority, are happier under Russian governance than Ukrainian .
 The U.S. takes the position that what country Crimea is a part of is none of the Crimeans' business . It is hard for me to feel too excited by any of this, and equally hard to believe that others in this country feel as strongly about this as they apparently
 The United States used the collapse of the USSR, which had once put some brakes on the U.S. Empire, to expand throughout the entire globe .
Women from Russia and the former Soviet Republics have replaced Korean women as sex workers in South Korea . To add to the humiliation of post-Soviet Russia, women from Russia have been replaced by women from the former Russian Republics .
 U.S. has three aircraft carrier strike groups deployed there at the end of Obama's term . China, and Russia as well, outgunned in the South China Sea .
 The United States moved against him because of his decision to nationalize Iran's oil concerns . They distrusted him as a possible communist who could not be relied upon to keep Iran’s vast oil wealth out of the hands of Russia .
 Iranians still resent the U.S. for its role in overthrowing a democratic government and setting up what can only be described as a torture state . Not surprisingly, the Iranians still resentment the United States .
 At that time, the United States shared a 1000-mile-long border with the Soviet Union . U.S. support for the Mujahideen in Afghanistan was a momentous, and arguably more disastrous.
 As Iraqis continue to suffer from ISIS terrorism, it is important to remember that it was a war of choice if there ever was one .
After the U.S. invasion dislodged the Taliban, cultivation skyrocketed . Then, after the invasion, cultivation soared .
 The late Ahmed Karzai was the first President installed by the United States after the 2001 invasion . He was coincidentally killed after it became public that he was running drugs . The CIA does so, he explains, by partnering with Afghani drug kingpins .
Saudi Arabia has been arming, and assisting Saudi Arabia in its own right, Hersh says . The United States recognizes al Qaeda as terrorist, such as al Qaeda, he says .
 The US removed a secular leader in Muammar Gaddafi, possibly the greatest enemy of al-Qaeda, and allowed the country to be overridden by religious extremists . This was another case of the West.
 NATO, which had a UN mandate to protect civilians in Libya, was aiding and abetting them in doing it . It was the US’s rebel friends who were actually carrying out genocide in Libya .
Human rights groups investigating this claim ultimately found no evidence of it . But, the damage was done, paving the way for the NATO invasion and the takeover of Libya by forces who actually have, and continue to, carry out rape on a large scale .
 Washington was concerned that Gaddafi was still shutting the U.S. and other Western countries out of key infrastructure investment opportunities in favor of Russia and China .
 Bill Clinton shunned all efforts by the Gaddafis to avert an invasion, instead preferring a war in Yugoslavia . Both Bushes had preferred wars in Iraq, and as both Bushes preferred war in Iraq .
 NPR assured the concermed listener that the new regime would see to it that the Libyans would adapt to this new world order and get to work as they should .
 The reaction of the U.S. government and media has been, of course, a collective yawn .
 The U.S. Central Command accidentally bombed a Syrian troop convoy, killing 62 soldiers and wounding 100.79 . This “marked the first time the United States has engaged the Syrian military since it began targeting the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq two years ago.
 The strike also came at a particularly sensitive time in U.S. and Russian efforts to forge a cease-fire in Syria’s civil war ace .
 The anti-democratic Electoral College system allows someone to win the popular vote but lose the election anyway . This is not even to mention the outdated, anti-democracy system, which allows someone (like Hillary Clinton, for example) to win but lose .
 Comey said it was unusual for the F.B.I. to confirm or deny the existence of any investigations . It was in fact comicable to hear Comey testify about his investigation of the Russia-Trump collusion allegations .
 There is good reason to be skeptical of the claims surrounding this alleged plot, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The FBI quickly pointed the finger at North Korea, but the press had to sheepishly admit later that the hacking was most likely an ‘inside job’ by a disgruntled Sony employee . Well, I guess it’s good we didn’t end up nuking
 The Kennedys never trusted the CIA after the Bay of Pigs, feeling that they had been misled about the chances of success . The CIA had concluded that only direct U.S. intervention against Cuba would succeed .
 The CIA is against a détente with Russia, says the Veterans of U.S. Intelligence Services . The CIA has warned Trump that Russia is against him .
 Pulitzer Prize winner Seymour Hersh has properly condemned the media for accepting these claims at face value . Hersh is a journalist I trust .
 This brings us to the new revelations of Wikileaks, which have been made as I write this book . This is the latest in a long line of revelations made by Wikileaks .
 Such conduct by an intelligence agency is itself a great breach of the public trust . Such conduct is a breach of public trust, such as that of the intelligence agency .
Senior official who leaked the story of Flynn-Kislyak conversation to Ignatius did not feel bound by any such tule . But the senior official did not.
 The leak was the first in a concerted campaign of using such leaks to suggest that Flynn had discussed the Obama administration’s sanctions with Kislyak . The leak is the first attempt to undermine Obama administration policy .
 This book is essential reading for anyone trying to make sense of the chaos of our current political moment . The book is also essential reading.