 Russia moved two units of S-300PM to the Hvardiyske Air Base last year . Crimea declared its independence from Ukraine on 17 March .
 Previously, Russia had employed this tactic with the former Georgian enclave of Abkhazia .
 Space snapshots show the S-300 units still deployed to the territory but in prepared firing positions . The S- 300 units are still deployed in the region .
 Ukraine, it's expected that units in expeditionary sites will probably transition to more permanent ones .
 Commercial imagery suggests the S-300PMs at Hvardiyske were jumped sometime between late 2014 and early 2015 .
 Space snapshots from April confirmed that the equipment was no longer at the airbase . Space snapshots were taken from April .
 Imagery of Sevastopol shows that the former Ukraine S-300 position located at 44°32’39″N 33°25’58″E had a Russian S-3000 unit in residence as early as February 2015 .
 Sevastopol is home to Russia’s strategically important Black Sea Fleet . The Russian city has been home to the Black Sea for over a decade .
 It is currently unknown if this is a new unit deployed from Russia or if it’s one of the batteries jumped from Hvardiyske .
 The Russian press however did report further S-300 moving into the Crimea in December 2014 .
 They were reportedly moved in response to NATO’s increased presence in the region . They were reported to have been moved by NATO's increased presence .
 Additional movement was also noted less than three miles to the east at another former Ukrainian S-300 site .
At least three short range Pantsir-S1s were also visible on imagery acquired in February . At least three of the short range pantsir-s1s are also visible.
 The latest imagery from September 2015 continues to confirm the new deployment locations . The latest images continue to confirm new deployment Locations .
 The S-300 is a highly capable surface-to-air missile system first deployed by the Soviet Union in 1979 . It was first deployed in the USSR in 1979.
 The system is often compared with the U.S.-built Patriot missile defense system . The system was designed to protect the nation's interests from attacks .
 The S-3000PM2 was developed in the mid-1990s as a direct competitor to Raytheon’s Patriot PAC-2/3s .
 units can acquire targets further out into the Black Sea . With redeployment to the coast, units can buy targets further from the coast .
 The Crimea could play host to the S-300 surface-to-air missile sites on the Crimea . The Crimea is the region of Russia's Crimea .
 Please feel free to drop any hints of potential locations in the comments below .
 At times there were quarrels and insults will, which usually blame the officials . At times, there were disagreements and insults .
 There is nothing to divide people – ordinary people are the same everywhere . There is no divide people - ordinary people have nothing to Divide people .
 This situation can not be assessed today, for an objective assessment will take time . This situation is not being assessed today. This situation will not be evaluated today, according to the experts .
 After 10 years, you will see the results of all events that are not visible right now . The results will be visible after 10 years .
 Russia and Ukraine – one nation, brother with brother may quarrel, but always reconciled . The two countries are one nation and one nation .
 Donbass region and ask lockals if they want to be with Ukrainian regime after all suffering that was thrown at them by the regime .
 Every government lies and none is close to the U.S. in the lying league .
 Bellingcat is conjecture towards Russia with lots of ifs, ands and maybes . Sure, highlight Russian lies, when they lie, but a lot of the stuff on BellingCat is conjecture .
 One could be forgiven for thinking the purpose of this blog is to be anti-Russian as there’s nothing on Yemen, Libya, Afkanistan, Iraq, SA but lots on Ukraine & Syria .
 In the former list of countries there’s no Russian link but there is in the latter. Well I’d argue that in the former lists of countries, there”s no Russia link .
 Bellingcat have a genuine interest in lies being told about Ukraine & Syria. But ok let’s say BellingCat have a real interest in lying about Ukraine and Syria .
 Anyhow I’m not here to try and convince anyone I was merely hoping someone from Bellingcat could answer my question. Anyhow, I'm not trying to convince anyone. I was just hoping someone could answer it .
 Many people, if motivated to, could give you an answer, not only Bellingcat . Many people could be motivated to do so .
 A former superpower and permanent member of the UN Security Council has extended its military operations to the Middle East . A large nuclear arsenal is threatening to topple it's increasingly isolated leader .
 Few other countries have managed to make themselves so unpopular in such a short time . There are few other countries with as many nuclear arms .
There is a large state sponsored terror campaign and Kremlin subsidized propaganda campaign going on around some very serious issues . There is a big state sponsored terrorism campaign. There is also a large State sponsored terror Campaign .
 Mr Higgins has his goals and direction, but he cannot report on every little thing in the world .
 Another reason for focusing on Kremlin lies is that it is criminal enterprise masquerading as a state . Another reason is that the Kremlin lies are that it's a criminal enterprise.
 Anyhow, Russia wage a war of lies and propaganda on the West, and they should be called to check on that from the democracy and freedom champions . Russia should be checked on that.
 Mr Higgins picked a great crew and they have exposed some very important items that the Kremlin should be called on .
 I am sure Mr Higgins would consider it. IF you want to contribute to the project and bring up an idea for an article, I'm sure he'd consider it .
 Your criticisms are just a bunch of whining comments that really do not make sense . If you do not want to contribute, then your comments are just whining comments .
 They only have so big a budget and time to write on certain things and it is good to stay focused . It is good for them to be focused on what they need to do .
 Creating lie after lie to cover up the solid ‘Fact’ they have soldiers in Ukraine and finance and supply mercenaries to destabilize a neighboring country .
 Its is better to be thought of as a fool, than to open ones mouth and remove all doubt . It's better than to be a fool.
 Bellingcat's writings attract conspiratorial scaremongers in the comments section . I think it says a lot of the calibre of Belling cat’s writings when it attracts such conspirators .
Anyone who disagrees with the groupthink is obviously a paid Russian agent . Anyone who disagrees is obviously the paid Russian agents .
 If you feel all warm and secure shutting down debate in order to shield yourself from opposing viewpoints, then make yourself at home .
Mature and conspiratorial comments make you appear. Maybe one day you’ll realise how immature and conspirator such comments are .
 Bellingcat is trying to find a resonating information topic. My guess is that BellingCat is attempting to find an information topic .
 One can see how many comments are under Russian-Ukrainian articles verses the rest of the world . One can also see how much comments are in Russian- Ukrainian.
 All recent articles are definitely anti-Russian and I would also like someone from Bellingcat to give any clue .
 Putin has annexed Crimea and exploited the existing separatist sentiments at Donbass, supporting the rebels . Putin has also tried to supply Kremlin people to ignite/head the riot .
 The question is how far the ‘west’ is going to move in order to show the disapproval/punishment .
 How many people died in anti-terror operation conducted by Ukraine at Donbass – estimated thousands . Thousands of people were killed in the operation, according to reports .
 The sides are negotiating, deceiving each other and the ‘west’ in trying to simulate the implementation of Minsk agreements . EU, Merkel and Oland are trying to emulate Minsk.
 Ukraine don't want to accept the separatist regions back at any price, but only to return the full control . Ukraine don’t want to accepted the separatist region back atany price .
 The ‘West’ supported the coup d’état of democratically elected president in Ukraine just an year before next re-election .
 Ukraine still has not finished the investigation with the majority of evidences have disappeared . The majority of evidence has been missing .
 Many English speaking commenters at this site are definitely from Ukraine or originally came from Ukraine . I can understand Ukrainians who take that personally, with many of them from Ukraine.
 The question is how to settle down this conflict and at what further price is the answer to the question .
These figures are before the referendum. Stranger, maybe, maybe you should read this article before you keep repeating misinformation .
 During the Crimean crisis from 23 February through 19 March 2014, six people were killed . It states – during the Crimea crisis, six were killed.
 The two Ukrainian soldiers who were killed are regularly included in the military death toll from the War in Donbass .
 Russian military and the Ukrainians from Crimea taken and transported to Russian Federation for circus trials . That does not include the various others that have been killed since then .
 A large part of Euromaidan's investigation has been completed, and it points blame at the yanukothief’s police and interior ministers . But I have yet to see accusations against Spetsnaz, they were there directing the oppression of demonstrators .
 Odessa's tragedy has also been mostly finished by International investigators . Odessa’s tragedy has been mostly completed by international investigators .
Six proUnity soccer fans were killed in the fire . They caused the fire, they attacked the proUnity fans and killed six of them .
 6 policemen received gunshot injuries from anti-Maidan supporters . yanukotheif had another year and a half to continue embezzling from Ukraine .
 Many of the comments are anti Kremlin or perceived as anti Russian, but ultimately they are opposing the Kremlin and its propaganda .
 The Russian government does not attack the Russian population at large, just its policy makers . They do not attack Russia at large .
 Kremlin defenders in Ukraine are firmly anti Ukrainian and state Ukraine . Now as far as the Kremlin defenders here, they have a right to beat, says Putin .
Wikpedia made an article about half the worlds Miem Kampf supporters are centered in Russia, that does not make me antiRussian, just that I am stating a researched fact. If I observe that wikpedia made a article abouthalf the world's Miemkampf supporters, that
 The Kremlin is usually right down the middle on passing judgement on the Kremlin . Now the articles themselves, from everything I have read, are usually right on the right side .
Past agreements need to be fulfilled so that peace can once again happen in Ukraine. I do support your opinion that negotiations are needed to be carried out, I say .
I just wished the people of Eastern Ukraine that did take up guns and steal them and tanks actually attempted to negotiate with Kyiv instead of the hatred, torture, corruption, destruction, theft, and death they brought . I just wished they did not try to negotiate,
 The rest were Russian little green men with guns and oppression and Russian imposed martial law . The rest of the Russian men were Russianlittle green men.
 Russian military imposed martial law and Russian military took over the Parliament building in Crimea . Crimea's leader was replaced by the ‘democratically elected’ leader of Crimea with less then 3 percent of the vote in the last election .
 Council of Europe’s full international investigation into Odessa can be found here . Some more of the full report by the council can be seen here .
 I thoroughly monitored the news about 1-2 years ago during those events . I thoroughly watched the news. I thoroughly monitor the news during those times .
 All Ukrainian military bases were captured, with the only single base all over Crimea from several dozens gave a resistance .
 Sergey Kakuryn, an ethnical Russian, was reported to have died under some vague circumstances . He was a Ukrainian military officer .
 Ukrainian navy spokesman says one accident might be countered twice and the second may be misinterpreted .
Every such accident is a tragedy and I am not going to compare with Donbass. Every such tragedy is a tragedies and I'm not comparing it to Donbass, he says .
 I’m just trying to compensate the one sided interpretation of those events, he says . I'm just trying. to compensate that one sidedinterpretation of the events. I'm not sure what happened .
 I feel shame for Russians, but I don’t appreciate Ukrainians at the same time . I feel ashamed for Russians. I don't appreciate Ukrainians. I feel Shame for Russians .
 Many of the Ukrainian militaries, most of them Russians from Crimea, just stayed to serve at the same bases in Russia . Others left to Ukraine, but nobody pursued them, the military machines were returned .
 The investigation on snipers at Maydan has not been completed and EU Conceal accused Ukraine in sabotaging of the investigation . The investigation is not completed and the investigation is still ongoing .
 The intersected call discussed Maydan between Urmas Paet and Catherine Ashton . Maydan was talking to Catherine Ashton.
 snipers at Maydan fired at both sides – Police and Demonstrants at the same time . They are saying, referring to Ukrainian politic Olga Bogomolets, that snipers at the Maydan shot at both side .
 If that is true, the reason was obviously to rage the crowd and police to escalate the uprising . If that's true, it would be the reason for the police to complete the uprising.
 Bellingcat investigation is a good topic for bellingcat investigations . Another good topic to discuss for the bellingcats .
 The police at Maydan stayed and protected the government buildings, until the very last moment they had no order to advance nor spread the crowd .
 Yanukovich was pressed by U.S. and EU, also including Putin, not to allow any violence . The Russian president was also pressed by the United States and EU.
 Just before the very end they concluded an agreement with the opposition . The opposition had agreed to an agreement before the end .
 firearms appeared at Maydan from some demonstrants, then snipers, firing both sides . Just after that agreement with the opposition was met, firearms appeared .
 Yanukovich fled after the parliament expressed distrust to Yanukovich and he fled .
 Police are burned by Molotov cocktails and without an order, don’t even try to respond .
 The protests at Maydan started not from that, but from the canceled Euro-Association . The protests started from that.
 Turky has been waiting for 50 years to enter EU, but it has been signed with many countries . It is the first time the country has entered the EU in 50 years . Turky is one of many countries with special trade agreements .
 Yanukovich tried to sit at two chairs at the same time, supporting populistic euro association in mass media . Yanukovich also tried to balance with Russia interests on the other side .
 At the very last moment Russia gave a loan with the first trench of 3 billion dollars and Yanukovish slammed brakes on the EU trade association .
 Mustafa Nayyem, an Ukrainian journalist, was the first to call people in Facebook to gather at Maydan .
 Yanukovich was elected mostly by Eastern Ukrainian parts and Crimean, not the Western ones . Most active and aggressive at Maydan were nationalists from the West .
 Ukraine was asked at Minsk to listen to Donbass, conduct elections, give amnesty, grant more independence to donbass . Minsk asked Ukraine to conduct elections and give amnesty for Donbass . Donbass was asked to hold elections and conduct elections .
 Ukraine prohibited any elections in ‘occupied’ areas as well as didn’t grant migrants from Donbass any rights to vote . Minsk announced in the West that they have completed everything according to Minsk .
 Putin utilized those sentiments trying to support one side, and provoke, but he didn't create that tension . Putin used those sentiments to support his side, but not provoke, according to CNN .
 U.S. applied economic sanctions specifically against Crimea . The Crimea region was subject of sanctions against the United States .
 I'm not saying Putin was right, I'm trying to compensate the only single-sided, stupid, black-and-white, oversimplified, information mc’donalds, for complete idiots perceiving of those events . I’m not sayingPutin was right.
 I’m trying to welcome everybody to think by their own brains and not to follow the paid or motivated by other means propagandists from both or more sides . I'm trying to encourage people to not follow paid and motivated by others .
 Western powers tend to lie by telling half truths. Russia lies by telling outright lies, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 The Russian lies are far easier to debunk, you just need to find the facts on the ground the will directly debunk what is said .
 To debunk the Western lies is usually far more difficult because often there is no contradiction between what is said and the facts on the ground . To debunk lies is often more difficult as often there are no contradictions between what's said and what's true .
 To see the lies you have to consider what is not being reported on in the press, what questions are not being asked by journalists . To see what is being reported and what questions aren't being asked, you must consider the lies .
 Russia is just out to suppress all the criticism about their actions, mainly by providing false information . Russia has been accused of using Russian media to cover up its actions .
 Russia is on a bash Russia mission, it just seems that way due to all the silliness Putin is capable of . IMHO, I don’t thing BC is on an Russia mission. IMHO.
 We are waiting for you to an article about the American missiles to other countries and the U.S. lies .
 If you are objective and impartial, then you will not be difficult to find it in the United States . The U.S. is a great place to be impartial and impartial .
 You do not need to publish only articles from the U.S. State Department .
 P, C, Chris, do not forget to answer when will the article about American missiles outside the U.S. be published .
 Mr Higgins runs the show. It is nice of you to offer suggestions of what you would like to see . But ultimately Mr Higgins is the show's creator .
 Many different articles touch on those countries. Click on it and you may be amazed at how many different articles touched on those nations .
 Bellingcat writes many articles about different sections of the world, not just the Russian Federation .
 The Kremlin needs its bubble busted about all its lies it tells the world and its people and I am glad BC is so helpful in exposing the outright fabrications and manufactured stories of vova .
 If Russia goes back into its little hole and concentrates on helping its own nation and rebuilding from within, there would be little to write about them .
 50 percent of Russia has no hot water or running water, that is more than 50 MILLION people . BC has its pick of ~200 different countries to do reports on .
 Alcoholism and drug use is a major problem there, resulting in many deaths . Alcoholism is a big problem in the U.S.
 Half of the fascists groups have offices in the capital of the world . Half of them have offices there .
 A million people a year leave the Russian Federation for greener pastures . It has a million people leaving the Russian federation a year .
 Ukrainian refugees have left Ukraine for other countries to live in the past year . Most of them are just migrant workers and have sought other countries.
 Russians are going around waging their own created and escalated wars in Ukraine and Syria . They are creating hatred towards Russians for many future generations .
 The Kremlin is trying to degrade America from being a Superpower, and trying to reclaim their seat as one .
 They may have become a Superpower again, if they concentrated on domestic problems . They actually may have been a Super power again if they focused on domestic issues .
 As I see it now, they will not regain that title for the next 30 years at least . AS I see now, it will be 30 years since they lost that title .
 They will remain a gas station with nuclear missiles that has a horrible complex about their value of human life . They will be a gas stations with nuclear missile missiles that have a terrible complex about human life.
 Next ten years for Russia will see China taking over large parts of it, or the Kremlin selling it off to the highest bidder .
 China has sold off large part of Siberia for China to develop and bring its people in . They have already sold off a large portion of Siberia to develop .
 The Kremlin could prevent that if they paid attention to taking care of itself and the festering wounds it has already been .
 The Kremlin defenders are working your comment board pleading for different articles and at the same time trying to discredit your honesty by claiming your biased by being proDemocracy and USA aligned. Chris and BC crew.
 Section revelations about America are waiting for, write about Serbia, Libya, Iraq, and the bombing of a hospital.