 Crimean Tatar leaders Akhtem Chiygoz and Ilmi Umerov were sentenced in occupied Crimea in politically motivated trials . They have landed in Turkey, multiple sources reported on 25 October .
Two political prisoners departed to Ukraine from Turkey, Interfax reported . Mustafa Dzhemilev, a veteran of the Crimean Tatar movement, is Ukrainian MP, and Commissioner of the President of Ukraine for the Affairs of the Crimea .
 Two prisoners were transported to the Simferopol airport at 10:30 AM and left for Anapa .
 Chiygoz and Umerov will head to Ukraine . At 13:30, the airplane left Anapa for Ankara for Ankara, after which the two will go to Ukraine.
 Dzhemilev added that this was a result of negotiations between Russian President Putin and Turkish President Erdogan . Dzemilev said this was the result of talks between Putin and Erdogan .
 Refat Chubarov, Head of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis, expressed his gratitude to everyone who contributed to their liberation . The two prisoners were released last week .
 He stressed that all Ukrainian citizens imprisoned by Russian occupiers in Crimea remains the priority for the Mejlis . He also stressed that the release of all Ukrainian citizen imprisoned by Russians remains the top priority for mejlis.
As their liberation through Turkey indicates that they will be banned from living in their native Crimea . Speaking to 112.ua, he said they will live and work in Kyiv, Ukraine .
 First Vice Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada Iryna Herashchenko said Erdogan joined the campaign to liberate Umerov and Chiygoz on the personal request of Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko . The two Crimean Tatars were persuaded to plead for pardon to Putin but
 I thank the President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mustafa Dzhemilev and Refat Chubarov, all the Crimean Tatars, all those who cared .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko thanked Turkish President Recep Erdogan for his efforts in freeing the Crimean Tatars . Poroshenko noted that the issue of Ukrainian hostages of the Kremlin will remain a priority for him during his negotiations with world leaders .
 The fates of all Ukrainian political prisoners, as well as the search of the Crimean Tatars abducted by Russian security services since the annexation, were touched upon the talks between the Turkish and Russian leaders .
 At present, there are at least 47 Ukrainian prisoners illegally held by the Kremlin . At least 47 prisoners are illegally held in Ukraine .
 Akhtem Chiygoz, deputy head of the Crimean Tatar national representative body, the Mejlis, sentenced to 8 years in a penal colony .
 Chiygoz was detained in January 2015 for participating in a rally in support of the territorial integrity of Ukraine . The rally took place in front of the building of the Verkhovna Rada of the Crimea on 26 February 2014 .
 At that time, protesters were opposed by pro-Russian activists, including the “Russian Unity party’s” ‘Russian Unity’
 The Russian authorities of the annexed Crimea accuse Chiygoz of organizing riots . Russian authorities say they have annexed Crimea .
 Ilmi Umerov is one of the senior leaders of the Crimean Tatar national movement . He is also deputy head of the Mejlis of the Crimea Tatar People . He was sentenced to 2 years of settlement colony .
 Umerov was found guilty of violating Russia's territorial integrity on the pretext of his public denial of Moscow’s ‘right’ to Crimea . He was convicted of violating Russian territorial integrity .
 A Russian prosecutor demanded only a suspended sentence but the court decided in favor of a real one . The conviction is the most striking thing about his conviction .
 Ilmi Umerov has a number of chronic diseases and needs constant medical care . Ilmi has been diagnosed with several chronic diseases including chronic diseases .
 The Supreme Court of Crimea declared the Mejlis an extremist organization and forbade its activities in Russia . In April 2016, the Russian-controlled “Supreme court of Crimea’s Crimea,” the court declared the group an extremist group .
 The UN Court of Justice ruled Russia must reinstate the Mejlis . Russia must make Russia comply with the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination .
 The EU Parliament adopted a resolution demanding Russia release its 47 Ukrainian de facto political prisoners . It also called for sanctions to be imposed on those responsible for politically motivated processes .
 Russia has arrested more prisoners in a new wave of religious persecution . Russia is not ceasing its repressions against the indigenous population of the peninsula it occupied .
 A recent UN report had condemned Russia’s human rights abuses in Crimea .
 Russia recognized as an occupying power in Crimea by a UN resolution . Russia has been recognized as a occupying power by the resolution .
 Six of the Ukrainian hostages of the Kremlin have escaped Russian prison . To date, six of the Ukrainians have escaped prison .
 Yuriy Yatsenko and Borys Yarychevskyi had resorted to self-mutilation as the only chance to escape torture during interrogations by the FSB . Nadiya Savchenko was exchanged for two GRU military intelligence officers who were Russian prisoners of