 Tymoshenko's detractors claim she is a friend of the Kremlin who would turn the Western direction in Ukraine back to Russia . She is accused of being a friend to the Kremlin.
 Ukraine's presidential election in 2019 is scheduled to take place on the eve of the election . Ukraine's president is expected to be elected in the presidential election next year . The country has been under pressure from Russia to respond to the ongoing Russian aggression .
 Of the current candidates, President Petro Poroshenko has made his position clear .
Pro-Russian candidates such as Yuriy Boiko and Vadym Rabinovych stand in the polls . According to the polls their chances of being elected are slim to nil .
 There is no clear determination on who will be the candidate for the presidential nomination .
 She promises to end the oligarchic rule and set a new economic course for Ukraine .
 detractors claim she is a friend of the Kremlin who would turn the Western direction in Ukraine back to Russia . But her detractors say she is friend of Kremlin who will turn the West back to the country .
 Yuliya Tymoshenko is the candidate who right now holds the highest ratings . She is the current candidate for theoshenko presidency .
 Tymoshenko is vying for the presidency for the third time . He is the leader of the Batkivshchyna party .
 In 2010 she lost to Viktor Yanukovych who following the Euromaidan Revolution fled the country in disgrace . She lost to Yanukovych who followed the Euromsaidan revolution .
 This year's main contender is Poroshenko, but the most recent polls are showing her in the lead . This year again her main contender was Poroshenko .
 Tymoshenko in first place with 16.1% of the vote . The results were released by Ilko Kucheriv of the Democratic Initiatives Foundation .
 The polls also indicate the same results if her opponent is Anatoliy Hrytsenko, leader of Hromadianska Pozytsiya .
 Let's take a closer look at the credibility of Tymoshenko's pro-Russian leaning by comparing her platform to that of Poroshenko .
 The main policy put forward by Poroshenko’s campaign is to move Ukraine away from the Kremlin .
 If indeed Tymoshenko has a Russia bias, then it would definitely be advantageous for Poroshenko to play upon her, or any other candidate's .
 The president has not made any accusations against Tymoshenko, neither publicly nor personally . However, thus far in the campaign the president has made no accusations .
 He has made oblique references to her gas policy during the period she was prime minister . She called upon Ukrainians not to trust populists who were promising to reduce gas prices .
Accusations of a pro-Russian stance are being launched by others, including politicians and media .
 Tymoshenko is often absent when Parliament is voting on major anti-Russian rulings . For example, an MP from Poroshenko’s Bloc, Oleksandr Bryhynets, has pointed out .
 Political expert Oleksandr Paliy questioned Tymoshenko's proposal to liquidate the oil company Naftogaz after the elections .
Tymoshenko claims that by such actions Tymoshenko appears to be coveting the Kremlin’s favour .
 She is criticized for not condemning Russian aggression against Georgia in 2008 . For example, she is criticized.
 Tymoshenko kept silent for some days, but later made a clear statement in support of the territorial integrity of Georgia . To be fair, this is often unduly manipulated, but she did later make a statement .
 Other troubling accusations are coming forward in regard to Ukraine’s NATO deliberations in 2008 when Tymoshenko was prime minister .
 Tymoshenko is being blamed for turning Ukraine away from the NATO path . She also suggested that she did so to please Moscow .
 As the elections near, it's getting harder to know how to weigh these many accusations toward Batkivshchyna leader .
 Georgian president Mykheil Saakashvili tried to oppose the aggression and lost . At the meeting of the State Security and Defence Council, she stated ‘There should not be any martial law’
 Tymoshenko declared that releasing transcripts from that meeting was equivalent to a crime . Later, she declared that release of transcripts from the meeting is equivalent to crime .
 Ukraine’s aggressive behaviour in the Black Sea and possible destabilization in Crimea, as well as failed attempts to stop the construction of the Nord Stream-2 . Ukraine also failed to stop construction of a new rail line in Ukraine .
 Detektor Media emphasized the first propaganda message and noted that it often appeared in Tymoshenko’s messages . DetekTor Media emphasized that the first message was the first.
Russian propaganda that the Ukrainian government benefits from the war in Donbas. In particular, it pointed out how she repeated the Russian propaganda .
 She has repeated other propaganda messages, notably that policies of the government have led to a demographic decline in Ukraine . People are leaving in droves, she claims .
 Tymoshenko has also accused Poroshenko for his agreement with leaders of the “so-called separatists’s” separatists . He has said it would lead to escalating the war and need to cancel the elections .
 Russia wants to interfere in the inner political discussion and impose an opinion that there is some connection between the elections and peace in Donbas, the political monitor says .
 Detektor Media contends that when taking into account the strong desire for peace, such a manipulation of the facts repeated over-and-over can significantly influence one’s outlook .
 The topic of war is inconvenient for Tymoshenko, says Vitaliy Kulyk, director of the Center for Research on Civil Society Challenges .
 She claimed that Poroshenko wants a big war with the seized territories . She said she wants a war that would lead to imposing martial law and cancelling the elections .
 Tymoshenko met with former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine John E Herbst . Kulyk points out that the day after her statement, she seemed to change her tune . She seemed to be changing her tune, she says .
 Herbst supported Tymoshenko by asserting she is not the Kremlin’s friend . In his follow-up interview with the Russian-language channel RTVI, Herbst said she was not his friend .
 She now claims that her main goal upon re-election would be to release Ukraine’s territories from the occupants .
 She says she would also insist that the U.S. increase pressure on the Russian Federation by political and economic means . She would also say that the United States would increase pressure.
 Kulyk suggests it would be wiser for Tymoshenko to change her posturing on war and peace and to reduce her emphasis on the election outcome . She says she should focus on the outcome of the election .
 Whether Tymoshenko herself contributes to the Kremlin’s supposed favouring of her candidacy or the Kremlin simply exploits all avenues for her victory is not known .
 The Kremlin clearly sees her presidency as more advantageous than Poroshenko’s . However, the Kremlin also sees Poroshenko's presidency more advantageous .
 Alexei Venediktov, editor-in-chief of Russian radio station Eho Moskvy appeared to confirm Kulyk’s concerns in November 2018 .
 He claimed that by holding elections in the pro-Russian territories of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, the Kremlin totally violated the Minsk agreements . He said by holding the elections, the Moscow government violated the agreements .
 He stated that with the current government in Ukraine, the conflict in Donbas would never be resolved . He said the conflict would not be resolved with current government .
With the current government in Ukraine we will not move forward. I think that it’s not the elections in the LNR and DNR which are important, but that said that with the current Government in Ukraine. It's not the election in LNR or DNR that is
 The Kremlin will support Yuliya Tymoshenko at the presidential elections, writes Venediktov .
 He says including Tymoshenko in the Russian sanctions list in November 2018 could also increase her chances in the elections . He says she could also be added to the list if she is included in the list .
 Many in Ukraine have speculated that including her in the sanctions was Russia's attempt to whitewash any possible relation she might have to Moscow .
 Tymoshenko is not by far the only candidate who uses populist slogans . She is considered by some to be the worst .
 Tymoshenko has a suspicious pro-Kremlin tendency that should be considered the most dangerous where she is concerned . Her past and her populism are not her most dangerous, rather two other facts .
 Tymoshenko’s career has been in the energy sector, which in Ukraine has always been closely related to Russia .
 In one way or another, Tymoshenko’s views have been influenced by that fact .
 Meantime, her relationships with Russia and with Putin have been shrouded in mystery . Her relationships with Putin and her relationship with Russia are shrouded in secrecy .
 An article published in 2012 in lenta-ru, an online Russian media outlet, hinted at a pro-Russian stance for Tymoshenko .
 Putin and Tymoshenko were described as having first met in March 2005 during Putin's visit to Kyiv .
 Prime Minister Tymoshenko assured Putin that she was ready to support Russian initiatives in the area of economic cooperation .
 At the time, some speculated that her receptiveness toward the Kremlin could be explained by the criminal prosecution against her .
 Those allegations were related to Unified Energy Systems of Ukraine, a company she headed in the 1990s . She headed the company.
 When it came to testify, she personally travelled to Moscow to do so in Russian court .
 Ukrainian media have suggested it was in July 2005 that Putin first got Tymoshenko on the hook .
 Tymoshenko was detected by the Russian Federal Security Services when she and her husband Oleksandr were detained at the Russian airport Vnukovo attempting to smuggle US$100,000 .
 The story was only published in 2012, and by then Tymoshenko’s policies had long shifted away from Russia .
 Tymoshenko spent two-and-a-half years in prison for controversial gas agreements with Russia . The gas agreements were concluded during her stint as prime minister .
 She gained wide support during her incarceration and was released following the Euromaidan Revolution . She was released from prison after her release from prison .
 Tymoshenko's potential links to Russia or her exploitive ways of winning popular support may be tragic . If she continues to preach the narrative of “peace by any means’s’ through negotiations with Moscow, the consequences to Ukraine could be tragic.
 Texty says even if Tymoshenko refused to negotiate with the Kremlin, she would be met with strong opposition in the informational field . Texty goes on to say that even if she refuses to negotiate, she will be met by strong opposition .
 As a consequence, the temptation to deal with the Kremlin would be weighty . The temptation to do so is weighty.
 Even if she agrees to peace with Russia, it doesn’t mean that Russia will not launch a full-scale offensive . However, even if she agreed to peace, it does not mean that it will not be an offensive .
 Texty concludes that Tymoshenko does not understand the new reality and the ramifications of the war . Texty: Tymchenko does not know the new realities and the consequences of the conflict . TextY concludes that.
 Tymoshenko’s desire to win is never exaggerated, she says . In the end, even if her seeming pro-Russian ambivalence is exaggerated, it's never exaggerated .
Ukrainian woman's attitude may bring her the results she covets, but can hardly meet the hopes of Ukrainians .