 The student protests organised to force President Viktor Yanukovych and Prime Minister Mykola Azarov to sign an association agreement with the EU developed into a revolution that overthrew the government and sparked a counter-revolution .
 Russian forces inside the Russian Federation took it upon themselves to free the east of Ukraine from the rest of the country . President Vladimir Putin ordered the rollout of a plan to annex Crimea .
This war, officially called an Anti-Terrorism Operation, has continued for some months . Behind them came Russian military hardware and soldiers, although the Kremlin insists they were not on official army service .
 The Maidan Revolution started in a now dark and sombre past, on 21 November 2013 . The war we have now with Russia has now pushed aside the Maidan revolution .
 Few have tried to analyse the progress of those protests and establish what actually happened .
 The Orange Revolution had been achieved without a real struggle, with no blood and no fatalities . The previous governments of Viktor Yushchenko and Yulia Timoshenko had not come to anything .
First, when not far from the peaceful protests on Independence Square, participants began building barricades on Grushevsky Street which leads up to the parliament .
A good number of people were fed up with peaceful protest in 2013. A good number were fedup with peaceful protests in 2013 .
 Viktor Yanukovych would hold on to power to the last, but at the time few considered where this hatred of him came from . The hatred roused hundreds of thousands of people from their usual state of political apathy .
 This hatred appeared a long time before the student protests. Today, I am sure that this hatred appeared to be long before the protests .
 The Donbas region has been taken over by the president of the country . He has replaced the top and middle echelons of state authority with representatives of the region .
 Donetsk elite set the population of all regions against Yanukovych . Donbas is a territory where criminal methods were casually employed to take control of the entire country . Ukrainians spent only the first eight days of their protest fighting for Europe .
 The protests were about a rogue state that featured an incredibly high level of corruption and a lack of respect for human rights . The revolution would not have succeeded if it had not been for the barricades on Grushevsky Street .
 Russian nationalists and Russian secret services, together with pro-Russian activists, would not have tried to incite uprisings against Kiev in Odessa and other cities in the south-east . Had the revolution not succeeded, there would be no war in Donbas .
 The number of displaced people inside Ukraine and beyond, mainly in Russia, is approaching 900,000 .
It is unclear how the current chapter of Ukrainian history will end . Equally, you cannot rewind history .
 I remain optimistic in spite of the pain I feel remembering those who died in the battle for a new Ukraine and those who are still dying and risking their lives on the Donbas frontline .
 I do believe Ukraine will withstand it all and will maintain her independence . I do not expect Ukraine to be cleared of a corrupt elite and corrupt judiciary .
 Ukraine will not be able to achieve this without the European Union's help . But without the EU's help, Ukraine will be unable to achieve it .