 For more than 50 years, DIA officers have met the full range of security challenges facing our great nation . DIA-11-1704-161 is the most senior DIA officer in the world .
 A Modernizing Force. The Russian Strategic Rocket Forces . A modernizing Force .
 Arms Sales: '2 ss Kwa de GE Sa eS ee wR ew we wo wo 85 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Kremlin Guards in 2017'
 The Russian Federation inherited several formidable tasks and challenges from its Soviet predecessor . The Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 and the Russian Federation was forced to take over the Soviet Union .
 Russia’s new military faced dramatic budgetary, readiness, and personnel shortfalls . Moscow struggled to determine its place in the post-Cold War world .
 Many young Russian men use any and all legal or illegal measures to avoid military service . Draft evasion became endemic, with many young men using any or all legal and illegal measures . Many Russian men are now using any legal or legal measures.
 The Russian force structure is made up of units with better manning and equipment levels . One arguable exception to this series of military reform failures was the effort during the late 1990s to create “permanently ready forces’s” A subset of
 Russian forces formed during the years of decay in the 1990s . The operation gave the world its first look at a military that appeared surprisingly disciplined and well-equipped .
 Ukrainian forces have stressed the capabilities of the Russian-enabled separatist units . C4ISR, artillery firepower, and air defense have been stressed by Ukraine .
 The Russian military today is on the rise, not as the same Soviet force that faced the West in the Cold War . As a smaller, more mobile, balanced force rapidly becoming capable of conducting the full range of modern warfare .
 The new Russian military is a tool that can be used to underpin Moscow’s stated ambitions of being a leading force in a multipolar world .
 DIA, D3 Design ince returning to power in 2012. Rustoo heavily in favor of the U.S. at sian President Putin's expense .
 Moscow seeks to promote a reassert Russia as a great power on multi-polar world predicated on the principles the global stage . Kremlin believes is tilted ference in other states’ internal affairs, the RUSSIA MILITARY POWER primacy of the United Nations .
 Russian National Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Security Strategy published in December 2015 . This perception of vulnerability vis-a-vis the United States is most clearly evident .
 The security strategy also cites the buildup of NATO military capabilities closer to the Russian border . The U.S. pursuit of strategic non-nuclear precision weapon systems as a serious threat to Russian security .
 Russia also has a deep and abiding distrust of U.S. efforts to promote democracy around the world . It perceives the United States as a United States campaign to impose a single set of global values .
 It has restructured its internal security forces to ensure a more loyal and responsive apparatus . It has also restructured the internal security force to ensure it is more responsive .
 Russia maintains security forces that are not subordinate to the military to conduct a range of internal security and policing functions . Russia maintains that security forces are not subordinated to military .
 The South Russia’s enduring insurgency in its restive North Caucasus region continues at a consistent but low level . Ministry of Emergency Civil defense, disaster response, humanitarian relief, firefighting 282,000 500.
 These groups and their members conduct small-scale operations and bombings against Russian foreces . They are from the Ministry of Internal Affairs police or the National Guard .
 Commonwealth of Independent States was a regional coordination body created among a number of former Soviet states in wake of the dissolution of the former Soviet Union .
 Some of the non-Russian member states worry that Moscow is using the organization to undermine their sovereignty . Uzbekistan's withdrawal in 2007 was evidenced by Uzbekistan’s withdrawal in2007 .
 The Kremlin continues to view its military outreach to these countries as important to enhancing its global stature and strengthening its regional influence .
 Russian government spending on national defense has generally grown over the last decade . In 2016, Russia reached a post-Soviet record for defense spending .
 Just 31% was to be spent in the first 5 years of the 10 year program . Nearly 70% was spent from 2016 to 2020 . Moscow to meet original target for SAP spending .
 Russia has reserved the right to a nuclear response to a non-nuclear attack that threatens the existence of the state . Moscow fears that the speed, accuracy, and quantity of non- nuclear weapons can achieve strategic effects on par with nuclear weapons .
 In the West, deterrence is often seen as an established condition, while in Moscow it is an active, flexible process that continues throughout the conflict spectrum . In Moscow it's an active and flexible process.
 Closely linked to strategic deterrence is the concept of strategic stability . The concept of Strategic stability is also linked to stability .
 Strategic stability is the sum total of political, economic, military, and other measures . Neither side has the opportunity, interest, or intent to carry out military aggression .
 Russia has observed modern conflicts and incorporated aspects of these observations into its deterrence and warfighting strategies . Russia has also incorporated these observations in its warfighting strategy .
 President Vladimir Putin dominates Russia’s decisionmaking, including for military and security issues . Military and Security Leadership Decisionmaking in Russia is highly centralized .
 The General Staffs primary mission is to ensure the military security of the Russian Federation . It is to protect the vital interests of the state and society from external threats .
 He is a respected armor officer with substantial combat experience and time in command in Russia’s restive North RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations region .
 General Lieutenant Sergey Rudskoy served as first deputy chief of the GOU for 9 years before becoming its chief in November 2015 . He will likely leverage this experience to enhance coordination with other militaries in Syria .
 He is authorized to assume direct command and control during times of crisis and martial law . As such, he is the primary decisionmaker .
 This includes all hiring, equipping, training, care, and feeding of military personnel . This includes overseeing all hiring and equipping. This also includes overseeing the feeding, hiring, training and care of the military .
 He uses the nuclear briefease, which is carried by officers who always remain near the president .
 Russia has one of the world's two largest inventories of strategic weapons . As heir to the former Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal, Russia has a nuclear arsenal .
 Land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles are controlled by the Strategic Rocket Forces . The sea-based and air strategic systems are managed by the Navy and Aerospace force .
 Moscow plans to spend about $28 billion by 2020 to upgrade its strategic nuclear triad . Moscow will spend $28billion by 2020 on the capacity of its strategic triad.
 The second element of the nuclear triad is a fleet of at least 10 nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines under administrative control of the Naval High Command . The fleet of 10 submarines is under the control of Naval High command .
 The Russian strategic Navy is modernizing, mainly by building and deploying the DOLGORUKIY-class SSBN platform for the new SS-N-82 BULAVA sea-launched ballistic missile .2% The third element of the nuclear triad is the
 The new bomber design is expected to have some stealth and shortor rough-runway capabilities .
 These include air-to-surface missiles, short-range ballistic missiles, and depth charges for medium-range bombers, tactical bombers, and naval aviation, as well as anti-ship, anti-submarine, and anti-aircraft missiles . These include torpedoes for surface ships
 Moscow has completed destruction activities and closed the facilities in Gornyy, Kambarka, Maradykovskiy, Leonidovka, Schchuch’ye, and Pochep . The remaining chemical weapons stockpile at a facility in Kizner.
Air forces would also prioritize the defense of the country against enemy air attack . Air forces would conduct close air support of RUSSIA MILITARY POWER ground operations .
Long-term procurement goals of platforms and weapons focused on space, aerospace defense, and precision-guided munitions . This emphasis on strategic air operations is reflected in long-term procurements .
 Russia’s 21st century integrated air defense system will be designed to integrate future and existing systems around a central command structure . Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations “ws e Russian S-400 Surface-to-air missile systems a key component of Moscow�
“* submarine-launched torpedoes, and naval mines, along with Russian fighter, bomber, and surface-to-air missile capability. These include the continued production and deployment of coastal defense cruise missiles, air/surface/ sub-surface-launcher cruise missiles .
 Russia was unable to achieve real progress in the development of precision strike until the first decade of the 21st century . Russia was able to create a viable state armaments program that allowed prioritization of certain key components of 21st-century warfare .
 Between 2010 and 2015, Russia’s strategic forces, space and aerospace defense platforms were defined as priorities, and system development, production, and testing occurred .
 Moscow first used its precision strike arsenal in combat in combat during a series of 2015 strike operations by seaand air-launched cruise missiles against targets in Syria . Moscow wants to maintain the health of its current constellations .
 Russia will prioritize the modernization of its communications, navigation, and earth observation systems . Russia will continue to rebuild its electronic intelligence and early warning system constellations .
 Russia’s current systems provide an array of capability including high-resolution imagery, terrestrial and space weather, communications, navigation, missile warning, electronic intelligence, and scientific observations .
 On 1 August 2015, Russia created the Russian Federation Aerospace Forces by merging RUSSIA MILITARY POWER the former Air Force and Aerospace Defense Troops .
 Moscow views information and psychological Information Confrontation warfare as a measure to neutralize adversary actions in peace to prevent escalation to crisis or war . Moscow views the information as a way to prevent escalating to war .
 Russian propaganda targets a wide variety of “Information confrontation,’ or ‘Pb’ The term is the Russian government’s term for conflict in the information sphere .
 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER of audiences includes its own population, selected populations of other countries, domestic and foreign political elites, and the West writ large .
 Compromised material can then be leaked to the media at inopportune times . e Hacktivists. eHacktivist.com.com is a group of hackers who share their views of the world .
 These groups Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations appeal to Russia due to the difficulty of attribution and the level of anonymity provided .
 Under the guise of hacktivism, a group called “CyberCaliphate,” seemingly ISIS associated, conducted a hack against French station TV5 Monde .
 The intent is to demoralize, embarrass, and create distrust of elected officials . The intent of this is to humiliate, embarrass and create trust in elected officials.
 Bots are automated pushers of content on yA a> y y y ra Russia uses a Troll Army to disseminate and overwhelm blogs and twitter communications . Bots are used to spread content on social media sites and blogs .
 Russia has implemented numerous laws curbing domestic media in broadcast, print, and cyber media . Russia has taken an abrupt turn from the post-Soviet glasnost policies of media "openness" and its own constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech .
 The use of social media to organize opposition street protests in Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations 2011 and 2012 prompted a reappraisal of official internet policy .
 Russia’s whole-of-government or interdepartmental strategy and overt or covert military means, indirect action seeks to exploit weaknesses and fissures in target countries in order to fulfill Moscow's desired national goals .
3%4 Russia has aspirations to develop and field a full spectrum of electronic warfare capabilities to counter Western C4ISR and weapons guidance systems .
 Russia used a mix of maritime and air assets to forward deploy its forces in Syria . Russia will almost certainly be able to logistically support its current level of operations in Syria via the mix of those means .
 Moscow began to deploy military forces to Syria in September 2015, likely both to shore up the regime and assert Russia's status as a military player and powerbroker in the Middle East .
 Moscow has launched Kalibr land-attack cruise missiles from naval units in the Caspian Sea and Mediterranean Sea . Moscow also deployed some of its most advanced air and air defense systems to Syria .
 AFP Underground Facilities Russia inherited a vast underground facilities program from the Soviet Union . The program was designed to ensure the survival of the leadership and military command and control in wartime .
 Two of the most important underground complexes for the National Command RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Authority and General Staff are located some 60 kilometers south of the city . The complexes are located around 60 kilometers from the city.
 It encompasses a set of interrelated organizational and Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations . It includes technical measures and practical actions of staffs, troops, and facilities intended to deceive foreign intelligence .
 maskirovka in rocket units and sub units is organized and carried out for the purpose of ensuring that the enemy experiences maximum difficulty in collecting intelligence data . It is also carried out to create the false appearance of a combined unit in support of deception .
 Moscow admitted to the presence of Russian troops in Crimea, this deception had created enough confusion to forestall significant international intervention in the conflict . The ground reality was irreversibly tipped in Russia’s favor .
 The Russians have modernized their military strategy, doctrine, and tactics to include use of asymmetric weapons like cyber and indirect action . Russian military has built on the military doctrine, structure, and capabilities of the former Soviet Union .
 The Strategic Rocket Forces is one of the most potent missile forces in the world . The Russian Strategic Rocket Force is a powerful missile force .
 Eight of the divisions operate road-mobile ICBMs, with the other four armed with silo-based missiles . The other four are armed with missiles .
 SRF arsenal includes three older ICBM types, 46 SS-18s and 30 SS-19s in silos, and 72 road-mobile SS-25s . Two newer ICBM type, 60 silobased and 18 road- mobile SS-27 Mod 1s,
 Russia has stated that it will soon begin testing a developmental, heavy, liquid-propellant ICBM called the Sarmat . The ICBM will replace the aging SS-18 and replace the SS- 18 .
 Russian ICBM force RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations will continue to decrease .
 Russia intends to retain the largest ing significantly to meet the deployed strategic ICBM force outside the U.S. The composition of the force is changconstraints, Russia says .
 The Western Military District has three numbered combined-arms armies . The Southern and Central Military Districts each have two, and the Eastern Military District have four . The Eastern Military district has four .
 Its main peacetime missions include maintaining adequate combat readiness, participating in international peacekeeping operations, and assisting in the maintenance of internal security .
 e Motorized Rifle Troops units are the most abundant formations in Russia's Ground Troops . They include engineer, engineer, nuclear, biological and chemical defense, and signal troops .
°* e Missile Troops and Artillery are the main means of indirect fires for Russian combined arms operations . They support Motorized Rifle Troop missions with direct fires during meeting engagements .
 Rocket-artillery units operate multiple rocket launchers, and combined artillery units operate composite towed or self-propelled artillery and MLRs. e Air Defense Troops provide air defense for the Ground Troops .
 The transition to the brigade structure was intended to optimize Russia's ground forces to fight in what the Russians call "local wars and armed conflicts" Russian General Staff believes to be very likely under modern conditions .
 The re-introduction of some smaller divisions may be based more on their potential intimidation value than their potential value in combat . The return of some small divisions could be based on the potential value of the division .
 A typical combined arms army includes two to four combined arms brigades, usually motorized rifle RUSSIA MILITARY POWER brigades . In a few cases, a tank brigade, plus artillery, missile, air defense, airDefense, engineer, chemical defense, communications, intelligence and
 The combined arms army is both operational and administrative Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations unit . The unit is both a military and administrative unit, like the combined army .
 All Russian combined-arms brigades are organized in essentially the same manner . All combined-arm brigades, regardless of specific primary combat vehicle, are organized by the same way .
 In addition, the primary equipment of a separate motorized rifle brigade is shown in the table below . In addition to the rifle brigade, the main equipment of the brigade is also shown .
 The VDV's increased mobility comes at the expense of armor and firepower . The primary combat vehicles are generally lighter than their Ground Troops counterparts . The V DV's primary combat vehicle is generally lighter.
 MBTs are not intended for air drops, but will accompany VDV ground maneuver formations to increase firepower and lethality . The MBTs will be used in ground maneuvers to increase the effectiveness of VDVs .
 Russian VDV Primary Combat Vehicles Coastal Troops consist of Coastal Missile Artillery Forces and Coastal Troop. The Russian coastal Troops are the Russian Coastal Military Troops .
 Efforts are underway to rearm Russia's coastal missile force with new, lonanti-ship missile systems .
 The merger places former space and aerospace defense assets vital to strategic aerospace operations under one organizational structure . The merger puts space and defense assets into one organization .
 The Russian Aerospace Forces include four tactical air armies, which are aligned with the military districts . The Russian aerospace forces include four military air armies .
 The 6th Air Force and Air Defense Army is subordinate to the Western Military 1612-11135 Eastern Military District e CHINA e Bomber e Fighter e Transport . Moscow maintains aviation units in Armenia and Kyrgyzstan .
 The LRA is tasked with long-range bombardment of strategic targets with conventional Russian Air Forces Order-of-Battle* or nuclear weapons . LRA has been tasked with bombing strategic targets.
 The primary aircraft operated by the VTA include the Il-76, An-124 and An-22 . The VTA's primary aircraft are the An-12, An -12, and an-12 .
 The State Armaments Program of 2015, and the subsequent 2020 plan, significantly enhanced support for the purchase and employment of the newest and most capable air defense equipment . The program includes radar, surface to air misRUSSIA, command and control, and electronic warfare equipment .
 Russia continues to support research and development efforts in the air defense realm . The acquisition plan is part of Russia's acquisition plan .
 A fully functional Russian military integrated air defense system would employ in an air defense scenario . The kill chain con builds a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations .
 Russia employs its military integrated air defense system at home and abroad . Russia employs the system in both countries and abroad.
 The past Russian Navy Organization Russian Navy Northern Fleet Joint Strategic Command Eastern Military District/ Western Military District/. 10 years have seen a steady increase in maintenance, training, and deployment activity of the Navy . The activation of a broad submarine and ship construction program to recapitalize the fleet .
 Beginning in 2014 after the occuNSE E 67 68 pation of Crimea, new units began to enter the order of battle including modern coastal missiles and naval infantry .
 Most of the flotilla’s combat power are based at Makhachkala, possibly to be closer to regional threats and to avoid navigating the Volga River Delta .
 All sea-launched ballistic missiles carried by these submarines can reach United States targets from their homeRUSSIA MILITARY POWER base piers . If required, if required, the submarines could be launched with the submarines on the surface .
 The Russian Navy’s major combatant surface ships, frigates and larger, comprise some 32 units assigned across all 4 fleets .
18 minor combatants and 4 amphibious assault ships are supplemented by 18 minor combatants . The ships are accompanied by 18 major combatants and four amphibian assault ships .
 The new SS-N-82 BULAVA submarine launched ballistic missile is being produced for the DOLGORUKITY-class SSBNs .
 The FSB and SVR are considered military services under Russian federal law . They are more akin to civilian intelligence agencies .
 The SVR is authorized to carry out the following missions . According to Russian law, the SVR can conduct intelligence .
 Putin reestablished the Military Industrial Commission in 2007 to better manage state control of defense production and acquisition . Putin reestablished the military Industrial Commission to better control of the defense industry .
 Russian officials claim a new class of hypersonic vehicle is being developed to allow Russian strategic missiles to penetrate missile defense systems . In addition, Russian officials say the vehicle could be used to launch Russian missiles .
 The SS-N-18 SLBM is a two-stage liquid-propellant system designed to be launched from a DELTA III submarine . The system was first deployed in 1978 .
 SS-26 ISKANDER-M is a mobile, single-stage, solid-propellant missile that is replacing the SS-21 . The missile is the latest in a long line of missiles that are being used by the U.S. Navy .
 Russia’s largest developer and producer of anti-ship, anti-radar, and multipurpose missiles for tactical airborne, ship borne, and coastal cruise missile systems .
 The Kh-55 is the main armament of Russia’s Tu-95 and Tu-160 bombers . The missiles are the follow-on system to the Kh- 55 .
 Russia plans to upgrade and operate its fleet of Tu-160/BLACKJACK, Tu-95MS BEAR H, and Tu-22M/BACKFIRE bombers beyond 2030 . The upgrades are intended to keep older aircraft operational until the fifth-generation PAK-DA
 Sukhoi Aircraft-Manufacturing Plants in Komsomolsk, Irkutsk and Novosibirsk produce the Su-30SM, Su-34, and Su-35 . MiG plants in Lukhovitsy and Nizhniy Novgorod
 Russia is producing its new transport, the I1-76MD-90A, which is a redesign of the Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Il-76/CANDID transport . The Ilyushin Design Bureau has begun development of the Il-78MD
Construction of patrol boats and corvettes has continued at a steady pace . Major combatants and amphibious ships have encountered significant delays .
 There are currently three in RUSSIA MILITARY POWER service, with an additional eight scheduled to enter service in the coming years . There are already three in the RUSSia MILITary POWER service .
 Since 2010, there have been significant improvements in the condition of Russian ground arms . The modernization and upgrade of the main battle tank inventory has been made .
 The Omsk Transport Machine Building Plant is one of Russia’s two MBT production and modernization facilities . The T-80U will be upgraded with Sosna-U, Relikt third-generation dynamic protection complex .
 The Uralvagonzavod Corporation is Russia’s primary MBT production and modernization center . It is responsible for the production of Russia's newest MBT to fulfill part of the 2020 and 2025 State Armament Program .
 This universal platform offers the Russian defense industry a more streamlined 83 84 T-14 Armata Tank . It will reduce maintenance and modernization costs in the future .
 Russian MRLs are produced in large quantities for the Russian Army and export customers worldwide . Russian M RLs are made in large amounts for the Russia Army and exported customers worldwide.
 Russia is an exporter of nearly every category of conventional military equipment . In 2016, Moscow exported $14.7 billion in military products, officials said .
 S-400 TRIUMF, ANTEY-2500, BUK-M2E, and TORM2e surface-to-air missile systems are top sellers . IGLA-S MANPADS, the PANTSIR-S1 air defense missile/gun
 Russian officials have acknowledged that exchanging arms for access to natural resources may be 85 86 necessary to stave off competition from other suppliers .
 President Putin has expressed Moscow’s willingness to improve financing options for contracts . He has expressed his willingness to expand offerings for joint production and local assembly of defense equipment in customers’ countries .
 Russia is touting the effectiveness of its combat operations in Syria and using this to add cachet to its military products for export . Russia also is touting its combat operation in Syria as a success .
 Moscow believes that advertising many of its weapons systems as combat-proven will generate additional interest and orders from customers . Moscow believes many of the weapons systems will generate more interest from customers.
Business Insider.com/russia-is-modernizing-its-air-force-201 5-3.com .
 Vedomosti Online, 22 Dec 2011, www.vedomosti.ru/newsline/ news/1448040/.