 Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is a result of the policies of the Kremlin empire-minded chauvinists led by Vladimir Putin . The irresponsibility of Ukrainian political elites throughout the years of Ukraine's independence is also the result of strategic miscalculations and the ir
 Ukraine's top political and military leadership pursued the illusion of a possible strategic partnership with Russia . For years, Ukraine's leaders pursued theillusion of a potential strategic partnership.
 The Kremlin is consistently implementing a policy aimed at destroying Ukraine . Meanwhile, the Kremlin was consistently implementing its own policy .
 Plan A for the gradual and ""peaceful" destruction of Ukraine, and Plan B for a one-time conquest by force . Plan A. for the  gradual and peaceful destruction of Ukraine . Plan B. for a one-time conquest by force
 The former plan was envisaged as a "humanitarian aggression" and the use of soft rather than hard, military power to destroy Ukrainian identity, a fundamental formative element of any national State .
 The Yanukovych regime was Russia’s partner in its "humanitarian" aggression against Ukraine . Russia's government was Russia's partner in the Ukraine conflict, says CNN .
 Controlled by Russian special services, it pursued anti-Ukrainian "humanitarian" policies .
 Moscow was obviously aware of the poor condition of the Ukrainian Army . Yet, it clearly underestimated the aspiration of Ukrainians for freedom .
 Ukraine's political and military leaders failed to organize immediate resistance to Russia’s aggression shortly after it began .
 Ukraine has lost Crimea and control over parts of Ukraine-Russia border territories in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . Russian mercenaries, diversionists and regular Russian Army units infiltrated into Ukraine .
 The National Guard was set up under the umbrella of the Interior Ministry . Large parts of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts were liberated from the aggressor .
 Petro Poroshenko’s reluctance to introduce martial law and to mobilize the entire potential of the State and society to fend off the enemy was among the factors that extended the war's duration .
 Ukraine's elites must realize that Russia is waging a total war against Ukraine . Russia is testing the readiness and ability of Western democracies to resist the Kremlin's revanchist and expansionist plans .
 Russia's ultimate goal is neither to annex parts of Ukrainian territory nor to deprive Ukraine of the right to make its own civilization choice, but to destroy all things Ukrainian that exist and Ukrainian statehood as such .
 The Russian aggression is violating the international order, threatening global security and undermining nuclear non-proliferation regime . The aggression is also undermining nuclear Non-Proliferation regimes .
 In resisting Russian aggression, Ukraine is at the same time is fighting for the West and its values . Ukraine is also fighting for its values and the West.
 If the Western democracies care about their own security, they should stand shoulder to shoulder with Ukraine to resist the aggressor . The aim is to defend common civilization values, world peace and international order .
 The proposed paper below is an attempt to provide a comprehensive analysis of the problems Ukraine and the international community are facing as a result of the recent war of aggression by Russia .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko addressed a joint session of Congress on September 18, 2014 . Poroshenko was speaking at the joint session .
 President Poroshenko's speech was very eloquent and emotionally charged, but laser focused on realities of Ukraine's present geopolitical situation .
 His oration garnered many a standing ovation from members of the House and Senate . He was nominated for President Obama's second term .
 Russia's war against Ukraine is not only a local war of aggression, but an unprovoked hostility in violation of international norms is not contained and reversed now . The U.S. will ultimately militarily engage the United States, thus, returning the world to the dangerous nuclear bipolar political
 In President Poroshenko's words, "It is Europe's, and it is America's war, too," he says .
 Russia, the United Kingdom, France and China agreed, jointly and severally, to assure Ukraine's economic, political independence and territorial integrity . In return, the U.S. and the UK agreed to guarantee Ukraine's independence .
 In the past year, Russia breached this international agreement in a blatant and violent manner . Russia breached the agreement in an "unclearly and violent" manner .
 It first invaded and annexed Crimea, then instigated an insurrection in Eastern Ukraine . Alleged separatists/terrorists were guided and supported by Russian troops . hostilities are in reality an invasion and violation of Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 The initial response to Russia's invasion were numerous verbal condemnations of the Kremlin's actions which resounded vociferously throughout the world .
 The United States and the EU instituted a variety of economic sanctions on an escalating basis . The sanctions are a stern scolding of Russia, the EU and the United States .
 Putin has doubled down even further on his bellicose rhetoric and actions . It is true that these economic sanctions have had a negative effect on Russia's economy, but it has not stopped the Kremlin's aggression .
 Ukrainian President Poroshenko acknowledged and appreciated this American non-lethal assistance for Ukraine . But stated Ukraine's soldiers in the field need more military equipment – both non- lethal and lethal .
 Congress initiated legislation that would give President Obama the authority to grant lethal and nonlethal military aid to Ukraine . The legislation would allow President Obama to grant military aid in Ukraine .
 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014 sailed through the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate with unanimous bipartisan vote in short order . The bill was approved by a unanimous vote .
 Congress will act upon this legislation in a timely manner since time is of the essence for Ukraine . Hopefully, this legislation will be acted upon in the next few days .
 President Poroshenko met with American President Obama at the White House only to get additional verbal assurances and pontifical statements of solidarity . No lethal military assistance nor MNNA status.
 This ill-founded foreign-policy position is grossly naïve at best, writes David Frum . Frum: It is grounded on a systemic lack of understanding of the historical realities of the existing world order . He says it inadvertently puts global stability into great jeopardy .
 International agreements are not to be disregarded merely because there's no money in it, especially if they deal with nuclear nonproliferation . International agreements should not be ignored because there is no money for them.
 America readily supplies lethal weapons worth billions of dollars to questionable allies in the Middle East . U.S. readily supplies weapons worth millions of dollars in the region .
 We are ready to put "boots on the ground" to protect countries in that region . Many of which have well-equipped armies of their own and the economic strength to fully support their own military .
 Ukraine's sons and daughters are dying daily on the front lines. America rebuffs Ukraine's dire requests with lame excuses . America does not ask America to put our soldiers in the line of fire .
 The Obama Administration must seriously take a long hard look at itself and its foreign-policy . The Obama administration must seriously look at its foreign policy and the image it portrays.
 The Administration must recognize that its present anemic policy towards Ukraine jeopardizes our own country's national security in the future .
 The Administration's actions to date have given the green light to despots in other countries to ignore international norms and freely grab territory .
 The dictators only need to make an economic calculation as to whether they can withstand the financial price of a scolding by the West . All international agreements, promises, and pledges they signed don't matter.
 International politics and world law and order should not be all about money, it should be about money and order .
 America can continue to give blankets to Ukrainian soldiers so they can be warm in the winter . Also to use them to cover and bury their dead .
 It does not reflect the principles of freedom upon which this country was created, it says . It doesn't reflect the principle of freedom on which this nation was created .
 Americans should and must do much, much more to aid Ukraine. We must reestablish the primacy of the principles that we claim are our core values, says Obama .
 President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, will address a joint session of the United States Congress on September 18, 2014 .
 U.S. and European Union imposed sanctions on Russia on September 12, 2014 . The sanctions were in response to Russia's ongoing invasion of Ukraine .
 U.S. President Obama will likely repeat requests for immediate military aid from the United States and its Western partners . But he will also likely repeat his prior requests for military aid. Ukraine can defend itself from further Russian aggression .
 It will not be a request for "boots on the ground" but for military weapons and supplies for Ukraine's armed forces .
 Most of the civilized countries of the world have condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine as an affront to international rule of law . It is a violation of the numerous international treaties and agreements that require civilized countries to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states .
 The UN Charter and Helsinki Accords maintained peace and stability on the Eurasian continent for over 70 years . These linchpin agreements such as the UN Charter have maintained peace.
 Russia's actions clearly evidence that it will not abide by any promises it has made or will make in any future treaty or other international agreement . Regrettably, it is now patently obvious that Russia's action is clearly evidence .
 Numerous concerned voices in the U.S. political, academic and mass media arena have urgently called for immediate military aid to Ukraine .
 The Kremlin obstinately continues its military buildup within Ukraine and continues to violate the cease-fire agreement reached in Minsk earlier this month .
 Russian military forces in and outside of Ukrainian borders are bombarding Ukrainian defensive military positions within Ukraine . Currently, additional convoys of "humanitarian" trucks openly unload lethal weapons inside Ukrainian territory .
 Putin has doubled down on his bellicose pronouncements and has vehemently restated his resolve to return Russia to the previous borders of the former USSR . Putin has also vowed to expand the Kremlin's hegemony over the eastern parts of the European Union .
 He has now publicly declared the United States, NATO, and the European Union to be enemies of Russia . He has announced an escalated buildup of his military arsenal .
 Putin has also made not so veiled threats of using his nuclear military capabilities in his quest to use his nuclear capabilities . He has also said he wants to use nuclear capabilities in the future .
 The conquest of Ukraine is the Kremlin's first necessary step in achieving its imperialistic goals . The conquest is the first step to achieve its imperialist goals .
 The present economic sanctions in and of themselves are woefully deficient and will not stop Russia's unlawful aggression against Ukraine . It is obvious that the present sanctions are woeful deficient.
 Had Ukraine received U.S. and Western military aid earlier in a timely fashion, Ukraine would have been in a better military posture . Ukraine would be in better posture to repel the pro-Russian terrorists and seal its border from further Russian incursion .
 Ukrainian military forces were in a strategic position to defeat the pro-Russian terrorists in Ukraine before September 5 .
 NATO leaders were debating what sanctions to impose upon Russia on that day . On that day, NATO leaders had been discussing sanctions against Russia .
 Moscow ordered its troops into Ukraine with superior weaponry and fire power to substantially push back the Ukrainian military from its gains painfully attained with the life and blood of many a brave Ukrainian soldier .
 The Ukrainian American Bar Association strongly urges the U.S. Congress to expeditiously pass on a fast-track basis this legislation . The legislation will help Ukraine defend its territorial integrity and sovereignty as the quid pro quo for surrendering its nuclear arsenal .
 Vladimir Putin's strongly held belief that the U.S. is only a paper tiger – all words and no teeth . Failure to do so will only reaffirm Putin's strong held belief, he says .
 If the U.S. does not keep its word regarding sovereignty and security guarantees, why should any other country have any faith in America's representations or promises in future nuclear disarmament negotiations and accords?
 Any tardiness or inaction by the U.S. Congress in rendering timely military aid to Ukraine will condemn Ukraine to an endless and hopeless waiting for American assistance .
 U.S. Congress acts now and fulfills its obligation and duty to give timely military assistance to Ukraine . All this may be avoided if Congress acts.
 Ukrainians are now grudgingly acknowledged by the rest of the world . In the past few weeks, what was painfully obvious from the very beginning to Ukrainians is now grudgely acknowledged .
 Russia has now openly invaded Ukraine and only Putin's generously paid Western apologists or the extremely naïve could argue otherwise . Russia has been openly invaded by the West .
 The Russian government's continuing boldfaced lies that the alleged Donbas ""separatists"" are self-reliant disgruntled Ukrainians who are Russian speakers seeking only to protect their rights can't be credulously accepted by the West .
 Russia is and has for months been in a state of war against Ukraine . Its sole objective is to eradicate Ukraine's independence and return it to a vassal state under the dictatorship of Moscow .
 Since the cataclysmic events of World War II, the world's nations have attempted to establish basic principles of international law and behavior to be adhered to by all nations .
 The UN Charter, the Helsinki Final Act and the various organic documents of the European Union have had as their linchpin the principle of territorial integrity and security and the inviolability of borders.
 NATO was created in part to protect the territorial integrity of its member states from outside military threats .
 Russia has intentionally trampled upon Ukraine's political and economic sovereignty and its territorial integrity for quite some time in full view of the world .
 The U.S. and European Union has been a blinders-like muted scolding of Putin with tempered economic sanctions . But specifically excluding any military assistance to Ukraine . The response from the United States and the European Union have been a mixed response .
 Putin has brandished not so veiled bellicose threats emphasizing the nuclear armament power that he has at his disposal .
 The West is in the long range self-interest of the West to take meaningful steps to stop and reverse Russia's aggression against Ukraine . Russia's own political and territorial integrity from future jeopardy.
 Failure to do so will undoubtedly undercut any future negotiations with other nuclear powers in the hope of achieving nuclear disarmament and world peace . Failure will undoubtedly undermine any future talks with other powers .
 The time has now come for the West to take strong and meaningful action in support of Ukraine's independence and territorial integrity .
 The West must stop moving the goal line in order to placate Putin in the unlikely Pollyanna-like expectation that he will take an ""off-ramp"" and deescalate the situation in Ukraine . The West should stop moving goal line.
 The hard and uncontroverted evidence proves exactly the contrary Putin only interprets such peace intended initiatives as a sign of weakness . The evidence proves that Putin is only interpreting such peace initiatives as signs of weakness.
 Neither the United States nor the EU will put boots on the ground in Ukraine. It is crystal clear that neither the U.S. nor the European Union will put Boots on the Ground in Ukraine .
 Ukrainians need military supplies and weaponry to aid them in their battle for national survival . Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has expressed to world leaders that Ukrainians have the resolve to defend their homeland .
 "We strongly urge that the following steps be implemented immediately by the U.S. government, NATO, and its European allies," says the United States .
 Western governments will condemn our children and grandchildren to a probable conflagration on the European continent that will be as great or even greater than the horrors of World War II . America will have no escape.