Whitmore expands on Gontmakher's essay about historical precedents to Putin’s situation . Crimean War, Battle of Tsushima, and Afghanistan leading to deep regime changes .
 Belarus report is forensic analysis by Gubarevich of how Ukraine is propping up Belarus . Most interesting report is Forensic analysis of Ukraine's situation .
 Belarus police quitting to get much better paid civilian jobs in Poland . Belarus police quit to get better paid jobs in civilian jobs .
 Comrade Dodon’s failed attempt at referendum produces a lot of media coverage . Dodon's failed attempt to vote in the UK has been widely reported .
 Kapitonenko essay on possible futures between Ukraine and Russia is quite good, but fails to elaborate on the toxic attitude of too many Russians . Too many Russians see all international relations as a simple hard-wired zero sum game, he says .
 Crimea loses all power as mainland Kerch grid collapses from summer peak overload . Donbass fires continue to burn in Crimea, while Don Bass fires continue . Crimea lost all power.
 Iran launches another large missile, while Russian treaty for Hmeymim AB near Latakia widely reported . Iran launches a large missile while Russia launches another missile .
Bechev book appears to disregard Putin’s opportunism, says Bechev . The book is based on two essays on Russian meddling in Balkans .
 IO/IW/Cyber starts with two COCW items of Russia advocacy, followed by an excellent essay by Prof Kuzio on Ukrainophobia and zombification .
 The U.S. House of Representatives adopted the bill ‘On Countering America’s enemies by means of sanctions’ It was met by the Russian political elite with poorly concealed panic .
 Moscow can only swim in the wake of confrontation, compromise actions will be a game in one gates . Moscow can't only swim after a confrontation, it can't be the only way to get out .
President Trump's figure for relations with Russia is losing importance, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he turned out to be a weak president, but could not block his political opponents .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin vows to retaliate against any new sanctions imposed by the U.S. He says the sanctions would be a violation of international law that other countries should ignore .
 Putin said that the details of such retaliation will depend on the final sanctions approved by Congress .
 Lawmakers are on the cusp of sending President Trump a sanctions package that has passed both the House and the Senate . Trump's desire for “flexibility’ that the bill doesn’t provide, he said .
 Russia’s comparatively small economy limits the threat of U.S. retaliatory sanctions . Russian officials hope European leaders won’t go along with the new measures .
 Putin said the sanctions bill “destroys international relations and international law,’s Putin said . He said it corroborates his long-standing claim that the United States is a bully .
 The new sanctions punish Russia for invading Ukraine, interfering in the 2016 presidential election, and backing Syrian President Bashar Assad in a civil war .
 Putin’s comment about third-party states’ sovereignty isn’t just a criticism of the U.S.
 Russian effort to convince Europe not to implement sanctions, which might appeal to European nations with energy companies trying to do business in Russia . It points to a Russian effort.
 This wasn't the U.S. administration the Russians thought they were getting. This wasn’t the United States administration the Russian thought they're getting .
 President Vladimir Putin is engaging in some more relaxed diplomacy with the west . After the stiff formality of the G-20 summit earlier this month, President Putin has been engaging in a relaxed diplomacy .
 The term&nbsp;&quot;anti-Russian, &quot has a long history . The term is a synonym for&nsp;&Quot;Russophobic,& quot; has a history of its own .
 It expresses the self-victimizing and enemy-creating sentiments of the Kremlin and Kremlin-linked media . It expresses a self-Victimizing, enemy-created sentiments of Kremlin and Putin-linkedMedia .
 CEPA project aimed at exposing Russian disinformation in Central and Eastern Europe .
 Historically, such periods have been followed by retrenchment, rapprochement, introspection, and reform . Such periods are followed by a period of introspection and reform.
 When costs of an expansionist foreign policy become evident, Russia tends to change course . Russia's foreign policy is often more expensive than its own .
 The reforms of Alexander II came on the heels of the Russian defeat in the Crimean War . Alexander II's reforms came in the wake of Russian defeat.
 The revolution of 1905 came in the wake of defeat in the Russo-Japanese War .
 Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost and perestroika came in the aftermath of the Soviet defeat in Afghanistan .
 There are voices in Moscow who are saying the status quo simply cannot continue. And believe it or not, there are voices.
 Aleksei Kudrin said Russia risks being saddled with a stagnant economy for decades as a result of Western sanctions . The former Russian Finance Minister said Russia could be saddled for decades with stagnant economy .
 There are reasons to believe that history will not be repeating itself anytime soon . But there are reasons that history won't repeat itself soon .
 Vladimir Putin has staked his legitimacy on restoring Russia’s superpower status . He appears to believe abandoning this would be an existential threat to his rule .
 This is now the regime’s legitimizing myth and it puts Russia on a collision course with the West . This is the regime's legitimizingMyth and it is now Russia's legitimization myth, says the author .
 Putin wants detente with the West on his terms alone . His terms are unacceptable, he says .
 Sooner or later, Kudrin’s argument will probably become ascendant and the historical cycle will probably resume . The historical cycle is likely to resume .
 Putin and his regime still operate under the principles of zones of influence defined in territorial terms . Like the tsar and most of the world a century ago, Putin's regime still operates under the rules of territory .
In the world today, the true zones of influence are not about territorial acquisition and control, but about the spread of influence .
 The Russian government has once again allowed the trend lines of economics and politics to diverge, supporting many of the right things in the economy . But opposing the political changes such as democracy and local administration that economic development requires.
 Gontmakher says both Nicholas II and Vladimir Putin operate on the principle that only one individual has all the answers . He says both the regime of Nicholas II. and that of Vladimir Putin .
 Gontmakher says the current Kremlin leader is quite competent in many ways . He says he will and does make mistakes and there is no one to correct him .
 A single unexpected event can bring the entire system crashing down, economist says . The economist continues .
 Moscow's housing project could be a reaction to poorly-thought-through plans at demolition and renovation of housing in Moscow .
 Gontmakher says Putin doesn't want to restore the monarchy and make himself tsar . At the same time, he says, it is clear that Putin doesn’t want to restored the monarchy .
First, “chaos of the type of February 1917,’ when everything fell apart and power lay in the streets . First, ‘chaos’ of the kind of 1917, whenEverything fell apart .
 Putin himself comes to the recognition that reforms are needed and moves to introduce them like a second Gorbachev . Second, Putin himself came to the recognize that reforms were needed .
 Russia will fall further and further behind the rest of the world which will view it as a backwater . In that event, Russia will be seen as the world's backwater.
 Putin will rule and things won’t be that disastrous during his lifetime, says CNN’s Tom Charity .
 There are a few reasons to think that this scenario won't be allowed to proceed, Gontmakher says . But there are few reasons that think this scenario will not be allowed.
 Those who can’t see no future for themselves, and the regime has not addressed this, he says . The regime is not addressing this .
 Russia could become a revolutionary element just as was the case in Russia a century ago . They could become an element of the revolution in Russia .
 If that happens again, the Putin system is going to be challenged, even threatened, however powerful it now appears to be .
 Moscow economist Igor Pushkaryov argues that there are too many parallels between 1917 and 2017 to be comfortable . He says Russia's failure to change with the times is the result of Russia’s failure to do so .
 Societies without a sustainable democratic culture and democratic institutions tend to perceive the commandeering model of governance as an acceptable and often desirable norm .
 These myths are also built into most people’s attitudes towards the ruling elites . They are usually subdivided into Putin as the leader, perceived as a source of higher justice, then the rest .
 All power institutions in such a system rest only on the authority of the ‘leader’ and on the society’s consent to such a governance model .
 Russian people towards Stalin should be perceived as an expression of such consent, says author . He says it is not a protest against the current government or a way to worship a murderer .
 The sheer scale of Stalin's crimes has been purposefully whitewashed from the social memory of Russians for quite some time . Although Stalin can — and should — be demonised, attempts to demonise Russian society are counterproductive .
 The illusory aura of the Great Patriotic War would not have been so successful without the Kremlin's policy of purposefully concealing ‘inconvenient’ issues .
Russian people had a good understanding of the scale of repressions and mistakes committed by Stalin on the eve of the Second World War .
 Such an understanding could start a wave of dissent, where the public would ultimately agree that the authorities must be held accountable . The public would agree that that commander-style governance is unacceptable .
 Authorities have been trying to avoid what they have been attempting to avoid . This is exactly what the present authorities have been tried to avoid. This is what they are trying toavoid .
 The absence of an in-depth discussion on this topic in the school curricula, and claims about Stalin being ‘demonised’ by people and organisations working for the interests of other countries .
 All these efforts are undertaken to constrain the discussion of historical facts as much as possible, and to prevent them becoming a subject of a large-scale public debate .
 86% of Russians do not have sufficient knowledge to fully realise the scale and nature of Stalin's repressions .
Through lack of historical understanding, they have been deprived of immunity to dictatorship and commandeering governance model . Through lack of history, they've been deprived.
 Russians see Stalin as an outstanding historical figure . 62% believe plaques, busts and other artefacts that tell a tale of his successes should be present in public places .
 This is a side effect of hushing up the truth in order to implant and reinforce the thinking that a commander-style politician is an ideal leader and an effective manager for Russia .
Only possible rival of Vladimir Putin at this stage could be a politician who more or less corresponds with people's ideas of an ideal leader .
 A liberal Western-type politician is doomed to fail in today's Russia, no matter how strong his programme would be .
 Alexei Navalny is often accused of having authoritarian inclinations . He can gain broad support precisely because of these traits, he says .
 The arrival of a 'non-leader' in Russia will be possible only after a long period of successful efforts to educate the population and create genuine democratic views .
 Vladimir Putin’s stalled program of reducing the number of federation subject by amalgamating smaller non-Russian regions with larger and predominantly ethnic Russian ones . The Kremlin has refused to extend that power-sharing agreement with Tatarstan .
 Taymyr activists have again demanded the authorities agree to a referendum on whether the Dolgan-Nenets district should be part of Krasnoyarsk kray .
 Some members of these numerically small groups in the Russian North have been raising these issues again and again since Putin forced through their amalgamation in 2005 . Putin forced the amalgamation of the groups in 2005.
 They argue that they have lost not only status but economic benefits and access to key institutions . Most if not all have been shifted from nearby to the distant kray capital .
 Moscow has turned down the Taymyr activists’ requests for a new referendum twice before . The Russian Constitutional Court shows no willingness to rule against the Kremlin .
 Any moves against ethnic territories now will spark conflict. But these moves are unlikely to get much attention .
 In 1970, Robert Sherill published a harsh critique of the U.S. military's justice system under the title Military Justice is to Justice .
 Vladimir Putin has refused to extend the power-sharing accord with Kazan . Now, one can say that Russian federalism has even less connection to genuine federalism .
 Russian centralizers are now celebrating because they want all decisions to be made by Moscow officials rather than by Russians and non-Russians . That is, some of the same words and music are used to describe it, but the content and meaning are entirely different .
 On Monday, the ten-year extension of the Moscow-Kazan power-sharing accord ran out . The accord was extended for 10 years .
 Tatarstan officials called for its renewal, but the Kremlin ignored their request . Putin declared it was constitutionally wrong to require Russian speakers in republics to learn the titular language .
Polubota asked two other Moscow writers what the end of the power-sharing accord means and what is likely to happen next .
 Mikhail Remizov, president of the Institute for National Strategy, said he welcomed the end of the accord . He said it would allow Moscow to end discrimination Russians and Russian speakers in non-Russian areas .
 The special agreement with Tatarstan was an "unnecessary and even dangerous exception" that has now been eliminated. That principle must be maintained, says the author .
 Russian speakers in the republics must not be compelled to learn non-Russian languages, and republics should not be allowed to have presidents . Russian speakers must not have presidents.
 All regions must be the same in terms of law and practice, and then all can be strengthened so as to strengthen the country . All regions need to be same in Terms of Law and practice .
 The one and the other will be eliminated as well, he implied . Eliminate the one and one will be eliminate as well .
 There is a great deal of work to be done on that and no one is yet focused on it. Unfortunately, there is a lot of work still being done on it .
 Second researcher with whom Polubota spoke was Oleg Nemensky of Moscow’s Russian Institute for Strategic Research .
 There now must be “special laws’ about national minorities wherever they live. There must now be ‘special laws' about national minority.
 Moscow warns that no one can tell how long it will be before such ideas become centerpieces of Moscow’s policy .
 In 1970, Robert Sherill published a harsh critique of the U.S. military’s justice system under the title Military Justice is to Justice What Military Music is to Music .
 Many in Russia's regions and republics are horrified by what Russian centralizers are now celebrating . They want all decisions to be made by Moscow officials rather than by Russians and non-Russians beyond Moscow .
 Russia's official name officially became a fiction this week . Russia’s official name is now a fiction .
 This week, the Russian Federation ceased to be anything remotely resembling a federation . The Russian Federation is now a non-federation .
 A decades-old agreement granting Tatarstan limited autonomy was allowed to expire this week . It includes control over its resources, budget, and special status for the Tatar language .
 One of Russia’s most important regions and its largest ethnic minority just got downgraded . The region is one of the country's most important areas .
 This week's Power Vertical Podcast looks at what this means for Tatarstan and for Moscow's relations with Russia’s regions . This week, we look at what it means for Moscow and for Russia's regions .
 Mark Galeotti is a senior research fellow at the Institute of International Relations in Prague . Galeotti will be head of the Center for European Security, and visiting fellow at European Council on Foreign Relations . Rim Gilfanov is director of the Tatar-Bashkir Service .
 Kremlin’s promotion of spirituality and traditional values is not leading to their strengthening among Russians, Vladislav Inozemtsev says .
 He works to the benefit of the Kremlin in two ways, he says . Talk about ‘spiritual values,’ he continues .
 Russia is "an island of morality" internationally. On the one hand, it allows Russia to position itself as “an Island of morality’’s’
 Russians have no reason to hold the government responsible for its shortcomings, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The authorities forget that religiosity by itself does not necessarily improve the socialization of individuals . Talk about moral norms gives rise to a sense that nothing needs to be done beyond that .
 Inozemtsev says Russian authorities should be focusing attention on the problems of Russian society .
 He says it should stop counting the number of churches and prayers as a mark of success and stop greeting any effort to provide objective information .
 The current Russian regime seems committed to moving in exactly the opposite direction . But tragically, the current regime is hardly a good omen for the future .
 The owners of the Avilon Automotive Group have secret business connections with relatives of Prosecutor General Yuri Chaika, his deputy, and a senior ex-official of the Investigative Committee, a top-level police agency .
 Russia’s Federal Security Service says it has detained suspected members of an armed neo-Nazi group in Moscow .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has signed a bill into law on Russian-Armenian joint military units .
 Russia’s Ministry of Defence has received into service a new batch of the improved T-72B3 main battle tanks . The new batch is the latest in a series of improved battle tanks.
 The Russian Army has received the next batch of upgraded T-72B3 main battle tanks with additional armor protection . According to the UVZ, the Russian army has received a new batch of upgrades to its main battle tank .
 Modernization of the T-72B to the T -72B3 began in 2010 . This process also includes installing a new fire control system and overhauling each of these old tanks .
 The new version of T-72B3 is fitted with armour plates on each side at the front of the hull and wire cage armour at the rear part to increase protection of the engine compartment against RPGs .
 The developers took into account the experience of fighting in Ukraine, Georgia and Syria .
 The armour of the turret is also upgraded with a new armour package . New generation of ERA mounted on each side of turret . Rear part of turret is fitted with wire cage armour .
 Belarus and Ukraine are seeking to reinvigorate direct dialogue between their leaders . They resumed three months ago in the Chernobyl zone . Both countries are seeking a return to direct dialogue .
 Ukraine is resisting Russian aggression while Belarus remains Moscow’s closest military and political ally . Russia is the closest military, political ally of Belarus .
 It seems that simplistic political clichés do not capture the two nations’ complex relationship . It seems the two countries have a complex relationship.
 Lukashenka attended Poroshenko’s inauguration in June 2014 and returned to Kyiv in December of the same year on a brief working visit .
 Ukrainian elites' displeasure at the Belarusian move against the Ukrainian resolution at the U.N. An attempt to arrange a meeting between the two leaders fell through .
 Belarus must be independent for the Belarusians not to die in the wars that Russia is waging throughout the world . Belarus must not die in Russia's wars.
 The statement was adopted by the city meeting of the solidarity movement Razam . It was timed to the 27th anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on State Sovereignty of Belarus .
 July 27 is the Day of Independence, which Lukashenka abolished absolutely illegally . July 27 was the day of Independence .
 Any nation pays a high price for its Independence, and the Belarusian people are no exception . Belarusians are no exceptions .
 Belarus must be independent for our people not to die in the wars that Russia is waging throughout the world. Belarus must not die in Russia's wars.
 The meeting of the solidarity movement Razam also adopted a statement demanding to release all the political prisoners who are still behind bars .
 As a result of low salaries, policemen break contracts and leave to work in Poland . Polish police officers break contracts to leave their jobs in Poland.
 Belarusian blogger d-zholik writes. The undermanning of Hrodna region internal affairs bodies has doubled within the year . The under-manning is approaching to ten percent of the total number .
 The unpleasant information was announced by the management of the Internal Affairs Directorate of the Hrodna Region Executive Committee at the operational meeting . The meeting was held a few days ago .
 Since the beginning of this year, the undermanning of the Hrodna police garrison has increased from 8.7% to 9.1%, almost doubling in comparison with the same period last year .
 A number of district police departments in the region could not find any candidates for the Academy of the Ministry of Internal Affairs .
 If this trend persists, the Ministry of Internal Affairs will face the insolvable problem of replacing the positions of territorial division senior stuff with persons having higher profile education .
 Hundreds of new vacancies have been formed in the region police structure, and their number continues to increase .
 The police is almost the only place in the province to work with a guaranteed social package and high income . That’s despite the continuing stagnation of the economy .
 Personnel services and heads of internal affairs bodies of the region have been given non-public instructions to prevent early termination of contracts with personnel . The disgruntled employees of the Ministry of Internal Affairs are forced not to appear at work in order to be dismissed .
 Lieutenant-Colonel Ihar VusikM seeks documents that served as the ground for an order for his dismissal from the Internal Affairs . He faces only formal replies, Mahilyouski Region writes .
 Vusik sent an application to the head of the Internal Affairs Directorate of the Mahilyou Regional Executive Committee . He requested to provide certified copies of documents, including the contract and employment position instruction that caused the dismissal .
 The Krycheu ROVD, where Vusik had previously applied to, refused to acquaint him with these documents . It should be noted that the Krychei ROV D, where he had previously application to, had refused to acquainted him with them .
 The head of the Catholic Church in Belarus criticized the authorities’ policy towards foreign priests .
Residents puzzled by strange behavior of the military in the night city . Residents of the capital were puzzled by the strange behavior .
 Minskers could watch the landing of several paratroopers from the helicopter in the center of Minsk .
 A lot of people were also puzzled by the appearance of military equipment in the capital . A few people were puzzled by a lot of the military equipment.
 The Ministry of Defense explained what was happening, and invited everyone to the holiday on July 29 .
 Belarusians want to “rattle the arms’ outside the capital . The ministry responded to the demand of the Belarusians to ‘rattle’ the arms .
 The tank that lost its control crashed down a lamppost and a tree in the city of Minsk . The city's citizens filed a petition asking to abolish the parades in the capital .
 The official response from the Ministry of Defense to the application of citizens has been received .
 Representatives of the Defense Ministry commented on the demands of citizens even at the time when signatures were being collected .
 The petition demand is to move the parades with heavy military equipment to special grounds . The petition also wants to move military equipment with heavy equipment to a special ground .
 Tanks spoil asphalt and create a traffic collapse in the city center and on the main highways . Tanks spoil the asphalt and cause traffic collapse.
 The Ministry of Defense sent an official response to the citizens’ claims .
 Belarusian citizens believe that the decision to hold parades in the city is supported by the overwhelming number of citizens . The transfer of the holiday will lead to a significant increase in the cost of holding it .
 Moldova's Constitutional Court has ruled that a referendum planned to ask voters whether the country's pro-Russian president should have greater powers is unconstitutional . Moldova’s Constitutional Court ruled that the referendum was unconstitutional .
 Moldova's Constitutional Court rejected President Igor Dodon’s plan to drastically expand his presidential power . With parliamentary elections looming, the real fight has yet to begin .
 Moldova’s constitutional court rejected on Thursday a plan to hold a referendum that might have boosted the powers of pro-Russian President Igor Dodon . The vote paved the way for a roll-back of the ex-Soviet nation's trade pact with the European Union .
 Moldovan authorities ban a group of Russian performers from entering the country . The move is a provocative gesture aimed at derailing bilateral relations, the Russian embassy says .
 Russian Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin says Chisinau had attempted to bar a flight from a Moscow airport with the country’s delegation from landing in Moldova .
 Republic of Moldova is to be connected to neighbouring Romania’s power grid in a bid to diversify its electricity supply . European funding could allow the Republic to be linked to Romania's power grid .
 A new project entitled ‘Moldova Romania Power Interconnection Phase I’ is now under consideration . The aim is to diversify the former Soviet nation’s electricity supply and domestic transmission network .
 The new deal will see them borrow an initial sum of EUR80 million as part of a total EUR270 million investment . European Investment Bank, the World Bank and the European Commission Neighbourhood Investment Facility will also invest .
 The proposal to establish the state of Malorossiya in eastern Ukraine was meant to initiate a discussion . No final decisions on the subject have been made yet, the leader of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, Alexander Zakharchenko says .
 For Kremlin propagandists and their witting or unwitting acolytes in the West, Ukraine is an irredeemably corrupt place . Ukraine is a corrupt place.
 progress in transforming Ukraine is agonizingly slow and always in danger of reversal, says CNN's John Sutter . Ukraine's young reformers and some of the country's well-wishers are among the country’s well-Wishers .
 Ukraine has achieved exceptional progress in very difficult circumstances. Ukraine's top leadership and those who worry most about defending the country from Moscow's aggression, the country's top leader says .
 Each of these points of view can be supported when the country’s situation is viewed from a particular angle . Each point of view is supported by the country's situation.
 A careful, comprehensive look at the circumstances and dynamics of Ukraine’s reform efforts results in an assessment that is ultimately positive . But a careful, complete look at Ukraine's reforms results in a positive assessment .
 Ukraine is a country still in transition from an authoritarian political system and the corrupt, crony capitalism that emerged after the fall of the Soviet Union . Ukraine is still in the transition from a political system to an authoritarian system .
 With the Orange Revolution over a decade ago, the country tried to hasten reform . The Orange Revolution was the country's first attempt to reform .
 The revolution ultimately failed because its leaders were products of the past and took few steps to reform the economy or address corruption . But the revolution ultimatelyfailed because its leader was products of a past and didn't take steps.
 The new leaders that emerged from the Revolution of Dignity, like their Orange predecessors, had also been successful under the old system . The new leader's success under the new system was similar to their predecessors .
 They are partly rooted in the old ways, but also recognize the need for at least some reform . They are mostly rooted in old ways but also need to be reform, they say .
 post-Maidan Ukraine is a new group of stakeholders composed of young, impatient leaders who were never part of the old elite . But what is unique about post- Maidan is a group of younger, impatient Leaders .
 This group has by and large not prospered under the old system or seen a need to reach an accommodation with it .
 The United States, European Union, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Monetary Fund, and World Bank are also proponents of reform . The U.S. and European Union are among those who support reform .
People of Ukraine made clear on the Maidan their desire to create an open, democratic society . They understand that the people of Ukraine are prepared to help them do it .
 They have become powerful advocates for reform by helping to set reform goals, providing technical advice, and offering conditional financial assistance . They have also been a powerful advocate for reform in recent years .
 Over the past three years, the young reformers and the Western community have formed a natural alliance .
 The young Ukrainian reformers and technicians from the Western development groups have helped identify the steps that need to be taken . The young reformers have also helped identify steps to improve Ukraine's economy .
 U.S. has been a powerful tool in persuading Ukraine's leaders to make difficult but necessary changes . Ukraine’s still powerful vested interests are being taken against their narrow preferences .
 By any measure, this confluence of factors has led to impressive successes . The success of this type of success has been attributed to a number of factors .
 Moved from discretionary pricing to market pricing in natural gas sales, reducing the government budget deficit by $8 billion in one year . Closed over eighty corrupt banks; Established the transparent Pro-Zorro procurement system to root out corruption .
 Arseniy Yatsenyuk was ousted in 2016 following a government crisis in which a number of reform ministers resigned . Many observers predicted that the reform process had ended .
 In their telling, new Prime Minister Volodymyr Groisman was Poroshenko’s tool and the two would move slowly, if at all, on necessary change .
 He presided over the final implementation of gas price reform, the introduction of transparent e-declarations, and the politically difficult re-nationalization of Privat Bank, the country's giant insolvent bank .
 Some are saying once again that reform is coming to an end, pointing to old interests pushing back against some of the progress .
 The evidence includes legislation demanding that NGO leaders provide detailed public information about their assets . The evidence also includes efforts to ensure that reformers do not have oversight responsibilities for the Anti-Corruption Bureau .
 They also point to little progress made in addressing the massive problem of corruption in the courts . They say little progress has been made in dealing with corruption in courts .
 The critics have a point, and they deserve credit for staking their careers on difficult issues . The critics definitely have a points, and the critics deserve credit.
 Ulana Suprun is taking heroic steps to overhaul the antiquated and corrupt health sector . The government is making substantial progress on pension reform .
 Ukrainian government's performance is on balance, according to the public description of its efforts . Ukraine's performance on balance is far better than its public description, says the government .
 It has exceeded expectations that many well-informed observers had at the start of this process three years ago . It has also greatly exceeded expectations, including in the international financial institutions, has also exceeded expectations .
 Ukraine's young reformers can thank the government, the government and Western friends, says the writer . But it has been substantial, he says .
 John E Herbst is Director of the Dinu Patriciu Eurasia Center at the Atlantic Council . He is also the Director of a European-based Eurasia center in London .
 He served as the United States Ambassador to Ukraine from 2003 to 2006 . He was the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine.
 The main issues – the conflict in the Donbas and the status of Crimea – have become unsolvable for the foreseeable future . The degree of mutual dependence has decreased, and distrust has grown dramatically .
 Under these circumstances, it is difficult to see anything but hostility and confrontation, says the author .
 The world is quickly moving forward, while its resources and potential are blocked . The world's resources are quickly moving ahead, while their potential is blocked .
 At stake for Russia is the loss of its status as a regional superpower . Ukraine faces ongoing risks to its statehood .
 If one confesses to a crime while the other doesn’t, the former is released but the latter receives the maximum sentence . The former is not released, but the former gets a maximum sentence of up to 10 years .
 If both of them testify against each other, they both get a minimum sentence . If both are convicted, they will receive minimum sentences of up to 30 years .
 If they refuse to confess, they get a minimum sentence under a different article of the criminal code . If they both refuse to admit, they will get a maximum sentence under the same article .
 The suspects often choose the safest line of conduct, which guarantees them the minimum loss regardless of the other player’s conduct .
 The safest choice is not the most beneficial for the parties when the game is repeated several times . The safest option is to avoid repeated games .
 Both of them could achieve much more in the long run if their is greater trust between the two prisoners . Both of the prisoners could achieved much more if their trust between them was greater .
 The game illustrates the difficulty of establishing long-term contacts between states as well as indicating how mutual trust can increase gains for both parties exponentially .
 It is precisely trust, or rather the lack of it, that is the key to the future of Russian-Ukrainian bilateral relations . The lack of trust is key to future of bilateral relations, says the Russian official .
 The Kremlin’s decision to occupy Crimea violated a long list of norms and principles of international law, as well as a number of biand multilateral documents signed by Ukraine and Russia .
In such a situation, no responsible statesperson has any right to create illusions or hope for the best outcome . In such a case, no responsibility is given to the statesperson .
 No document signed by Russia could become a convincing guarantee of security for the foreseeable future . Ukraine is going to build its policy following this very principle, and no document signing by Russia would be a convincing guarantees .
 The mutual perception of the situation as a zero-sum game is a natural consequence of the deficit of trust, says the author . The relationship between the two sides is a result of a lack of trust .
 The parties make no major concessions, since the slightest victory by one side is perceived as a failure for the other . Hence the parties makeno major concessions .
 In the case of protracted conflicts, the tactic of small steps becomes the best way to at least partially restore confidence .
 The ability to understand the hierarchy of the other party’s interests becomes crucial in order to exchange secondary interests for primary ones . It is crucial to be able to understand other party's interests.
 These small steps and sacrifices of secondary interests serve as a contribution to mutual benefit, says author . "These small steps" serve as "a manifestation of intent," he says .
 Under current circumstances, signatures on documents are hardly able to convince anyone, but concrete, practical steps can be taken . Under the current circumstances.
 Small steps towards each other can partially restore trust as a basis for even the smallest dialogue . The humanitarian, environmental and social spheres are the most important areas from the point of view of post-conflict settlement .
 Three main scenarios for the development of relations between the two countries can be outlined against the backdrop of this dramatic lack of trust .
 The most likely scenario is the one which requires minimum effort and ensures persistence of the existing status quo . As usually happens in politics, the most likely scenarios are the one with minimum effort .
 Let’s call this a pessimistic scenario, which means the worst possible outcome for the dynamics of bilateral relations if not Ukraine or Russia individually .
 Russia will still be perceived as the main threat to security, and long-term strategy will aim at deterring Russia by all available means . In this case, Russia is still perceived as a main threat, and the strategy will continue .
 The current imbalance of forces, and the ephemerality of Ukraine’s chances of joining NATO and/or the EU, will hardly provide great comfort to Russia . Ukraine is going to take advantage of any chance that it comes across in the future .
 Confrontation with Ukraine will largely undermine Moscow’s position in the post-Soviet space . It will narrow the opportunities for any geopolitical maneuvers .
 Russia can unilaterally reverse this trend by the use of military force, where costs and risks are high and incalculable . At the moment, Russia could unilaterally reverse the trend by using military force .
 Strasbourg-based European Court of Human Rights passed its first judgment in a case related to the loss of control over the part of the territory in Luhansk Oblast . The case is the first of its kind in the European court of human rights .
 The Court concluded Ukraine had done all it could to ensure the right to a fair trial within a reasonable time in the case Khlebik Ukraine . The plaintiff could have increased his chances of victory by complaining about the actions of Russia .
 Petro Poroshenko has called the adoption by the United States Congress of a Russia sanctions bill a resolute message of support for Ukraine .
 Crimean ‘energy and fuel minister’ Vadim Belik said on Friday, Censor.NET reports .
 Ukraine to resume power supplies to occupied territories after debts settled . There is a total blackout in Crimea after the automatic emergency response system went off on the mainland .
High temperatures in the Krasnodar Region, which supplies the peninsula with electricity, are the cause of the blackout .
 A source in the Crimean occupation government told TASS that power supplies will be restored by 4m. A source told Tass that power supply will be restore by 4M.
 Ukraine halted its power supply to Crimea from mainland Ukraine on Nov., 2015 . Two power lines were blown up in Chaplynka, the Kherson region .
 President Vladimir Putin of Russia launched electric power supply bridge from Kuban to Crimea on Dec. 2015 .
Power supply to the occupied peninsula was restored in April 2016 . By April 2016 power supply was back in full .
 Russia's hybrid military forces attacked Ukrainian army positions in Donbas 22 times in the past 24 hours . One Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action and five wounded in action .
 The militants continue to block access of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission observers to the temporarily occupied town of Novoazovsk in Donetsk region .
 Funeral vans have been spotted traveling from Russia to Eastern Ukraine .
 Observers from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe have marked at least 2 such vans at border checkpoints in eastern Ukraine .
 Vice Admiral Ihor Voronchenko welcomed Commodore James Morley and vessels commanders . The Ukrainian Navy Commander welcomed the new commanders .
 The parties held discussions and stressed the importance of the development of cooperation to strengthen maritime security in the region . The parties also stressed the important importance of cooperation.
 The vessels crews will undergo joint training and on July 25 from 02:00 to 05:00m. Odesa citizens and guests will be invited to join the crew .
 SNMG2 vessels and Ukrainian Navy ships will have PASSEX training after visit . It is expected that after visit SNMG 2 vessels and Ukraine Navy ships.
 Ukrainian-British Stiletto Systems Ltd. has revealed to Defence Blog’s details of the new BS-13 bullet, its upgrade of ammunition for sniper and assault rifles .
 The new series of ammunition by Stiletto Systems is designed to support tactical level operations on the battlefield . The ammunition will be used in the battle of the Middle East .
 The new ammunition is provided to penetrate all current body armor and light armored vehicles . The ammunition includes infantry fighting vehicles. The ammunition will be used to penetrate the body armor .
 The BS-13 is a special 7.62 mm armor piercing bullet for long range sniper rifle or STL-016 sniper rifle . It is also developed by Stiletto company .
 The bullet is capable of piercing armor plates over 20mm from the distance of up to 450m . The bullet can be fitted with 20mm armor plates. It can also be fitted to a maximum of 450m.
 Ukraine’s military with a specialist from Stiletto Systems held ballistic tests of the new type of ammunition for small arms in order to confirm the accuracy of declared technical characteristics .
 The objective for full-scale ballistic test was a comparative evaluation of the armor-piercing capability of up-to-date bullets developed by Stiletto Systems company . The objective was to test the capability of armor-Piercing bullets against armored elements .
 The ballistic test confirmed that Stiletto Systems Ltd. can stop armored vehicles at a distance of up to 450m. The test was carried out by a ballistic test . The test also confirmed that the company can stop infantry fighting vehicles .
 Stiletto Systems Ltd. is working on plans to organize the production of new bullets in Ukraine . The company is also working on a plan to produce new bullets for Ukraine .
 The new defence enterprise will operate according to NATO standards and produce interoperable ammunition of Soviet calibre . The new enterprise will be based on NATO standards .
 A few more companies are participating in the tender for the build the ammunition plant in Ukraine . The ammunition plant will be built in Ukraine.
 Ukroboronprom SE has finished testing its weapon station for RS-80 missile launch . The missile launch is planned to be mounted at Ukrainian-made hardware .
 Ukraine defence company developed a new Phantom-2 heavy unmanned tactical multipurpose vehicle with a rocket launcher on aboard .
Developers have integrated the unguided rockets system into the new Phantom-2 8×8 unmanned platform . The unmanned platform is the latest in a series of unmanned platforms .
 Phantom-2 unmanned ground vehicle with launcher for RS-80 rockets was displayed during military drills at the Goncharovsky Polygon of the Armed Forces of Ukraine .
 The new Phantom-2 vehicle with a rocket launcher for RS-80 rockets will augment the tactical capabilities on the battlefield . The vehicle will also be equipped with a launch system for the rocket launcher .
 The RS-80 is a unguided rocket developed and manufactured by SJSHC “Artem’s” The rocket is part of the UkrOboronProm .
 New rockets caliber 80 mm are designed to destroy ground targets . They are developed for attack helicopters and aircraft using regular starter units or special ground platform .
 The Phantom is a family of unmanned ground vehicles on 6×6 and 8×8 chassis for capabilities . The Phantom can perform a wide range of tasks .
 The unmanned tactical multipurpose vehicle can deliver ammunition and loads across areas that are under threat of enemy fire . The vehicle can quickly evacuate wounded from the battlefield .
 In addition, antitank missile system or rocket launcher mount allows “Phantom” receive nearly invisible, portable and effective means for destroying enemy’s armored vehicles or fortified points . In addition to antitank missiles, the mount can also be used to destroy enemy vehicles .
 The United States delegation visited the International Peacekeeping and Security Centre in Lviv oblast .
 The delegation toured the centre infrastructure and observed the tactical training of Ukrainian unit . They also saw the progress of construction of the Imitation Modeling Centre and the work of United States and Polish instructors .
 Rapid Trident is a USAREUR led, in the spirit of partnership for peace, exercise designed to promote regional stability and security .
 Rapid Trident is a regional command post exercise and field training exercise focused on peacekeeping and stability operations to ensure a safe and secure environment within the operating environment .
 This year’s exercise will be the validation phase for the Ministry of Defense unit undergoing training under the Joint Multinational Training Group-Ukraine program . The exercise will take place in the summer of 2014 .
 The exercise is being held at the International Peacekeeping and Security Center in Yavoriv, Ukraine . The exercise will be conducted June 27-July 8, 2016 .
 14 countries are taking part in the exercise with participation of approximately 2,000 personnel . This year, 14 countries will take part with the participation of about 2,00 personnel .
Training audiences will undergo one week of situational training exercises that focus on exercise key tasks such as countering improvised explosive devices and convoy operations .
 The exercise will feature a combined, internationally staffed battalion focused on peacekeeping and stability operations . The exercise is expected to take place in the summer of 2014 .
 The Rapid Trident exercise comes at the explicit request of the Ukrainian government and military .
 Mothers of Ukrainian political prisoner Stanislav Klykh and captive Russian contracted soldier Viktor Ageyev have jointly appealed to the presidents of Russia and Ukraine via a video clip recorded in Kyiv . Svetlana Ageyeva was allowed to visit her son after SvetLana
 About 40 Ukrainians were detained in Italy in 2014-2016 on suspicion of migrant smuggling, Ukraine's Ministry of Foreign Affairs says .
 The Kyivan-Rus Prince Volodymyr made a choice that would change the path of eastern Slavic history forever . He made a decision that would changed the path.
 Today, the Slavic Orthodox Christian world celebrates the day of baptism of the Kyivian-Rus .
 Mikheil Saakashvili, former President of Georgia and current political opponent of Ukrainian President Poroshenko, was stripped of Ukrainian citizenship in July 2017 . He is the current political opponents of Ukraine's president .
 Saakashvili applied for asylum in the USA, where he is currently on a visit . The timing was chosen to make him apply for asylum .
 Former Georgian politician was invited to boost Ukraine’s reform efforts on the invitation of Poroshenko . Poroshenko, his classmate from university times in Kyiv, lost his Georgian citizenship in 2015 .
Saakashvili’s recent move is redolent of the selective justice and abuse of law from the authoritarian times of Yanukovych .
 Former Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili has suggested the revocation of his earlier Ukrainian citizenship was a result of two oligarchs&nbsp;uniting against him . He has suggested to the BBC that the revocation was due to his earlier obtained Ukrainian citizenship .
 The Prosecutor General's Office of Ukraine has turned down Georgia&rsquo's request to extradite Mikheil Saakashvili in March 2015 . It deemed criminal cases against him against him politically motivated, according to a PGO document .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has signed a law allowing for Russia to keep its air base in Syria for another 49 years . The law allows for the country to keep the base for more than 50 years .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has endorsed a bill ratifying a protocol to the 2015 agreement between Moscow and Damascus regulating the deployment of the Russian Air Force in Syria for 49 years .
 U.S.-backed Syrian fighters have captured almost half of the Islamic State group’s de facto capital of Raqqa . But the push into the city in northern Syria has slowed due to stiff resistance and large amounts of explosives planted by the extremists .
 The Trump administration is seeking to force Iran to let in IAEA inspectors to military sites . The U.S. intelligence community believes the Islamic Republic may be cheating on a deal .
 DNA is painting a more detailed portrait of the ancient Canaanites . The Canaanites have largely been studied through secondhand accounts of their contemporaries .
 A joint U.S. and Afghan military operation in Afghanistan’s eastern Paktika province killed two al-Qaida-linked leaders . A third, a government official says, led to the capture of a third .
 It is not immediately clear whether the ballistic missile was an intercontinental one . But it is not clear whether it was a ballistic missile.
 Japan’s prime minister says North Korea has fired what is believed to be a missile . The missile may have landed in the sea off Japan .
 The U.S. detected a ballistic missile launch out of North Korea at approximately 10:45 am . The United States detected a missile launch from North Korea .
 South Koreans are fully aware that their efforts to build a modern society and economy are constantly at risk of being turned into rubble . North Korea is as close as North Korea and as far away as Washington .
 The very idea of North Korea losing at war to bitter enemies United States will leave a nuke-nut Kim raging . But photos of that very event unfolding have been revealed in colour .
 China’s Foreign Ministry says countries outside of the region should not stir up trouble in the South China Sea . Britain said it planned to send a warship to the area next year .
 Vietnam’s foreign minister has asked his Indonesian counterpart to investigate and clarify reports that the Indonesian navy shot and wounded two Vietnamese fishermen in the South China Sea . The foreign ministry said Friday .
 Many point to unromantic 20-somethings and women’s entry into the workforce . But an overlooked factor is the trouble young men have in finding steady, well-paid jobs .
 Croatia's moderate government is currently the West's strongest ally against Russian expansion in the Balkans . Croatia is the West’s strongest ally in the region. Croatia is also the country's most populous country .
 A new book takes a searching look at what Russia is up to &ndash; and what it is not &dash; in Southeast Europe .
 Bechev ends this absorbing book, which takes in Greece, Cyprus and Turkey as well, by insisting that what we are not seeing in the Balkans is a return to an old-style Russian empire .
 Russia is bent on interfering with Western plans with the region, he says . He says it is not recreating satellite states there as some form of revenge for the loss of the old Soviet bloc .
 For all its significant leverage over energy, it lacks the economic muscle to draw any of these states fully into its orbit . The U.S. lacks any kind of state ‘model’ to export beyond vague appeals to national conservatism .
 The author closes by dismissing the notion Moscow is somehow responsible for the region’s undoubted problems .
 At first glance, the recent G-20 summit in Hamburg may have seemed little more than another expensive and pointless diplomatic exercise .
 Italy hopes to have a freer hand in stemming a rising tide of migrants . Libya has asked Italy to operate in its waters .
 All demonstrations that ‘might disturb the electoral process’ have been outlawed ahead of President Nicolas Maduro’s vote on delegates to rewrite the constitution .
 The opposition is boycotting a vote that could undermine the country’s institutions . The opposition says it will not allow the vote .
Lykke’s formula is directly or indirectly influenced by Lykke's formula . Nearly every single strategic document the U.S. military generates is directly influenced by the formula .
 As the circumstances of international politics have changed, the strategic and operational utility of overseas bases deserves renewed scrutiny . The circumstances of the international politics are changing, and with new innovations in technology, it needs renewed scrutiny.
 The U.S. Defense Department needs to make its use of RPA use “more economical, efficient’ and “effective,” says Vago Muradian . Muradian says RPA can be used to improve technology, organization and acquisition .
 The Air Force's top general wants to network all its assets together in a massive battlefield picture .
 Missile experts at Lockheed Martin Corp. and Raytheon Co. are upgrading the Javelin anti-tank missile system to enhance the system’s mobility .
 Senator advocates first building sensor layer, Senate appropriators back NextGen ATM and NASA’s Mars-bound rocket .
Consumer drones could cause more damage than bird strikes in aerial collisions . Testing reveals consumer drones are more likely to cause damage than birds strikes .
 The more America makes foreign nations feel squeezed, insecure, belittled, and even bullied, the more they are likely to turn to a “strong man,” authoritarian, figure .
 By-and-large we prefer butter to guns but will choose guns if we feel threatened . We prefer guns to butter, but will prefer guns if threatened .
 Vladimir Putin’s decade-long media campaign turned Russians against Ukrainians and Ukraine itself before he annexed Crimea in 2014 .
 Keith Alexander outlined his vision for defending the nation in cyberspace . Alexander's vision is to protect the nation from the threat of cyberattacks .
 FBI Cyber Division agent Tom Grasso says only way to dismantle botnet operation is through cooperation with the private sector and citizens .
 It freezes certain Russian officials’ access to the stashes they were keeping in Western banks and real estate . It bans their entry to the United States and bans them from entering the U.S.
 Russian officials keep talking about adoption in the same breath because of how the Russian side retaliated to the Magnitsky Act in 2012 . The Russian side banned adoptions of Russian children from the United States .
 The Russians vowed they were punishing Americans who violated the human rights of Russians . An adopted Russian toddler died of heat stroke in a Virginia family's car .
 The only Americans the bill directly targeted were the ones involved in putting the Magnitsky Act together .
 It can tell us something about what may have happened during the 2016 campaign . It can also tell us about what might have happened in the campaign .
 The Senate Judiciary Committee held a hearing on Wednesday . The hearing was called by the Senate Judiciary committee .
 It was an extraordinarily important hearing, despite the fact that it occurred in a near vacuum . The hearing was a very important hearing .
 Browder was the founder and CEO of Hermitage Capital Management . The hedge fund was looted of $230 million by kleptocrats allied with Vladimir Putin in the largest case of tax fraud in Russian history .
 Browder and his firm were hauled into court by the Putin regime on a number of trumped up charges .
 The company lawyer who discovered the massive pillaging was a guy named Sergei Magnitsky . He was arrested and ‘died in custody,’ he was arrested . The all-purpose fig-leaf was used by corrupt cops from Moscow to Chicago .
 President Barack Obama signed the Magnitsky Act in 2012 . It prohibits anyone who was suspected of being involved in the death from entering the U.S. and denied them the use of any American bank .
 In response, Putin cut off the adoption of Russian children by U.S. families . Russian children were adopted by American families .
 Browder came to the hearing with two extremely large bodyguards, and with quite a tale to tell . The hearing was held in New York City .
 Donald Trump Jr. took a meeting explicitly pitched as being “part of a Russian government’s effort to aid Trump’'s 2016 presidential campaign . The clearest evidence to date confirming the Trump-Russia collusion story is anything but a hoax, as President Trump likes to tweet
 The president’s son, his son-in-law Jared Kushner, and his campaign manager Paulafort had significant contacts with Russians directly linked to the officials in Putin's orbit . Those interactions in fact evidence the very acts of coordination, collaboration and collusion between the Trump campaign and the
 The level of candor and raging frustration Scaramucci expressed yet again stunned a Washington political class that has become increasingly inured to this White House .
 Derek Harvey, a retired Army colonel and hard-liner on Iran, was removed after complaints about his management style . Harvey was a hard-liners on Iran .
 The attorney for a House IT staffer arrested this week fired back at the feds in an interview with Fox News . He also speculates that the bank fraud count he faces could be a "placeholder" for more charges .