 In any case it was United States funded and orchestrated overthrow of a democratically elected president . The United States is responsible for the overthrow of the democratically elected President .
 If it looks like a war, it's probably a war and the war in Ukraine started in 2014 . Western media does not wish to report it to conceal their own ongoing complicity in it .
 So-called “Peaceful Ukraine,’ was anything but peaceful in that region . The citizenry did not accept the American appointed presidents following the coup overthrowing former President Viktor Yanukovych .
 The inherent right of self-defence, individually or collectively, exists so long as the Security Council has not taken measures to “maintain international peace and security,” and thus Putin’s armed intervention is protected by international law .
Western nations should place a moratorium on weapons to Ukraine to provide a face-saving reason to negotiate with Putin . NATO should back off from the borders of Russia to pre-1991 positions, according to a report .
 All sanctions should be dropped against Russia as a Confidence Building Measure to help return friendly relations between nations as stated in the UN Charter .
 This is unlikely to happen due to global extreme news censorship imposed primarily by the United States and allied western nations . This is the only way to secure peace with self-determination and dignity for the region and world .
 Alternative scenarios all end with catastrophic results up to and including thermonuclear war . It could be the result of a nuclear war .
 This is the second illegal war in which Joseph Biden played a key role in igniting, with the first being the Iraq War . This incidentally, is the first illegal war that Joseph Biden was involved in .
 This case is substantially different because of the threat of nuclear war and potential containment breeches in the 30+ American B SL-3 and/or BSL-4 laboratories located in Ukraine . This case has been compared to that of the 30-year-old American BSL3 and
 The U.S. has tried to prevent the Biological Weapons Convention from establishing a checking mechanism . It is now clear why the United States has, for four decades, tried to stop the Convention from being established .
 U.S. WMD in Ukraine is accused of violation of BWC in Ukraine . Robert Pope's Admission of United States violation of U.
 President Biden has called the Russian invasion “unprovoked,’ but that is far from the truth, says Davies .
 In the four days leading up to the invasion, ceasefire monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe documented a dangerous increase in ceasefire violations in Eastern Ukraine . 5,667 violations and 4,093 explosions were recorded, according to the monitors .
 His military record and ability to maintain central authority for twenty-five years was exemplary . He was exemplary.
 It is unlikely Putin would be object to the comparison, even if both were provoked into war by ruthless invading barbarians .
 An explanation must be offered for what was really going on in Ukrainian laboratories working with highly dangerous pathogens . An explanation is needed for what's going on.
 That is the line relentlessly sold on MSM versions of news 24/7 around the world . The line relentlessly sells on the MSM version of news.
 A closer examination of the facts leading to this current escalated state of armed conflict in Ukraine reveals an altogether different set circumstance . Most people with a moral mind would find nearly impossible to believe unless they’ve studied the exceedingly long and bloody histories of American foreign aggression .
 America’s Deadliest Export: Democracy, and Killing Hope: The U.S. Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II .
 U.S. worked very hard to pick a fight between Ukraine and Russia launched by a coup against Ukraine’s former president Viktor Yanukovych . This time the United States moved in as a friend to Ukraine .
 Adding insult to injury those "guests" then go about murdering your brothers and sisters, nieces and nephews, sons and daughters that object to the activities of this ultimately horrid guest .
 The United States intentionally provoked Ukraine’s northern neighbor and friends in Russia in many ways . The U.S. is “only’ providing weapons, money, paid mercenaries, highly sophisticated intelligence and unrivaled mass media support to the “friends” they betrayed
 The U.S. role of the United States in the current escalated military violence in Ukraine is not an overstatement at all, but rather the shortest, simplest and most accurate description possible .
 The U.S. has a great deal of experience at setting up these bloody and destructive “color revolutions,” which in all cases are profitable only to EuroAmerican “defense’s industries . The United States then determines who will be the next leaders of those countries
 "Austerity" means poverty, degradation and brutal suppression of any dissent. Goodbye dad, welcome American puppet president, and increased ‘austerity’
 The puppet president is then free to play “foot-loose and fancy free’ with the local citizenry, while murdering off any and all who object to this sickening scenario .
 In the case of Ukraine, those objecting were and still are scattered around the country, but mostly concentrated in the Donbass region . The current escalated phase of the violent military conflict really began back in 2014 .
 Russia attacked ‘peaceful Ukraine’ is as far from truth as “far from the truth’ can possibly be because 13,000 men, women and children are a lot of people to kill .
 Many are the children in Donbass, Donetsk and Luhansk towns especially who grew up entirely living in underground bomb shelters . Nobody knew when or where the next missiles and bombs would hit .
 The U.S. corporate controlled “news’s’ coverage of Ukraine in the past was often referred to the region as a “break-away state,” implying a certain treachery on their part for abandoning their “beloved” nation of
 The U.S. biological ‘research’ centers are located in a place like Ukraine . Much of that work is so dangerous due to the possibility of leaks the United States didn’t want it done at home .
 The world's deadliest pathogens can pass through any border undetected making them as or more dangerous as a nuclear bomb, or many nuclear bombs .
 The U.S. is concerned that Russian forces might seize them, says Victoria Nuland . The State Department confirmed this ‘discredited story’
 Nuland wasn't the only U.S. official to admit the United States had a deadly, highly infectious pathogens that could be used as biological weapons . The United States may still have deadly pathogens, and probably still has deadly pathogens .
 Hunter Biden helped secure millions of dollars in funding for U.S. contractors in Ukraine specializing in deadly pathogen research . His laptop emails raise more questions about the disgraced son of then vice president Biden .
 Roberta Flack: These are certainly ‘tryin’ times, as noted by bluesy R&B singer Robert a Flack .
 The reader is invited to read the rest of this document and appreciate the cleverness, deadliness and ultimate selfishness of U.S. foreign policy . With that as an introduction to the eight-year American duplicitous treachery involved in the horrifically bloody conflict in Ukraine
 As a nation it deserves recognition by other states, self-determination and security including safe borders . The U.S. should also be recognized by other countries, including the United States .
 The same is true for Russia, and based on its historical uniqueness and current political situation, Donbass as well . It is based on the historical uniqueness of the country .
 There is a "longish" section in this article proving beyond any doubt that armed invasion was provoked “in extremis,’ what Russia or any nation, especially a super-power, would consider a life and death threat .
 The questions that follow in this document substantiate those beliefs and also prove motive, intent, methods, and opportunities for President Biden to essentially start another war . This time in Ukraine, this time in the Ukraine, is the first time Biden has been in Ukraine .
 President Biden is invited to consider the questions for President Biden listed on this document . The referenced evidence supports the relevance of those questions, and President Biden's answers .
 Ukrainian national guardsmen reportedly fired their weapons as they tried to close a polling station in Krasnoarmeisk, killing an unspecified number of people, according to American news sources .
 Lugansk and Donetsk were on the losing side of a civil war initiated by Kiev . They strongly objected to an American backed coup against Ukraine’s former President Viktor Yanukovych .
War is so profitable for the U.S. and western Europe’s ultra-rich corporate capitalists and the politicians they can so easily afford to put in office . But, alas, this will probably never happen because war is so lucrative for the United States and Western Europe .
 U.S. and relevant international prosecutors will start the process to prosecute the real progenitors of this war . Ukraine's war has killed more than a million Ukrainians . The war is being waged by NATO, former President Obama, President Biden and other politicians .
 Then Senator Biden’s key role in starting the Iraq War . Then Biden was chair of the Senate committee on foreign relations .
 His role in bringing about that war remains mostly unknown or misunderstood by the public . But his role in the war is mostly unknown and misunderstood.
 When the war was debated and then authorized by the U.S. Congress in 2002, Democrats controlled the Senate . Biden was chair of the Senate committee on foreign relations .
 American intelligence American “intelligence’ has become only another adjunct, an echo chamber in the U.S. socalled Defense Department and presidents . Please read the link provided on 2.
 The vast majority of Americans and people worldwide have no idea how much their news is heavily censored by the U.S. government .
 NATO jets conducted 2,300 sorties, dropping 420,000 missiles and bombs, including cluster munitions and depleted uranium rounds . In 78 days, NATO jets carried out 2, 300 sorties and dropped 2,000 sorties .
 President Trump for example sold the “China virus’s lie, and now President Biden has sold ‘the war that Russia started in Ukraine’ lie .
 I've been saying we should go in on the ground, we should announce there’s gonna be American casualties . I’ve been saying that we should do so, but now we’re going to do so. I'm not saying that, but that’
 Hunter Biden’s Ukraine salary was cut two months after Joe Biden left office . The Ukrainian energy company that was paying him $1 million a year cut his monthly compensation in half two months .
 On might consider this concealing or destroying evidence, a form of obstruction of justice . On may consider this conceal or destroy evidence .
 US-NATO Installed a Neo-Nazi Government in Ukraine by Prof Michel Chossudovsky Global Research . First published by Global Research on March 6, 2014 .
 US-EU-NATO sponsored coup d’etat in blatant violation of international law. What is a stake is a US- EU-NATo sponsored coupd'etat.
 The West has engineered -through a carefully staged covert operation -- the formation of a proxy regime integrated by Neo-Nazis . The forbidden truth is that the West has orchestrated a covert operation .
 It has been excluded from the dictionary of mainstream media commentary . It is the first time it has been included in a mainstream media dictionary .
 Journalists told not to use the term “Neo-Nazi’s’ to designate Svoboda and the Right Sector .
 The Coalition Government is not dealing with a transitional government in which NeoNazi elements integrate the fringe of the coalition, formally led by the Fatherland party .
 He is referred to by the Western media as the ‘kommandant’ of the EuroMaidan movement . He is called the “komm andant” of the European Movement .
 Dmytro Bulatov, known for his alleged kidnapping by police, was appointed minister of youth and sports . He was also known for UNA-UNSO connections, but also had connections with UNA.
 The Lustration Committee is to organize the Neo-Nazi witch-hunt against all opponents of the new regime .
 The targets of the lustration campaign are people in positions of authority within the civil service, regional and municipal governments, education, research, and research .
 It will in all likelihood be directed against Communists, Russians, Russians and members of the Jewish community .
 It should be understood, however, that the Neo-Nazis do not ultimately call the shots . It should also be understood that the neo-Nazis are not ultimately calling the shots.
 The composition of the Cabinet broadly coincides with the U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland’s ‘recommendations’ contained in the leaked telephone call to the United States ambassador to Ukraine .
 It would call on States to ensure that education systems develop the necessary content to provide accurate accounts of history, as well as promote tolerance and other human rights principles .
Censorship of news from foreign and domestic news sources challenging government dictums on the Ukraine War 21 . Censorship is based on news from abroad and domestic sources.
 Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Victoria Nuland admits to U.S. research on deadly pathogens in Ukraine .
 Russian Ministry of Defence presented new evidence that Ukraine was involved in bioweapon research . President Joe Biden’s son, Hunter, funded the Pentagon’'s military biological programme in Ukraine via the investment fund Rosemont Seneca .
 Karen Kwiatkowski is a former analyst for the U.S. Department of Defence . She worked for the United States Department of Defense .
 A 2010 BioPrepWatch article preserved in web archives and the U.S. Armed Forces' Counterproliferation Centre confirmed that America had maintained bioresearch cooperation with Kiev since 2005 .
 At least 31 laboratories across 14 settlements are suspected of being involved in US-funded military biological activities . The laboratories are believed to have been involved in the US- funded military activities .
 Metabiota and Black & Veatch are known as major supplies of equipment for Pentagon biolaboratories around the world . The MoD specifies the equipment used in the Pentagon .
 The Lugar Center in Georgia, the Ukrainian Ministry of Health and associated centers and institutes, and teh Ukrainian Defence Ministry's epidemiological departments are shown to the Lugar center in Georgia .
Major mainstream sources are likely to suppress the story as major U.S. defence contractors are heavily investing in American mainstream media . Russian Defence Ministry is likely to deny the story .
 The former Pentagon analyst notes that 90% of U.S. mainstream media personalities are politically Democrats . It makes it almost impossible that they would attack Democrats, he says .
 He recalled that he was the first one to blow the whistle that the anthrax attacks of October 2001 came out of the US Biological Warfare Weapons Lab and programme .
 Russian forces discovered US-operated biolabs in Ukraine carrying out dangerous pathogen research . Russian forces also found US- operated biolab in the country .
 Washington initially tried to deny their existence, but later confirmed it . They later claimed the labs’ activities were unremarkable .
 The Russian Ministry of Defense revealed new documents on Thursday that had been seized by Russian forces in eastern Ukraine . The documents include correspondences between Hunter Biden the son of U.S. President Joe Biden and figures involved in biological research in Ukraine .
 The documents revealed an intent to create a "Central Depository of Especially Dangerous Microorganisms in Kiev," according to Russian MoD spokesperson Maj. Maj. Major: "The documents reveal an intent for a central depository in Kiev"
 Igor Konashenkov, as well as ways to distribute biological agents via drone, has been involved in distributing biological agents through drone . He has also been involved with distributing biological agent via drone .
 Robert Pope Pope was deputy director of operations, readiness and exercises at the DTRA from 2017 until 2020 . Pope was Deputy Director of operations and readiness at theDTRA .
 He previously held various positions at U.S. Air Force European Command, United States Central Command, and the Pentagon .
 emails reveal correspondence between Pope and Ukraine’s acting health minister . Ulana Suprun went to Ukraine to participate in US-backed coup in 2014 .
 He led the Department of Defense’s program to develop capabilities to detect, locate and neutralize foreign WMD and improvised explosive devices . He also led the department's program to detect and locate WMD.
 Williams also served as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Nonproliferation at the U.S. Department of Energy .
 Joanna Wintrol headed DTRA projects in Ukraine until 2021 at the United States Embassy in Kiev’s Defense Threat Reduction Office .
 MoD emails reveal she supervised experiments with deadly pathogens in Ukraine . The UP-4 Project, described as a “risk assessment of particularly dangerous pathogens transmitted by birds in Ukraine during migration’s migration.
 Previously released documents showed she also oversaw Project P-782, conducting research into the transmission of diseases through bats .
 CSE was formerly known as Chemical Weapons Elimination program and the Chemical Weapons Destruction program . CSE is now known as CSE.
 The effort “started in 1992 to build the capacity of the states of the Former Soviet Union to reduce the threat from chemical weapons,’s agency says . The agency says the effort is aimed at eliminating CW stockpiles, chemical research capabilities and production facilities .
 He has been with the company since 1978 and was formerly its Chief Operating Officer . He was formerly the company's Chief operating Officer .
 Black & Veatch was long known to be working on Pentagon projects in Ukraine . But documents seized by Russian forces earlier this month revealed the firm’s job in overseeing biological programs .
 Lance Lippencott has been the project manager in Ukraine for Black & Veatch since 2011 and its biological project coordinator since 2011 . He has been a project manager for the company since 2011.
 In August 2021, he told the Kansas City Business Journal that his work on airborne biological agents in Ukraine had helped Black & Veatch develop a device for purifying air of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles .
 Lippencott is a graduate of the United States Army Military Academy at West Point . He is a senior at the U.S. Army Academy in New York .
 Another document from Lippencott to the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense concerns the extension of the UP-8 project mentioned above . Another document also concerns the extensions of theUP-8.
 Mary Guttieri was the Executive Vice President at Metabiota from 2014 until 2019 . She has a doctorate in microbiology from UMass Amherst . She was previously vice president of its Science & Technology Administration .
 In Ukraine, Guttieri was the integrator of research projects for the US biology program . He supervised the execution of biological projects related to the research of animals as vectors of disease .
 She specializes in epidemiology and pandemics and has a PhD in Public Health . She also specializes in Epidemiology andPandemics .
 There was no information in the documents about her supervising any specific biological programs in Ukraine, according to the Russian MoD . However, there is no information about her work in Ukraine .
 He previously spent 20 years in the U.S. Navy . He worked as a research microbiologist and head of the Navy's Threat Assessment Department .
 The pathogens in Ukrainian labs vary by facility, Pope says . Some can be characterized as presenting a concern in the Ukrainian environment .
 Herein lies the grand deception, another duplicitous treachery of the Euro-American empire . Herein is a grand deception of the EU .
 It cleaned house and disavowed biological and chemical weapon research . It also disavowed chemical and biological weapons research .
 The United States swooped in and collected those biological and chemical weapons, according to a U.S. official in Ukraine . Robert Pope continued that research right on Russia's doorstep .
 U.S. officials have admitted there are no bioweapons in Ukraine, while at the same United States officials have said there are, totally confident United States taxpayers and voters will swallow the lie . There are no biological weapons in American funded and operated laboratories.
 Global database of anthrax occurrences versus outbreaks ofAnthrax by country anuary 2005-August 2016 . Data digitized from ref.
 Victim nations of the US drive for hegemony in perpetuity should have a voice, and not be censored by the U.S. or anyone .
 There are always leaks from those BSL-4 labs, says Bardhan, Bangladesh PAHO.org .
 Soutnik News claims that BSL labs in Ukraine contain biological weapons . Robert Pope's own words have been confirmed by Robert Pope .
 The Bulletin’s Board of Sponsors was established in December 1948 by Albert Einstein . J Robert Oppenheimer was its first chair .
 Members of the Board of Sponsors are recruited by their peers from the world’s most accomplished science and security leaders to reinforce the importance of the Bulletin's activities .
 The U.S. funded and operated BSL in Ukraine, according to the United States . This confirms that BSL did indeed have what could be and naturally would be viewed as biological weapons . The United States denials of having those weapons are categorically false .
 Wintrol’s published confession makes two of the top three U.S. officials admitting to and confirming Russian allegations about Ukraine having biological pathogens that could be weaponized .
Employees of biological laboratories in Ukraine destroyed especially dangerous pathogens . The Russian Ministry of Defense says the laboratories were destroyed .
 Among them were the causative agents of plague, anthrax, tularemia, cholera and other deadly diseases .
 An agreement on joint biological activities was concluded between the Pentagon and the Ministry of Health of Ukraine .
 The real recipient of the funds was the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense . But the real recipient was the laboratories of the Ukrainian Defense Ministry .
 It's too bad it required a military intervention by Russia for U.S. security officials to destroy those deadly pathogens as it should have done decades ago, if indeed they did .
 DTRA allocated $80 million for biological research in Ukraine as of July 30, 2020 .
 United States company Black & Veatch Special Projects Corp. was tasked with the program . The company is based in the United States .
 There are issues involving destroying evidence, witness tampering, obstructing justice and so on . There are also issues involving destruction of evidence and witness tampering .
 Thousands of U.S. soldiers and civil servants have lost their lives in the War on Terror .
 The U.S. government claims to stand against terror, but this same government refuses to acknowledge its role in creating a deadly international quagmire .
 CIA Handouts That Rocked the World sets the record straight by laying the blame on high-ranking U.S. officials .
 During the 1980s, the CIA recruited and trained Muslim operatives to fight the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan .
 The CIA would move operatives from Afghanistan to the Balkans, and then to Iraq, Libya, and Syria, traveling on illegal US visas . Later, those operatives would move from the Balkans to Iraq and Libya .
 The author visited a United States designed Talban training madrassa near Islamabad in November 1993 while working as a journalist . There is also former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's very open public support for the internationally recognized LTTE terrorist group .
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1 . The Senate, House and House will vote on the bill .
 White supremacists and other far-right-wing extremists are the most significant domestic terrorism threat facing the U.S. White supremacists are most significant threat facing United States .
 Funding American terrorist groups (like the CIA and other American neo-Nazi groups) is quite OK — no problem, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Funding U.S. terrorist groups like the CIA, other neo-Nazis is OK .
 The U.S. and EU governments have been providing funding and weapons to Ukrainian neo-Nazi groups for years . The groups have been doing this for years, but may pass this threshold .
 U.S. officials appear to have earned themselves potential life sentences in federal prisons . Why right on his border unless they are there as a threat or weapon? Why not?
Corporate controlled mainstream media will censor the whole illegal biolabs story to ensure the voting public never hears about until years in the future, jf civilization as we know it survives that long .
 Karen U. Kwiatkowski and Michael Springmann have launched previous unjust and illegal wars . U.S. State Dept. of State official and diplomat Springmann has been involved in previous unjust wars .
 sputniknews.com has been accused of Russian propaganda . But fact checking their sources proves it to be 100% accurate at least .
 Credibility issues regarding Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons . There has never been a credible international body to regulate the development of potential dual-use biological pathogens and chemical weapons .
 BWC states-parties had been meeting since 1995 under a body known as the Ad Hoc Group to negotiate the protocol . BWC outlaws biological weapons but does not contain verification measures .
 The BWC Protocol was not designed to be capable of detecting violations with a level of confidence comparable to that of verification systems for treaties controlling nuclear or chemical arms . Because of these dual-use dilemmas, the BWC protocol was not able to detect violations .
 The Protocol was to provide greater information about, and access to, dual-capable facilities and activities that could potentially be misdirected for BW purposes . The primary aim of the Protocol is to provide more information about the Protocol .
 increased transparency was believed to provide a useful deterrent by complicating any efforts of countries attempting to defraud their BWC obligations . Such increased transparency is thought to provide an effective deterrent to countries trying to defraude BWC.
 The U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency has done all three in hundreds of secretive labs around the world without external monitoring of any kind .
 That is prima facie evidence of saturation corruption at the highest levels of the U.S. government. That is first evidence of corruption in the United States .
 World War III will be too late, but it won't change their minds, says CNN.com .
 It was home to nomadic peoples and farmers only moved south with great difficulty . It's home tonomadic peoples.
 After the Mongol invasion in the 13th century, the Wild Fields was a dangerous place to find yourself . The Wild Fields is a dangerous area for people.
 It was then that many of the cities without which it is impossible to imagine today’s Donbass were founded .
 In 1869, the British industrialist John Hughes built a factory around which the village of Yuzovka grew . It had a few more names, including Stalino, before a local man renamed it Donetsk .
 Coal deposits and increasing factories formed the unique ‘face’ of the region .
 The region was inhabited by several streams of colonists from Russia and Ukraine . Its population was very diverse, but its peoples mixed easily due to the proximity of their languages .
 Central Rada in Kiev declared Ukraine autonomous, before making a declaration of independence after the October Revolution .
 The Rada made broad territorial claims, which included the territory of Donbass .
 The Rada did not exercise any authority over most of these territories, and it soon was quarreling with the Provisional Government in Petrograd .
 Russian officers considered the Rada a lesser evil than the Reds, actively participated . In Kiev, the Communist uprising was suppressed, and Russian officers, who considered it a lesserevil, actively participate .
 Its center was Kharkov, a large industrial city that was not part of the Donetsk Basin region but closely tied to it . The city is located in the Donetsk basin region .
 Although the area was administratively divided into three entities, they had a common economy and interests .
Local councils in the east of Ukraine announced the unification of the Donbass and Krivbass coal basins . The Rada was in session when the unification was announced .
 It also included cities belonging to the region of the Don Cossack Army, such as Mariupol and Krivoy Rog .
 Ukraine’s independence projects were of no interest to it creators. Moreover, Ukraine's independence projects had no interest.
 This whole district has its own completely independent fundamental importance for Russia and lives a separate life .
 The administrative subordination of the Kharkov district to Kiev is not called for by anything at all, but on the contrary, does not correspond with reality .
 Putin is afraid of a free peaceful Ukraine, competing in a fair election, his own people, and the free press, he says . Putin is not interested in a free Ukraine, but he is worried about a free Ukrainian election .
 96% of voters in the neighboring province of Luhansk voted for independence . They also claim that 96% in the neighbouring province of Lhansk vote for independence. They also say 96% voted forindependence in neighboring province.
 Donetsk is Ukraine’s most populous province, home to a tenth of the population . Donetsk is the country's most populated province .
 Time.com reported voters were killed by Ukrainian national guardsmen for trying to achieve the independence they believe they deserve owing to a history of independence . The coup they believe was orchestrated by the United States.
 Americans and Western Europeans are ready to kill someone that provides a convenient target right now . Call it “displacement,’ that is transferring anger from one person, event or object to another, says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Trump brilliantly turned that anger on China with his “China virus’s lie.” lie.
 This is different because it's the world’s premier colonial power picking the fight, instead of the colonized . This is a different because of the world's premier Colonial power picking a fight, rather than colonized.
 Article 51 states that sovereign nations may fend off an armed attack until the Security Council has adopted measures under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter . This concept has been used to mitigate the lack of definition provided by Article 51 of the Charter of the UN .
 The Iraq War, promoted by then Senator Biden, was “legally justified’ by the Doctrine of Preemption, even though there was no proof . There was no evidence that the war was justified .
 For centuries international law recognized that nations need not suffer an attack before they can lawfully take action to defend themselves against forces that present an imminent danger of attack . For centuries, international law recognizes that nations must not suffer a attack before taking action .
 Legal scholars and international jurists often condition the legitimacy of preemption on the existence of an imminent threat . Most often a visible mobilization of armies, navies, and air forces preparing to attack .
 We must adapt the concept of imminent threat to the capabilities and objectives of today's adversaries, says the U.S. President .
 The United States has long maintained the option of preemptive actions to counter a sufficient threat to our national security . The U.S. has maintained that preemptive action is necessary .
 The greater the threat, the greater is the greater the risk of inaction, the more compelling the case for taking anticipatory action to defend ourselves, says author .
 To forestall or prevent such hostile acts by its adversaries, the State will, if necessary, act preemptively, says the U.S.
 In the case of the Iraq war to which he was referring there was no proof, he said there was 'no proof' in the case .
 In the case of the Ukraine War, overwhelming proof does exist regarding American/NATO buildup for war against Russia . The U.S. has been criticized by Russia for its actions in Ukraine .
 Euro-American military forces’ relentless movement east after 1991 in violation of numerous agreements, especially in Ukraine . Imminent threat is all too easily proven by Euro- American military forces.
Imminent threat is established by Victoria Nuland’s admissions regarding American biological ‘research’ and destroying evidence right on Russia's border . The threat is being established by the Russian government .
 That one single admission alone, legally justifies the Russian invasion of Ukraine . That one admission alone is legally justified, says the author .
 Biological weapons can be just as dangerous as nuclear weapons, or more dangerous than nuclear weapons . Biological weapons are just as deadly as nukes .
 Actual and imminent threat refers to a physical danger that is real, would occur within an immediate time frame, and could result in death or serious bodily harm .
 The duration of the risk, the nature and severity of the potential harm, and the length of time before the possible harm would occur . The duration, the severity and length of the harm, the likelihood that the potential harms will occur, the risk and the duration of
 An inciter is generally one who is present at the scene of the offense and encourages the principal offender to commit an act he is already inclined to commit on his own .
You did not cook up the plan for this international crime syndicate yourself, please be so kind as to share the name of the individuals and/or group that proposed this scheme .
 U.S. media and foreign policy hardliners want to create a new Afghanistan in the middle of Europe by flooding Ukraine with weapons .
 Photographic evidence shows that these weapons have already ended up in the hands of neo-Nazi paramilitaries . units which have already received training and arms from the United States and its NATO allies .
 Many are fleeing back across the Polish border, filled with fear in the face of heavy casualties . Many are now fleeing back to Poland .
 The Ukrainian army has been accused of being the "real fascists" in Ukraine . The group has been trying to spin the unit as heroic defenders of Ukraine against the alleged fascists .
 The latest wave of the lionization of Azov began sometime before the Russian military operation . notorious was the much-publicized image of an AK-47-wielding Ukrainian granny training to repel invaders in the regiment's camp .
 The last week of March saw the puff pieces come in a tight group, like the bullet holes after an AK burst .
 Ros Atkins sought to debunk Russian ‘untruths’ about Nazis in Ukraine . The first of the bunch was a ten-minute video, from Britain’s statebroadcaster BBC .
 The FT acknowledges that Azov was created in 2014 “by volunteers with nationalist and often far-right political leanings,’ the FT shrugs off its Nazi connections .
 Azov founder Andriy Biletsky told another outlet back in 2014 . The symbols themselves were picked out by the notorious white supremacist, he himself said .
 Azov has a “history of neo-Nazi leanings, which have not been entirely extinguished by its integration into the Ukrainian military,” check. Azov is “an effective fighting force,’ check.
 Azov’s political wing only won 2.15% of the vote in 2019 — quoting a German researcher this time .
 The story opens with the emotional description of a funeral for an Azov soldier killed in the fighting outside of Kiev . The story is based on the funeral for a soldier killed outside of the Kiev city .
 Azov members are apparently good at sticking to the message, and knowing their audience and which buttons to push . As an aside, AzovMembers are apparently really good at keeping the message .
 The Times article repeatedly mentions their praise of the British NLAW anti-tank rockets . For example, the Times piece repeatedly mentions the UK's anti- tank rockets .
 Azov got in the West before 2022. Contrast this to some of the coverage Azov received before 2022 . Some of the West's coverage of Azov in the past was in the last few years .
 In an interview after the coup, he told the magazine he picked out Azov's insignia .
 Even Bellingcat, that "open-source intelligence collective" apparently serving as a conduit for the British intelligence agenda, has raised red flags .
Militants browbeat Zelensky into not withdrawing from the Donbass as required by the Minsk agreements .
 corporate and state media in the West have run cover for a group they themselves had until recently described as extremist . This isn’t exactly the first time the corporate and State media in West have ran cover for the group .
 The U.S. did not create or support a terrorist group, it's hard to find . The United States has not created or support any terrorist group .
 Azov was absorbed into the Ukrainian National Guard in 2014 . Azov that was absorbed in 2014 was absorbed by the Ukraine National Guard .
 Russians are not so universally hated in Ukraine as western media makes it appear . Russian media make it appear that they are not universally hated .
 Western media is not reporting news objectively, only reporting views and injuries on the side of those who support the U.S. backed “neo-“ Nazi regime in Ukraine .
 Facebook Allows Praise of Neo-Nazi Ukrainian Battalion If It Fights Russian Invasion . Critics say Facebook's content moderation lacks nuance and context .
 Facebook will temporarily allow its billions of users to praise the Azov Battalion, a Ukrainian neo-Nazi military unit . Facebook previously banned from being freely discussed under the company's Dangerous Individuals and Organizations policy .
 The policy shift, made this week, is pegged to the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine and preceding military escalations .
 The Azov Battalion is known for its hardcore right-wing ultranationalism and the neo-Nazi ideology pervasive among its members . It is an armed wing of the broader Ukrainian white nationalist Azov movement .
 The footage shows multiple people, apparently Russian prisoners of war, lying on the ground .
 The injured soldiers are interrogated by armed men, many of whom are wearing blue armbands commonly used by Ukrainian units .
 Some of the wounded personnel apparently died during the interrogation. Some of them apparently died in the interrogation .
 Footage also shows three other prisoners ordered out of a van and shooting their legs at a point-blank range . The prisoners were also ordered to shoot their legs.
 The founder of the US-government funded Bellingcat has called for a “further investigation’ of the disturbing imagery . Eliot Higgins has described the incident as “very serious incident’s”
 The German and French-brokered protocols had been designed to regularize the status of those regions within the Ukrainian state . The Germanand French- Brokered protocols were designed to normalize those regions in the Ukraine .
 This therefore should not have been difficult to verify and apparently it wasn’t. This therefore shouldn't have been hard to verify .
 Video circulated on social media in which several armed Ukrainians were seen torturing and shooting captured Russian soldiers . Video prompted calls for Kiev to address the issue .
 The Ukrainian government stated that such behaviour was unacceptable and vowed to investigate the matter . Ukrainian government said that such behavior was unacceptable .
 The Russian Defence Ministry has not yet confirmed the lawmaker's claim . The Russian Defense Ministry has yet to confirm the claim .
 A video depicting several Ukrainians torturing Russian soldiers has been making the rounds online for days .
 Russian servicemen had their legs shot and were left without any medical assistance, according to the footage .
 The soldiers were captured during the special military operation that Moscow had launched in Ukraine on 24 February .
 The Russian investigative committee ordered the launch of an investigation into the incident . At least eight captured Russian soldiers were killed after being tortured .
 The committee said that it will spare no efforts to identify the perpetrators of the crime . The committee says that it has no plans to name the perpetrators .
 Azov appears to have spread its extremist approaches to war throughout the Ukraine military . Azov also enjoys the full support of Euro-American mainstream media “MSM’s’ in all of its forms, including social media .
 Facebook rules say anyone can advocate for torturing and killing any Russian anywhere simply by yelling “Ukraine’s first.’
 The USA under the leadership of President Biden has devolved into a level of depravity far below what most sane and healthy minds can conceive .
 Euro-American war fever on any side is likely to be beyond imagining . As for those caught up personally in the current Euro- American war fever, the price is likely.
 Socrates' observations about the fate of democracies devolving into populism have been proven eerily and morbidly accurate . Socrates' views on democracy have certainly been proven to be accurate .
 President Biden’s top cabinet officers in addition to members of the senate that profit from war are most certainly culpable in all of these crimes .
 Militants from Ukrainian nationalist battalions are taking humanitarian aid away from civilians in Donbass, Victoria Serdyukova, the Human Rights Commissioner of the Lugansk People's Republic .
 People come to part of the city where the humanitarian convoy will be located . The humanitarian convoy is scheduled to be located in the city of Aleppo .
 Members of nationalist battalions arrive there with weapons in their hands, and they forbid them to receive this humanitarian aid .
 Throughout early 2022, 55% of Afghans will face acute food insecurity . Nearly 9 million people will be at emergency levels, one step before famine conditions .
 Food insecurity is likely to deepen in 2022 as the country is facing shortages of food, rapidly rising food prices and an ongoing drought .
 The Nebojsa Malic article quoted above refers to an international crime syndicate and cabal . Yet this sort of criminal behavior is deemed not worthy by the “media club’s” “Media club”
 During its entire history the USA has only experienced 17 years without a war . During its whole history the U.S. has only had a war in 17 years .
 Many in the USA now admit the Vietnam War was a “mistake,’ while others assert the entire war was a War Crime . The Vietnam War is now known as a war crime .
 At least 2.38 million human beings have been killed thus far in the Iraq War . The Afghanistan War has likewise been lamented as a “mistake’s’ or a crime, as was and is the Afghanistan War .
 Ukraine only comes in at 5 ‘ place with less than half of the wheat exports of Russia but is usually listed first for some odd reason .
 Ukraine and Russia are two of the top five grain exporters in the world . Russia and Ukraine are one of the world's top grain exporter .
 The global agricultural trade involved is worth nearly $1. trillion . By some estimates, what is at stake is global food security since the trade is worth $1 trillion .
 The immediate food related effects of the conflict are being felt in Egypt, Turkey, Bangladesh, and Iran who buy more than 60 percent of their wheat from Russia and Ukraine . All of them have outstanding food imports .
 Lebanon, Tunisia, Yemen, Libya, and Pakistan also rely heavily on the two countries for their wheat supply . Pakistan also relies heavily on Libya and Lebanon for its wheat supply.
 The USA creates the real and imaginary monsters in the world just to keep enriching the already ultra-super rich who incidentally mostly don't pay taxes on that wealth .
 The U.S. is attempting to crash both Russia's and China's economies . The United States is trying to crash the economies of both countries .
 Not many Americans are crying about the human suffering in Palestine, Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Chad, Niger, Ethiopia, Somalia, Mali .
 The link here is a real-time counter the reader is invited to investigate . The link is the real time counter to the reader's story .
 It was they who fought to free African, Latin American and Asian nations from colonialism . The United States swoop in later with larger armies and install puppet governments totally subservient to the United States .
 Nations that tried to nationalize their energy natural resources were crushed and their leaders killed . Nations that try to nationalized their energy resources were killed .
 Reports are slowly starting to leak out from the hermetically sealed American political/media echo chamber . All Ukrainian civilians around the country are not all so enthralled with love for the U.S. installed neoNazi regime in Kiev .
 A million or more Ukrainians will happily take a U.S. visa to find what think will be a better life in the US . But that will not change events leading up to, and consequent from the realities on the ground in Ukraine during the past eight years .
 The inhumane acts are often attributed to nationalist and Neo-Nazi groups .
 Many reported atrocities are being committed by Ukrainian nationalists and the neo-Nazi Azov Battalion . Many are reported to have been committed by the Ukrainian nationalists .
 Civilians are tied to electric poles or trees with tape . Sometimes their faces are smeared with paint or green antiseptic dye, they are whipped and left in the cold .
 Photos of the victims and footage of the punishment are widely shared on social media networks .
 Among those targeted are the Roma people, one of Ukraine's ethnic minorities .
 One photo shows a Roma family tied to a pole with their faces painted with green dye in the city of Lvov .
 There is no evidence that these people committed crimes, nor is there any provision in Ukrainian legislation authorizing the use of such brutal methods of punishment, says the author .
 The discovery of a torture chamber in the basement of a building previously occupied by the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the village of Kryakovka, Lugansk region, tells another story .
 "Library" was located in the International Airport of Mariupol, the Donetsk region . Another infamous torture site codenamed ""Library"" was located at the airport .
 Kasonta says everyone in the West is perfectly aware of what is happening in Ukraine and how Ukrainian nationalists, the Azov Battalion, and violent mobs are treating regular citizens .
 Racism and xenophobia have long penetrated into the fabric of Ukrainian society, an analyst says .
 African students were turned back by Ukrainian border guards while attempting to cross into Poland .
 The nationalist agenda became part of the Ukrainian education system . Meanwhile, the nationalist agenda becomes part of a Ukrainian Education System .
 nationalist projects received up to half of all the funds allocated by the Ukrainian government for children's and youth organizations in 2020 alone .
 U.S. and western European voters and tax payers are being conned again, he says . The same miscreants that led us into the last war, and the one before that and so on for at least 70 years .
 Russia submitted to the US’ attempted nuclear blackmail, Washington would have immediately set its sights on China . It would have restored its declining unipolar hegemony over the planet if it subsequently succeeded .
 Moscow will decisively support its newfound Donbass allies with military means in order to ensure the security of their civilian populations . The author warned earlier this week that “Kiev Must Withdraw From Donetsk & Lugansk If It Truly Wants To Avert War’
 The United States failed to rein in its Eastern European proxy army, which prompted Russia to commence its ongoing special operation in Ukraine . The U.S. failed to regain control of the Eastern European proxies.
 Russian Ambassador to the UN Vasily Nebenzya articulated the reasons behind President Putin’s decision .
 Europe is rallying Europe to stand up to Russia's military incursion into Ukraine . It was the culminating event of a four-day trip planned at the last minute for the purpose of rallying Europe .
 Joe Biden concluded his remarks by going off-script . He was speaking before a large and enthusiastic crowd in Warsaw .
 The White House was scrambling to contain the damage done by Biden’s most recent gaffe .
 A senior Biden administration official was quoted as saying that in the aftermath of the Russian military incursion into Ukraine, “The only end game now is the end of Putin regime.’
 Russian President Vladimir Putin believes the U.S. works hard to foster regime changes around the world . McFaul says the United States is working to foster "color revolutions"
 The Russian government has long held that Western intelligence services had been using ‘democracy promotion’ as a front to organize political opposition to Putin . The goal of removing Putin from office is to remove him from office.
 MI6 used a so-called "spy rock" to communicate with its agents in Moscow . The rock was discovered by Russia of a “spyRock’s” Russia .
 Russian intelligence services were accusing the British of secretly funding Russian political opposition groups .
 Russian government first passed laws which compelled groups that receive foreign funding to register as ‘foreign agents’ before barring NGOs altogether if they were deemed to pose a threat to Russia’s constitutional order, defense or security .
 The list of banned organizations included USAID . The Obama administration withdraws from the Civil Society Working Group of the US-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission .
 William Blum was a former State Department and foreign service officer . He was one of the most respected and quoted critics of U.S. foreign policy . In many cases, the United States tried to overthrow at least 56 foreign governments .
 In none of those cases was the target nation in any way a threat to United States security, in stark contrast to the case of Ukraine and Russia . The US’s build up WMD and highly trained neo-Nazi brigades most certainly did present a provably imminent threat to
 Yemen 2014, Ukraine 2014, Turkey 2016, Venezuela 2015, Venezuela 2019, Bolivia 2019, Iran 2017 to present, Nicaragua 2018, China 2018, Cuba and Russia 2022 . Yemen 2014: Ukraine 2014*, Ukraine 2014*. Turkey 2016: Turkey 2016; Venezuela 2019: Bolivia 2019*. Iran 2017
 Palestine deserves to be on that list as it’s being rapidly and violently conquered by Israel on a day-by-day basis ever since the Nakba in 1948 .
 One can assert Israel is the aggressor, however Israel is just a cat’s paw . Saudi Arabia, other Gulf States and Egypt are among the countries that Israel is trying to conquer .
 No nation in world history ever tried to overthrow that many governments (67 at minimum) directly or via proxies . No nation ever tried the same thing, directly or through proxies .
 The most recent economic and media wars against Russia by the US by the U.S. is the third major assault by the United States on Russia . The most recently economic andMedia wars against the US are the most recent .
 The 1918 US-UK Allied invasion of Russia is a landmark in Russian History . It is often mistakenly portrayed as being part of a Civil War .
 He tried floating a proposal for NATO to back off, and was totally rebuffed . He was ridiculed for the effort, in fact ridiculed for his effort . He tried to make a proposal to get NATO back off .
 The United States does not negotiate with its target nations in its drive for hegemony in perpetuity . The U.S. does not negotiations with its targets in its bid for hegemony .
 The United States government has acted in a collusive fashion to hide evidence and silence news critical of the U.S. government’s role in the 2014 coup in Ukraine and subsequent deadly indiscriminative violence .
 Ukrainian forces bombarded Lugansk and Donetsk were not in any way careful about their targets . Russia is attempting to engage in highly targeted attacks against forces trained to attack Russia by the US .
 No one in the mainstream media, or even the alt-news has asked why Putin didn't just execute his Nazi elimination plan via primarily drones and missiles . The US has primarily pursued wars for the past 20 years .
 The answer may be that drones, missiles and bombs cause far greater civilian casualties than ground troops . Special forces tend to be much more precise in their targeting .
 President Putin acted honorably to defend innocent Lugansk and Donetsk civilians from the eight-year genocidal war in Donbass . The neo-Nazi riddled Ukrainian government acted under orders from the United States State Department .
 The highly censored corporate controlled American news does not report any of the 13,000 human beings murdered in Donbass between 2014 and 2020 in what was then “peaceful Ukraine’s” Ukraine .
 President Putin’s existential need to prevent an even greater build up of Euro-American tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces, neo-Nazi ultra-nationalist extremists, other Euro- American financed militias, and ongoing highly infectious and deadly biological pathogen “research
 Russia already had one Nazi invasion, and absolute proof of U.S. loading Ukraine with neoNazi forces, other paramilitary forces, and even the government of Ukraine was.
 No videos of children blown to bloody bits, sobbing grandparents, amputated limbs — nothing . Nothing. No videos. No video of children being blown to blood bits .
 The people of Lugansk and Donetsk were under armed attack by American trained and coordinated forces . They pleaded for assistance in self-defence from Russia which was also motivated by selfdefense .
 President Putin’s legal analysts focus on Article 51 on the UN Charter as rational for disarming Ukraine .
 The right of individual or collective self-defence under Article 51 and the collective enforcement by the Security Council on the basis of Chapter VII of the Charter .
 It was the highly illegal aggressiveness of the US, and failures within the UN that led to the escalation of armed conflict in Ukraine in February 2022 . The conflict began in February 2012 .
 Donbass region strongly objected to 2014 U.S. backed coup against the former democratically elected president of Ukraine .
 President Putin was trying to stop a war, and prevent a vastly greater biological weapons war, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: A solid fact-based case can be made that Putin's intervention in Ukraine in 2022 is a good example .
 The phrase was created to reframe the phrase “overthrow foreign governments’ to make egregious violations of international law more palatable to U.S. voters .
Airbnb says it has suspended operations in Russia and Belarus . It joins an array of Western corporate shutdowns in those two countries .
 According to media reports, the platform is not planning to return paid bills for accommodation . The platform has not yet returned paid bills.
 Money spent on bookings after the April 4 date will be converted into bonuses . Money that was spent on books after the time will be turned into bonuses.
 It is not clear how those bonuses could be used, as the service is no longer available . However, it is still unclear how the bonuses would be used .
 Blocking markets leads to greater economic isolation for those doing the blocking, as much or more than the blocked parties who simply turn elsewhere for those same products and/or services . Blocked markets lead to more economic isolation, according to experts .
 Keeping/absconding/stealing the money of those people is a violation of international law . Regular people who already paid for those services are also being punished .
Shame, shame Airbnb, and in the long run, rather poor public relations .
In the heat of a good lynching it seems highly appropriate, backed by populist demand . In the long run it will be analyzed as mob rule in just one more of the US’s bloody ruthless campaigns for global domination .
 The United States as usual presumes that the wealthy mostly white nations (plus Japan and Taiwan as a couple of token minorities) really represent the entire world . The U.S. as usual assumes that the rich mostly white countries (and Japan andTaiwan) represent the world .
 The United States laid the groundwork to hate Russians at least since the 1950s and 1960s . This is excusable because the U.S. laid a groundwork for hating Russians since my childhood in the late 1950s.
Best Of Boris And Natasha The Contest Laer. Best Of Boris and Natasha The contest Laer .
 The U.S. leans heavily upon its century of anti-Russian stereotypes to whip up a mob to lynch all Russians . Now the United States leans heavily on its century-old anti- Russian stereotypes .
 Sanctions are imposed by the U.S. and its junior partners against countries that resist their agendas . The United States and junior partners are imposing sanctions on countries who resist their agenda .
 Economic War is a weapon of Economic War, says author . Economic dislocation, chaotic hyperinflation, artificial famines, disease, and poverty are the weapon of economic War .
 In every country, the poorest and the weakest suffer the worst impact of sanctions . In all countries, infants, children, the chronically ill and the elderly are the worst affected .
 US imposed sanctions, violate international law and are a tool of regime change, US says . U.S. imposed sanctions are a 'tool of regime changes'
 They are a crime against humanity used, like military intervention, to topple popular governments and movements . They are used to topple government and movements. They are also used to overthrow popular governments, and to topple movements .
International humanitarian law posits that no person may be punished for acts that he or she did not commit . International humanitarian law says no person can be punished if they do not commit a crime .
 This is one of the fundamental guarantees established by the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols . This is a key part of the 1949 Conventions.
 The case follows a temporary change to Meta's hate speech policy that allows some Facebook and Instagram users to express violent sentiments against Russian armed forced invading Ukraine .
 Meta did not immediately respond to a request for comment from CNN Business regarding Russia's criminal investigation .
 Minsk agreements were a great idea that many nations worked together to bring to fruition . The Minsk agreement was the first of its kind .
 The tragedy of the current escalated conflict can easily be traced to that betrayal by Kiev . The tragedy can be traced by Kiev.
 The Minsk agreements were a series of international agreements which sought to end the war in the Donbas region of Ukraine .
 The first, known as the Minsk Protocol, was drafted in 2014 by the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine . It includes Ukraine, Russia, Russia and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe .
 This agreement followed multiple previous attempts to stop the fighting in the region . It aimed to implement an immediate ceasefire . The agreement followed several previous attempts.
 The war did not start with President Putin’s intervention in Ukraine, but instead stemmed from the successful United States coup staged in 2014, overthrowing elected president Yanukovych .
 The war continued until February 24 2022 when President Putin stepped in to start to end it . The war ended in February 2022 .
 The participants of the talks in Minsk agreed on a plan which focused on a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine and efforts to get the government functioning again . The participants agreed to a plan that focused on the ceasefire in east Ukraine .
 Other points of the agreement include amnesty for all those who disarm and who did not commit serious crimes . Other points include corridors for refugees, and humanitarian aid access .
 Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council chief Alexey Danilov warned that his country risks collapsing if it implements the UNSC-supported Minsk Accords .
 Ukrainian elite's self-interests and those of its foreign patrons. This position doesn't reflect reality, but the existing Ukrainian elite’s self- interests and foreign patrons .
 Washington wouldn’t have done so unless it believed at the time that this was a pragmatic means for resolving its proxy’s civil war .
 Kiev certainly has the capabilities to offset that scenario. This objective observation discredits Danilov’s fears that society will meaningfully revolt over the Minsk Accords’ full implementation .
 Even if it loses control, then that's the government's own fault and not Russia's or anyone else’s. Even if the government loses control of the country, it's not its own fault .
 If carried out to its full extent, this could lead to Ukraine’s de facto or de jure federalization . In practice, this might end up creating a Bosnian-like scenario whereby various regions achieve quasi-independence .
 That might result in the emergence of new elites who can challenge the existing ones . That might be a sign of the rise of the new elites .
 Russia, China, Turkey, and even the GCC might begin patronizing local partners in pursuit of mutual economic and/or strategic benefits . For instance, Russia, Chinese, Turkish, Russian and Turkish partners might be patronizing each other .
 There’s nothing wrong with that or inherently destabilizing about it per se, but it nevertheless threatens the USled West's current influence over Ukraine .
 Ukraine wouldn’t ‘collapse’ if the Minsk Accords were fully implemented, but it might end up with a very different administrative structure in the most extreme scenario . These five points prove that Ukraine definitely wouldn't “collapsed’
 Ukraine’s extremely deep contradictions are quickly reaching a breaking point as proven by recent events . That outcome would be disadvantageous for the country's existing elites and their US-led Western patrons but would arguably be more strategically stabilizing in the long-run .
 It remains unclear whether the detained were part of a USbacked Color Revolution plot to punish Ukraine for its very close economic ties with China .
 Danilov's prediction of a “very difficult internal situation’s ‘very difficultinternal situation” has already come to pass .
 The United States and its allies don't have any need to abide by such little things, even if the Minsk agreement did have the force of law . The U.S. and allies don’t have a need to abiding by such small things, according to
 The latest research by Redfield & Wilton Strategies finds that 47% of Americans disapprove and 37% approve of President Joe Biden’s overall job performance as President .
 Biden's net approval rating, at -10%, is eight points lower than in our polling on 23 February . 41% disapproved and 39% approved of Biden’s performance .
 The following is a graphic representation of the overall data of that survey . Redfield & Wilton Strategies survey was conducted by Redfield and Wilton.
 Nearly twice as many people strongly disapprove of Joe Biden Administration Approval Ratings and Hypothetical Voting Intention (20 March @ Strongly disapprove Don't know 2022) Eligible Voters in the United States nearly twice as much disapprove of his performance as strongly approve of it .
 By far the strongest single issue diminishing his tattered remnants of his popularity is economics . By far, the strongest issue is economics.
 Throwing an extra four billion dollars at Ukrainians to get those same Ukrainians killed in another game of thrones is wasteful at a time when inflation is also at all time highs . Throwing extra money at Ukrainians is a waste at the time of inflation and the cost of the
 The price of gasoline is one of the single most important issues for Americans . President Biden’s urgent need to overthrow President Putin and try to demolish another nation .
Raising fuel prices and other inflationary trends, and paying billions to essentially kill innocent Ukrainians and Russian solders in another unjust war probably not helping President Biden's standing .
 Americans must assume the opposite of what is reported to get any inkling of the truth, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 It should not be terribly surprising that American trust in MSM “news’ is justifiably rather low. So, it is not terribly surprising.
 comic book style sales pitches based on amplified versions of the same old lies just aren’t selling that well .
 Distortions and delusions from America's top politicians Nancy Pelosi compares Putin’s Ukraine moves to Hitler . House Speaker Nancy Pelosi compared Russian President Vladimir Putin to Nazi leader Adolf Hitler .
 Pelosi likened Putin sending Russian “peacekeeping’s troops into separatist-held areas of Ukraine to the Nazi takeover of Czechoslovakia prior to World War Il .
 The longer a debate rages, the greater the likelihood that someone will compare someone else to Hitler . The longer the debate rags, the more likely someone will be compared to Hitler.
 The former secretary of state reportedly told a private fund-raising party that Putin's actions are similar to Hitler's in the run up to World War Il .
 Clinton might have had some invisible hand behind events in Ukraine . President Biden's feverish attempts at overthrowing the government of Russia .
 She was President Obama's principal foreign policy advisor . She pushed for the disastrous and deadly so-called “Arab Spring’s” “color revolutions’ that left nothing but death and chaos behind .
 The Maidan riots in Ukraine were American funded and an emblematic example of a classic color revolution . American funded the Maidan protests in Ukraine .
 It's easy from lofty perches in DC and NY to beat the war drums that get men, women and children killed in far away lands, but not so easy to see one's own family members butchered .
 For the record it is the United States that’s funding and training neo-Nazis and sending them to Ukraine to fight against Russians .
 One of President Putin’s key goals was and remains to de-Nazify Ukraine .
 The U.S. Department of State organized the government the United States put into Ukraine and loaded it with Nazis too . The United States also loaded the government with Nazis.
 It would be fascinating to do MRI scans on people like Presidents Trump and Biden, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Hillary Clinton .
 American news censorship and laws prohibiting it are blocking Russian state-controlled media outlets in light of the Putin regime’s invasion of Ukraine .
 European Union president Ursula von der Leyen tweeted that state-owned Russia Today and Sputnik will no longer be able to spread lies to justify Putin's war .
 Multiple tech platforms have complied with the E.U.’s media ban and deplatformed, demonetized, or blocked RT and Sputnik from their services .
 CNN Business reported Thursday that RT America is effectively shutting down . The Russian-owned news network is the U.S. cable branch of the Russia-owned News network .
 “The CIA and the media are part of the same criminal conspiracy,’ wrote Douglas Valentine in his important book, The CIA As Organized Crime .
 The corporate mainstream media are stenographers for the national security state’s ongoing psychological operations aimed at the American people . They have done the same for an international audience .
 It is shocking only to those who don’t do their homework and see what is happening today outside a broad historical context .
Corporate media are now leading the charge for increased censorship and the denial of free speech to those they deem dangerous .
 Media giants want to make the quieting of dissenting voices complete . They already banned critics from writing in their pages and talking on their screens .
 Instagram's ban is an inducement to further censorship of Mr Kennedy by Facebook that owns Instagram . It is a perfect piece of propaganda posing as reporting, since it accuses Kennedy of falsity and stupidity .
 What was once done under the cover of omission is now done openly and brazenly, cheered on by those who claim to be upholders of the First Amendment and the importance of free debate in a democracy .
 Since the digitization of news, news companies are geared to different audiences . The new business models are aimed at these separate audiences .
 electronic media have replaced paper as advertising revenues have shifted . People’s ability to focus on complicated issues has diminished drastically .
 The censorship is not being driven by power hungry reporters at the Times or CNN or any media outlet, says CNN .
 All these media and their employees are but the outer layer of the onion . The means by which messages are sent and people controlled are controlled .
 If they do not play their part in this twisted and intricate propaganda game, they will suffer . If they don't play their role, they'll suffer, says one expert .
 They will be eliminated, as are pesky individuals who dare peel the onion to its core . They will also be eliminated .
 For each media company is one part of a large interconnected intelligence apparatus . The purpose is power, wealth and domination for the very few at the expense of the many .
 The NYTimes, CNN, NBC, etc. These companies are deeply connected to U.S. intelligence agencies .
Operation Mockingbird is the CIA's program to control, use, and infiltrate the media . They too are part of what was once called Operation MockingBird, the CIA’s program.
 Google and other search engines have silenced virtually all facts and opinions contrary to the United States government narrative regarding the 2014 American backed coup in Ukraine, and February 2022 acceleration of the Ukraine War .
 The Ukraine War and body count escalates daily, and the U.S. and EU continues to agitate and advocates sending more and more weapons of mass destruction to Ukraine .
 UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres has warned this conflict can end in nuclear war . Even the ordinarily very diplomatic U.S. Secretary General has warned that nuclear war can end.
 "The Great War" led to unprecedented efforts by the federal government to control and restrict “unpatriotic’s’ speech .
 The boundary between speech that undermined the government and legitimate criticism was often unclear . But the boundaries between speech and criticism were often unclear.
 This law, which is still largely in effect, makes it a crime to do three things . The law is still in effect .
 First, convey false information in order to interfere with the U.S. military, or promote the success of America's enemies . First, conveys false information to the American military .
 Phil Donahue was fired from his prime-time MSNBC talk show during the run-up to the U.S. invasion of Iraq . He was fired in 2003 .
 The U.S. occupation there now is illegal as the Iraqi government has asked them to leave, but they won’t .
 No weapons of mass destruction were found, and the whole thing was dismissed as a mistake . No weapons were found .
 Phil Donahue was never ‘rehabilitated’ for disagreeing with the US government’s decision to start war in Iraq .
 American censorship has gotten much more extreme than when Bill Blum wrote the above referenced book . Blum's book is titled, "Killing Hope"
14 people and entities were sanctioned, including a senior Russian military planner, and Sergey Brilev, a well-known Russian TV anchor .
 Those elected "representatives" have brought those "liberal democracies" to the brink of thermonuclear war . One might wonder if that is true right now .
 Censorship is not helping, and probably the primary reason those scoundrels keep getting re-elected . Censors are not helping.
 RT was banned in Ukraine in 2014 after Russia's annexation of Crimea . Latvia and Lithuania implemented similar bans in 2020 .
 e African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights e Declaration of principles on freedom of expression in Africa e Amsterdam Recommendations . Costa Rica’s e Declaration on principles offreedom of expression e African charter on human and Peoples’ Rights .
 Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe e Bishkek Declaration . The Declaration was signed by the European Union .
 Kiev government amassed up to 125,000 troops along the contact line with the Donbass republics . By December 2021, the Kiev government had amassed 125,00 troops .
 OSCE reported more frequent use of heavy weapons, prohibited under the Minsk Agreements . At the same time, Ukrainian Armed Forces against the breakaway regions used more heavy weapons .
 Published satellite images of Russian army positions show the Russian army on bases over a day's travel .
 Censored War in Donbass starting in 2014 . Western mainstream media have kept silence for years about the shelling of Donetsk and Lugansk Republics .
 Independent American and European journalists and freelance photographers have been working in the Donbass region . The Ukrainian government is fighting its own people against its own citizens .
UN: Over 13,000 have been killed in the region since the Maidan coup d'etat of February 2014 . According to the UN, over 12,000 people have died.
 Ukrainian military has intensified bombardment of the Donbass region . Children and elderly people have been evacuated from the region .
 'Ukrainian spec ops groups have been targeting evacuees leaving to Russia with mines and shells,' says Eliason .
 The U.S. openly dismissed Russia's warnings about the ongoing genocide of Russian-speakers and crimes against humanity in Eastern Ukraine .
 German Chancellor Olaf Scholz claimed at the annual Munich Security Conference on 19 February that it is "really ridiculous" to say that "there is something like genocide" in Donbass .
 coming from the German chancellor is "scandalous but expected," says Eliason . Eliason: Coming this from the chancellor is ""scandalously but expected"
 Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov stated on Thursday that Russia started a military operation to protect Donbass in order to clear the country of Nazis .
 In the wake of the 2014 Maidan coup, anumber of corporate media sources questioned the role of Ukraine neo-Nazi groups in the nation's political life . But very then it was largely scratched from the mainstream narrative .
 Many Americans are unaware of 2 May 2014 ‘pogrom’ in Odessa where roughly 50 people were burnt alive in the Trade Unions House by Ukrainian nationalists and neo-Nazis .
 The Azov Battalion, an official component of Kiev's armed forces, has a pro-Nazi ideology . The professor continued that the mainstream media has also overlooked the fact that the battalion is an official part of Kiev’s armed forces .
 The rehabilitation of neo-Nazism in Ukraine has been tolerated by successive U.S. administrations since the time of the 2005 "Orange Revolution" and continued to thrive, under George Bush, Barack Obama, and Donald Trump .
 Joseph Biden used to be Obama’s appointee in Ukraine . The administration went even further by providing tonnes of weapons and training to Ukrainian military .
During the first Cold War of condemning the Soviet Union for taking over much of Eastern Europe after the Second World War . For example, the very common practice was used to condemn the Soviet Soviet Union .
 The condemnation is misapplied if no mention is made of the fact that Eastern Europe became communist because Hitler used it as a highway to reach the Soviet Union . The Russians in World Wars | and II lost about 40 million people because the West had twice used this highway to invade Russia .
After World War II the Soviets were determined to close down the highway . It should not be surprising that after World War Two the Soviets wanted to close the highway.
 Ukraine has not been peaceful ever since, and the U.S. has loaded it with Nazis, and weapons of mass destruction up to and including biological pathogens .
 Russia’s need to de-Nazify and de-militarize Ukraine. Those are essential for understanding the basis for Russia's need for de- Nazify and De-Militarizing Ukraine .
 You go to a movie, and violence is there, Tanay told Psychiatric Times . "Violence is there," he said .
 The average American watches nearly 5 hours of video each day, 98% of which is watched on a traditional television set .
 Most self-involving video games contain some violent content, even those for children . Some games are more violent than others for children, including those for adults .
 In a given year, more U.S. children will die from gun violence than from cancer, pneumonia, influenza, asthma, and HIV/AIDS combined .
 The overall rate of firearmrelated death or injury in the United States is higher than the rate in most other industrialized countries .
 Theaters of Command tells how the Pentagon and sometimes the CIA have had the final say over thousands of films, video-games, and TV shows, often imposing heavy rewrites .
 The government's deliberate creation of what investigator Roger Stahl terms ‘American empire’s cinematic universe’ is one of the great swindles perpetuated against an unwitting public .
 These actions have systematically scrubbed from the screen an unsavory century of military history . War crimes, illegal arms sales, racism and sexual assault, torture, coups, assassinations, and weapons of mass destruction have been scrubbed .
 This government operation amounts to the airbrushing of entire culture, laid bare here for the first time after decades of secrecy . This is the first government operation in the U.S.
 Theaters of Command tracks the full scope of Pentagon and CIA influence on everything from Lone Survivor to The Last Ship . In stunning and unsettling detail, the film is based on the work of the CIA and Pentagon .
 This deliberate creation of ‘American empire’s cinematic universe’ is one of the great under-reported PR coups of our time . Some have called it “American empire's cinematic universe.”
 A false flag operation is when one side in a conflict does something horrible, like kills many of its own people, and then blames the opposing side in that conflict .
 false flag operations are usually difficult to prove, in some cases enough circumstantial evidence collects to make it quite clear who was the real perpetrator of that crime .
Evidence from Ukraine strongly suggests that Kiev’s neo-Nazis have perpetrated at least two false flag operations thus far . The U.S. and/or Europe are trying to enforce a no-fly zone over Ukraine .
 The following was published March 23, 2022 in the Canadian Global Research online newspaper . The following is published March 22, 2022 .
 Those who exalt Hitler don't even feel the need to do really convincing frame-ups and instead leave enough clues behind to prove that they are committing crimes against humanity and war crimes . Fortunately, due to the infinite arrogance of the real aggressors in this ongoing tragedy, those who ex
 The Mariupol Theater Bombing We don’t know for sure what happened to the theatre, but it wouldn't be the first time the Ukrainian government made false claims .
 satellite images show the word “CHILDREN’s’ written in Russian in large letters on the pavement outside . Maxar satellite images showed the word in Russian written in big letters on pavement outside.
 The incident occurred within hours of President Volodymyr Zelensky’s virtual address to Congress . He asked again for the United States to establish a no-fly zone over Ukraine .
 Civilians would be endangered or even killed before the world’s watching eyes .
 The incident had the supposedly desired effect. But these allegations have been distorted by misinformation, he says .
 More than 30,000 people have been evacuated from Mariupol, which is surrounded by Russian troops . So far, more than 30.000 people are evacuated through humanitarian corridors .
 If Moscow wanted to slaughter civilians, it could have easily targeted vehicles rolling in bumper-to-bumper traffic out of the city . The pro-Russian separatist-controlled north.
 Russia is not deliberately targeting civilians as part of a genocidal campaign. This is not to say civilians have not been killed during the conflict . This isn't to say that civilians have been killed in the conflict.
 These facts, coupled with what happened in the days before the bombing, raise questions no one is asking .
 The Ukrainian sky needs to be closed immediately. This is done so that they could scream to the whole world that Russia’s aviation did this and that the Ukrainian sky should be closed . Russia's aviation does this so that the world can scream about it .
Max Blumenthal noted that Western media repeated Ukrainian officials’ claims about the mosque in Mariupol being shelled by Russia with scores of civilians, including children, inside . Blumenthal also noted that Ukrainian officials' claims that the mosque was shelled.
 Zelensky and his officials had previously made similar misleading claims about the bombing of the memorial at Babi Yar, a ravine in Kiev that was also the site of massacres committed by the Nazis during World War Il .
 Twitter user named Elena Evdokimova issued another warning on March 13 . On March 13, she issued another Twitter warning .
 Militants of the Azov nationalist battalion blew up the Mariupol theater building, which they rigged with explosives earlier, Russian Defense Ministry says .
 The Defense Ministry debunked Kiev’s accusations of an airstrike on the theater building . The theater building was a theater building where civilians could have been held hostage .
Militants of the Azov nationalist battalion carried out another bloody provocation by blowing up the theater building, the Ministry of Defense says .
 People sheltering in a theater in the Ukrainian city of Mariupol are emerging from the building after it was bombed, the former head of the Donetsk region says . The theater was bombed on Thursday .
 CNN was interested only in information that was being supplied by Ukraine’s government .
 ‘reporting’ in that way is only propaganda, not journalism. Of course, ‘ reporting’ is only journalism, not propaganda .
 One of the first lessons of objectivity is to slow things down to make sure that fact is not obscured by emotion . The first lesson is to stop objectivity from being obscured.
 The video has been released in its present form, with the express intent of producing a visceral ‘shock and awe’ moment for the viewer . The video appears to have been produced with the intent of creating a visceral 'shock' moment .
 Ukrainian National Police have succeeded beyond their wildest imagination. If this was indeed the case, then those who released it may have succeeded .
 The linkage between the dead and the Russian military was established immediately, without any fact-based data to back it up . It was echoed in all forms of media — mainstream and social alike .
 Anyone who dared question the established “Russia did it’s narrative was shouted down and belittled as a “Russian shill,’ or worse,” or worse . Anyone who dare question theestablished “ Russia did it,�
 That these conclusions are the byproduct of mass hysteria is beside the point — why seek to be objective when the narrative fits every stereotype that had been carefully assembled beforehand .
 The Ukrainian narrative of the events in Bucha seems to stretch credibility. And let’s be clear — the Ukrainian narrative appears to stretch.
 The chronology of the narrative produces the first red flag that the story is being peddled by Ukraine is not what it seems . The chronological of the story produces a red flag, says the author .
Russian troops evacuated Bucha on March 30 . It is established fact that Russian troops evacuated the city on March30 .
 Ukrainian National Police began entering Bucha on March 31 . The mayor of Bucha announced that the town was fully under the control of Ukrainian officials .
 At no time was there any suggestion by the mayor or any other Ukrainian official of mass killings undertaken by Russia .
 The videotape in question was released by Ukrainian authorities on April 2 . It is not certain if the video had been taken earlier or on that day .
 The mayor's video was filmed in New York City, New York . The mayor has been accused of using the video as a cover-up for the mayor's office .
 Russia has vehemently denied the allegations, and has requested an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council . The Russian Foreign Ministry has called the “criminal provocations by Ukrainian soldiers and radicals’ in Bucha .
 The presidency of the Security Council is held by Great Britain . The British mission to the UN has denied the Russian request . A discussion on Ukraine currently scheduled for Tuesday, April 4 would serve as a forum for any discussion about Bucha .
 The Security Council has shown a readiness in the past to meet on short notice to discuss the events coming out of Ukraine . One would think that the Security Council would seek to accommodate Russia’s request .
 The goal of the British does not appear to be the rapid search for truth and justice, but rather to buy time to allow the political fallout to develop further .
 President Joe Biden's reaction to President Obama's actions is a tactic he has used in the past . Biden has been criticized for his reaction to the president's actions .
 Biden took advantage of the Bucha crisis to advocate for the delivery of more weaponry to Ukraine . Biden also pushed for more weaponry for Ukraine .
 The president of acountry has refused to recognise the International Criminal Court . He is the president of the country's largest state of the nation .
 For reasons which should beobvious toanyone’s willing to apply some critical thought. For reasons that should be obvious to any one’ll be able to apply critical thought .
 British chief prosecutor of the court, Karim Khan, announced in March 2022 that he had launched an investigation into alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Ukraine .
Forensics team to take control of crime scene and oversee autopsies on victims . Forensics team will establish time of death, mechanism of death and whether victims died where they were found .
 Khan would also be empowered to conduct interviews with the Ukrainian National Police . Khan has a history of close relations with members of the Ukrainian far right, including the Azov Battalion .
 Ukrainian civilians deemed to have collaborated with the Russian military during its occupation of Bucha . Of particular interest would be any investigation into orders given to the police regarding the treatment of those Ukrainian civilians .
 The results of such an investigation would conflict with the narrative being pursued by the Ukrainian government and echoed in the West by compliant media outlets and politicians .
 Khan is not currently on the ground in Bucha. This is the prime reason why he is not at the ground. Khan is a former footballer who played in the World Cup .
Ukrainian National Police manipulated by police to such an extent that disproving the allegations will be virtually impossible . One can assume that if and when Khan is eventually given access to evidence, it will have been manipulated by the police .
 The truth about what happened in Bucha is out there, waiting to be discovered . The truth is still out there .
 The truth appears to be inconvenient for those in a position to pursue it aggressively through a forensics investigation. Unfortunately, that truth appears.
 The claims have been made by Ukraine itself, and amplified by some Western media outlets and human rights groups . Some days after Moscow withdrew its troops from the area, some days after the withdrawal .
 Some of the dead apparently had their hands tied . Others wore white armbands, commonly used by Russian forces and civilians in areas under control .
 Kuleba wrote on Twitter: “We must stop them and kick them out. We must stop the G7’s ‘ sanctions’
 Top Western politicians have backed Kiev’s assessment of Bucha . Some explicitly pinning the blame for the killings on Moscow as well .
 Bucha-Like 'False Flag' Incidents to Continue as West ‘Frustrated’ Over Propaganda Failures, April 3, 2022 .
 The Russian Defence Ministry dismissed the accusations, underscoring that the footage is nothing short of yet another provocation .
 Western media seems eager to automatically criminalize Moscow without a full investigation . It looks like the media is a tool for the West to make up for frustrations caused by the failures of its own propaganda, experts say .
 'NATO-aligned' media plays its role to ‘protect their ‘side’ from repercussions for the war crimes they have been committing for decades’ Vanessa Beeley points out inconsistencies in the Western-promoted narrative .
 The sentiment is echoed by Joe Quinn, political commentator and author, who says it was "entirely plausible" that Ukrainian military policy was to shoot anyone on the street that did not have a blue armband .
 Some Bucha civilians wore white bandages as a sign of friendliness towards the Russian military . The Ukrainians assumed that everyone with that bandage was somehow aligned with the Russian forces .
 Russian soldiers decided to indiscriminately 'shoot' civilians on the street in Bucha, Quinn says . It is certainly a more plausible explanation than the irrational claim that retreating Russian soldiers shot civilians, he says .
 Russia has made significant steps towards financial and economic independence from the West . Russia has stronger ties with China and India, which is causing a huge frustration in the West, he said . He also said that it can relate to the fact that Russia has been making significant steps
 Occam's razor principle suggests Azov probably was Azov, as they have motivation, means and opportunities . But in a fair world, one must await further evidence to be absolutely positive of their guilt before conviction .
 In 2017, the Syrian Arab Republic had been in the six-year long grip of a Western-backed regime change operation . President Bashar al-Assad’s 2009 refusal to allow US-allied Qatar to build a pipeline through his country would have undermined his relationship with key-
 Timber Sycamore would see the arming, funding and training of Wahhabi terrorists groups by the West and its allies . It would replace Assad's secular government with a Westernfriendly leadership .
 With the Syrian regime change operation not going as planned, Washington's Neocons would soon resort to desperate measures . Washington’s NeocONS would soon resorts to desperate and reckless measures .
 The phrase ‘false flag’ can be used to describe an imagined threat by another nation used to justify an attack on it . More general uses of the phrase 'false flag' can also be used in the following quote .
 Iran, the U.S. government spokespeople are forever demonizing Iran, says Robert Fantina .
 Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has proclaimed that Iran is the world's chief sponsor of terrorism .
 The possibility of the U.S. waging war against Iran is very real. In keeping with this, the possibility of a war on Iran is real .
 The United States is currently bombing, or supporting, of Palestine, Yemen, Syria, Afghanistan, Libya and Somalia . The U.S. is currently supporting the bombing of Palestine.
 Venezuela is sanctioning Venezuela, causing untold suffering there . It is also wanting ‘regime change’ in that nation also .
 Pompeo has the temerity to say that Iran is the world’s chief sponsor of terrorism .
 President Donald Trump and his cohorts continually raise the false flag of Iranian threats to the world, against all facts .
 The United States has been at war for the vast majority of its history . The U.S. has been in war for most of its time .
 More often than not they have been based on weak evidence, questionable motives, and outright lies . Yet more often thannot they have be based onweak evidence, dubious motives, or outright lies.
 The U.S. government has rallied public opinion to support its wars and military objectives since before the American Revolution .
 Next comes the use of propaganda to manipulate public opinion and enlist widespread buy-in .
 Quoting and parroting the government, the media helps spread this propaganda, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This approach has successfully garnered support for both official warfare and acts of aggression such as plundering other country’s resources and removing left-leaning foreign leaders . The approach has been successful, says author .
 Since World War II alone it is estimated that the United States has killed at least 20,000,000 people in over 37 nations . The U.S. is estimated to have killed more than 20,00 people since the war began .
 Muhammad A Aziz and Khalil Islam each served more than 20 years of a life sentence . The two men had always maintained their innocence .
 Some media observers have noted their impressions of how coverage differed from wars past, particularly in terms of new focus on impact on civilians .
 We used the Nexis news database to count both sources and segments about Ukraine during the study period .
 U.S. officials have a newfound ability to cover the impact of civilians when they are attacked by an official United States enemy . The United States has a new ability to frame events, including when civilians are white and under attack by the United States .
 Ukrainian sources are the most striking things about early coverage of the Ukraine crisis . The number of Ukrainian sources has been the highest in recent years .
 FAIR always challenges news media to seek out the perspective of those most impacted by events . U.S. outlets are doing so to a much greater extent in this war than in any war in recent history .
 Only five civil society experts appeared during the study period . But these voices were almost completely marginalized .
 Fair.com’s niche specialty incidentally is media bias and the entire article quoted above is well worth reading .
Escalate, escalate escalate after provoking, provoking and provoking, until finally some reaction is elicited, there is the inevitable escalation . Escalate is the next step in the process of escalating, says CNN's John Sutter .
Before that happens though some western nation will declare war on Russia . Some western nations will also declare war.
 The mass and momentum pushing this drive to war will not be stopped by common sense or even self preservation . The mass of the war will be pushed to war, and it will not stop by commonsense or self preservation.
 None-the-less, Russia defeated the Nazis before and will again no doubt . Russia defeated Nazis before.
 In any case the U.S. and NATO are currently flooding nations adjacent to Russia will soldiers trained to kill .
 That is an artifact of a bygone age when the U.S. needed to pretend to be nice sometimes, at little bit at least .
 Tod Wolters fell short of specifying whether he meant permanent basing . Wolters, commander of United States European Command, told U.S. senators on 29 March .
 In recent months, U.S. military forces have soared from roughly 60,000 to 102,000 in Europe . In the past year, the number of troops in the United States has risen to 60,00 .
 Tod Wolters was asked by Senator Roger Wicker whether the United States should increase the number of troops permanently stationed in Europe . Wicker asked whether the U.S. should increase troops permanently, rather than rotating forces .
 "Think the reluctance came from two things," says Scott Ritter, United States military analyst, former UN Weapons Inspector and WMD Whistleblower . Wolters’ remarks left more questions than answers .
 The general is aware of these financial and political unknowns, adds military analyst . The general's hesitance is due to his lack of knowledge of these unknowns .
 The number of U.S. troops deployed across Europe has soared from 60,000 to 102,000 since October 2021 .
 NATO-allied European states hosted 450,000 U.S. military servicemen in 1957, according to Axios .
 The one and only thing that matters is quarterly dividends from war related industries for the super-rich, because they also own the politicians and news monopolies .
 Most Americans believe American wars are good for the U.S. economy . It is commonly believed by most Americans that American wars have good economic benefits .
Political pundit Caitlin Johnstone noted in 2020 that the US has no allies, only hostages .
 The United States and Russia are on the brink of WWIII and thermonuclear Armageddon . President Biden's son's and his top cabinet members' corruption, threats and an astonishing array of provocations have brought the U.S. and Russia to a brink of war .
 The U.S. invaded Iraq based on false information regarding “weapons of mass destruction’s” yet none were found . The United States invaded Iraq.
 American politicians and so-called defense industry giants wanted this war, did everything they could possibly do to provoke it, and are already profiting hugely from it . innocent Ukrainian soldiers and civilians and Russian soldiers are being ruthlessly killed .
Top U.S. foreign policy advisors predict the armed conflict in Ukraine now, if NATO continues its march with its unmistakable intent to provoke war .
President Biden has a chance to lead the U.S. to create a war. Motives, intent, methods, and opportunity for President Biden to create this war are all there .
 The U.S. funded and orchestrated “Color Revolution’ against former President Viktor Yanukovych, in violation of “The principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples under Article 1, paragraph 2’ of the UN Charter .
 President Biden and his top cabinet officials have ‘the appearance of conflicts of interest’ between their government posts and weapons and related war industries, according to the US .
 Putin virtually guarantees a Russian military response in the Donbass region . That was not only ‘undiplomatic’ but more extreme provocation .
 President Putin has decided to clear out Ukraine's war-making capabilities once and for all . President Putin said the only way to secure that section of his southern border is to clear it out .
 The U.S. had been playing a game of “peek-a-boo’s” repeatedly dangling the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO, then later denying they would permit it .
 Provocation was the name of the game the United States and NATO were playing and finally, they got a response .
 Ukrainian President Zelensky to surrender. At this point, the only way to stop the acceleration of this war is to surrender, says the U.S. President .
 He would never do that, buoyed by massive U.S. and European financial, military, media and “moral’s support. He would not do that . But he would never be able to .
 The only other option to stop this war from devolving into WWIII is to place a moratorium on weapons delivery to Ukraine . President Zelensky has a “facesaving’ excuse for calling for a truce, and negotiating in a reasonable manner with Russian President Putin.
 The potential for peace with selfdetermination and dignity for all parties would spring to life. Referral for Criminal Investigation should have started in 2014, says the author .
 The alternatives include loselose scenarios for the entire human species and earth’s ecology . The alternatives also include losinglose scenario for the whole human species .
 Public officials shall not use their official authority for the improper advancement of their own or their family's personal or financial interest . Public officials will not be allowed to use their officials' authority for improper advancement.
 The Committee of the Committee of such recusal. Requires such Member, officer, or employee to recuse himself or herself from any matter in which there is a conflict of interest .
 The Clerk of the House has to submit a statement of disclosure for which such recusal was made . Such recusal must also be made .
 Water and electricity were cut, no people or supplies were allowed in or out, and the city was subjected to constant shelling by heavy artillery .
 e War crimes were also committed in neighboring villages, including some occupied by right-wing militias . Many Ukrainians did not want to join the army to fight their own people .
 The war in Ukraine did not begin February 24, 2022 as western media makes it appear . The war began in February 2014 .
 Earlier a residential neighborhood had been struck by a grad missile, while other Ukrainian army attacks destroyed schools .
 Another woman said that the targets that were hit “were not new targets’s’
 A woman told him that her daughter had been born on June 26, 2014, and that the war began in her village on July 19 . A woman said her daughter was born in June 2014 . She told him she had been in the war since July 19.
 Ukraine has committed significant war crimes. Ukraine not only instigated the war but has committed major war crimes . Ukraine has also committed significant War crimes .
 This document provides specific and specific and credible evidence. Those motivations can be proven and proven and credible .
 President Biden and his son “Hunter’s” son ‘Hunter,’ and Devon Archer, a former John Kerry campaign manager, were on the board of directors . “conflict of interest” investments in Ukraine are masking their desire to stop legitimate
 The Bidens and other administration officials are involved with taking bribes from fracking industrialists . In any event, due to campaign finance laws permitting unlimited “donations from anonymous sources, nobody can know just how deeply the Bidens are involved .
 Client does not have access rights to the content so server is rejecting to give proper response . That's an error Client doesn't have access to the material so server rejects response .
 International Court of Justice in the Namibia case 7, the Western Sahara case and the 8th case . The 8th and 7th cases are heard at the International Court.
 President Trump worked against building up the war machine in Ukraine and was impeached for it . Motivation for President Trump to accelerate the Ukraine War will not be found because he actively worked against it .
 President Biden's decision to accelerate the war in Ukraine can be proven. However multiple motivations for President Biden to greatly accelerate the conflict can be found .
 It isn't the same as intent, which relates to whether an action was accidental or intentional . It's unclear whether the action was intentional or accidental .
 The prosecution must establish that the defendant intended to commit the criminal act . Intent is an element of just about every crime, meaning that the prosecution must prove that the Defendant intended to committed the criminal acts .
 The prosecution doesn't have to prove the defendant had it. But motive usually isn't a criminal element, the prosecution has to prove it .
 Just making Hillary Clinton and her CIA director happy might have been enough .
 In any case, this referral for criminal investigation is not directed at President Obama per se . Instead focused primarily on President Biden who had multiple motivations and material incentives to rapidly escalate this war .
 Hillary Clinton was President Obama’s foreign policy advisor and Secretary of State for some time . Clinton was Obama's secretary of state for some times .
Hillary Clinton is credited with the disastrous and massively deadly series of so-called Arab Spring revolutions in more than half a dozen formerly stable nations .
 "color revolutions" were highly profitable for war and related industries in the U.S. They wreaked havoc, homelessness, death and hunger upon tens of millions of citizens . Yet the American public did not weep for them .
 To prove a crime, one must show intent and motivation . To prove that President Biden is guilty of crimes against humanity in Ukraine, he must prove intent .
 The Ukraine War is currently the most current phase of the Ukraine War . President Biden's references to the war have been linked to the President's desire to escalate .
 President Biden's family’s long-standing corrupt business practices in Ukraine profit from starting a war just to kill the Nord Stream 2 pipeline between Russia and Germany .
 Most of President Biden’s top political appointees have the appearance of conflicts of interest . They have personally profited from corporate war industries in the past .
 Profit motive of other Euro-American war and oil & gas industrialists is to justify their budgets, bonuses and dividends .
 The U.S. spends more on the war industry than China, India, Russia, Russia and other countries . The United States spends more than other countries on war industry .
 President Biden might well have had additional motivation to greatly accelerate the Ukraine War provided by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . President Biden may well have been motivated by Hillary Clinton.
 The so-called "Arab Spring" series of disastrous and deadly American funded "Color Revolutions" mostly started in 2011 before and after her stint as Secretary of State to then President Obama .
 President Biden cynically used “national security’s justifications. To cover up his profit and other personal motivations for his increased support to mostly neo-Nazi militias in Ukraine, he used ‘national security justifications’
 The U.S. had driven the nuclear arms race from the beginning, and Russia has maintained parity . The United States had driven it from the start to Russia, but it has kept parity .
 The United States is jealous that China’s economy could grow larger than U.S. at some time in the future . China's economy is expected to grow faster than the United States in the coming years .
 Ukraine has been considered a ‘battleground nation’ since the dissolution of the Soviet Union . The country has been a “Battleground’ nation since the breakup of the USSR .
 Number 4 immediately above is itself a violation of the UN Charter . interfering in the affairs of other nations thereby negating any possibility of those nations exercising a right to self-determination .
 The appearance of conflict of interest becomes impossible to ignore . Several distinctly personal motivations for greatly accelerating the War in Ukraine can be proven .
 Raytheon Technologies, the U.S. defense giant and maker of the Stinger ground-to-air missile that Germany has pledged to supply to Ukrainian forces, has seen its shares price increase more than 10% .
 Raytheon’s stock rose over 4.6% on Monday and has risen more than 18% this year . The company's stock rose more than 4.5% this week .
 Lockheed Martin, the maker of the F-35 fighter jet, advanced more than 5.4% on Monday . Lockheed Martin's F- 35 fighter jet is made by Lockheed Martin .
 The company, with Raytheon, is the manufacturer of the Patriot missile defense system . The company is set to be deployed with the NATO battlegroup in Slovakia .
 Britain's BAE Systems is the largest defense contractor in Europe . Germany's Rheinmetall, France's Thales and Italy's Leonardo have all seen their share prices rise sharply .
 The super-wealthy can buy another island and boast at cocktail and drug parties about the “killing’s they made on Wall Street .
 A nuclear winter could kill a billion people instantly, cause another two billion to die of hunger, disease, and the tsunami of chaos and crime that will follow, and leave the rest scarred and damaged for life .
 In 2021 alone we committed over $300 million in assistance to support Ukraine’s democratic and economic development, and over $650 million in security assistance . In 2021, we committed more than $300million in assistance.
 If they survive, their children will not be so proud when they learn the whole truth behind, and human cost of their wealth .
 He does not want his entire western front lined with American and NATO tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces and neo-Nazi ultra-nationalists .
 As many as 27 million Soviets lost their lives, as many as 11 million military deaths joined by up to 10 million civilian deaths . An additional 8 million to 9 million deaths due to famine and disease due to starvation and disease .
 More than 14 million Soviet soldiers were wounded during the war . Those totals do not include more than 14million Soviet soldiers who were wounded .
 Russia withstood the highest number of casualties, with 6,750,000 military deaths and 7,200,000 civilian deaths . Among the Soviet Union's 15 republics, Russia has the highest casualties .
 Threatening aggression is a violation of the UN Charter and the US placing tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces, neo-Nazi ultranationalist extremists and especially BSL-3 and B SL-4 laboratories all along Russia’s western border is realistically viewed as
 There are also links between Neo-Nazi groups and U.S. government officials .
 Hatewatch could not find Kreider or his contact information to seek comment from him . Hatewatch cannot find him or contact information .
 The United States government has openly embraced many neo-Nazi groups around the world, including in the USA, Europe and Ukraine . The U.S. government has also embraced neo-Nazis in Europe, the United States and the Ukraine .
 President Putin's demands prior to it's attack on Ukraine appear critically necessary in order to ensure Russia's selfdetermination as guaranteed by UN Charter . The US's buildup of military along all of Russia’s western front, other military assets including space-based weapons, the west’
 Putin is an oldfashioned romantic who apparently believes in family values and honor . He is willing to risk all to help those in Lugansk and Donetsk suffering under the withering fire of EuroAmerican-Kiev imposed genocide for eight years .
Living in a world where honor has been cast aside for profits and political expediency makes President Putin very difficult or impossible for most American politicians to understand .
 Most American politicians don't really care about his motivation for his attempt to disarm his neighbor . The neighbor is increasingly aggressive, threatening and deadly neighbor .
 Starting wars has been a “tried and method’ of stimulating the American economy when it appears a bit flat, as occurred as the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and mounting American debt .
 Had former President Trump been reelected there is a reasonably high probability he would have provoked a war against China instead of Russia .
 Ukraine is a place well known to President Biden and his son Hunter due to their deep investments and profiteering there . Ukraine is well known for its deep investments.
 The U.S. backed the 2014 coup against the democratically elected president Viktor Yanukovych . It was hugely aided by the fact that the United States had already backed the coup .
 President Biden has profited enormously from the Ukrainian oil and gas industry . Many of his top appointed cabinet officials give the appearance of conflicts of interest between their official government positions, and positions in lobby groups and/or government funded think tanks .
Some American disinformation experts posing as journalists pose as journalists. That is a comic book style rational cooked up by some minions in the legions of U.S. disinformation experts .
Top U.S. officials in addition to Hunter Biden, President Zelensky and European weapons manufacturers will not like the plan . The plan is for a moratorium on weapons gifted to Ukraine .
 substantial evidence suggests they are complicit in launching and escalating the current armed conflict in Ukraine . That is because substantial evidence shows they are involved in the conflict .
 A criminal investigation into their roles in starting this armed conflict/war should be launched . They should have no say whatsoever in the determination to open a criminal investigation .
 Al Capone and/or Jack the Ripper had to give approval before police investigation into their criminal activities was permitted .
 A criminal investigation is underway in the case. This is the case . The case is being investigated by the FBI .
 There appears only one reasonable and simple way to end the war in Ukraine almost immediately .
 The UN needs to take a lead on a moratorium on arms shipments to Ukraine, in order to give President Zelensky a face-saving excuse for surrender .
 Ukraine becoming a neutral country is the only solution to this war forced on it by the U.S. and European political and economic ambitions . Ukraine becoming neutral is only solution.
 This war is no different from any of the other wars the U.S. has launched since WWII, except it is still in its very early stages . It has a very real possibility of leading to nuclear war .
 Western media has entirely suppressed and mocked his legitimate motivations and instead demonized and censored him. He had very substantial legal, national security and moral rationale for it .
 Americans falsely believe they have fair access to news, falsely believing themselves to have that fair access . Americans meanwhile have not had fair access. Americans have not been able to get fair access, according to experts .
 Many Americans are enjoying this war in Ukraine having been programmed by the U.S. government to enjoy extreme violence .
 Kiev is only escalating the US-NATO terrorism campaign in Ukraine in attempt to further provoke and escalate it as much as possible to increase corporate profits in their respective countries and enlist NATO’s involvement . Ukraine in the middle means the total destruction of “his nation.
 UN Secretary General Guterres calls for a moratorium on weapons shipments to Ukraine . He calls for an investigation into alleged corrupt activities by President Biden, his son Hunter, and top cabinet members .
 This may seem awkward, ill-advised, and//or politically risky, compared to the effects of thermonuclear war . But those efforts would be trivial.
 The onus of responsibility lies with the relevant authorities to whom this Referral for Criminal Investigation is addressed . Referral For Criminal Investigation will be addressed .
 President Biden's blitzkrieg media campaign may have met with initial western public support, but news media is not being honest about the origin of this war, the true motivations for this war . The U.S. does not fight wars to win, as the United States has lost all
 The United States fights wars to make profits from war and war related industries . The U.S. will pump that war for all it's worth until the target country is flattened .
 The United States disgracefully withdraws, while the corporate profiteers, the merchants of death, laugh all the way to the bank . Then the U.S. withdraws. Then the United States.
 Ukraine is meat on the table of the “good ol’ USA,’ at least those rich enough to profit from it . Ukraine is food for the rich.
 The operation in Ukraine was launched on 24 February, as Russian forces hit Ukrainian military objects with precision weapons .
 President Vladimir Putin noted it was started to stop the genocide in Donbass . People have been suffering from an eight-year-long war waged against them by Kiev .
 The U.S. has increased censorship of Russian news media by the US .
 A nearly $32-million program was aimed at “organizing work of the laboratories, built and modernized with the help of the donor’s help . The program was designed to “monitoring infectious diseases’ and conducting work to ‘react rapidly’
 The program also listed the “safe collection, processing, temporary storage and transportation of clinical samples’ as its goals .
 The Ukrainian biolaboratories network has been funded by other US agencies . Kirillov says the scale of the biolabs program is an "impressive" one .
 Scientific supervision is carried out by leading research organizations, an official says . The Los Alamos National Laboratory develops nuclear weapons .
 The military offensive came following a seven-year standoff over Ukraine’s failure to implement the terms of the Minsk agreements . Russia's eventual recognition of the Donbass republics in Donetsk and Lugansk .
 The document highlights a meeting between the attaché and representatives of the US-Canadian company Skymount . Skymount is involved in Al-related research .
 The system “performs the work of 60-person years per day, greatly reducing the manual labor hours to generate new target molecules from existing, pre-approved drugs, developers say .
 The screening system for pharmaceuticals ‘Deep Drug’ has not passed the licensing procedure in the United States and Canada .
 Indonesia shut down the U.S. Navy Medical Center in Jakarta in 2010 . The center was apparently involved in a similar project, he says .
 The attack came following a seven-year standoff over Ukraine’s failure to implement the terms of the Minsk agreements . The attack comes after Russia's eventual recognition of the Donbass republics in Donetsk and Lugansk .
 Russia has demanded Ukraine declare itself a neutral country that will never join the US-led NATO military bloc . Russia has now demanded that Ukraine officially declare itself neutral .
 Russian media outlets recently reported that the Pentagon had commissioned more than 30 biological laboratories in Ukraine, where large quantities of dangerous viruses were stored .
 laboratories spread around the world, they are aware of the high risks of viruses leaking and triggering pandemics .
 Chinese scientists assumed similar risks from Chinese laboratories, but that is stretching it too far . They assumed similar risk from Chinese labs, but it is stretching too far.
 US has failed to bring COVID-19 under control on its shores, says CNN's John Sutter .
 laboratories around the world. But they cannot wash away the fact about the existence of such laboratories around world .
 Americans "let it all hang out, but they don't in this part of the world," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia asking China for military assistance in Ukraine is laughably ridiculous . Russia's request for assistance in a military operation in Ukraine it is laughfully ridiculous .
 Whoever makes that stuff up is creative, and knows how to inflame American audiences . But such totally unsubstituted rubbish only proves they know nothing about Russian military capabilities and protocol .
 Hollywood style movies smear jobs based on complete fiction. Nothing less than screenplay writing.
 The Roots of American censorship are found in the Reich Ministry for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda . It is only appropriate to mention the Nazis’ media roots .
 The Reich Ministry for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda also known as the Ministry of Propaganda was responsible for controlling the content of the press, literature, visual arts, film, theater, music and radio .
 The ministry was created as the central institution of Nazi propaganda shortly after the party's national seizure of power in January 1933 . The ministry is now the main institution of the Nazi propaganda .
 Hitler's cabinet was headed by Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels . He exercised control over all German mass media and creative artists through his ministry .
After Hitler’s death, Goebbels had his six children first given morphine and cyanide pills .
 Please consider the evidence contained in this Referral carefully before making any decisions regarding the validity of this evidence . Failure to consider and act upon it in a timely fashion can and probably will have catastrophic consequences for all of humanity .
 The Security Council took no measures to “maintain international peace and security,’ despite President Putin’s best efforts . President Putin's best efforts were to protect the security of his nation, the Security Council said .
 The U.S. military intervention in Ukraine is a justification for President Putin’s armed intervention . U.N. terrorist financing of neo-Nazi groups has been amplified by the U. S. President Putin's intervention .
 Nuland might not have known at the time of Hunter Biden’s key role in helping to escalate that dual-use pathogen technology ‘research’ in Ukraine . Nulan may not have been aware of Biden's role in the Ukraine.
 He also introduced Metabiota to an allegedly corrupt Ukrainian gas firm, Burisma, for a 'science project’ involving high biosecurity level labs in Ukraine .
 Respect for this principle can be ensured solely by establishing guarantees that protect judicial procedures . Respect for the principle can also be ensured by establishing guarantee for judicial procedures.
Every Russian has “links’ with President Putin, as do many other world leaders . Every Russian has links with Putin.
 Anyone who ever sold a washing machine to any Russian has links to President Putin. Anyone who has ever sold washing machines to any Russians has ties to Putin .
 The absurdity of U.S. sanctions is contemptable and proves United States contempt for international law, signed treaties, and innumerable signed contracts . The absurdity is the absurdity of United States sanctions .
 It embraces expression that may be regarded by some as deeply offensive . It also embraces expressions that may also be regarded as deeplyoffensive .
 The right covers communications that are both verbal and non-verbal, and all modes of expression, including audio-visual, electronic and internet-based modes of communication . The right cover communications that can be verbal or non- verbal .
 The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities . The exercise. of the right to exercise the rights is also included in the paragraph 2 .
 The United States retains sole right to censor all news except “news’s generated by the U.S. government .
 Both political parties are simply two sides of the same coin representing primarily corporate interests and not the people . Many make it clear both parties are just two sides.
 If they are pro-peace, against racism, misogyny and economic sanctions, they are probably alt-news . If they support drastically reducing the ever-widening wealth gaps within and between nations they are likely alt- news .
 There has been a "dark side" to American history and current events, but we all know it. And yet to collect all that glory there have been a 'dark side'
 The USA is perfectly ready to give us 10 million “very good reasons for every crime against humanity, foreign invasion, devastating predatory behavior in one nation after another, and we at least pretend to go along with it .
 The United States is a super-sized grand-scale serial killer selecting one target group, and/or nation after another for robbery, human slaughter and destruction . Like a predatory killer, a hungry tiger, a vampire, a sadistic mass murderer the U.S.
 The United States can afford to feed every person on earth, yet is more interested in accumulating ever more vast and unimaginable wealth for that small group of already rich people .
Unrestrained capitalism which is totally different from and vastly worse than any hungry tiger. That is unrestrained capitalism, which is completely different from that of the hungry tiger . That is not the same thing as any tiger .
 The USA does need to keep blowing-up and robbing other nations to keep the momentum of its incredible grandeur going .
 The list of U.S. slaughter of by-in-large innocent other nations is a long one . The list is a very long one.
 US Military and CIA Interventions since World War II, 2004 and Rogue State, 2005 . U.S. military and CIA interventions since WW2 .
 Many or most of the educated around the world have known one or two or more Americans and they can be amazing .
 Sometimes they come into a situation, analyze the problems, diseases, structural flaws and find solutions faster than imaginable . They have figured out solutions and ways to implement those solutions.
 It is easy to see all that goodness in so many American movies, TV shows, cartoons, and even from time-to-time newspapers .
 It's no longer clear whether a president requires congressional authorization at all . The War Powers Act of 1973 was the first to expand war powers .
 The reality was much more complicated, and it's only gotten more complicated . But the reality was more complicated and more complicated.
These operations may require low visibility, clandestine, or covert capabilities . These operations may need low visibility or clandestine capabilities .
 They can be conducted independently or in conjunction with operations of conventional forces or other government agencies . They can include operations through, with, or by indigenous or surrogate forces .
 Since then, it's more than tripled in size, received an ever-increasing share of funding, and has conducted _operations in dozens of countries . The organization has conducted operationsin dozens of nations .
 Army's 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment, the Naval Special Warfare Development Group, and the Air Force's 24th Special Tactics Squadron . The Air Force is the 1st and 24th special tactics Squadron .
 JSOC has its own intelligence division, the Intelligence Support Activity, and often oversees the 75th Ranger Regiment, the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment, and other special operations forces . In addition to the SMUs, JSOC also oversees the 150th Special Operation Aviation Regiment .
 Psychologist Sigmund Freud was the first to deeply explore psychological defense mechanisms in humans .
 In most cases, these psychological responses are not under a person’s conscious control .
 Some are well known and won’t elaborate on the meaning, but some are not so well known .
 Denial is when a person consciously or unconsciously refuses to accept obvious facts . This is when they refuse to accept the facts .
 At least half of the U.S. population are in denial of the criminality of American foreign wars . For example, nearly all American politicians, and probably at leasthalf of the United States population are.
 Memories of things done by a person that are incompatible with a person’s value system are simply suppressed and ‘magically forgotten’
 Some thoughts or feelings people have about another person may make that person so uncomfortable they project those feelings, misattributing them to another person .
 A person may dislike a new co-worker, but instead of accepting that, s/he chooses to tell him/herself that they dislike you . For example, a person may disliked a new worker, but rather than accept that, he chooses to say that .
 This is when a person redirects feelings from the true source to another . Displacement is when someone redirects their feelings from a source to a source .
 The man goes running, or plays a furious game of basketball. Or, perhaps after work, or after work.
 Regression is like a kind of denial where a person unconsciously goes back to an earlier stage of life . This is like childhood to avoid some uncomfortable or exceptionally painful reality they can’t deal with .
 Rationalization is making excuses for things a person says or does when they know those things are incompatible with their value system . This is making excuse for things people say or do when they are wrong .
 There are often flimsy reasons to excuse people's actions or actions . So, they can build elaborate systems of excuses, usually flimsy excuses .
 A person flips to the opposite side and takes excessive pride in it . Instead of feeling bad about having done something wrong, a person flips.
 At least half or more Americans make it through the day and sleep at night knowing their government, the government they vote to put in office, and they support with their tax dollars, kills, in fact .
Around 9 million people die every year of hunger and hunger-related diseases, and that breaks down into 25,000 dying every day from hunger . American inspired “conflicts,’ and economic sanctions,” and sanctions .
 Anytime any national leader does not kowtow to American interests, they and their nation will be crushed . Anytime a national leader doesn't kowdow to U.S. interests, it will be crushing them .
 If a nation signs on with the China led “One Belt One Road’s project, they will be punished . The project is part of the China-led "One Belt 1 Road"
 This is the Antebellum movie from which there is no waking up to a better reality for most of the world . The movie is based on the film, which is about the life of a man in the Middle East .
 It’s a nightmare with no escape or end until death, which will be experienced without painkillers . But long it may take, however long it will take.
 That’s the reality of American overseas foreign economic and military aggression. That's the real reality of U.S. foreign economic, military aggression, says CNN.com .
 Euro-American media’s disinformation machine turns heroes into devils, and devils into heroes . The world's most clever psychologists know how to shape those lies into believable tales .
Every American and western European voter should read this book, and the links in their entirely, says author .
 Both bibles and virtually every major spiritual philosophy warn against the tyranny of ego . The tyranny of egism is a sign of the power of ego, says the author .
 Freud postulated that humans are primarily motivated by unconscious forces, with the two dominant ones being sex and aggression .
 Well-being means to be fully related to man and nature affectively, to overcome separateness and alienation, says author .
 Russia is by far the world's largest country occupying about 11. % of the earth's land mass . It is also one of the world’s natural resource richest countries . Russia is one of world's most populous countries .
 The artic cold sweeps in from the North Pole and kills all those not well prepared in advance . It is also a harsh and unforgiving land as the articcold sweeps in .
 To survive in Russia requires a great deal of planning, forethought and industrial cleverness . To survive, Russia needs to be prepared for the future .
 Russia has been invaded by the west three times now with the last time, WWII resulting in about 24,000 total civilian and military deaths . Russia has also been invaded three times in the past three times, with the most being in Russia .
 The Russians make amazing weapons that actually work, unlike so many of the hyper-expensive American weapon systems . So, instead of making amazing movies, cell phones and cars, the Russians make incredible weapons .
 Russia has a nuclear arsenal just a bit larger than the USA, but if the truth be told, it wasn't leading the arms race at any time .
 WWII never, never happens again, says U.S. military officials . They follow behind and always make sure they can do one better at a fraction of the cost of American weapons .
 The U.S. has not really prepared defensively for WWIII, thermonuclear Armageddon, Russia has . The United States has not been prepared defensively.
 It, like every other target of American unrestrained military aggression, wants to be friends . It's not the first time the U.S. military has tried to make friends with the military .
 Life so often offers us win-win solutions, and to then betray the friends who make possible such brightness in our lives and endeavors is treachery. Life offers us a win-winning solution, says author .
 There is a limited warranty on all empires that have based their survival on such foundations . There is no guarantee on the foundations of all empires .
 Sooner or later, forces from both without and within always, always end up creating implosions and/or explosions . The downfall of such unmitigated arrogance.
 Russians do drink too, but have planned for another attack from the west more meticulously than the USA or Europe .
 American foreign policy makers’ psychotic fantasy that it can attain absolute uncontested rulership of the world forever, or destroy human civilization as we know it in a thermonuclear war .
 President Biden and the world will pay for this unimaginably deadly gamble in unimaginable ways if the Euro-Americans do not back-off and soon .
 All of the psychological defense mechanisms and potassium iodine in the world will not protect the mostly good people of the U.S. and Europe if this conflict is permitted to escalate any further .
 The U.S. was already sanctioning 1/34 of humanity before Russia’s armed intervention in Ukraine .
 The United States further isolates itself as well. By cutting Russia out of the world economy the U.S. will further isolate itself .
 President Biden's war chiefs are attempting to goad NATO into sending ground troops to Ukraine or at least try to institute a no-fly zone over Ukraine .
 The U.S. and EU “defense industrialists would just love, in spite of the fact it would destroy all infrastructure in Ukraine and kill millions . That would transition this Russian attempt to clear Ukraine of weapons of mass destruction and neo-Nazi extremists .
 U.S. and European war machines never slowed down for a second time . The US and Europe's war machines are still being used in the war .
European and Russians die in macabre replay of WWIII, again, far from U.S. shores .
 President Biden’s true masters are attempting to trap Europeans into a deadly quagmire of a major world war, without the loss of a single American life, according to CNN .
 The Dulles brothers went around the U.S. and Europe soliciting funds to build Germany and Japan into the industrial powerhouses they had to be in order to be .
 The Dulles’ plan from the beginning to break the German-Russian alliance forced the Russians to carry the penultimately heavy burden of stopping Nazi Germany .
 That made it easy for the U.S. to attack from the west and win the war they created in the first place . That made the United States to attacks from the West and win it.
 Europe, North Africa and Japan were smoking ruins . United States industrialists had wild parties and enjoyed the many fruits of their total victory .
 20 million humans were killed, sacrificed on the altar of American capitalists’ and politicians’ infinite greed .
 Deaths from WWIII are likely to be in the billions, but the profits will be in trillions .
 Those who might think this is too cynical and wicked for any person to really consider simply don't personally know the sadists and bullies American target nations .
 Expanding empires in history usually did so with a great deal of bloodshed, true, but then their empires usually enjoyed at least a few hundred years of relative peace afterwards .
Currently, the United States spends over $900 million per day on interest payments . Currently, the U.S. spends more than $9 million a day on the interest payments.
 Entrepreneurs face a higher cost of capital, potentially stifling innovation and slowing the advancement of new breakthroughs that could improve our lives .
 Growing debt has a direct effect on the economic opportunities available to every American . Growing debt also has an impact on the economy, according to experts .
 The status of the dollar in international trade fell below 50% several months ago . It was largely due to sanctions imposed on Iran .
 Russia from SWIFT is very likely to accelerate that decline into a landslide . Now, banning Russia fromSWIFT is likely to accelerated that decline .
 The G7 and EU can’t figure out de-dollarizing the world economy will have a rather negative effect on the value of the dollar . The dollar is an imaginary entity anyways since ditching the gold standard .
 The isolationist policies directly led to the Great Depression of 1929, says John Sutter . Sutter: "These kinds of isolationist Policies directly lead to the Depression"
 Narcissistic personalities virtually always exhibit delusional beliefs in their own invincibility . Narcissist personalities almost always show delusional beliefs.
 Thinking that the U.S. could attain and maintain “hegemony in perpetuity was and remains delusional’s delusional. thinking that the United States could attain, maintain ‘he hegemony in perpetuit’ is delusional .
 Countless would-be world conquerors have tried and died along with their empires . Countlesswould-be conquerors had tried to conquer the world .
 If the answer is yes, then continue to permit President Biden and EU to continue pouring gasoline on the fire in Ukraine . If the answers are yes, it will continue to pour gasoline in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The future of humanity, if there is to be one, is highly uncertain . In any large complex equation with many unknown variables, the best one can calculate the outcome is 50/50 .
 The unrivaled power of the U.S. military-industrial-media-university-medical/pharmaceutical-complex has become an existential threat to all life on earth . The un rivaled power has become a threat to the world's lives,
 The fate of advanced life on earth beyond plants, bacteria and viruses rests on a 50/50 gamble . If the “Western Alliance of unrestrained capitalists start to back off now, it's time for them to stop .
 In the case of a thermonuclear war, the United States will be totally obliterated .
 Following that there will be revolutions around the world deposing American puppet leaders in developing countries .
 The probability all 300+ Top Secret American biological research labs distributed around the world will keep their pathogens contained is-equal-to-zero .
 The full range of all American biological weapons will be set loose upon the earth . In other words, the full range is set loose.
 There will be no cures or vaccines due to obliteration of global supply chains . There will not be a cure or vaccine due to the destruction of supply chains.
 He will push the red button ending civilization as we know it without a second thought when the time comes .
 There is no animal more dangerous than a cornered animal, and this is the situation into which the west thinks they have pushed him . The west has pushed him, and he is not dangerous.
 The dollar as the global currency is finished, and its legitimacy as legal tender for currency was based entirely upon its status as global currency . The dollar is now the world's most popular global currency.
 He believes he has predicted Euro-American responses precisely . Maybe not, maybe not, perhaps not .
 The odds are 51% according to my calculations . I believe his intelligence sources are probably more reliable than American intelligence sources .
 My mother always argued that a benign despot is better than a liberal democracy ruled by Narcissistic demigods . In any case, she was right about that and President Putin’s somewhat autocratic style of leadership has all the advantages of a good ship captain in a storm
 The side of peace is peace with dignity, self-determination and security for all . The side-of-peace is the side ofpeace with dignity and dignity . Peace with dignity is peace for all, with dignity.
 The current conflict in Ukraine is only profiting those invested in western "defense" related industries . The vast majority of those invested are already very rich men, the author says .
Everyone else in the world is losing at a time when humanity as a whole should be investing in COVID-19 recovery and working to prevent the next global pandemic as globalization, climate change, poverty and poverty are rapidly spreading many infectious diseases .
 President Putin has access to a great deal more information than he could have, says Putin . Putin will not assert he was wrong for launching his military operation in Ukraine, he says .
 It appears there is more at stake here than simply the survival of Ukrainians, Russians and Americans . It appears to be more at risk than just the survival.
 The entire human species is in danger from possible release of biological pathogens from the 300+ American biological laboratories around the world should WWIII break out, the American empire descend into anarchy .
Five years ago had friends in Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Ukraine, Ukraine and Russia and all were well with everyone .
 The Biden family, other politicians, corporate shareholders and puppet presidents like Zelensky. In that same breath, have to add, also have infinite empathy for the families of the valiant and disciplined Russian militaries .
Until their power is contained, and campaign finance in the U.S. and Europe cleaned up, these wars will continue until thermonuclear war and a global biological and chemical weapons blitzkrieg occurs .
 President Biden so loves to brag about the working poor and jobless world-wide, including the US .
 Global unrestrained capitalism has brought the working people and jobless to our knees . There is no hope in sight, except that provided by China and Russia, says author .
 Socrates was most certainly right about democracies ending with oligarchy, and now demagoguery . It has been my long belief that the system of governance is not as important as the quality of people in those governments .
 China has an infinite number of advantages over the U.S. and Western Europe, says China's economic system .
 The political system in the U.S. has reached such saturation level corruption, such expertise in overthrowing governments . No honest person in the world is safe now, anywhere.
 Ukraine's bid to join NATO was one of the reasons Moscow said it launched a military campaign against the country last month . Ukraine’s bid to joined NATO was a reason for the campaign, Moscow said .
Ukrainian team presented a draft roadmapping a future peace deal . He said the Ukrainian team presented the draft. He said it was a "draft roadmapper"
 Russia proposed negotiations, proposed to conclude various kinds of agreements that were supposed to guarantee Ukraine’s security and provide Russia's national interests .
 The North Atlantic Alliance has been creating an anti-Russian foothold from Ukraine for years . The alliance has also been creating a foothold in Ukraine, more precisely, from Ukrainian territory .
 The issue of Ukraine's acquisition of nuclear weapons was made public knowledge . The issue was also made public.
 Kyiv was planning to launch an offensive against Donbass in the near future. There’s irrefutable evidence that Kyiv is planning an offensive in the future .
 Russia would have had to stand up for tens of thousands of our Russian citizens living there anyway . In that case Russia would had had to standing up for thousands of its citizens .
 Ukraine stated that it’s ready to fulfill these demands that Russia has been insisting on all these years . That is, Ukraine stated . Ukraine said that it's ready to fulfil these demands .
 Austin actively campaigned to resurrect the Pentagon’s failed program of trying to arm ‘rebels’ in Syria to fight ISIS . In 2014 he backed immunity for United States troops from war crimes prosecutions by the government of Afghanistan .
 Pine Island has launched some new ‘special purpose acquisition companies’ which are essentially shell companies .
 Chambliss served as vice chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee from 2011 to 2014 . He advocated for dramatically improved information sharing and human-intelligencegathering capabilities . He was appointed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence .
 His previous role as chairman of the House Intelligence Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Security made him one of the leading congressional experts on those issues . He is also a leading congressional expert on the issue of terrorism .
After his 2004 upset loss to John Thune, Daschle joined law and lobbying firm Alston & Bird as a “special policy adviser,’ earning as much as $2. million a year . He never registered as a lobbyist .
 Daschle registered with the Justice Department under the Foreign Agents Registration Act to represent Taiwan .
 Sen. Daschle serves on numerous public and private boards, including the Center for American Progress .
 Mandy Smithberger is the director of the Straus Military Reform Project at the Project on Government Oversight . Smithberger says it's concerning in this case .
 WestExec Advisors thrive in the so-called gray zone doing many, most or all of the same things as a lobby group . Though not officially a lobby groups, WestExec advisors thrive in a gray zone .
 Antony J Blinken was sworn in as the 71st U.S. Secretary of State on January 26, 2021 .
 Michéle serves on the boards of Booz Allen Hamilton, Amida Technology Solutions, The Mission Continues, Spirit of America, The United States Naval Academy Foundation, CARE, and CARE .
 Flournoy previously served on the Pentagon's Defense Policy Board, the President's Intelligence Advisory Board, and the CIA director's External Advisory Board . Each of these positions gives members access to sensitive information.
 Many of the people who work closely with Biden are enmeshed in the opaque world of strategic consultancies . But many are also involved in the world's biggest businesses .
 If they've been consulting for corporations with offshore interests, this spells potential conflicts . If they’ve been consulting with corporations with off-shore interests, they could be at risk .
 The legality of that has yet to be challenged and given the potential for encouraging corruption in government, and the deadly consequences of that potential corruption . The legality has yet not been challenged .
 The Ukraine War is at least prima facia proof of that deadly corruption . The Ukraine war is at minimum primafacia evidence of that corruption .
 Mandy Smithberger suggests special interest control of U.S. politicians may not be so opaque as Mandy suggests .
 Haines worked in the private sector consulting for companies such as the Denver-based Palantir Technologies, which specializes in data analytics .
 Palantir’s government business grew much faster in 2020 than its commercial business . The government's government business grows much faster than its business business .
 Its total revenue increased 47% from about $743 million to $1,093 million in 2020 . The company's total revenue rose 47% to about $1.3 million .
 The U.S. keeps claiming “just war, when its wars are profoundly unjust, when it is profoundly unjust . When someone actually does promote a real humanitarian intervention, nobody believes it is even possible .
 It is like the boy who falsely cried ‘Wolf’ so many times, nobody believes there are wolves anywhere, anymore . The boy who cried “Wolf” so much times, no one believes there is wolves anywhere .
 It is long past time to exculpate President Putin, and place responsibility for the war in Ukraine that began in 2014, where it belongs .