 Viktor Medvedchuk is the last chance to avoid a full-scale war in Donbas, as reported by Oleksandr Tkachenko . Dnipropetrovsk Regional State Administration Head Ihor Kolomoisky is sure that the appointment of Viktor
 Ligabusinessinform reports that Ihor Kolomoisky is the owner of this holding . Lig Busy is a former owner of the holding .
 War will be the only alternative to this deal, says Tkachenko on his Facebook page . War will not be the first alternative to the deal, he says .
 Putin is the godfather of Medvedchuk’s child, Kolomoisky says . The separatist leaders will not approve his candidacy, he says .
 Borys Filatov, Kolomoisky’s deputy in the Dnipropetrovsk Oblast State Administration, confirmed that the conversation between his boss and Tkachenko took place .
 Viktor Medvedchuk and Nestor Shufrych may soon lead Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts as a compromise . Earlier, media reported that Medveschuk and Shufych may lead Donetsk.
 Kyiv, weakened by contradictions, does not fully control Ukraine's Southern and Eastern regions . The issue is that Kyiv doesn't fully control the regions .
 The Donbas Battalion, Dnipro Battalion, and so on. All these regions each have their own versions of local armies which support Ukraine .
 These military formations arose due to Kyiv’s inability to protect the citizens of these regions from the Russian invasion or from Russian-backed terrorists .
 Yuriy Romanenko called the execution of a similar scenario “Bosnia 2.0,’ drawing an analogy with the state model . The state model has been established in Bosnia and Herzegovina since the war of 1992-1995 .
 It is characterized by the weakness of the state, which has insufficient resources to solve the contradictions between the various regions of the country . It is described by the state as a state that has insufficientresources to solve contradictions .
 Russia counts on being armed with qualitatively new missile systems by 2018-2020 . Ukraine is a key part of Russia's development of missile systems . Russia is expected to be armed with new missiles by 2020 .
 The dependence of Russia’s defense industry on Ukraine cannot be overcome in so short a time . Russia's defense industry is a key part of the Ukraine crisis .
 Getting Eastern and Southern Ukraine under its control could resolve this issue for Russia . Russia is trying to get Ukraine under control of Ukraine .
 US, EU, Russia, and Ukraine on the regional status of Ukraine’s terrorist-besieged regions .
Political analyst Pavlo Nuss claims Poroshenko is being compelled to resolve the situation in the east through exclusively peaceful means . Such a consensus can be inferred from this article by Nuss .
 Only then will the key EU countries be ready to ratify the agreement, he says . The agreement was signed on June 27, 2014 .
 Russia has to understand that Ukraine will not be a member of some mythical Eurasian Union . President Putin is trying to promote on the basis of this new doctrine of a special position for Russia in the world .
 Ukraine will not be a member of the Eurasian Union, but Ukraine can have a separate trade agreement with Russia . Ukraine can also take into account that certain forms of exchange and trade are mutually beneficial .
 Industrial products that Russia needs and are being produced in Ukraine. Industrial products are being made in Ukraine .
 Most of the engines for Russian civil aviation are produced in Ukraine . Some of the rockets used by the U.S. are produced by Ukraine .
 Ukraine and Russia have a special treaty, says Brzezinski . The treaty should be continued under an arrangement, he says .
 This scenario was first mentioned in the article “The first target of Putin’s Russia is not only Crimea, but all Eastern and Southern Ukraine” on March 16, 2014 .
 A strong resistance by the Ukrainian army, unexpected by Russia, a failure to fully destabilize Eastern and Southern Ukraine, would force Russia to consider a backup scenario . The Ukrainian army is expected to resist Russia's attempts to destabilize Ukraine .
 If military intervention fails, Crimea and Ukraine could be put under Russia's "protectorate" of Russia . Ukraine could formally leave Ukraine as a territory of Ukraine .
 Rallies against the truce declared by the President of Ukraine were held today in Kyiv . The President has declared a truce between Ukraine and Ukraine .
 President Petro Poroshenko faces very hard decisions to make in a short time . President Poroshenko has been in power for more than a decade .
Third round of negotiations declared with the possibility of a truce extension . Third round could result in riots and insubordination of military units not fully controlled by Kyiv .
 Another option for Putin, mentioned by Stratagema Centre for political analysis director Yuriy Romanenko, is turning Ukraine into weak confederation .
 In this case, our motherland transforms into a confederation, where the external players establish zones of their influence . In the case, the motherland turns into a Confederation .
 Russia gets guarantees to pump gas through our territories and control over the east of Ukraine . Russia gets guarantee to pumpGas through our territory and control of our territories .
 The driver of Ukraine’s destruction in this case would the west of Ukraine and Kyiv,’ he concludes . ‘Another wave of escalation in the relations between the United States and Russia,” he says .