 Putin and the Annexation of Crimea TUOMAS FORSBERG. This article contributes to the growing scholarly literature endeavouring to explain Russia's annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 .
 This article discusses several middle-range theories within this genre of International Relations . It discusses the psychological point of view and discusses several theories .
 These theories are examined sympathetically but critically, spelling out the added value they might have in elucidating Russian foreign policy . They also consider the methodological limitations in producing plausible explanations .
 The article strives to overcome the traditional juxtaposition between the idea of rationality as a standard account of agency and various psychological interpretations .
 The article concludes that cognitive and psychological features can be applied to the Russian case . They can all explain Russia’s higher willingness to take risks in the context of the Ukrainian crisis .
 Russian foreign policy in general and the Crimean case in particular. In that way, they can provide us with partial explanations, and indeed are important elements of our understanding of Russia's foreign policy .
 Russia’s intervention in and subsequent annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 provides a contemporary challenge for policy-making and foreign policy scholarly community .
 Theories are rooted in the wider context of Russia-West relations, writes Peter Bergen .
 The Causes of Russia’s Near Abroad Assertion Revisited’.
 The lack of transparency in Russian decisionmaking is difﬁcult to present with any certainty, according to the Russian government . However, such explanations are dif ﬁ Cult to present.
 The paradox is that the less we have access to the actual decisionmaking process, the more important the psychological dimension might be, at least potentially .
Most scholars of international relations and Russian politics failed in their forecasts . Russia’s behaviour in the Ukrainian crisis surprised the policy community .
 IR schools failed to anticipate Russia's behaviour but still provide the most well-known explanations of the case . Concepts such as national interest or identity are so vague that one can always use them to retrospectively explain an event that was regarded as unlikely beforehand .
There is already a plethora of scholarly explanations reﬂecting the common theoretical approaches to Russian foreign policy .
 John Mearsheimer’s offensive structural realism is known for his structural realism . The most famous is his offensive Structural realism .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine should be seen as a self-evident reaction to the external context, he says . He argues that the West's aggressive grand strategy in Russia is one of the weapons in the struggle for power .
 Russia’s primary objective is to keep Ukraine out of foreign military alliances and geopolitical blocs . Russia's primary objective was to keep the country out of military alliances .
 Richard Ericson and Lester Zeager presented in pure game-theoretic terms . They used the socalled theory of moves .
 The idea is to derive the equilibrium, or ultimate outcome, under various assumptions about Western and Russian preferences 2.2.
 The example shows that sophisticated models of different scenarios can be developed on the basis of rational choice . Such models also face the challenge of empirical data in terms of explanation .
 Michael McFaul, representing the liberal school of thought, claims the reasons for Russia's behaviour lie in Russia’s domestic politics . Putin reacted to the homegrown threat of a colour revolution and created an external crisis to enhance the domestic pressure against the opposition .
 Robert Legvold argues that the Cold War's lesson for contemporary Russia and the United States is that it is the interaction between the two sides, rather than the actions of only one side, that creates the spiral in tensions .
 Russian national identity discourses changed so that the annexation of Crimea became both thinkable and natural by 2014 . A more internal identity dimension is what some analysts see as the Russian use of ‘bio-politics’ that is, claiming to defend the interests of “compatri
 Andrei Tsygankov suggests that both interests and values explain Russia's behaviour in Ukraine .
 Roy Allison combines the above explanations to explain Russia’s conduct in this case .
 Elias Götz also concludes his survey of theories attempting to explain Russia’s assertive policy in the “near abroad” by warning against mono-causal approaches . He says future research should develop different synthetic explanations .
 We will contribute to this debate by advancing a set of psychological approaches . We will also contribute to the debate by offering a set.
 This should not be seen as a case for mono-causal explanations, but as an attempt to construct theoretically sustained psychological explanations . This should be a attempt to assess them against the background of available evidence .
 Psychological theories have always been part of the tradition of Soviet/Russian foreign policy research . But paradoxically in the present context these theories have remained marginal and underdeveloped .
 Putin was named by Forbes as the most powerful man in the world in 2016 . But we need to account for the psychological aspects of agency, he says .
 Our attitude towards these approaches is sympathetic but critical at the same time. Our attitude is sympathetic, but critical, according to the author .
 This new semi-academic branch of ‘Putinology’ is reminiscent of the old “Kremlinological’ tradition . Much of it is based on the art of second-guessing the inner dynamics of an opaque system .
 Such theories exist, however, and could be utilised more systematically . Such theories are still exist, but could be used more systematically.
Psychological approaches can be located within the middle-range theorising typical of FPA . They are partly but not entirely individual-level explanations focusing on a single decision-maker .
 These approaches rarely claim to offer all-encompassing, comprehensive or sufﬁcient explanations for any decision . But they can provide partial explanations that are nevertheless crucial for understanding foreign policy decision-making in cases such as Russia's intervention in Crimea .
 We will home in on these approaches in order to examine how they could contribute to Russia’s decision-making and behaviour in the context of the Ukrainian crisis of 2014 .
 Russian foreign policy has previously been applied to the study of Russia's foreign policy . In so doing, we will also draw a historical-theoretical picture, and review how these approaches have been applied .
 We are most willing to admit that the empirical evidence related to psychological theories is often speculative . But attempts to apply them can perhaps better be seen as “hoop tests’ that make one theory plausible while not excluding others .
Psychological approaches will not only complement but are necessary elements of any in-depth discussion and understanding of Russian foreign policy in general and the Crimean case in particular .
 Putin and other Russian leaders may be treated as human persons, say experts . But they do exactly the opposite when treating them as human people, they say .
 The question of whether Putin is acting rationally or not has been posed in the context of the Ukraine crisis in Ukraine . The question has been asked about whether Putin's actions are rationally.
 Russia already had immense inﬂuence on the peninsula, but without the need to subsidise it, as Ukraine had . Ukraine had already had a huge in-depth in the region .
 Such a question often assumes that we can juxtapose rationality and psychology, but this is often impossible . The question is often difficult to answer, says John Sutter .
 A strict methodological deﬁnition of rationality is proposed by positivist science . It seeks to turn individual behaviour into that conducted by anybody in a similar situation .
 Mainstream political realism has turned this into a normative claim that the pursuit of national interest, deﬁned as power, should guide the foreign policy of a state if it desires to be successful and survive .
 The mere notion of instrumental rationality does not predict anything about what an actor should want in a choice situation .
 Rationality is merely understood as a process of gathering sufﬁcient information about costs and bene ﬁts . Then choosing the option more likely to lead to a better outcome, according to 21.
 Bounded rationality is already a step towards taking into account psychological factors, as it emphasises the improbability of optimal choice in most cases .
 The decision-maker stops considering alternatives when he thinks he has found a satisfactory solution, even if it was not the optimal .
 There are three ways to understand the relationship between rationality and psychology with regard to decision-making .
 In this understanding, there is also an implicit or explicit normative juxtaposition between a rational decision-maker and someone whose decisionmaking is seemingly negatively affected by psychological attributes, such as stress, ideological prejudices or emotions .
 The second approach regards the degree of rationality vs. psychology as some kind of continuum . The third approach is to consider the level of rationality and psychology of the human experience .
Psychological theories dealing with decision-making vary in how much they overlap with instrumental or bounded rationality .
Psychological approaches discuss the limits of rationality and reveal some features in human behaviour . Human behaviour may appear as anomalies from a very strict rational choice approach .
 The point of psychological approaches, therefore, is that they normalise these anomalies . The point is that these anomalies are normalised .
 A third, and more recent approach assumes that it is more fruitful to understand rationality as part of human psychology, rather than seeing rationality and psychology as opposite components .
 Psychological and, above all, neurological research has made great strides in recent years in understanding the importance of emotions during decisions .
 The realisation that emotions are not necessarily the opposite of rationality, says the study . The study was carried out by the University of Cambridge .
 emotions are essential to human rationality and are always present in decision-making . rational information processing and emotion in the human brain are physically and functionally much more closely integrated than previously thought .
Group dynamics, personal characteristics and situational factors are typically omitted in IR grand theories . At the same time, they form a toolbox of useful theoretical perspectives .
 Groupthink has long featured among the most-cited psychological theories in foreign policy analysis . Groupthink is one of the most popular psychological theories of foreign policy .
 Irving L Janis presented the concept to explain why a small group of decision-makers can reach not only suboptimal but clearly irrational decisions on most important issues .
 One of his case studies was the disastrous Korean war, in the context of which American foreign policy decision-making was characterised by an almost naive harmony, mutual admiration and ﬂattery .
In certain circumstances, the decision-makers do not strive for the best solution . They omit even clear facts and do not allow any contradictory information and opinions to interfere with the group dynamics .
 It is interesting to consider Russia’s decision-making in the Crimean question from this perspective . Russia's decision- making in the Crimea question is interesting, says CNN .
 The decision was communicated to the Security Council and the Foreign Ministry . Only later was the decision communicated to them .
 This information, from corridor sources of “ofﬁcials and analysts, was subsequently circulated in other analyses and became more or less accepted version of events .
 Putin’s own statements in a Russian TV documentary at the beginning of 2015, now widely available in social media, to some extent .
 Putin says the decision was made during the night between 22 and 23 February . Putin says it was made in the night of 22-23 February .
 Putin frames the decision as being related to planning the rescue of the deposed Ukrainian president, Viktor Yanukovych . It is not quite clear how this actually made the Crimean intervention necessary .
 He recollects that besides himself there were four colleagues in the meeting . He also recalls that there were also four colleagues.
 Putin does not reveal the names of those four colleagues . It is probable that they included Defence Minister Sergey Shoygu, who was allegedly present .
 Putin states that he himself took the initiative and ordered his colleagues to prepare the takeover of Crimea . In any case, Putin says he himself takes the initiative .
 There is evidence that the idea of annexing Crimea would have been expressed one or two weeks earlier in February 2014 by a powerful business group .
 The idea was seriously considered in the Kremlin as early as December 2013 . Others have remarked that the idea was considered in 2013 .
 The question would have been raised by the chairman of the Crimean Parliament, Dmitry Konstantinov, when he visited Moscow and met with Patrushev, who was positively surprised .
 The possibility of annexing Crimea had allegedly been discussed as a principal option in the Kremlin back in 2008 . The wider narratives of Russia’s foreign policy formulation point to the concentration of power and the diminishing role of outside inﬂuence .
 Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and Defence Minister Sergei Shoygu played a seemingly marginal role in the decision-making over Crimea . ShoyGu was hesitant with regard to the military intervention in Ukraine .
 If these views are correct, we can conclude that the decision-making unit consisted of like-minded “hawks’ belonging to the ‘siloviks’ All those usually regarded as representing a more “liberal” wing were missing . If these
 The group was obviously controlled by a strong leader, but all the elements conducive to groupthink emerging were present . The group's leader was clearly controlled by the strong leader .
 A constellation of the decision-making unit, with very little space for an open and rational search for alternatives, creates a tendency to inﬂuence the decisionmaking towards increased risk-taking .
 It seems that the consequences of the decisions were not considered in detail, as one might expect from a rational decision-maker .
 The level of our competence is not enough to answer this question, he says . "We don’t know what information is possessed by our country," he says.
 I know the president and I can say that he does not make decisions lightly. I know that he makes decisions lightly, and I know he doesn't make a decision lightly .
 The annexation of Crimea was announced in Crimea on Thursday . It is not clear which groupthink played a role in the decision-making . But, in fairness, it was also unexpected for all of us .
 A future study on political history might advance more such features of the decision-making situation . It is important that the theoretical plausibility of groupthink be presented, he says .
 Another psychological theory that might explain the Kremlin’s propensity to take risks in Ukraine conﬂict is prospect theory .
 Theory was developed by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky in the 1970s . They investigated why behaviour of people so often differs from what would be expected to be rational .
 Prospect theory claims that people are generally risk-averse in choices involving gains . People are more likely to be risk-seekers in decisions involving losses, it says .
 Instead of choosing on the basis of the outcome’s utility value, the choice's starting point is framed . As many choice situations can be framed in terms of both gains and losses .
In international relations, prospect theory has been used to explain why politicians are sometimes ready to take risks against the odds .
 Russian foreign policy has not been analysed in academic articles in terms of prospect theory . It has been used in jounalistic accounts .
 The argument is that Putin interpreted the political developments in Ukraine in early 2014 as a loss of the preferred status quo . The argument was that Putin had interpreted the developments as a lost status quo.
 In other words, it was actually weakness, not strength, that led Russia to invade Crimea . Russia invaded Crimea in Crimea, Crimea in February 2014 .
 prospect theory does not differentiate between individuals but anticipates on the basis of average behaviour, based on a different rationality that would suggest .
 It has been found that prospect theory generally holds across different cultures . But there are some signiﬁcant exceptions .
 The theory does not contain any clear statement about how the framing exactly happens, that is what the reference point is for gains and losses .
 The theory, in this sense, has problems similar to those in rational choice theory . The theory is similar to that of rational choice. The theory has problems like that of the theory of choice .
In retrospect, one can deﬁne the reference point from the choices, but not independently from the materialised action . In retrospect, the choice is not the choice, but it is the choice .
 Russia's national interest or identity, or individual decision-makers’ belief system, might make a fair estimation of the reference points of Russian foreign policy, and then draw a conclusion about Russia’s risk-taking behaviour .
This type of tailored approach would consequently individualise or contextualise the otherwise general notion of prospect theory for a certain foreign policy situation and actor . This type of tailor-made approach would be tailored to individualise and contextualise.
 Ukraine’s tightening relationship with the EU in the form of the Association Agreement was framed as a loss, while Ukraine's entry to the Eurasian Economic Union was framed more as a gain .
 The Euromaidan and the revolution in Ukraine were threatening Putin’s previous accomplishments, according to Putin .
 President Putin appears to be a risk-taker in the context of invading Crimea, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The readiness to take risks at the beginning of the crisis could be explained by his fear of a loss . The growing risk-averseness would be caused by his willingness to defend his initial victories, that is, the annexation of Crimea and the ability to control the future of
 Any risk-taking could easily transform these victories into major defeats, both domestically and internationally . Any risk taking could easily turn these victoriesinto major defeats .
Psychological approaches suffer from a serious methodological setback, says John Sutter . Sutter: It is very difﬁcult to obtain any direct evidence about the psychological reasoning or subconscious motivation of a decision-maker .
Public speeches and other similar available data can then become an 44-year-old . However, approaches such as belief systems, worldviews, cognitive maps and so forth have resolved this problem .
 Before constructivism, these approaches were considered rather progressive . They were apt to challenge the more traditional realist approaches by adding an ideational dimension .
 Study of operational codes became a popular trend in the study of Soviet foreign policy . One application of this trend is the study, which might also be considered “more psychological’ than research on belief systems or ideology .
 The concept was coined by Nathan Leites in the 1950s when he studied the operational code of the Bolsheviks, especially that of Lenin and Stalin .
 He concluded that this code included such political maxims as pushing to the limits . He said it included engaging in pursuit of an opponent who begins to retreat or make concessions, but knowing when to stop .
 Leites also used examples from classical Russian literature .
 Leites claims that in many cases it was only in Russian literature that one could ﬁnd ‘a clear and vivid description of the feelings and moral sentiments which are opposed, or continued, in Bolshevik beliefs’
 The Bolshevik operational code denies in opposition to the traditional Russian intelligentsia’s tendency to stress sincerity . Instead, any communication should be orientated on the basis of impact only .
 A real Bolshevik must also, unlike Russians typically do, “avoid the servitude and annihilation which follows from a lack of control over his feelings,’ says a real Bolshevik . A real Bolshevist must also ‘avoid servitude’ and ‘
50 Leites’ sophisticated approach is difﬁcult to replicate or apply to other countries and political leaders . He must be able to interfere with, release, and simulate emotions’s.
 Alexander George tried to popularise the approach. It is partly for this reason that it was largely “neglected’s”
 George’s major contribution was his development of the operational code 45 . The code was developed for the first time as a result of George's work .
 Stephen Dyson's analysis was written immediately after Putin took up ofﬁce as president in 2000 . Dyson followed George’s original methodology rather literally, using as sources of evidence Putin's personal history .
 Dyson concludes that Putin’s behaviour is characterised by a belief in reciprocity in following norms and rules . He says he is inclined to believe in the possibility of harmonious political life .
 If others are not following the jointly agreed-upon norms and rules, he is ready to strike back in retaliation . However, if he feels that others aren't following the joint agreement, he will strike back .
 Putin is not willing to adapt to norms that provide no way out, and which serve to limit his freedom . On the other hand, Putin is also unwilling to adapt, and that's not the same thing .
 He is inclined to choose political goals that are both achievable and measurable, and he works in a step-by-step fashion .
 Putin's world is that of both norms and anarchy, allowing both predictable and risky behaviour . All in all, Putin’s world is of both norm and anarchy .
 Dyson concluded that Putin is unlikely to make rash, impulsive or emotional gestures that interfere with the rationality of political exchange . He warned that “a breakdown in cooperation will likely be bitter and long-lived’
 Russia also explains its action in the Crimean case by referring to legal frameworks and language .
 Russia continues the tradition of couching its basic foreign and security policy line in very rational language, such as the December 2014 updated version of Russia’s military doctrine .
 The operational code type of approach does not offer any explanations as to individual decision-making situations, such as the annexation of Crimea, but rather helps in understanding Putin’s speciﬁc rationality .
Political leaders’ operational codes can be reconstructed from public sources, and something about their expected actions and reactions in different situations can be inferred . It was originally assumed that operational codes had already been developed in childhood or early adulthood and rarely changed much in later phases of life .
 New wave of studies in operational codes that started in the late 1990s. This assumption has been challenged by the new wave of Studies in operational code .
 Based on George’s original two sets of questions, but now enhanced with rather sophisticated data treatment software, this research has analysed huge quantities of 52 questions .
 Lyndon B Johnson, 56 Jimmy Carter, 57 Bill Clinton, 58 Bill Clinton and 58 George W Bush, 59 Mao Zedong,60 Fidel Castro and Kim Il-sung,61 have experienced a measurable change .
 A noteworthy observation regarding George’s two sets of questions is that it was in the more fundamental philosophical set that the signiﬁcant changes were identi ﬁrst set .
 This is completely at odds with the traditional perspective on foreign policy learning . Basic beliefs are the most durable ones, according to which basic beliefs are most durable .
 In the study of Soviet foreign policy, for instance, this had always been the mainstream view . This had been the main view in the study.
 New research suggests that when policy-makers change, their modus operandi remains unchanged .
 If operational code undergoes a signiﬁcant change, one faces the puzzle of whether the concept is merely an analytical tool or whether it can also explain and predict foreign policy decisions of leaders .
There used to be a discussion about Putin I and Putin II, that is the difference between his foreign policies during the ﬁrst and second presidential terms .
 Jan F Triska, “Model for Study of Soviet Foreign Policy’s’S.
 In any event, even the best-informed Russian analysts failed to anticipate the major change that the Ukrainian crisis produced .
 The collapse of the Viktor Yanukovych regime and his ﬂeeing the country was an unexpected catalyst for the Russian leadership . The failure of his efforts to stop Ukraine’s association with the EU, the Euromaidan movement and the collapse of Yanukovych regime was a surprise catalyst
 The documentary broadcast one year after the annexation of Crimea was interpreted by some Russian political analysts as bearing the hallmarks of a rather impulsive decision . Putin's contempt of Western leaders who did not, in his view, take Russia's interests and Russia's leader seriously enough.
 Operational code analysis cannot explain Russia's or Putin's decision to invade the Crimean Peninsula .
 Putin's decision to violate sovereignty principle was rooted in his legalistic worldview . But one could argue that without the change in Putin’s answers to “philosophical questions’, one could hardly understand the decision .
 The proposal in the current operational code literature that the fundamental ideas of a political leader are more susceptible to change than instrumental beliefs could be supported by evidence in Putin’s case .
 His fundamental beliefs changed from the possibility of cautious pragmatic cooperation and harmony with the West, to a much more ideologised antagonism . He said his beliefs changed to a more Ideologised  antagonism.
 Ukraine has been under fire for its treatment of Chechnya in 1999/the early 2000s and Georgia in 2008 . But the Ukrainian case is not the same as those in Chechnyya and Georgia .
 So-called psychological proﬁling is commonplace in diplomatic reports, intelligence services and everyday journalism .
 The fact that individuals have different psychological characteristics is not something that rationalist-oriented analysts would dispute . However, the fact that people have different personalities is not what rationalist analysts would say .
 Putin’s own account in Putin, ‘Meeting of the Valdai International Discussion Club’, op. cit. cit . Putin's own account: “Meeting. of the Vladai International discussion Club”
 Advancement in that shadowy world presupposes a strong nationalist commitment and a cool, analytical streak .
 It leads to a foreign policy comparable to that during the tsarist centuries . It is seeking to dominate neighbors where they cannot be subjugated .
 The proportion between which is reached by careful, patient, and cautious manipulations of the balance of power. With respect to other powers, it involves a combination of pressures and inducements .
Should one employ psychological proﬁling, one would need to dig deeper than Kissinger, it would be more than Kissinger .
 In the study of history, this approach is usually called psychohistory . It is usually known as "psychohistories"
Psychohistory is itself such a multifaceted approach that whole books have been written about its internal differences . To be sure, psychohistories are itself such an complex approach .
 There is no single uniform theory or methodology. Some authors have applied psychoanalysis, some medical analysis . Others base their arguments on everyday psychology .
 In Soviet studies, Joseph Stalin has been a fruitful target of this type of approach . Robert C. Tucker is known for his approach to Soviet studies .
 Stalin’s general political behaviour was explained by his personality, rooted in the violent experiences of his childhood . So the argument went—gave rise to his narcissistic cult of personality, mirroring his inner conﬂicts and self-hatred .
 Putin did not receive much support from his parents, who showed little “Vova’s no demonstrable affection.’
 The child’s physical stress and frustration led him to suppress his emotions as there was no way to vent them .
 Putin’s adult character was subsequently born of a fear of feelings and affection, a kind of encapsulation, which was reﬂected in his personal identity, and shaped his future actions in society .
 Putin’s full identity was formed in the axis of this rather prosaic personal tragedy . In the pressure of the totalitarian social system, he was a secret service agent .
 Putin's character changed to that of “a rational terminator, who despised the enemies of the state’s enemies .
 At ﬁrst, it was the Chechens who were punished for their attempt to destroy the state .
 Putin then went on to restore the glory of the Soviet security service, the KGB . He hung a picture of Yuri Andropov, the former KGB director and subsequent party leader, on his wall .
 Putin, looking inside himself, instinctively felt that only hard, top-down discipline could bring salvation to the Russian people . When confronted with freedom, Putin turned to selfaccusations and shame .
 That conﬂict could be settled by directing this shame towards external parties, and instilling blind Conﬁdence in the state executive .
 Putin concealed his internal feelings of shame by resorting to anger and rage, hiding all signs of weakness . Putin hid his feelings of weakness by resorted to force as the only way to avoid being humiliated .
 He arranged his features into a frozen expression, thus involuntarily defending his vulnerable feelings . He was incapable of expressing his feelings, he said .
 When he became a public ﬁgure, his media advisors had difﬁculty teaching him to express some kind of contrived semblance of a smile .
 Putin suppressed his internal conﬂicts with narcissism, which is typical of all dictators . Ultimately, Putin suppressed the internal con conversion with narcissism .
 It led to wholesale dominance and the inevitable creation of Putinism, according to his own image . Putinism led to the creation of the Putinism. Putinism cast the environment and society at large according to him .
 Before long, an awareness of his own aging and eventually demise came into the picture . But before long, he had not been aware of his age .
 Ihanus predicted in 2008 before the Georgian war that the feeling of weakness and inevitable mortality would eventually shred the internal protective veil . He says it would lead to aggressive and sadistic behaviour .
 Swiss psychoanalyst Philipp Jaffe says Putin's actions as president are characterised by some kind of childhood trauma related to weakness . In the same spirit, Jaffe said Putin’s actions are characterising by childhood trauma .
Psychoanalyst claims psychobiography is not necessary to personally know the subject under analysis . He claimed that from the perspective of a professional psychoanalyst, it was not necessary.
 Putin takes any criticism against Russia personally, and tries to retaliate with force. What was noteworthy in his assessment was that Putin took any criticism of Russia personally .
When other children shove him, he shows his physical strength in no uncertain terms . When other children push him, his strength is not uncertain .
 Jaffe says Putin has transferred personal characteristics into his political activities . Jaffe: Putin has achieved almost absolute power in Russia .
 The psychoanalyst sees Putin as a very intelligent person, who nonetheless suffers from a number of complexes .
 Upon reaching a position of relatively unlimited power, such a person may develop several other syndromes . Such a person could develop several others .
 The notion of ‘childhood trauma’ and “emotional chaos’ is reiterated in many journalistic accounts . Many journalistic accounts suggest a narcissistic and bullying personality is reiterated .
 According to these stories, Putin apparently grew up feeling that he had some kind of internal defect . He harbouring thoughts that there was something about himself that was damaged and shameful .
 He developed a defensive identity to hide his subconscious shame and to prove that he was a winner instead . So he developed a defence identity.
 Putin, younger than the thugs and slight of build, tried to hold his own with them . Putin was younger than his thugs and had a slight of building .
Biographical evidence suggests that his growing physical prowess, later supplemented with a junior position in the most feared institution in the Soviet Union, the KGB, made him no less impulsive or violent, but certainly much calmer and more self-concerned .
 Putin has turned his tough childhood experiences into a mythology, emphasising his antisocial characteristics . Putin has managed to turn his tough experiences to his advantage .
 NATO’s ofﬁcial commentators did not hesitate to tweet it . This typical Putinesque quote quickly hit the headlines worldwide .
 Fiona Hill and Clifford G Gaddy claim Putin suffers from a ‘personality disorder’ Putin has several identities, which are in conﬂict with each other, they say .
 Many in the West tend to see Putin’s personality in a rather negative light .
 He has been called a ‘high-dominance introvert’ with a mindset characterised by a tendency to view the world as a conﬂictual zero-sum game . He also has an expansionist orientation in foreign affairs .
 It has been said that “contempt’ is the key to his psychological proﬁle. It has also been said ‘contempt' is the main key to the psychological pro-psychological pro-life .
 Some journalists have noted a peculiar trait in that he does not respect other people's property . But he thinks instead that everything is his for the taking .
 Latvia's former president Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga was trained as a clinical psychologist and worked in that ﬁeld for many years . The former president's comment is a comment by Latvia’s former president .
 Putin's gait is a behavioural adaptation resulting from intelligence training, according to experts . Putin's motor skills are otherwise excellent, they say .
 Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev walks in the same way without having a military or intelligence background . The imitation phenomenon has parallels in cases of a disorder known as hyperekplexia .
 Putin’s personality may explain his willingness to take risks as well as his risk-aversion, but they have difﬁculty in explaining variation .
 These theories are rather speculative due to the nature of the sources they rely upon, says the author .
 Western mass media and social media are awash with such interpretations of Putin . The West is demonising Putin, with suggestions that he is a typical narcissist, and has a severe psychological disorder .
 The sources underpinning such analyses are bound to be mainly second-hand and indirect . Most likely anecdotal, and most likely anecdotal .
Psychological warfare is often part of the psychological warfare in a conﬂict situation . They are seldom nuanced enough to account for any variation .
 Such narratives may challenge us to think more systematically about possible character traits . But such narratives could challenge us more systematically to think about possible traits .
 The tough overall attitude of Russia’s foreign policy and risk-taking could, at times, be seen as compatible with the perception of Putin's personality . If harder evidence is available, the tough overall attitudes of Russia's foreign policy could, if harder evidence were available.
Psychology and psychological proﬁling are rather far removed from any credible explanation of Russia’s decision-making . We should be ready to widen foreign policy analysis theoretically to include the possibility of such factors .
 Counterfactual theories of causation take as their point of departure from the basic idea that the meaning of causal claims can be explained in the form of ‘If A had not occurred, C would not have occurred’ While there are several versions within this debate, it is dif
 Even if Putin's psychological characteristics were part of the explanation, they would not provide sufﬁcient reasons for Russia’s annexation of Crimea .
 Russia would have reacted to the developments in Ukraine in a roughly similar manner . It is possible that had the circumstances been different, the annexation would not have occurred under Putin, or had there been another president .
 The question of the role of emotions in Russian foreign policy decision-making is not a new theme, but it has not been properly integrated into academic research . The question is not new theme.
 emotions are often seen as pejorative and contributing to conjecture about a special Russian character or abnormality . One reason for this is that emotions are seen asPejorative. One reason is that they contribute to conjecture.
 Dmitri Trenin and Bobo Lo have argued that Russia has been transformed from an object of serious scientiﬁc enquiry into a mystical and virtually “unknowable” entity .
 The role of emotions in Russian foreign policy might be formulated and how meaningful research into the subject can be conducted . We should consider how the role of emotion in Russia's foreign policy may be formulated .
 Two opposing stereotypes of Russians in general, and of Russian political leaders in particular, have a long pedigree in the literature as well as in contemporary narratives .
 A cold-blooded chess player with a long-term plan who contemplates every move rationally .
 There is the emotional type who reacts impulsively; guided by his feelings, he does everything to excess, and lives in the moment . Then there are the emotional types who react impulsively, guided by feelings, and live in the moments .
 In Russian politics, emotions are typically attributed to some leaders more than to others .
 There are numerous examples that support this view of Putin as a calculating, rational thinker .
 In journalistic accounts, references to Putin’s emotions, or rather the lack thereof, are commonplace . Besides, what we do is limited in scope and scale, but is, however, sufﬁcient to ensure Russia's security.
 Putin had to address the Kursk submarine tragedy at the beginning of his presidential career . For example, he was seen as being emotionally cold .
 Putin was seen in tears after the 2012 presidential elections . Putin's spokesman said it was due to the wind, and not his emotions .
 Putin often expressed his emotions when issues related to terrorism in the North Caucasus were discussed . Yet Putin often expresses his emotions during talks with North Caucasus .
 Putin was chosen as Person of the Year 2007 . Richard Stengel described Putin as an “angry, angry man’s”
96 Putin’s emotions, as the president of Russia, cannot be understood without the social context of the extended self of Russia . Others have noted that ‘Putin’'s judo training taught him to control his emotions, but when he is angry his out
 We are less pragmatic, less calculating than representatives of other peoples, and we have bigger hearts . Of course, we are more pragmatic, more calculating than other peoples .
 Maybe this is a reﬂection of the grandeur of our country and its boundless expanses. Maybe it's a re-enactment of our nation's grandeur, says author .
 Putin’s hardline policy towards the West can also be seen as reﬂecting cultural models rather than individual impulses .
 It is difﬁcult to say exactly how prevalent and accepted anger is as an emotion in Russian culture . It is hardly merely an irrational sentiment, but it is not an irrational emotion .
 Displays of anger are quite common in Russian political and business life .
 Putin’s emotional outbursts may have helped achieve some foreign policy goals . It can be suggested that Putin's emotional outburststs may help achieve some Foreign Policy goals .
 He sharply criticised the United States and its planned missile defence. For example, his speech at the Munich security conference in 2007 .
 The speech was important because Putin was able to shift the agenda from democracy development in Russia to military strategic issues between the West and Russia .
 Putin's speech in Munich was ‘calculated’ and not ‘emotional’ Russians themselves have claimed that Putin’s speech was “calculated.’ It may have sounded so, although it may have sound so .
2 Anger is typically seen as an emotion conducive to inﬂicting harm on the other and motivating costly punishments . As Todd Hall notes, it is typical for political actors themselves to deny that they were driven by emotions .
 Anger is not merely a negative emotion that always results in violent behaviour, but it can also be seen as a constructive emotion aimed at addressing and rectifying wrongdoings rather than dissolving a relationship .
 Even when aggression is caused by anger, often its point is not so much to hurt the other as to send a message about a perceived injustice .
 Anger is not simply an impulsive emotional outburst, but can oftentimes be a long-lasting disposition . Also, anger is not just a impulsive outburst.
 It can explain the ﬁxation of the angered party on an issue even when the chances of inﬂuencing the issue have passed .
 The source of anger is often related to offences against identity or violations of key rights and moral codes . People feeling angry had more optimistic risk assessments than did people feeling fear .
 Russia has reacted angrily to NATO expansion, Kosovo war and missile defence . Russia’s desire to regain status as a great power on a par with the West .
 The Ukrainian crisis was seen as a breach of fundamental norms as well as a direct insult to Russia’s identity as a great power .
 It is possible to support this interpretation on the basis both of public statements and appearances . It's possible to back this interpretation, says the author .
 There is reason to believe that anger has been a genuinely important element in Russian foreign policy in Ukraine . Western partners have crossed the line, playing the bear and acting irresponsibly .
 Tsygankov claims the support for Crimea and hostility toward the Ukrainian revolution must be understood as a reaction to what the Kremlin views as neglect of Russia’s values and interests .
 The issue was at the heart of Russian identity, as well as Putin’s sense of justice .
 Russia reacted in line with action tendencies associated with anger by using sharp language, inﬂicting harm and even instigating a hazardous, violent campaign .
 The article has considered a range of psychological theories applicable to the study of Russian foreign policy . It focuses on Russia’s decision to invade and then annex the Crimean Peninsula .
 The chosen perspective emphasises the speciﬁc role and character of the key decision-maker in the case, President Putin . But psychological approaches should not be equated with individual-level explanations .
 The relevant information and data available on the current decisionmaking situation are not abundant enough for the psychological explanations discussed above to be validated beyond reasonable doubt . It is unlikely that much new “hard evidence’ will be presented in the near future .
Realist, liberal and constructivist theories all contain assumptions about decisionmaking that they cannot prove with much concrete evidence when providing explanations for particular cases .
 There are both practical and theoretical reasons for integrating psychological approaches into the academic research on Russian foreign policy . But psychological approaches entail methodological and evidence-related problems .
 Psychological approaches can generate new research questions and resolve some of the existing puzzles in the analysis of foreign policy .
 It is possible to advance partial explanations of Russia’s behaviour and validate these to the extent that they are plausible in the light of available evidence .
 The psychological dimension of Russian foreign policy, focusing on the main decision-maker, President Vladimir Putin, can still be crucial . While external power relations, domestic politics and national identities cannot be omitted .
Psychological factors should be seen as part of the overall explanation alongside the IR 109 . The IR 109 should also be considered to be a factor in the overall analysis of the team .
Psychological factors as causal triggers of the decision in certain structural conditions, or intervening variables that explain the relationship between independent and dependent variables, such as foreign policy behaviour, can be counterfactuals .
 Not as much as we had hoped, perhaps, and at least not with any certainty. Not as many as we'd hoped, maybe, perhaps .
 In this way, they do not hamper the intellectual effort to understand Russian foreign policy, but facilitate it . In this case, they don't hamper their efforts to understand Russia's foreign policy , but facilitates it .
Nothing in standard realist, liberal or constructivist accounts denies their possible role . Nothing in standardrealist or liberal or Constructivist accounts deny their possible roles .
 Russian foreign policy studies can pave the way for concrete research on the role of these factors in international affairs in general, without singling Russia out as a special case .
 The Academy of Finland Centre of Excellence on Choices of Russian Modernisation and the Academy Project on Cultural Statecraft in International Relations .
 His research has most recently dealt with Russian foreign policy and European security issues . He has also dealt with the EU, Germany and Northern Europe .
 His scholarly publications focus on such themes as crisis management, international relations theory and Soviet/Russian history and politics, published in different countries and in several languages .