 President Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama greet military families as they host an Independence Day celebration on the South Lawn at the White House in Washington, Friday, July 4, 2014 .
 He argued that the system must be changed for the U.S. to remain the greatest nation on earth . He said that the United States must be the greatest country on earth.
 Paris Charles de Gaulle airport in Roissy, France, is a French airport . The airport is located in the French capital of Paris .
 French government officials would not elaborate Friday on the measures . They say the need for discretion in security matters is needed .
 France is increasing security on flights headed for the United States this summer . U.S. concerns that al-Qaida is trying to develop a new kind of bomb .
 The Obama administration this week called for tighter security measures at foreign airports that have direct flights to the U.S. British airports to increase security Thursday .
 French government officials would not elaborate on the measures, citing the need for discretion in security matters .
 extremists with a U.S. or other Western passport could carry the new bomb onto a plane undetected by airport security .
 At Paris’ Charles de Gaulle airport, U.S.-bound flights saw delays of 30 minutes to an hour Friday .
 Sophie le Poulennec, a 26-year-old heading to Chicago, said she hoped there weren't any new luggage restrictions .
 U.S. intelligence has picked up indications that bomb makers from Yemenbased al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula have traveled to Syria to link up with the al-Qaeda affiliate there .
 Olivier de France says experts already exist to put explosive devices “in anything from shoes, soles, to energy drinks and even possibly surgically implanting these devices .
 Palestinian militants fired rockets and mortars from the Gaza Strip into Israel . Israel later carried out several airstrikes on what it described as “Hamas terror targets’ in Gaza .
 Israeli military says its troops opened fire offer spotting two Palestinians planting explosives near the Gaza border fence . Also, fhe Israeli military said its troops open fire on offer to spot two Palestinians.
16-year-old Mohammed Abu Khdeir was wrapped in a Palestinian flag and fradifional headscarf . He lived in east Jerusalem neighborhood where he lived .
 During the procession, scores of masked Palestinians threw rocks at Israeli police on duty nearby . They responded with stun grenades, spokesman Micky Rosenfeld said .
 Israeli police clashed with Palestinian protesters in Jerusalem on Friday . Thousands converged on a cemetery for the burial of an Arab teenager . Palestinians say the teenager was killed by Israeli extremists in a suspected revenge attack .
 One of Venezuela's mosf prestigious newspapers has been sold at a moment of increasing pressure on the country’s independent press .
 Details of the sale of Caracasbased El Universal to a group of Spanish investors were still emerging Friday .
 Jesus Abreu will assume leadership of the paper . Editor in Chief Elides Rojas confirms the sale .
 Abreu is best known as the brother of the director of Venezuela's governmentfunded system of youth orchestras . He is also the son of the former head of the Venezuelan government's youth orchestra .
 Rojas acknowledged there is apprehension in the newsroom about whether the paper will follow in the steps of other recently sold news media outlets that have softened their editorial line .
 He said he was hopeful that the paper would maintain its editorial standards . The paper's editor said he is hopeful that it will maintain its standards .
 The 26-year-old Dutchman remains the chief suspect in the 2005 disappearance of U.S. teen Natalee Holloway . He is married to a Peruvian woman pregnant with his child .
 Van der Sloot's lawyer says prison officials prohibited video and photos during the midday nuptials . He says none of fhe groom's relatives are expected to attend .
 Lawyer Maximo Altez says Van der Sloot's mother did send a tailored suit and dress shoes fitting his extra-large feet .
 Van der Sloot was sentenced to 28 years in prison two years ago for the 2010 murder of a Lima woman he met in casino . He was convicted of the murder in 2010 for the killing of a woman in Lima .
 Hurricane Arthur left tens of thousands without power Friday in a swipe at North Carolina’s dangerously exposed Outer Banks . It then brought lousy Fourth of July beach weather to the Northeast .
 Arthur scooted north and its outer bands scraped the Delaware and New Jersey shores . The weather along the narrow barrier islands had already cleared by Friday afternoon .
 Forecasters predicted the storm would weaken before its center moves over western Nova Scotia in Canada early Saturday .
 The effects of the hurricane were mostly confined to that part of the state . State and local officials worked to restore access to Hatteras Island .
 Farther south, the beaches were once again packed with people soaking up the sun . The beaches in the south of the country were packed with tourists .
 North Carolina Highway 12 was breached in Hurricane Irene in 2011 . About 40,000 people lost power in the area .
 Dozens of workers are heading to fix the highway, and the Department of Transportation says it is confident the road will reopen Saturday . An underwater sonar test of a key bridge showed no problems .
 After praising emergency officials and saying the state dodged a bullet, he said it dodged a shot . The state's emergency officials have been praised for their actions .
 McCrory noted that all of North Carolina’s beaches were open outside of the Outer Banks .
 The families said they were departing from their “moderate polite approach’s since the shootings in December 2012 . They said they have met with politicians privately and eschewed what they call “naming and shaming" because of the shootings .
 Family members from Sandy Hook Promise had traveled from Connecticut to Christie's office this week to deliver a petition with 55,000 signatures asking him to sign the bill .
 They had been seeking a meeting with him since May 22, they said . They had tried to see him again, but were told he was not available .
 Christie announced he was sending the bill back to the Legislature . He had taken out the magazine limit . The State House had left the State House earlier this week .
 Morehead City, Atlantic Beach and Beaufort only sustained minimal damage from Hurricane Arthur . Many were ready to enjoy the holiday weekend as the weather cleared rapidly .
 Q Onion Vidalia per 3 lbs. The# SUPERMARKET in ARUBA is available at www.lingandsons.com.com f lingandsons .
 Obama: "If we want to keep attracting the best and brightest from beyond our borders, we're going to have to fix our immigration system"
 Deputy Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas administered the oath of allegiance . Mayorka became a naturalized citizen in 1973 .
 The immigration issue is earning renewed attention because of the influx to the U.S. of tens of thousands of unaccompanied children .
 Under U.S. law, they must be returned to their home countries . Obama's deportation policy has been criticized by immigration advocates .
 At the same time, Obama blames House Republicans for delaying action on legislation covering millions already living in the U.S. illegally .
 The grounding is the latest in a long string of delays that has plagued the Air Force's newest, and most advanced, fighter aircraft . It comes just days before the plane was to make its international debut at an air show in Britain .
 The root cause of the problem at Eglin two weeks ago remains under investigation, the Pentagon's press secretary says .
 Eagle Beach, Aruba Fleet of F-35 jets grounded by Defense Department after fire for fire FOR SALE . luxurious residential complex built to the highest level .
 Some of the immigrants who have flooded the Texas border with Mexico have been arrested . Some of them have been detained in Texas .
 Earlier this week a crowd of protesters blocked buses carrying women and children migrants from overwhelmed Texas facilities .
 Obama and his wife, Michelle, welcomed hundreds of military members and their families to a barbecue on the South Lawn . The barbecue was sponsored by the USO, a nonprofit organization that provides services and entertainment to troops and families .
 The event featured a concert by Pitbull, along with prime seating for the fireworks on the National Mall .
 The president explained that he had other reasons to celebrate on Friday . The president said that he has other reasons for celebrating .
 House leaders say he will pursue non-legislative ways he can adDemocratic candidates . House leaders also lier that he will not visit the border . He plans not to visit border .
 The Marine Band plays the national anthem during a naturalization ceremony for active duty service members and civilians . The ceremony is held in the East Room of the White House in Washington .
 Andres is being awarded as an “Outstanding American by Choice’s’ initiative . The initiative recognizes the outstanding achievements of naturalized U.S. citizens .
 Obama scheduled a trip to Texas next week, mostly to raise money for everything I can to keep immigration system smarter and more efficient .
 Gerald Robinson’s sister-in-law told him the priest died Friday morning . The priest died at the age of 50 .
 He was arrested 24 years after the nun's death and was found guilty in 2006 of stabbing and strangling Sister Margaret Ann Pahl at a Toledo hospital where they both worked . He was also found guilty of stabbing the nun at the hospital where she worked .
 Church historians have said it’s the only documented case of a Catholic priest killing a nun .
 Robinson and Pahl had worked closely together at the hospital where he was a chaplain . She was caretaker of the chapel in the hospital .
 The 71-year-old nun was killed while she was preparing the chapel for Easter services in 1980 .
 Police found a sword-shaped letter opener in his desk drawer two weeks after the killing . Robinson emerged as a suspect when police found the letter opener .
 He also admitted lying to police, making up a story that someone else confessed to the murder . He also made up the story that another person confessed to murder .
 The Rev. Robinson developed a # in this Thursday, May 11, 2006 photo, in Toledo, Ohio .
 Gerald Robinson, a Roman Catholic priest, was found guilty of killing Sister Margaret Ann Pahl . He is accused of killing her and killing her with a shotgun .
 A federal court denied a request from Robinson to spend his final days in his Ohio hometown .
 Robinson died Friday at a Columbus prison hospice unit . He had delivered sermons and heard confessions in Polish .
 He ministered to the sick and dying at nursing homes and hospitals . He retired from three Roman Catholic parishes after retiring.
 A letter surfaced that accused Robinson and other priests of molestation . Police arrested him in 2004 after investigators reopened the murder case .
 Police weren't able to substantiate the allegations of sexual abuse, but it led them back to the nun’s murder .
Blood stains on an altar cloth seemed to match patterns of the letter opener found in Robinson's apartment . Investigators said blood stains on the altar cloth appeared to match pattern of letter opener .
 New technology not available in 1980 allowed them to connect the killing with the letter opener . The letter opener was used in the 1980s for the first time .
 Prosecutors said Robinson tried to humiliate Pahl in her death, her stab wounds formed an upside down cross and a smudge of blood on her forehead meant as a mock anointing .
 They blamed the murder on Robinson's simmering anger over Pahl’s domineering ways . Pahl was upset over shortening of Good Friday services a day before she was killed .
 Robinson, who wore his priest's collar throughout his trial, maintained his innocence while losing several attempts to overturn his conviction . Robinson was convicted of murder in 2007, but his conviction was later overturned .
 A new defense team argued that a now-deceased serial killer could have been the one who stabbed and strangled Pahl . The defense team said the killer may have been Pahl.
 Prosecutors dismissed the theory, saying investigators and even the priest's original attorneys didn’t think there was a connection . The priest’s original attorneys said there was no connection to the case .
 Robinson remained a priest after he was convicted, but he was barred from ministry . He was still a priest when he was sentenced .
 He told The Columbus Dispatch in an interview three years after the trial that he was stunned by testimony linking him to the murder . He told the Columbus Dispatch that he had been stunned by the testimony .
 The long-serving Cochran relied on Democrats and independent voters in his narrow win over Chris McDaniel .
 McDaniel says many Mississippi residents are angry because they think their votes in the June 24 primary were nullified by fraud . McDaniel: Many residents “are very angry’ because they believe their votes are nullified .
 Most of what McDaniel is describing as irregularities involved people who apparently voted in both the June 3 Democratic primary and the Republican runoff . McDaniel says people apparently voted for both the Democrats and Republicans .
 Mississippi does not register voters by party, but state law bans a person from voting in one party's primary and another party’s runoff in the same cycle .
 He did say that if the courts side against him, he would accept the outcome . He said that if he had a court case against him he'd accept the result .
 Cochran would not say whether he would ultimately endorse Cochran for Senate in the general election . He wouldn't say if he'd ultimately endorse him for Senate. Cochran is running for the Senate in 2014 .
 Michael Watson, an attorney who is working with the McDaniel campaign, is working for the campaign . Watson is also a former attorney for the Obama administration .
Immigrants hit a human wall in California town of Murrieta, California . Demonstrators argue about immigration outside town hall meeting .
 Many residents say they have been stunned by their neighbors' reactions in an ongoing dispute over the busing of immigrants for processing to a Border Patrol facility .
 immigration officials reroute the buses to San Diego, an hour south of San Diego . Fearing for the safety of the migrants and federal officers, immigration officials decided to reroute them .
 More than a thousand residents packed a high school auditorium Wednesday night for a town-hall-style meeting . The meeting lasted more than four hours, voicing fears about an influx of migrants .
 Murrieta is the only place that has managed to turn the migrants away from the border .
Residents of Artesia, New Mexico, expressed frustration at a meeting this week that immigrants were being placed at a temporary detention center there . Officials in Dallas have said they will welcome thousands of migrant children and have helped to coordinate donations .
 Central American immigrants have been met with such tremendous anger as they have here, in this middle-class conservative community . Nowhere have the Central American immigrant community in Los Angeles .
 We do our own daily fishing so we serve the freshest seafood on the Island . We serve our own seafood so we can get the fresest seafood on Island .
 Gertrude Weaver spent her birthday at home at Silver Oaks Health and Rehabilitation in Camden, southwest of Little Rock .
 Weaver was born in southwest Arkansas near the border with Texas . She was married in 1915 .
 She and her husband had four children, all of whom have died except for a 93-year-old son . All of them have died, except for her son, who was 93 .
 Gerontology Research Group used Weaver’s 1915 marriage certificate to confirm her birth year .
 Weaver celebrates her birthday each year on July 4 and did the same this year . No birth record exists for Weaver .
 Sunset & Dinner Cruise includes snacks, open Bar, Caribbean music . The Pelican Nest Restaurant on the Sea offers a spectacular view and professional service .
 Visit us at Casa del Mar, Playa Linda, Holiday Inn Concierge/lobby desk/ beach huts or at our own Pelican Pier, located between the Holiday Inn & Play a Linda Resort .
 Cleveland and Dallas are the two finalists for the Republican National Committee's third visit this week . The RNC has returned to Cleveland for a third time this week.
 Ohio is the only city on both the Republicans' and Democrats’ list of candidates to host their national conventions . Ohio voters have correctly picked the president every time since 1964 .
 The restaurant scene is percolating, and young newcomers are giving faded neighborhoods wesf of downtown . brew pubs and bistros are opening, a patina of hipness .
 Cleveland is a candidate for bofh the Republicans’ and Democrats’ 2016 conventions . Cleveland is the only city to make both lists .
Cleveland, Ohio, is in a bath of national attention that is making boosters giddy . This is about the renaissance of Cleveland. Landing either one, with its tens of thousands of visitors and prime-time TV coverage, would immerse the city .
 Obama and Romney spent so much time barnstorming the small towns and university arenas of Ohio in 2012 it sometimes seemed the entire election was being fought in the Buckeye State .
 Cleveland is heavily Democratic, with large numbers of black voters . The surrounding suburbs of Cuyahoga County have many Republican voters .
 A convention may have less influence on local voters than many assume . But a convention may be less influence than many assumes .
 Both Democrats, who gathered in Charlotte, North Carolina last time, and Republicans, who were in Tampa, Florida, lost their convention states .
 Republican National Committee spokesman says the choice would come down to other factors . Ryan Mahoney, a spokesman for the GOP, said the decision would be made by the committee .
 Central considerations are the ability of the host committee to raise money to pay tor the event, the number of hotel rooms and the calendar . Central considerations include the ability to raise funds for the event .
 Republicans want to avoid the mistake of 2012 when they waited until August, depriving Romney of general-election funds to counter a summer of Democratic attacks .
 Cleveland promises it could hold a convention in June, and Dallas in July . Cleveland promises to hold a conventions in June and July .
 If they select Cleveland, they will strike the city off their list . The Democrats are not planning to choose until later, they say .
 Jim Swift, a native of Shaker Heights, a Cleveland suburb, worked on logistics at previous conventions . Swift threw cold water on boosters' hopes in a column in The Plain Dealer .
 He warned of snarled traffic, violent protests and the unlikelihood of a ‘media narrative’ about a Cleveland comeback .
 The Cleveland Cavaliers' 20,500-seat arena would be home to the party hats and balloons of a nominating convention . It came two decades ago with the opening of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame .
 Wfe fish cur own daily fish so we serve the freshest cuality seafood on the Island .
 The High + Low Rise Hotels Reservation Suggested SATURDAY 5 JULY 5 JULy 5 July 5 .
 A lethal jihadi insurgency swept across the same Iraqi battlefields where thousands of Americans had lost their lives . This indirect approach, intended to avoid costly, bloody wars, immediately collided with reality .
 The seizing of large parts of Iraq by Sunni militants has stunned the White House . It has laid bare the limitations of a policy that depends on the cooperation of often balky and overmatched partners .
 The White House is struggling to repel militants from the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant . Officials concede measures will take months or longer to be effective .
 The U.S. will have to rely on a constantly shifting cast of surrogates to confront the threats it once took on . The White House is now determined to arm and train local forces .
 Obama announced a plan to spend $500 million to train and equip rebels in Syria last week .
 Pentagon has only begun detailed planning for the program . Officials say it would be months, or even more than a year, before fighters would be battle-ready .
 The Pentagon faces months of work to rebuild the shattered Iraqi security forces . The Pentagon trained over a decade at a cost of $25 billion .
 The administration's efforts to press the Iraqis to fend off the militants have been bogged down by the country’s sectarian feuds .
 White House officials acknowledged it would take time to execute Obama's policy . They pointed to other parts of the Middle East where they said the U.S. had deployed a rapid-response force of drones, special forces and intelligence assets .
 Obama has not ruled out targeted airstrikes on militant positions in either Iraq or Syria . Obama hasn't ruled out targeting militants in either country .
 ISIL fighters have intermingled with other Sunni militants who oppose the government . But that could raise political problems with a skeptical Congress and a wary American public .
 Martin E Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said at a briefing Thursday . He said at the briefing that the military's chief of staff is the president .
 Sunni militants have stepped up their offensive in Syria, capturing much of the oil-rich province of Deir ez-Zor .
 Obama’s cautious response appears properly calibrated to the nature of the threat, says Steven Simon . Simon served on the National Security Council during Obama's first term .
 ISIL fighters have been stopped short of Baghdad by Iraqi forces and Shiite militias . Despite their swift advances, ISIL fighters are still in control of Baghdad .
 Administration officials said the Iraq crisis had not altered its policy in Syria . The goal was always to equip rebels to fight extremist groups, they said .
 The White House has not set aside its goal of ousting Assad, they say . It's not clear whether the White House will try to oust Assad .
 The numbers kindled hopes of a lift to their party’s downbeat prospects in this fall's midterm elections . But for President Barack Obama and congressional Democrats, the numbers kindling hopes are low .
 The economy continues to be the main concern of most voters, polls show . International crises dominate the news and the attention of the White House and Congress .
 Thursday’s jobs report for June sent stock markets soaring as investors celebrated another sign of a rebounding economy .
 Republicans remain confident of winning control of both chambers of Congress for the final two years of Obama’s administration . Republicans emphasize negative data the president's continued slump in the polls .
 Republicans argue that November is too few to shift the political winds Democrats face . Republicans argue, but Democrats say it's too early to shift political winds .
 Obama presents a diploma at a ceremony in West Point, N.Y., May 28, 2014 .
 Obama laid out plans to fight terrorism through local allies in Iraq . But quick rise to power of Sunni extremists in Iraq has stunned the White House .
 The Pelican Pier is located between Holiday Inn Hotel & Playa Linda Resort The FIFA World CUPT3 . Wearing your team’s T-shirt or face painting is a chance to win awesome prizes .
Child plays football near soldiers from the “Donbass battalion of Ukraine, outside the Parliament in Kiev, Ukraine .
 Fighting in eastern Ukraine left at least nine Ukrainian soldiers dead Friday, as government troops pressed their offensive against pro-Russian insurgents .
 Fighting in eastern Ukraine left at least nine Ukrainian soldiers dead Friday . Government troops pressed their offensive against proRussian insurgents using heavy artillery and combat jets .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said Ukraine was ready to conduct another round of talks between representatives from Ukraine, Russia and the rebels on Saturday . He didn't name their venue .
 Two previous rounds of such negotiations held during a 10-day ceasefire have yielded no visible progress . They brought the warring parties together for the first time .
 Moscow strongly pushed for extending the truce and holding more talks in an apparent hope to negotiate a settlement that would allow it to secure a degree of influence over the neighbor .
 The continuing fighting is putting more pressure on Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin has been facing increasingly angry nationalist demands to send troops to help the insurgency . The move would inevitably trigger crippling Western sanctions .
 Ukraine's National Security Council chief Andriy Parubiy said Friday that Russia was massing troops near the Ukrainian border . Russia claimed that it let insurgents attack Ukrainian border posts from its side .
 The two neighbors share a 2,000-kilometer border that is unmarked and unguarded outside of a few checkpoints . They have been trading claims and counterclaims since Ukraine began fighting pro-Russia separatists in April .
 The government says nine troops were killed and 13 others were wounded in Friday’s fighting in the east . The government said nine troops died and 13 were wounded .
Ukraine says Russia is arming and supporting the separatists . The head of Ukraine's SBU security service says 20 Russian tanks or armored vehicles crossed the border to take part in the insurgency . Iraq’s Nouri al-Maliki vows not to abandon his bid for another term .
 The sharp words are certain to prolong the political impasse gripping Iraq . Iraq is facing urgent demands for a new government that can hold the nation together .
 The offensive by militants who have swept across much of northern and western Iraq since last month has been fueled in part by grievances among the country's Sunni Muslim minority .
 Al-Maliki has been prime minister since 2006 . He has been accused by former allies and others of monopolizing power and contributing to the crisis .
 The U.S. has urged the formation of a more inclusive government . But it has not explicitly called for al-Maliki to bow out .
 In what has been seen as a rebuke of al-Maliki, Iraq's top Shiite cleric, Al Qaeda leader .
 Moscow has repeatedly accused Ukrainian troops of firing shells that landed on the Russian side . On one occasion last month, one customs officer was wounded by a border post .
 Russian border guards said 10 artillery shells flew from the Ukrainian side Friday . No one was injured .
 It is nearly impossible to prove or dispel the claims from the opposing sides, since the fighting consists of intermittent clashes between small units with no fixed front line . It is deadly dangerous for journalists and other observers to travel around .
Lawmakers failed in their first session of parliament on Tuesday to make any progress . Lawmakers failed to make progress in the first session on Tuesday .
 al-Sistani lamented the inability of political leaders to agree on a new prime minister . He urged them to redouble their efforts, a cleric who represents him told worshippers .
 Al-Maliki's State of law bloc won the most parliamentary seats in April elections . It would traditionally make him the leading candidate to head a new government . The most seats in the State of Law bloc were won by the opposition party .
Al-Maliki failed to gain a majority in the legislature, meaning he needs allies to form a government . But al-Malik failed to win a majority.
Q Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki will be prime minister in June 2014 . That has set the stage for intense wrangling over the makeup of a coalition .
 Al-Maliki says he will fight until the Islamic militants are defeated . He says he won't step down despite pressure for him to do so . The Islamic militants who have overrun much of the country are defeated.
 The African troops hoped the latest defector from the Lord’s Resistance Army rebel group would have fresh insight into the location of infamous warlord Joseph Kony .
 Sam Opio, a senior rebel commander who defected last week, shook his head and said he hadn’t seen rebel leader Kony since 2010 . But he says he hasn't seen Kony, who has been in charge since 2010, since 2010.
 All recent defectors have denied seeing or communicating with Kony in the last few years . U.S.-backed Ugandan troops are hunting down rebels in the dense, often-impenetrable jungles of Central Africa that cover the size of France .
 An Associated Press reporter recently trailed soldiers tracking a small group of rebels .
 Ugandan commanders lead the chase for Kony, who is wanted by the International Criminal Court . Kony is wanted over many atrocities, including atrocities, in the Central African Republic .
Foot soldiers may also be at a disadvantage against a man who has spent all of his adult life in the bush .
 John Kagwisa, the intelligence officer for military operations against the rebels, said of Kony. Kony .
 Kony has a wide theater in which to operate and stay ahead of his pursuers . Central African Republic is a sparsely populated but chaotic country with a history of political upheaval .
 He now eschews any use of hitech devices, leaving soldiers heavily reliant on any human intelligence they can glean from defectors or civilians .
 Ugandan military commanders say it’s likely most of the defectors haven't seen or heard from Kony in years .
 Kony now uses personal couriers to send out his orders . Even senior commanders for the Lord's Resistance Army may spend years without seeing their boss .
 Michael Kabango, commander of Ugandan troops in Central African Republic, is commander of Uganda's troops . Kabango is the head of the Ugandan army in the country's capital, Uganda .
 commanders say the daily slog in the jungle is justified because it keeps rebels on the run and unable to regroup . Despite the challenges, commanders say it is justified .
 Ugandan and U.S. soldiers examine belongings of three fighters who defected from Lord's Resistance Army rebel group in Central African Republic .
 African troops hoped the latest defector from the Lord's Resistance Army rebel group would have something fresh to say about the possible whereabouts of Joseph Kony .
 The pastor of a Christian church in central China was sentenced to 12 years in prison on Friday . Supporters say a crackdown aimed at curbing fast-growing religious activity .
 Zhang Shaojie of the Nanle County Christian Church in Henan province was convicted of fraud and of gathering crowds to disturb public order . He was convicted by a lawyer in the province of Henan .
 Zhang’s church is sanctioned by the Communist government, which allows worship only in state-monitored groups . The church has been involved in a dispute with local authorities over land for a new building .
 The country also has a large number of unsanctioned underground, or home, churches that have attracted millions of worshippers .
 A report by the Washington, D.C.-based Pew Research Center said there were likely 67 million Christians in the country in 2010 . There were likely 58 million Protestants and 9 million Catholics, the report says .
 The ruling party is wary of religion as a possible rallying point to challenge its rule . Beijing loosened social controls in pursuit of economic development in the 1980s . China has seen the rapid spread of Christianity three decades after China loosened controls .
In eastern Zhejiang province, where Christianity has been particularly popular, local governments have been tearing down crosses on Christian churches . Local governments say they lack construction permits, even if they have been officially sanctioned .
 The crackdown on Christian churches could be an extension of an ongoing campaign to suppress the growth of civil society in the country .
 The mother of a pupil at a French preschool stabbed a teacher to death in front of her class Friday, authorities said .
 The mother apparently had “serious psychiatric problems,’s education minister says . Education minister pledges support for teachers in the face of angry or violent parents .
 Deadly attacks in a school are extremely rare in France . The stabbing in front of a class of 5and 6-year-olds raised concern .
 French President Francois Hollande expressed outrage at the attack at the Edouard Herriot school in Albi .
 A police official said the mother stabbed the teacher with a knife soon after school started Friday morning . The teacher was stabbed in the head by her mother.
 The attacker’s child had been in the school only for a month and a half, Hamon said . The mother had had very little contact with the school staff until Friday .
 It was unclear whether her 5-year-old daughter was in class at the time of the attack .
Fabienne Terral-Calmes, 34, was attacked by a woman in her home in Paris, France . Police and city officials would not comment on possible reasons for the attack .
 The regional prosecutor was expected to speak publicly about the case Friday evening .
 "The children were immediately taken in by another teacher who brought them to another classroom to talk to them," Hamon said . The children were taken in to tell them stories, "to try to break them away from what they had just lived through"
 The leaders of China and South Korea expressed concern about Japan’s recent reinterpretation of its war-renouncing constitution . A South Korean official said the leaders expressed concern .
 Many in China and South Korea still harbor a strong resentment against Japan . There are concerns in both countries about growing nationalism in Tokyo .
Visiting Chinese President Xi Jinping and South Korean President Park Geunhye had “lots of discussions’ about Japan . They shared worries about its “revisionist attitude’ and reinterpretation of its constitution to allow its military a larger international role .
 Both leaders regretted Japan's recent review of its landmark 1993 apology for forcing Asian women into wartime prostitution . Ju said the review was an apparent attempt to “disparage the apology, Ju said .
 A Japanese panel confirmed the validity of a study that led to the apology last month . South Korea called the review unnecessary and said it included material that undermined the reliability of the apology .
 Historians say up to 200,000 women from across Asia, many of them Koreans, were forced to provide sex to Japan’s front-line soldiers .
 Japanese nationalists contend that the so-called “comfort women" were voluntary prostitutes, not sex slaves . Japan has been unfairly criticized for a practice they say is common in any country at war .
 Xi highlighted Japan’s past brutality against China and Korea during a speech on the final day of his visit to Seoul .
 In the late 16th century a Chinese dynasty sent troops to help a Korean dynasty defeat invading Japanese troops . He noted that in the late 1600s a Chinese Dynasty sent troops.
 China assisted North Korea and fought against South Korea during the 1950-53 Korean War . American-led United Nations troops fought alongside South Korea . China assisted N. Korea and South Korea in the Korean War.
 The countries now have booming trade ties and share concerns about Japan’s military ambitions . Critics see recent attempts by Tokyo to obscure its bloody past .
 The funeral of a Buddhist man killed during sectarian violence this week in the central Myanmar city of Mandalay stirred passions . No major new unrest was reported .
 Calm was restored to the city with an overnight curfew declared Thursday after two nights of violence by Buddhist extremists against Muslims . The city has been restored to calm after the violence .
 The unrest raised fears that ethnic violence that has plagued the country for two years might escalate again .
 Hundreds of people on foot and motorcycle join the funeral procession for the Buddhist man who had been killed . The Buddhist man was killed in a car accident .
 His hearse was draped with a poster of his bloody body blaming Muslims for his death . His body was covered in a poster with the words 'Muslims for the death' and 'Islam'
 The crowd damaged a Muslim cemetery and threw stones at mosques . But otherwise avoided violence .
Win Mya Mya is a Muslim member of the opposition National League for Democracy party . She says some people who wanted to incite unrest shouted that they didn't want any mosques in the city .
 Security forces criticized for failing to do much to stop two nights of violence . Security forces have been criticized for not doing much to prevent violence .
 He said they did not enforce a ban on assemblies of more than five people that was imposed Thursday . He said the ban was not enforced .
 This week’s unrest was the first in Mandalay, an important center of Buddhist culture . Muslims and Buddhists have traditionally lived peacefully together .
 Thousands of Haitians lining up this summer at government offices in the Dominican Republic trying to take advantage of a rare chance to secure legal status in a country where they've long lived in the shadows .
 Haitians have been living in the Dominican Republic since 2011 . Only a tiny fraction of applicants have managed to show sufficient documentation from their homeland .
 The deadline to register or face deportation arrives early next year .
 Migrant workers camped out at the Ministry of the Interior to be at the front of the line the next day . They are being told that their documents must include a Haitian identity card, passport or birth certificate .
 The 36-year-old's many years as a bricklayer have worn down his hands . He even had a tough time getting his fingerprints taken by Dominican officials .
 Migrants from Haiti have long had a tough time in the Dominican Republic . Their anger is largely directed at Haiti’s government, which has been slow to issue the needed documents .
 Haitians have staged several protests in recent weeks outside their government’s embassy in Santo Domingo .
 Haiti is charging the equivalent of about $60 for a new birth certificate, voter ID and a passport . The rate is a special rate for the migrant registration process since it normally costs $80 .
Migrant workers barely earn $5 a day, says William Charpentier, director of the National Migration Roundtable, a nongovernmental group .
 The Haitian government has been coming under increasing international pressure to address the issue . A solution may emerge before the deadline, says the Haitian government .
 The Dominican residency process, known as “regularization, is clearly off to a slow start . But the process is still on the way, according to a report .
 The Dominican Republic has long been a magnet for low-wage workers from Haiti . It has been seeking to limit unregulated, cross-border traffic in recent years .
 The surge of Central American migrants to the United States in the past few months has been a stark reminder of the poverty and violence they face at home .
 To some, the haggling over a program to help poor farmers in El Salvador has looked tonedeaf .
 Salvadoran government buys corn and bean seeds for subsistence farmers . At the heart of the dispute is the way the Salvadorans buy corn and beans .
 The United States had objected to moves to favor small, local seed producers on the grounds that they violated the Central American Free Trade Agreement .
 16 members of the House of Representatives called on Secretary of State John Kerry not to use changes to the food program as a condition for aid . The U.S. Embassy in El Salvador says the dispute has been resolved .
 The U.S. trade representative's office said that the countries had already reached a resolution last week . The United States Trade Representative's office says that the resolution has already been reached .
 The resolution clears up one issue that blocked the $277 million aid package approved in September by the Millennium Challenge Corp. A United States aid agency approved the package in September .
 Washington is still waiting for El Salvador to tighten controls on money laundering to release the funds . El Salvador has been accused of laundering money for years .
 The 10th Prokids Bonaire IFCA Championship 2014 started with a very enticing opening ceremony on June 25th . The Salvadoran government excluded foreign seed companies from a program known as the Family Farming Plan in an effort to encourage local producers .
 The final results were announced during the Award Ceremony . All the winners who competed in Slalom and Freestyle were called on stage to receive their trophy, certificate and prizes .
 Beach Soccer Veterans, Beach Soccer Youth and Beach Bolas also received their trophy and prizes on stage . The other winners of Beach Soccer Veteran's award also received trophy and prize .
 Janiro Eisden from Basic One and Biggy Boy from Aruba performed together with DJ Caliber from Curacao . The celebration went on with performances by the group Basic One .
 The 10th Prokids Bonaire IFCA Championship 2014 event took place during the entire week of June 20th till June 29th . The MC for the evening was Mr Gerrald Victorina the General Coordinator of the PWA Bonaires World Cup event .
 Beach Soccer Veterans, Beach Soccer Youth and Beach Bolas winners of Freestyle and from Bonaire, U-15 Boys first place Wave Antonia from Curacao . Smit Luis and Rowan Richie were second and third place in the Award Ceremony .
 U-17 Boys first place Stephard ‘Cheppy’ Gustowski and second place Quincy Marchena from Bonaire . Third place Johnny Yagen from Israel is third place.
 Ethan Westera from Aruba, Kenroy Francisco and Richard Richie, both from Curacao, are the U-20 first place winners .
 The entire community of Bonaire and other visitors cheered for the participants in all the different sports the entire week .
 Fheir event has been a successful one. We would also like to thank all our sponsors for supporting the event .
 MCB Bonaire NV, TCB, Government of Bonair, Budget Car Rental, ‘Fundashon Wega di Number’ and ‘Krioyo Paint’
U-9 Girls first place Rosa Ruijter from Bonaire, U-9 Boys first place Jeankarl Mayer, second place Dante Abraham and third place Davion Coffie all three from the country's largest school .
 U-13 Girls first place Alyssa Wijnand from Bonaire, second place Anne Coenen from Curacao and third place Koleta Abrahamsz. U- 13 girls first place.
 U-13 Boys first place losu Balzaretti from Mexico, second place Davinton Janga from Mexico . Third place Gian Martis from Bonaire is third place from Mexico.
 U-15A Boys first place Wave Antonia and second place Stijn Overwater from Curacao . Third place Melvin van der Linde from Aruba .
 U-l 5B Boys first place Raynold Wilsoe, second place Arnold WilsoE and third place Hayley Thode . All three from Bonaire .
 U15B Girls first place Luz Day Zambrano and second place Davie Janga, both from Bonaire . U 15B girls first place in the girls' class.
 U-17 Boys first place Gunther Landwier from Bonaire, second place Mark Tjon from Aruba and third place Jurgen Saragoza from Bonnaire .
 U-20 Boys first place Ethan Westera and second place Willem ten Ham, both from Aruba and in third place Richard Richie from Curacao .
 Gillien Vrolijk from Aruba, U-7 Baby Class Boys first place Kingston Coffie and second place Everson Frans, both from Bonaire .
 U-9 Boys first place Jeankarl Mayer and second place Dante Abraham, both from Bonaire, are from the same town .
 U-l 3 Girls first place Koleta Abrahamsz from Bonaire and in second place Anne Coenen from Curacao . U-L 3 Girls second place in the U.S.
 Faan Coenen from Curacao, Davinton Janga and Darwin Perdomo from Bonaire are the U-13 Boys first and second place .
 U-15 Girls first place Luz Day Zambrano Divi Resorts Resorts Donates 5 Electric Cars to EPB Hato for the “Auto Monteur"" Unit on July 2, 2014 .
 5 Electric Cars donated to Grape Holding N.V. and Divi Resorts to the school so they can use this to help increase their knowledge of the Electric Car System . Mr Alex Nieuwmeyer, Managing Director of Grape Holding. V.V., and
 Mr Nieuwmeyer together with the Executive Team from Divi Resorts . Mr Patrick Franssen, Mr Gerrit Griffith and Mrs. Mrs. Griffith were also on the team .
 Maria Geerman-Esguerra were all in attendance for this wonderful moment . Maria Geerra was in attendance at the event .
 The school’s teachers are Mr Reginald Ramon-Teacher of Auto Monteur Unit . The school's teachers are Ms. ReginalD Ramon.
 Divi said they would make excellent use of the cars . Mari Flor Nicolaas Unit Manager, in representation of EPB Hato together with some students, were more than happy to receive this kind donation .
 Fishes & More Restaurant is one of the lovely restaurants of this intimate plaza . This great family happened to walk past the Arawak Garden .
 The live music and shrimp and lobster casserole were served at the restaurant . The restaurant's live music was played on the spot .
 The Arawak Garden is situated across from the Occidental Resort on the hi-rise strip . The Garden is located across from Occidental resort on the high-rises strip .
 Restaurants, a piano bar, small kiosks and live music make up the Garden . The Garden is a popular choice for visitors and locals alike .
 The Shops At Alhambra Casino Offering a wide vanity pi pi Retail S Dining Outlets .
 Joseph Parascondola celebrates his 80th Birthday in Aruba PALM BEACH Joseph and Rosemary Parasondola from Manchester, New Jersey have been visiting the island of Aruba for over 32 years .
 They visit every year and sometimes even twice a year and enjoy the warm weather and dining at Chalet Suisse .
 This year their children and grandchildren joined the trip to celebrate Joseph’s 80th birthday .
 Driftwood Fishing Charters is the successful fisherman of the established seafood restaurant Driftwood in Oranjestad .
 A fisherman who knows about fish, what our local waters have to offer, and what the words ‘fresh seafood’ really mean . The words “Fresh seafood” really mean.
 Herby loves to share his fishing passion with the many visitors to the island . Herby's fishing passion is to share with many visitors .
Twin Engine Post yacht, appropriately called “Driftwood I and II, is available for charters on 12 noon and from 1pm to 5pm .
 This authentic Aruban seafood restaurant is located in characteristic downtown Oranjestad .
 Driftwood Restaurant Authentic Aruban Seafood Restaurant; Klipstraat #12, Downtown Oranjestad .
 Brazil's poster boy fractured a vertebra in his back during Brazil’s 2-1 quarterfinal victory over Colombia on Friday . Brazil beat Colombia 2-0 in the quarterfinal to reach the quarterfinals .
 The striker has been ruled out of the rest of the World Cup with a knee injury . The injury is a blow to the team's chances of winning a World Cup at home .
 Brazil advanced to the semifinals for the first time in 12 years . Thiago Silva and David Luiz scored the goals for Brazil in the semifinals .
 Neymar broke his third vertebrae and is expected to be out for several weeks . Brazil team doctor Rodrigo Lasmar says Neymar will miss Tuesday's semifinal match against Germany in Belo Horizonte .
 Neymar has been the focal point of both the Brazilian team and the entire World Cup . The 22-year-old has scored four goals in the first three matches for the team .
 Juan Camilo Zuniga took a knee to the back late in the match against Colombia at the Arena Castelao . But he took the injury to his back in the second half of the match .
 The Brazilian star was crying in pain as he was carried off the field . He was taken to a private clinic .
 Brazil's Neymar is carried away after getting injured during the World Cup quarterfinal soccer match between Brazil and Colombia at the Arena Castelao in Fortaleza, Brazil, Friday, July 4, 2014 .
 Billy Hurley III tees off the ninth hole during the second round of the Greenbrier Classic golf tournament . Hurley takes the lead by 1 shot at the GreenBrier Resort in White Sulphur Springs .
 Billy Hurley III shot a 7-under 63 on Friday to take a onestroke lead after the second round of the Greenbrier Classic .
 The former U.S. Navy officer says it was “pretty cool’ that it occurred on America’s birthday .
 Steve Strieker and Chris Kirk were another stroke back at 6 under . Brice Garnett and Steve Striker were also in the top six .
 Reigning Masters champion Bubba Watson was among five players at 5 under . Watson was one of five players in the group at 5-under .
 Hurley spent five years in the U.S. Navy and played golf sparingly while stationed in Hawaii .
 Hurley's missions included steering a Navy destroyer through the Suez Canal . He also steered a Navy Destroyer through the canal .
 Hurley rejoined the U.S. PGA Tour this season and has three top 10 finishes so far . He has a tie for eighth at Congressional last week .
 His best career finish is a tie for fourth in the AT&T National two years ago, also at Congressional . He has been in Congress for two years .
 A solid ending at The Greenbrier resort would get Hurley into the British Open later this month . A solid end at the resort would give Hurley a solid end to his career .
 Playing partner Chris Stroud said he was amazed at how Hurley could recapture his golf game after his time in the military . Hurley was a member of the military and served in the US military .
 Chappell’s round included holing a 35-yard pitch on the par-3 15th after a poor tee shot .
 Matteson holed a 35-yard pitch on the par-3 15th and needed just 19 putts . It is one shy of the PGA Tour record held by eight players . Matteson is one of eight players to play in the tournament .
 Jonas Blixt of Sweden had three early bogeys and shot 73 to drop into a tie for 25th at 3 under . First-round leader Jonas Blix of Sweden has shot 73.
 Cleveland Cavaliers and LeBron James are talking about a reunion . Four years after their messy breakup, the Cavs and James are still talking about their reunion .
 The sides met as James continued his family vacation, a person with knowledge of the details told The Associated Press . The sides meet as James continues his vacation .
 The person spoke on condition of anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the talks . The person said the talks were held in a secret location .
 James recently opted out of the final two years of his contract in Miami . James has been in Miami for two years .
 The Heat have gone to four straight finals with the Heat . The twotime NBA champion has gone to 4 straight finals. The Heat won the NBA title four times .
 San Antonio was throttled by San Antonio in this year's finals . James said he would weigh his options this summer after the team's defeat .
 One of them could be resigning with the Cavs . He spent seven seasons with the team before leaving in 2010 to join forces with Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh .
 Wade and Bosh also opted out of their deals with Heat, raising speculation the "Big Three" could be headed in different directions . The Heat are expected to announce a new deal this week .
 James' decision to leave Cleveland prompted owner Dan Gilbert to condemn him in a scathing letter to Cavs fans . James' departure prompted Gilbert to criticise him in the letter .
 The owner also told The AP he felt James had quit during games in the playoffs . The owner said he also felt James quit during the playoff games .
 Paul met with representatives for Phoenix, Houston and Dallas . Paul also met with reps for Houston, Dallas and Houston .
 The Cavs have waited patiently for their chance to convince the Akron, Ohio, native to come home . The Cavs are hoping to convince him to return to Ohio .
 James has never ruled out the possibility of a return. Now, they're working on bringing back him .
 Two years ago, James was asked if he could ever see himself playing for the Cavs again . Two years later, he was asked whether he would ever play for the Cavaliers again .
 I'm happy where I am now, but I don't rule that out in no sense, he says . I'm here as a Miami Heat player, and I’m happy where he is now, he adds . I”m happy to be a
 James was booed mercilessly by Cleveland fans in his first games back with the Heat . In recent years he has been received more favorably by the Heat fans .
 Paul James could be putting on pressure for the Heat to upgrade their roster . James could put on pressure to upgrade the Heat roster .
 Pat Riley and Erik Spoelstra met in Los Angeles with Lakers free agent Pau Gasol . Miami has been pursuing free agents for several years .
 The Heat could have trouble surrounding James with enough talent if the reports are accurate . James will only accept a maximum contract if he agrees to a maximum deal .
 James is scheduled to be in Las Vegas next week to host a basketball camp . He is also expected to attend the World Cup in Brazil . James is expected to be at the tournament in Brazil.
 Roger Federer-Djokovic Wimbledon final at Wimbledon . Federer was on the decline, or so the thinking went .
 A guy ranked 116th at the All England Club. Started losing before the quarterfinals at majors, including in 2013’s second round .
Roger Federer moves one victory away from a record eighth Wimbledon title and 18th Grand Slam title . Federer beat Milos Raonic of Canada in their men's singles semifinal match at the All England Lawn Tennis Championships .
 Novak Djokovic of Serbia defeated Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria in their men's singles semifinal match at the All England Lawn Tennis Championships in Wimbledon, London, Friday, July 4, 2014 . He will now face Novak in Sunday's final, where he will
 Federer asked how much it would mean to add to his trophy collection . Federer was asked how many trophies he would like to add .
 A quartet will have won 36 of the past 38 Slams . Rafael Nadal and Andy Murray will face off in Friday's semifinals .
 Djokovic beat Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 , 7- 6 to reach his third final at Wimbledon . The 2011 champion is 12th in the past 16 majors to reach the final .
 Federer, tied with Pete Sampras and William Renshaw with seven Wimbledon titles . Federer beat 11 thseeded Milos Raonic of Canada in a 6-4, 6-3 win over Raonic .
 Dimitrov beat defending champion Murray in the quarterfinals . Raonic beat Nadal in the fourth round to make their debut in a Slam semifinal . The 23-year-old duo are making their debuts in the tournament .
Six-time major champion Djokovic in his 23rd. Federer was in his 35th; six-time world champion was in 23rd . Federer's 35th was his first major title in his career .
 Djokovic and Dimitrov found themselves slip-sliding around the worn court, especially along swaths of brown dirt . It was sunny, 77 degrees and windy, but it was sunny.
 One of the many lengthy, entertaining exchanges ended with both face-down on the turf . One of their many long-running exchanges ended at the end of the fight .
 Djokovic appeared ready to run away with a win, one point from leading by a set and two breaks . The Serbian is one point away from winning the match, one set and three breaks .
 Dimitrov, cheered on by girlfriend Maria Sharapova, hit an ace to erase a break point . The Russian star reeled off five consecutive games to grab the second set . The match ended in three sets .
 Djokovic was volleying poorly, something that surely bothered one of his coaches . Three-time Wimbledon champion was generally struggling to find his strokes .
 Djokovic threw his racket end-over-end in the air and caught it . After one botched forehand, he threw it into the air .
 In the third, his one-handed backhand accounted for three mistakes in the tiebreaker, and he also double-faulted . In the second, he also made a mistake in the third tiebreaker .
 Dimitrov wasted four set points, including three in the tiebreaker, which he led 6-3, before losing six of the last seven points . In the fourth, he wasted four sets points, and lost four in the fourth .
 Djokovic has lost his past three major finals, and five of his past six . The Serbian has won five of the past six major finals . He has not won a major title since 2004 .
 The U.S. Open is Federer's second major final . The other was the 2007 United States Open, won by Federer .
 Germany will play Germany in the semifinals of the World Cup in Brazil . It would be the first time Germany has played in the semi-finals .
 Germans become the first team to reach four straight semifinals in the sport's marquee tournament . Germany beat France 1-0 on Friday to reach the semifinals . The Germans are the first German team to win four straight semifinal matches .
 Mats Hummels scored the winning goal in the 13th minute of the game . The German defender outmuscled his marker at a free kick to glance a header in off the crossbar .
 Germany selected a more robust lineup and restricted a flat France team to only a handful of clear-cut opportunities in muggy conditions . Germany's defense was criticized for poor defending in earlier matches .
 France's young players slumped to the ground and some shed tears after the final whistle . The Germans soberly saluted all corners of the Maracana Stadium .
 Brazil beat Colombia 2-1 on Friday night . Germany's next up for Germany is a meeting with host nation Brazil .
 It will be Germany’s 13th appearance in the semifinals in 20 editions of the World Cup . Germany's 13th World Cup semi-final appearance will be their 13th in 20 years .
 France struggled to impose the kind of attacking game that made the team one of the most exciting in Brazil during the group stage . Benzema squandered chances in both halves for the French side .
 Real Madrid striker seized on a rebound after Manuel Neuer's save from Mathieu Valbuena's shot . But his close-range effort was deflected wide by Hummels .
 Neuer created space for himself about eight yards out at an angle, but a fierce shot was swatted away by Neuer . Then, in stoppage time, he created space to create space.
 Germany has reached the last four in every major tournament it has played . But it remains without a title since winning the European Championships in 1996 .
 France play Germany for the first time at the World Cup in Brazil . The German team seemed comfortable at this level, but it was perhaps too much for a young, revamped France .
 Germany won on penalties after a 3-3 draw in 1982 semifinals in Spain . The match was marked by a late and high tackle by Germany goalkeeper Harald Schumacher on France defender Patrick Battiston .
 The World Cup match was one of the most riveting matches in World Cup history . It was 32 years on, but the rematch couldn't have been more different .
 "He will not be in condition to play, he will need a few weeks to be fit again," says team doctor .
 Brazil committed 31 fouls and Colombia had 23 in one of the dirtiest games of the tournament . The foul on Neymar came toward the end of the game as Brazil committed31 fouls .
 Colombia captain must sit out after getting his second yellow card of the tournament . Colombia goalkeeper David Ospina has been sent off for impeding Colombia's goalkeeper . Colombia captain will sit out for the second time in a row .
 Brazil is trying to become the first host to win the World Cup since France in 1998 . Brazil had been eliminated in the quarterfinals at the last two tournaments . The World Cup is being held in Brazil .
 The ‘Selecao’ lost to the Netherlands in the quarterfinals in 2010 and to France in 2006 . It won its fifth title in 2002 after winning its fifth crown in 2002 .
 Brazil won its group and then beat Chile on penalties in the second round . This time around, Brazil won the group and won its second round.
 Silva gave Brazil the lead in the seventh minute against Colombia . He scored with his left knee after a corner from Neymar passed through the Colombian defense . Silva's left knee scored the goal for Brazil .
 Luiz added the second from a free kick in the 69th, side-footing a long-range shot into the top of the net . Luiz also added a second in the second half of the game .
 James Rodriguez scored his tournament leading sixth goal from the penalty spot . Julio Cesar brought down substitute Carlos Bacca inside the area . Rodriguez scored in the second half of the game .
 Ospina had to make a series of saves in the first half alone in Brazil . Rodriguez tried to control the pace of the match, but it was Brazil that created most of the scoring chances .
 The Colombians tried to pressure after Rodriguez’s late penalty, but Brazil held on with solid defending .
 Colombia had entered the match after scoring 11 goals, second only to the Netherlands . Colombia had been playing at the World Cup for the first time since 1998 and in the quarterfinals for thefirst time ever .
 There was a lot of talk about Rodriguez and Neymar before the match . But the 22-year-old forwards didn't really deliver in Fortaleza .
 Rodriguez scored the late penalty but was otherwise mostly ineffective, as was Neymar before he left on a stretcher . Rodriguez scored a late penalty, but was mostly ineffective .
 Zelous Wheeler homered in his big league debut after eight years in the minors . Wheeler made his debut for the first time since joining the New York Mets in 2009 .
 David Robertson notched his 19th save with a hitless ninth inning . The Yankees started an 11-game road trip with a sigh-of-relief performance .
 Phil Hughes was leading 2-0 against his former team before Beltran's big hit cleared the tall wall above right field . Hughes' singles to start the fifth were consecutive singles to begin the game .
 Sonny Gray allowed four hits over seven innings to bounce back from his worst start of the season for Oakland . Gray's start was his worst for Oakland this season .
 The Blue Jays scored their only run with the help of an odd replay challenge by manager John Gibbons . Gibbons wanted to have his own player called out .
 Stephen Vogt scored the winning run on a passed ball in the second inning . A’s made it hold up behind Gray and two relievers .
 Oakland's defense turned three double plays, including one in the eighth after Josh Thole's leadoff single . Gray walked three, struck out five and got some help from Oakland’s defense .
 Jose Reyes hit a flyout to deep right and Brandon Moss made a strong throw back to first baseman Nate Freiman . Moss tagged out Thole trying to get back to the bag .
 Max Scherzer allowed two hits in eight outstanding innings, and Detroit backed its star righthander with three early homers .
 Tampa Bay snapped Tampa Bay's five-game winning streak with their 12th victory in 14 games . Ian Kinsler, Victor Martinez and Torii Hunter all went deep as part of a five-run first inning .
 Scherzer allowed a first-inning sacrifice fly by Evan Longoria . Longoria was the first of 10 straight hitters retired by the reigning American League Cy Young Award winner .
 Scherzer retired another 13 in a row before he was pulled with a pitch count of 106 . After allowing a single in the fourth, Scherzer retires another 13 times in the row .
 Erik Bedard allowed six runs and eight hits with two walks in two innings . Bedard let six runs, eight hits and two walks with two runs in two.
 David Freese hit a two-run double in the first half of the day .
 Los Angeles won the opener of a four-game series . Matt Shoemaker pitched in and out of trouble for six innings . Los Angeles beat Los Angeles 2-1 .
 Shoemaker allowed two runs, seven hits and three walks, and worked with runners on base in every inning . Shoemaker worked with runner on base every inning.
 The right-hander gave up eight runs and 11 hits in four innings on Friday in a loss at Kansas City . He began the season in the bullpen in a bullpen .
 He had been 5-0 with a 3.00 ERA in his seven previous starts this season . He has had a 3-0 record in his previous seven starts this year .
 Shoemaker had seven strikeouts against the Astros, giving him 57 through his first 10 big league starts . Shoemaker's first 10 starts in the big league has been in the majors since 2009 .
 Juan Uribe follows through with his swing after hitting an RBI-single to drive in the go-ahead run against the Colorado Rockies in the ninth inning of the Dodgers’ 3-2 victory in a baseball game in Denver .
 Zack Greinke pitched eight solid innings and Juan Uribe hit the go-ahead single in the ninth inning for Los Angeles . The Associated Press DENVER.
 Matt Kemp worked a leadoff walk off LaTroy Hawkins . Uribe singled under the glove of second baseman DJ LeMahieu .
 Kenley Jansen worked fhe boftom of fhe inning to get his NL best 26th save in 29 chances . Jansen is the NL's best save of the season in 29 saves .
Justin Morneau and LeMahieu had two hits each for the Rockies . The Rockies have lost four straight and 15 of 17 to move within a half-game of last place in the NL West .
 Jhonny Peralta hit a tworun homer, Carlos Martinez earned his second win as a starter, and St. St. Francisco won the game for the second time .
 Martinez also drove in a run for the Cardinals, who won their second straight after losing three in a row . The Cardinals won their third straight win after losing their first three in the last four games .
 Madison Bumgarner fell to 0-3 over his past four home starts after allowing five runs — four earned — and six hits over five innings .
 Bumgarner also drove in a run for the Giants, who have lost 17 of 22 . The Giants have fallen ouf of first place in the NL West .
 David Peralta had three hits, including a two-run homer, and drove in four runs to help Arizona avoid a series sweep . Arizona avoided the series sweep.
 The Pirates are 0 for 8 in chances to sweep opposing teams this season . The Pirates have a chance of winning at least eight games this season.
 Vance Worley retired the first 12 batters he faced and carried a no-hitter into the sixth inning . Worley's team looked primed to get their first sweep as he retired 12 batters .
 Ender Inciarte broke up Worley’s no-hit bid with an RBI single with one out in the sixth .
 Peralta followed with his third home run of the year which barely cleared the 21-foot-high fence in right field and gave Arizona a 3-2 lead . Arizona's first home run in the year was his third in a row .
Ben Revere scored the go-ahead run when Miami second baseman Donovan Solano bobbled a grounder in the ninth . Philadelphia rallied to snap a six-game losing streak to beat Miami .
Photographer on the back of a motorcycle rides standing up to take pictures of Britain's Christopher Froome during a training session . Froome is a member of the British national team .
 Spain's Alberto Contador is training in Leeds, Britain, Friday, July 4, 2014 . He is due to take part in a training ride in the UK .
 Wimbledon doesn't seem the same without Serena Williams or Rafael Nadal and your baseball team is slumping . England's national team is out of the World Cup in Brazil .
 Cycling's big event gets going Saturday through bucolic countryside in northern England . Officials hope to draw tourists, capture media attention and feed the recent cycling craze among Britons .
After Lance Armstrong's doping exposure, the sport may still be dogged by drugs cheats . It could first require getting over a nagging belief that after Lance Armstrong’s doping exposure.
 Cycling chiefs and experts agree that the era of widespread doping is over . But few would claim to know that today’s pack is fully clean .
 Drugs testers will conduct hundreds of blood and urine checks during the race . The race will take place in London and London .
 Most are “domestiques’ who race above all to help their team leaders win. Most are "domestique’s" who raceabove all to aid their team leader's win .
 Vincenzo Nibali of Italy, plus Spaniards Alejandro Valverde and Joaquin Rodriguez, stand an outside chance . The pair are both Spaniards and Italians .
 Contador said Friday that “local hero’s Froome remains the favorite .
 Five of the 21 stages end in summit finishes, which usually promise drama as the cream of the climbers rises to the top first .
 In all, riders will cover 3,664 kilometers of roads in England, France, Belgium and Spain . The riders will travel in all, including France, France and Belgium .
 The mountains mostly matter this year, including cobblestone treachery in Stage 5 .
 For the first time in 61 years, this Tour has only one long time trial . racers set off oneby-one down a sfarfer’s ramp .
 Contador and Froome are among the best climbers in both climbing and time-trialing . The pair are also known for their climbing skills .
 This year marks the second time that theTourde France is starting in Britain . The first time the Tourde France has started in Britain was in London in 2007 .
 Local officials use municipal funds to pay for the right to host the race in their cities . Local officials hope for shortterm tourism revenues plus a longer-term return from the international media spotlight .
 After three stages in England, this 101st edition enters France on Tuesday . This is the first time this edition has been held in France .
 Riders will cover many of the same roads their forebears covered since the race was first run in 1903 . The riders will also cover the roads they have been on since 1903 .
 The 2007 Tour de France was held on English roads during the 2007 race . Millions lined up to watch the pack zip by .
 Saturday's 190.5-kilometer rolling Stage 1 from Leeds fo Flarrogate is likely to favor sprinters . Saturday’s 190. 5-kilometers rolling stage 1 is likely fo favor sprinter .
 The Tour's green jersey goes to the best overall sprinter . The overall title chase includes pure climbers seeking the polkadot jersey .
 The top 24 drivers in the first knockout qualifying stage were supposed to advance to the next round . rain prompted NASCAR to cancel the final two sessions . The top-24 drivers were expected to advance.
 Reed Sorenson qualified David Gilliland for the pole position for the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series auto race at Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach, Florida . Gilliland won the pole for the race on Friday .
 Associated Press second, followed by Landon Cassill, Bobby Labonfe and Jimmie Johnson . LandonCassill is followed by BobbyLabonfe, JimmieJohnson and Landon Cassidy .
 Fie will attempt to become the sixth driver to sweep both annual races at NASCAR's most famous track on Saturday . Fie has won two of the last two races at the track .
 It was Gilliland’s third Sprint Cup pole and first since landing the top spot for the 2007 Daytona 500 . Gilliland's third pole was his third in a row .
 All three of his poles have been at restrictor-plate races . First one came at Talladega in 2006 .
David Ragan and David Ragan both have good enough cars to win, and that is an exciting feeling . "That is a exciting feeling," says Ragan .
 New Android wristwatches from Samsung and LG make a few evolufionary advances . I won’t be rushing out to buy either .
 Samsung's Gear Live and LG’s G Watch are good products and will appeal to those who like to be among the first to own new gadgets .
 The watches serve as pedometers and let you catch up on email, texts and Facebook notifications while your phone is in your pocket or in the bedroom .
 Even with the phone in your hand, you can check messages on the watch and keep playing video on the phone .
Both smartwatches try to keep things simple through voice commands rather than touch . Both smartw watches try to use voice commands.
 Android Wear has a lot of potential but still lacks the functionality of even last year's smartwatches . Android Wear is still not ready to be used in the future .
 Your ability to reply is limited, and there’s not much you can do yet without a companion phone nearby .
 The companion phone must run Android 4. or later, which covers about a quarter of the Android devices in use .
 It estimates distance and calories burned and measures heart rate on your runs, hikes and bike rides . It measures distance and calorie burn on a bike ride, runs and hikes .
 Shots from the watch's 2-megapixel camera are mediocre, but that beats missing the shot entirely because your better camera is in your pocket or handbag .
 If you don’t need the camera, you can save $100 with the Gear 2 Neo, which has similar features otherwise .
 The Gear 2 line doesn't use Android Wear, but a fledging system called Tizen . Tizen is an Android Wear-based system that doesn't work on Android Wear .
 Samsung says that helps extend battery life to two or three days, instead of the single day on the original, Android-based Galaxy Gear . Samsung says the Galaxy Gear can be used for up to three days .
 The Gear 2 watch face doesn't go dark as the one on the Gear 2 does after inactivity . The watch face goes dark when it's not in activity .
 The promised battery life is back down to a single day, though actual performance varies depending on use . The battery life on the device is back to a one day .
 You can count steps and measure heart rate, but you can’t measure distance or calories with builtin apps . You can also measure distance and calories with a builtin app .
 Journal expresses 'concern' over Facebook study. Journal expresses ‘concern’ over the study .
 The scientific journal published a study by Facebook and two U.S. universities examining people's online mood swings . The journal regrets how the social experiment was handled .
 The experiment prompted privacy regulators in the U.K. and France to open inquiries into whether Facebook may have violated any laws . The experiment was conducted in the UK and France .
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences concluded that the decision to manipulate the content appeared on the Facebook pages of about 700,000 people without their prior consent may have violated some principles of academic research .
 The journal also pointed out that, as a for-profit company, it was governed by its own terms of service . The journal was published in January 2013 .
 The unusual “editorial expression of concern” surfaced Thursday, a day after Facebook Inc. posted the statement . Facebook Inc.'s "editorialexpression of concern" surfaced .
 Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg apologized for failing to communicate about the experiment . The world's largest social network should have done a better job communicating, Sandberg said .
 The data-scientists conducted the study during one week in January 2012 . The study was conducted during the week of January 2012.
 They were trying to collect evidence to prove their thesis that people's moods could spread like an “emotional contagion” depending on what they were reading . They were also trying to prove that people’s moods can spread.
 markets in Europe were lackluster as Wall Street remained closed for the Fourth of July holiday . Investors cheered a strong United States jobs report from the previous day .
 Markets buoyed by news that the U.S. economy generated a greater than expected 288,000 jobs in June .
 The bank will pay as much as $320 million for a combination of consumer relief and housing counseling services . Bank will pay up to $320million for consumer relief, housing counseling and consumer relief .
 The agreement stems from an investigation by federal prosecutors in Virginia . SunTrust's compliance with the Flome Affordable Modification Program is one of several initiatives enacted by the Obama administration .
 Trading volumes were low on Friday due to the U.S. holiday . The holiday is a holiday in the United States .
 Many investors in France and Germany likely also kept to the sidelines to turn their attention to the World Cup match between their countries later in the afternoon .
 SunTrust, based in Atlanta, not only acted slowly in processing borrower applications for mortgage modifications but also made misrepresentations to homeowners . Federal prosecutors and investigators from several ofher federal government agencies found that SunTrust.
 Most of the money being paid by the bank under the settlement will go toward a fund to compensate borrowers who were shortchanged by SunTrust . The bank will also pay for a fund for borrowers who have been shortchanged .
 Asian shares got a lift Friday following fhe data that saw the Dow Jones index break 17,000 for the first time .
 SunTrust must provide at least $179 million, and as much as $274 million, for consumer restitution . The deal will require SunTrust to provide $179m, and $274m, forConsumer restitution .
 The bank will also provide $20 million to a fund that will distribute money to organizations that provide housing counseling services . The bank also will provide $ 20 million to the fund that provides counseling services.
 SunTrust also will make a $10 million payment to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . Hong Kong’s Hang Seng added 0. percent to 23,546.36.36 .
 The market tone was equally subdued elsewhere with the euro 0. percent lower at $1.3599 and the dollar 0.0 percent down at 102.07 yenO finance companies . The euro is down 0.3 percent to 0.5 percent in the yen
SunTrust said it would take a $204 million pretax charge in the second quarter to cover the cost of the agreement . SunTrust said in a news release that it would taken a $200 million Pretax charge .
 The bank said it had acknowledged weaknesses in its administration of the loan program . The bank has put in place procedures to correct the deficiencies .
 The government said thousands of the 26,000 borrowers who applied to SunTrust for loan modifications under the federal program might be entitled to relief .
 Spotify and YouTube let customers listen to millions of songs online, often free . What’s good is the rapid growth of streaming media services like Spotify.
 Nielsen SoundScan says listeners in the U.S. used such audio and video streaming platforms to listen to 70. billion songs in the first half of 2014 . The increase is 42 percent from the firsthalf of 2013 .
 Wifh downloads now joining CDs as a format in decline . But in a pattern that has alarmed music executives, this growth appears to have come at the expense of fradifional sales .
 Nielsen: 120 million albums have been sold so far this year, down 14. percent from fhe first half of 2013 . According to Nielsen, 120. million albums had been sold .
 Download sales a major growth engine for fhe music industry since the introduction of Apple’s iTunes store in 2003 began to cool .
 The format on the rise to one on the decline has come suddenly. But their slip from a format on a decline has been sudden .
 Last year, downloads of individual tracks fell for the first time ever, by 6 percent . In the first half of 2014, they dropped 13 percent, to 593 million .
 The top album so far this year is Disney's "Frozen" soundtrack . It has slightly less than 2. million sales since January and about 3 million since November .
 Wall Street remains closed for the Fourth of July holiday . Markets in Europe were lackluster on Friday .
 FTC attorneys say they’ve never seen a legitimate credit repair operation making those claims . FTC attorneys: "I’m not sure what’s happening"
 FTC's advice comes in the wake of a settlement it reached with RMNC Credit Services Inc. The FTC’s advice comes after a settlement was reached with the nation's largest credit repair company . The company is one of the nation”s largest creditrepair companies .
 The Texas-based company owned by Doug and Julie Parker, a husband-and-wife team, agreed to settle charges . The company lied to credit bureaus about information in people's credit reports and illegally collected fees before performing any services .
 The firm charged consumers more than $40 million in illegal advance fees for its services, the FTC says . The FTC says the firm charged customers more than a million dollars in advance fees .
 The letters purporting to be from consumers were signed by RMNC employees using the consumers’ names . RMNC staff signed the letters using consumers' names .
 A federal court order imposes a $2.35 million civil penalty against the defendants . The defendants will be partially suspended based on an inability to pay, after they pay a total of $400,000 in two installments .
 The firm violated federal law by charging up to $2,000 in up-front fees for a six-month program to improve consumers’ credit ratings . The firm also made false statements to credit bureaus disputing the accuracy of negative information in consumers' credit reports .
 Tell the credit reporting company, in writing, what information you think is inaccurate . Step 1: Tell the company what information is inaccurate in writing .
 Tell the creditor or other information provider, in writing, that you dispute an item you dispute .
 If the provider reports the item to a consumer reporting company, it must include a notice of your dispute . The provider must include the notice of the dispute in its report .
 If the information is found to be inaccurate, the provider may not report it again . The provider may never report the information again .
 By law you’re entitled to a free credit report if a company takes ‘adverse action’ against you, like denying your application for credit .
 Equifax, Experian and TransUnion -is required to provide you with a free copy of your credit report once every 12 months . If you ask for it, you will be required to give it to you .
 You may order reports from each of the three credit reporting companies at the same time . You can stagger your requests throughout the year, or you can stagger requests .
 It doesn't cost anything to dispute mistakes or outdated items on your credit report. It doesn’t cost anything.
 The credit reporting company and the information provider are responsible for correcting inaccurate or incomplete information in your report .
 A friend introduced Moeck to a partner at the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers . Moeck asked the partner to sign a nondisclosure agreement .
 Such agreements, known not unusual for entrepreneurs to request and potential investors to sign nondisclosure agreements, are not unusual .
 In fact, some investors say they walk away from a founder who even suggests signing one .
Lawyer: Even if a startup manages to get an agreement signed, it can be tough to enforce . Lawyer Aaron I Messing: "It's hard to enforce"
 NDAs are designed to prevent an idea or technology from being stolen and copied . Moeck went ahead with a pitch to Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers even though they refused to sign a non-disclosure agreement .
 Moeck was especially concerned because the venture capital firm was already backing Zynga, another gaming company . Moeck is especially concerned that ZyngA is already backing another gaming firm .
 The Kleiner Perkins investor refused to sign an NDA, leaving Moeck to decide whether to proceed with his pitch . Moeck's pitch has been rejected by the NDA .
 Kauffman Foundation says declining use of NDAs “is cerfainly nof in the interests of entrepreneurs.’s Thom Ruhe, vice president of entrepreneurship, said the decline in NDAs is “cautious nof’
 It is rare that an investor steals an idea, Ruhe said . But it does happen, he said, but it is rare .
 Each time an NDA is signed, it stalls the conversation for a week because of the legal work involved, Hwang says . Over time, that can give a competitor the opportunity to enter a market first, he says .
 7/05 Sudoku is a number-placing puzzle based on a 9x9 grid with several given numbers . I t'AATAT^a.ft-Va, JlriAkiA^ is a A Blondie Mother Goose & Grimm Baby Blues .
 The difficulty level of the Conceptis Sudoku increases from Monday to Sunday . The difficulty levels of the concept is now at a high level .
 A C R e. In 0 U N S m m J E R D T E A l. A N C 1 3 A G A E D G y. I s H E E E nJ |r 0 Y Y .
 Mayor Alan Long told residents he planned to send a “fat bill’ to President Barack Obama . “We didn’t ask for this problem it was just dumped at our doorstep," he said .
 Murrieta was not much more than a rural outpost, but in the past decade the population has exploded to more than 100,000 . Suburban developments have taken over large plots of scrub brush .
 For the most part, residents were attracted to the promise of a quieter life and housing that was much less expensive than in the coastal cities .
 Latinos make up more than 25 percent of the population in Southern California . Murrieta has not been as transformed by immigration as many other communities have .
 Many residents say they came here to escape the kind of crime and urban problems they now fear the immigrants could bring . Many say they come to the city to escape crime andUrban problems .
 Dozens of residents vented at the Obama administration for what they saw as a failure to secure the borders .
 Border Patrol officers promise to show up at Border Patrol station every time they know a bus of immigrants is scheduled to arrive . They vow to continue to fight back .
 Dozens of pro-immigrant residents wearing Mexican soccer jerseys also showed up at the meeting . The meeting was held Wednesday but mostly sat in silence .
 Many more waited outside, having arrived too late to be let into the auditorium . The auditorium quickly filled to capacity .
 New York 52 OV $49k Marriott Aruba Ocean club DIVI WEEK PHOENIX wk 27,7/5 to 12 ocean front studio Rm 804, all amenities 4150$ and Divi Dutch Village wk. 27 7-5 to 7
 The blood is not the most jarring part of the photograph taken shortly after the bomb blew off Marine Gunnery Sgt. Sgt. Gunner Sgt. The blood isn't the most shocking part.
 He knew his defiance in the face of death would keep his comrades going and ease the torment caused by what they had witnessed . He knew that his defiance would keep them going and easing the torment.
Double amputee is taking along with nearly 2,000 troops who lost one or more limbs from combat injuries in Iraq and Afghanistan . His attitude set the tone for the long journey the double amputees are taking .
 It’s also pushing military medicine to find better ways to accommodate such a large population of young, severely disabled combat veterans .
 Many wear out their prosthetic limbs in a matter of months doing everything from mountain climbing to running marathons . Many wear them out in a few months.
 The Naval Health Research Center is launching a major, six-year study on wounded warriors to track their quality of life and better understand the road to recovery . Survival rates are reaching historic highs during the two wars .
1,500 people have signed up for the Wounded Warrior Recovery Project study . So far, 1,500 have signedup for the study .
 About 50,000 military personnel have been injured in the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan . 16,000 hurt so severely that they likely would not have survived previous conflicts .
 Doctors say a positive attitude is key to recovery . Study will also examine mental resilience and why some troops have it .
 It will rely on Web-based, telephone and mailed surveys about mobility, ability to function and social activity .
 Researchers will analyze military databases detailing clinical encounters with each service member injured while deployed . Researchers will also analyze medical records of injured soldiers .
 The study aims to provide one of the broadest reviews yet of how post 9-11 veterans with a variety of combat injuries are coping and enjoying life .
 His case was featured in the New England Journal of Medicine in May to demonstrate the success of battlefield trauma care over the past decade .
Retired Marine has benefited from a host of new medical strategies used by the military . The retired Marine has had laser treatments, including laser treatments .
 Peter Shumaker, chief of dermatology at Naval Medical Center San Diego, helped pioneer the use of an ablative laser . The laser is commonly used to smooth wrinkled or acne-scarred skin to ease wrinkles .
 Meyer was hospitalized for a month after the 2011 bomb blast in Afghanistan . Meyer was hospitalized for a year after the blast in 2011 .
 He lost his right leg above the knee, and his right hand above the wrist . He also lost his left leg above his knee and right hand.
 After multiple surgeries, he was outfitted for prosthetics and learned to walk again . He was able to walk for the first time after multiple surgeries .
 His prosthetic arm has a flashlight so at night he can see where he plants his prosthetic foot . He can also use a flashlight to help him plant the foot .
 His prosthetic arm has the knobs and battery pack positioned to one side so he can shoot a bow and arrow . The arm has been fitted with a prosthetic device that can be used to shoot arrows and bows .
 laser treatments on his scar tissue. He can now hold a toothbrush, write with a pen, dial his phone and pull the trigger of a hunting rifle .
 Laser treatments also removed a sore, allowing him to withstand his prosthetic leg for 18 hours a day . Laser treatments were also removed from a sore .
 Chad Hivnor, who recently retired from Lackland Air Force Base, helped pioneer the method . The method was first developed by the Air Force .
 Hivnor also discovered botulinum toxin A injections decrease perspiration where the prosthetic limb attaches, helping stop it from slipping off while exercising .
 The findings were presented to the American Academy of Dermatology to promote treatment for severely scarred people in the general population .
 Such unconventional treatments make a big difference in daily life, veterans and their doctors say . Such unconventional treatment make a huge difference, veterans say .
 One soldier’s scar tissue has softened so he can grasp his daughter's hand . Another soldier's scar tissue can now type .
 A week after a recent treatment, Meyers rode on his motorcycle through a shopping district in Murrieta, 60 miles northeast of San Diego .
 His pinky and ring finger operated the throttle that has been put on the left side because he only has a left wrist . The throttle has been placed on the right side of his left side .
 It has a side car that can carry another amputee, wheelchair or his dog . It can also carry a wheelchair or a dog .
 Warfighter Made, which modified his motorcycle, started the nonprofit organization . Meyer and two others have started the organization . The group is based on Meyer's motorcycle.
 It also customizes sports cars, off-road vehicles and other transportation for veterans . Veterans can join in the work, which can be customized .
 Meyer works for the Injured Marines Semper Fi Fund, counseling fellow combat veterans . Meyer also works for Injured Marine SemperFi Fund .
 He loves the photograph taken after he was injured because “it's the exact opposite of what somebody expects you to do.’ He was injured in a car accident .
 ‘Inside Man’ is the fourth novel by Jeff Abbott to feature bar owner and ex-CIA agent Sam Capra . It continues one of the best ongoing series in the thriller genre .
 Readers will be hooked from the start when a friend of Sam’s — who doesn’t know about his spy past — asks for a favor .
 Steve occasionally takes security positions, and he hopes Sam will help him protect a young woman by becoming an inside man .
Before Sam can learn more, Steve is shot and killed in front of the bar . Before Sam can learning more, Sam will have to learn more from Steve .
 Sam learns the woman Steve was trying to protect is the daughter of a powerful tycoon with potentially shady dealings . Sam learns that Steve's daughter is a daughter of the powerful businessman .
 She agrees to let him pretend to be her boyfriend, and soon he has access to her possibly criminal family of treacherous brothers and sisters, and a father who might be going senile .
 Sam doesn't know whom he can trust, and with no access to his usual safety net, has to tread carefully . Sam doesn’t know what he can trusts, and has to step carefully .
 Scott Derrickson’s ‘Deliver Us From Evil’ adapts the detective genre to an exorcism tale . It is very serious about the prospect of demonic possession .
 The picture is based on claims made by real-life NYPD officer-turned-paranormal investigator Ralph Sarchie . A composite religious figure played wifh a predictable level of smolder by Edgar Ramirez .
 The pic has a shot at surpassing that outing commercially by virtue of its appeal to devout Catholics . "Sinister" is more aesthetically coherent if less frightening than the director’s 2012 hit “Sinister.”
 "Evil" is very respectful of their faith, though its nods to religion are genreappropriate . The film is never preachy enough to alienate the average horror fan .
 Sarchie, a cop who covers fhe South Bronx with partner Butler, is proud of an internal “radar’s’ that steers him away from mundane radio calls and toward juicy cases .
 A mysterious, blood-stained bystander disrupts the investigation before vanishing .
 Sarchie is ready to write the mother off as a gardenvariety psycho even when a Jesuit priest, Ramirez's Mendoza, shows up to insist on a more complicated explanation .
 Sarchie admits there may be something to this chainsmoking, whiskey-drinking priest's claim . Only after other crimes prove to share both tangible connections .
 The lapsed-Catholic cop is a lapsed Catholic cop . The man they’re hunting really is possessed .
 The victim's family and friends were terrorized by one spirit-controlled victim . The victim was not the victim of a terror attack .
 The invesfigafion yields some appreciably icky encounters with putrefying corpses and deranged prisoners . It's good considering the sometimes flimsy cop-movie stuff that surrounds the scares .
 McHale gets the kind of jadedly quippy dialogue one can easily imagine him parodying on "Community" Munn's part could have been scripted by cutand-pasting any of a hundred other neglected-policeman's-wife characters .
 Broadway and TV casting director Barry Moss dies . Moss was a longtime Broadway and television casting director .
 Barry Moss helped cast nearly 90 Broadway and touring productions, including the 1980 revival of “West Side Story’s” ""Nine,’ ""Torch Song Trilogy"" and “The Who's Tommy,” has died .
 Moss died June 17 of congestive heart failure in Manhattan, said his partner Bob Kale .
 Among his casting credits are the 1995 revival of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" He also was the casting director for "The Cosby Show" and was a founding member of The Casting Society of America .
 He joined the Mort Schwartz Agency, where he was put in charge of the theatrical department . He has been in charge at the agency for more than a decade .
 He met Julie Hughes, with whom he founded Hughes Moss Casting, in 1981 . Hughes was married to Julie Hughes . Hughes founded Hughes Casting in 1981.
 For years. For years, the U.S. government has been unable to find a solution to the problems of the nation's most pressing issues .
 Ketch Secor of Old Crow Medicine Show has been thanking Bob Dylan from afar for "Wagon Wheel" The multiplatinum hit is based on an unfinished Dylan song .
 The reclusive master songwriter finally responded — in a way Secor never expected . The songwriter is a former member of the group who wrote the song .
 Old Crow's new album "Remedy" comes out Tuesday . The lead singer likens his relationship with Dylan to a kid dropping letters in a bottle and tossing them in the ocean .
 From that came “Sweet Amarillo," a waltz about a cowboy's search for his lover .
 Dylan's management received a short suggestion to move the chorus up and switch out the harmonica for a fiddle . Dylan's manager sent a demo to Dylan's managers .
 The actress says she also plays one in the big-screen comedy “Tammy,” in theaters this weekend .
 McCarthy and husband Ben Falcone wanted me for a part. I'd heard they (the creative team of McCarthy and his husband BenFalcone) wanted me to be part of the creative team .
 Even when she gets outrageous, she gets on the most ridiculous jaunts and puts a bag on her head, you go with it, because it's real . Even when it's outrageous, when she's on the best jaunts, you're going with it .
 Lenore sets Tammy and her grandmother out of control on their road trip . She sets them both straight .
 They met in college and came out when it was very difficult for lesbians to be accepted . They met at college and they came out at the age of 20 .
 A young director who wants to do all these fancy shots and use all these wide lenses from a low angle will get nipped .
 I'm about to turn it over to the kids that are coming up, which I will do, willingly. And I’m about to turning it over, which he will do. And he’s about to turned it over.
 "Harry's Law" was canceled when she found out she had breast cancer . She had a double mastectomy in the summer of 2013 .
 Melissa and Ryan Murphy are the co-producer of "American Horror Story" Ryan Murphy is the producer of the show .
 A few months ago, I made the choice not to have reconstruction, because it occurred to me, "I don’t want to go back to bed," he says . He says he made the decision because he doesn't want to have reconstructions .
 They did always create their own reality spun from grandiosity . But then, then, they did always make their own own reality spin.
 cable TV has so much airtime to fill that it doesn’t care if it’s hot air. They are shamefully showcased on cable TV .
 Middle Eastern terrorists are once more pounding on the fear button . They are warning that America needs to attack or risk being emasculated by terrorists .
 Even Fox News anchors are now pressing him with skeptical questions about the war .
 Cheney is not only responsible for Iraq melting down and Afghanistan being mucked up . He is also responsible for the Iraq meltdown and Afghanistan mucking up .
 Rand Paul is a credible candidate for the Republican nomination . He can also claim credit for so exhausting John Wayne’s America that he is a skeptic on military intervention .
 Jon Stewart calls Liz Cheney, "Sith apprentice,” as Jon Stewart called Liz Cheney . Darth Vader is campaigning for validation with his cowboy hat and ""Sith apprentices"
 The Alliance for a Strong America is a group demanding a more chesty foreign policy in a statement redolent of the manifesto that neocons and other Republicans waved back during Clinton administration .
 Liz blamed President Barack Obama for the chaos wrought by her father and W. Obama . She said he was intentionally trying to weaken America .
 Ahmad Chalabi was the neocons’ cagey partner in fakery and initial choice to replace Saddam Hussein . He was the first choice for the new president .
 Just when you thought our wreck in Iraq could not get any more sulfurous, you thought it was a disaster . Just when we thought our war was over, we thought it could not be worse .
 Lawrence Wilkerson is a regretful former aide to Colin Powell . He says he is amoral about Cheney's actions .
 Ukrainians have crowdfunded the first "people's drone" to help their army stem infiltration by Russian-supported rebels in Ukraine’s eastern provinces that border Russia . The Guardian reported on Sunday that Ukrainians have funded the first ’s drone’
 Millions have already voted to align their country with the free markets and free people of the European Union . Millions there have already fought for and voted for.
 Petro Poroshenko signed a trade pact with the European Union on Friday . The pact will lower tariffs on Ukrainian exports to the 28-nation EU market . It will also bring Ukraine's economy up to Western standards .
 Viktor Yanukovych refused to sign last November under pressure from President Vladimir Putin of Russia . It was the same deal that Poroshenko’s predecessor, Viktor Yanukovych, refused to signs .
 Putin-directed separatists in eastern Ukraine. That set off the revolution in Kiev’s main square that eventually toppled Yanukovych .
 Poland joined the European Union after the collapse of the Soviet Union . It has badly lagged those of its neighbors, like Poland, who joined the EU in the 1980s .
 I get that the Russians would not want Ukraine to join NATO, a defense alliance still aimed at containing Russian power . The Russian government has said it would not support Ukraine joining NATO .
I opposed NATO’s expansion at the end of the Cold War and would not support it now . I opposed NATO's expansion in the past and now would not back it now. I opposed it at end of Cold War.
 Putin pulled back troops from Ukraine's border where he had massed them hoping first to block Poroshenko's election and then the signing of the EU deal . Putin had “blinked’s when, in the wake of Western sanctions and the threat of more, he pulled
 He has shoveled arms and proxies into eastern Ukraine to foment separatism in Russian-speaking areas . While he did not invade, he has shovels arms and proxy proxies into the region .
 Poroshenko fed up with Putin’s Goebbels-quality lying moved forces to regain control of eastern Ukraine . Ukraine's right to choose its future.
 Putin shows how dumb and clever he is at the same time. In denying Ukrainians the right to choose their own economic and political path, he shows how smart he is .
 He is dumb in believing that in this connected world of newly empowered citizens, he can enjoy the same "sphere of influence" that Russia had in Central Europe in the days of the czars .
 If a leader wants to have a sphere of influence today in this age of ‘people of influence’ he either has to earn it by how he behaves or take it all by force .
 In Ukraine, Putin is in incapable of the former and for now doesn't dare do the latter . Putin is incapable of a former and doesn’t dare do it.
The czars never had to deal with people of influence who could crowdfund their own drone . The czars had to do with people who could fund their own drones .
 His principal achievement has been to eliminate any meaningful debate on alternative futures for Russia . His main achievement is to eliminate a meaningful debate.
 Frolov: The seizure of Crimea and its proxy war in Ukraine "transformed the national conversation from a healthy debate on Putin's presidential performance into a toxic discussion on war and Russia’s enemies"
 If Putin “is fighting Nazis in Ukraine, then by extension anyone who disagrees with him could be a Nazi collaborator and an enemy of Russia .