 Located in southeast Europe, the country consists largely of fertile black soil steppes . The country is known for its fertile black soils .
 Mountainous areas include the Carpathians in the southwest and the Crimean chain in the south . The Carpathian region includes the Crimea and the south of the Crimean region .
 Ukraine is bordered by Belarus on the north, by Russia on the east, by the Black Sea on the south, by Moldova and Romania on the southwest, by Hungary, Slovakia, and Poland on the west . Ukraine is also borderedby Belarus, by
 Ukraine declared its independence from Russia on Jan., 1918, and several years of warfare ensued with several groups .
 The Red Army finally was victorious over Kiev, and in 1920 Ukraine became a Soviet republic . In 1920 Ukraine was a Soviet Republic .
 Ukraine became one of the founders of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in 1922 . In 1922, Ukraine became the first country to join the Soviet Union .
 In the 1930s, the Soviet government's enforcement of collectivization met with peasant resistance . The resulting famine took an estimated 5 million lives, according to reports .
 On April 26, 1986, Chernobyl was the site of the world's worst nuclear accident . The nation's nuclear power plant at Chernobyl is the nation's largest .
 On Oct., 1991, Ukrainian parliament voted to shut down the reactor within two years' time and asked for international assistance .
 Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk was elected by the Ukrainian parliament in 1990 . He vowed to seek Ukrainian sovereignty .
 In Dec.91, Ukrainian, Russian, and Belorussian leaders cofounded a new Commonwealth of Independent States with the capital to be situated in Minsk, Belarus .
 The new country's government was slow to reform the Soviet-era state-run economy . It was plagued by declining production, rising inflation, and widespread unemployment in years following independence .
 The United States announced in Jan.94 that an agreement had been reached with Russia and Ukraine for the destruction of Ukraine's entire nuclear arsenal . The U.S. announced the agreement in January .
 In Oct.94, Ukraine began a program of economic liberalization and moved to reestablish central authority over Crimea . In October, Ukraine started to move to re establish central authority in Crimea .
 In 1995, Crimea's separatist leader was removed and the Crimean constitution revoked . Crimea's Crimean constitution was revoked in 1995 .
 A presidential election pitted Viktor Yushchenko, the former reformist prime minister, against Viktor Yanukovich, the current prime minister and Kuchma's chosen successor .
 Yushchenko was nearly fatally poisoned with dioxin and had to be hospitalized for several weeks before the election . He was hospitalized shortly before election .
 Doctors predicted that poisoning will affect his health for years to come .
 Yushchenko's supporters took to the streets of the capital and other cities in protest . What became known as the Orange Revolution continued full strength over the next two weeks .
 Parliament votes in favor of overhaul of Ukraine's political system . The constitution is to reform election laws and transfer some presidential powers to the parliament .
 Yushchenko's reformist reputation was tarnished by his administration's infighting and allegations of corruption .
 The crisis shook the public's belief in the Orange Revolution, and Yushchenko's continued inattentiveness to governmental corruption has further disillusioned the public .
 Russia suddenly quadrupled the price of gas sold to Ukraine in Jan.06, triggering an energy crisis in the country . Russia's energy crisis is blamed for the increase .
 Ukraine maintained that Russia, angry at Ukraine's growing pro-Western stance and its loss of influence in the region, was attempting to damage its economy . Ukraine maintains that Russia is trying to damage the country's economy .
 Russia maintained that the rise in prices was purely a commercial consideration . Russia maintains that the increase in prices is purely aCommercial consideration .
 A quarter of Europe's gas supplies come from Russia via Ukraine's pipelines . Russia briefly stemmed the flow of gas to Ukraine to force the country to accept the higher prices .
 Ukraine agreed to pay about double its current price. A compromise was eventually reached, with Ukraine agreeing to pay more than double its price .
 Ukraine's parliament then sacked the government of prime minister Yuri Yekhanurov . Furious at the unfavorable terms of the deal, the parliament sacked the prime minister .
 In parliamentary elections on March 26, 2006, Yushchenko's party fared badly, receiving only 14% of the vote . The party received 14% in parliamentary elections .
 Viktor Yanukovich, the former prime minister whom Yushchenko had defeated in 2004, received the largest percentage, 32% of the vote . Yulia Timoshenko, the ex-PM whom YUSHchenko had sacked earlier in 2005, won 32%. Yanukovich was the former PM
 Yushchenko appointed his arch-rival Viktor Yanukovich as prime minister . Yanukovich was the very leader the Orange Revolution had defeated in 2004 .
 Yanukovich has vowed to strengthen Ukraine's ties with Russia once again . Yanukovich wants Ukraine to strengthen its relations with Russia again .
 dispute over debts and pricing of gas supplies between Russia and Ukraine led Gazprom to halt its gas exports to Europe via Ukraine . At least ten EU countries were affected by the dispute in January 2009 .
 Russia and Ukraine blamed each other for the disruption to Europe's energy supply . Russia, Ukraine and Ukraine blame each other.
 Viktor Yushchenko, who led Ukraine's Orange Revolution in 2004, resoundingly lost the first round of the presidential election . He led the Orange Revolution.
International observers declared the election fair, but Tymoshenko alleged election fraud . International observers declared it fair .
 Yanukovich formed a government in March with Mykola Azarov, a Russian-born former finance minister, as his prime minister .
 He promised voters that he had moved beyond his thuggish and intimidating demeanor . He vowed to allow an free media, government transparency, and to reach out to the West .
 Yanukovich resumed his intolerance for the opposition and opened investigations into opposition leaders . Once elected, Yanukovich returned to his intolerance, but opened investigations in the past .
 Tymoshenko was arrested in June 2011 for exceeding her authority when she signed a gas deal with Russia in 2009 . She was a prime target in 2011 .
 The arrest had the unintended effect of angering Russia, which saw the arrest as an affront to Vladimir Putin, who signed the deal, and the European Union .
 She was convicted in October 2011 and sentenced to seven years in prison . She was sentenced to 7 years for her role in the crime .
 The verdict was widely criticized as being political and to punish her for her continued participation in politics . The verdict is widely criticized.
 On April 13, 2012, the United States condemned the imprisonment of former Defense Minister Valery Ivashchenko .
 Ivashchenko, who has already been in custody for 18 months, denied the charges .
 Yulia Tymoshenko accused current President Yanukovych of wanting to persecute all of his political opponents . The former prime minister is serving a seven-year prison term .
 Many suspect the move was to keep her away from the public and the media . Many suspect she was trying to hide from the media.
 Tymoshenko's former Interior Minister was also found guilty and given a four year sentence . Tyloshenko's ex-minister was also given four years in prison .
 On July 3, 2012, Parliament passed a bill that reaffirmed Ukrainian as the country's national language .
 The bill also allowed local governments to give official status to other languages, including Russian, as long as the other languages are spoken by at least 10% of the region's residents .
 Opposition argued that the new bill violated the Constitution, which designated Ukrainian as the only official language .
 Critics of the bill feared that giving the Russian language official status would alienate the Ukraine further from the EU .
 On April 30, 2013, the European Court of Human Rights found that the detention of former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko was arbitrary and unlawful .
 The judges delivered a unanimous decision citing four violations of Ms. Ms. G. Gwyneth .
 Neither is the government legally obligated to release her or annul her conviction . Kraine has no intention of appealing the verdict .
 Ukraine was close to signing a trade agreement with the European Union in November 2013 . President Yanukovich backed out at the last minute, bowing to pressure from Russian president Vladimir Putin . Putin threatened financial penalties if Ukraine edged closer to Europe .
 Yanukovich refused to comply with EU demand that Yanukovich release former prime minister Tymoshenko from prison . In addition, Yanukovich refuses to comply.
 Tens of thousands of people take to the streets of Kiev to protest against Yanukovich's decision to integrate with Europe .
 Police responded violently to the protests, using tear gas and truncheons to disperse the crowds .
 The protests continued for days, increasing in scope and intensity after the violent response by police . The protests continue for days .
 By early December protesters had taken over City Hall, Trade Unions building, and Independence Park . They were planning to seize the parliament building .
 Several hundred thousand protesters gathered in Kiev in early December, demanding that Yanukovich resign .
 Yanukovich dispatched police to clear Independence Square with chainsaws and bulldozers . But they withdrew when it was clear the protesters would resume their demonstrations .
 Yanukovich reached a deal with Putin in which Russia loaned Ukraine $15 billion and sharply cut oil prices . Yanukovich is not re-engaging with the EU .
 The Ukrainian government said the aid prevented the country from falling into bankruptcy . The aid will provide economic stability, the government said .
 Ukraine will once again fall into financial crisis, economists say . However, they say that unless Ukraine increases revenue and cuts spending, the country will again fall in financial crisis .
 The deal did little to quell the unrest, and the protests continued into January 2014 . The deal didn't stop protests in Independence Square .
 Parliament hastily passed sweeping measures on Jan. that outlawed demonstrations . The measures include a ban on demonstrations .
 Yanukovich met with opposition leaders, but the negotiations only produced threats . Yanukovich has been in power since 2008 .
 Protesters began to lose confidence in the opposition leaders after they failed to win any concessions from Yanukovich .
 Yanukovich offered to install opposition leader Arseniy Yatsenyuk as prime minster . As the protests spread to cities across the country, Yanukovich offers to install Arseny Yatseniuk as PM .
 Both refused the offer, saying the moves only further entrenched Yankovich . Both refused to accept the offer .
 On Feb., 2014, riot police and protesters clashed as the demonstrators attempted to reclaim portions of Independence Square . Police had taken over the central plaza in Kiev two days before .
 Yanukovich agreed to hold elections by the end of the year and accept a weakening of the presidency . In a deal between the opposition and Yanukovich brokered by European Union officials on Feb.
 The opposition wanted him to step down immediately, but signed the agreement nevertheless . The opposition wants him to resign immediately .
 Parliament passed a series of measures that illustrated Yanukovich's weakened position . Parliament passed the measures after the agreement .
Former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko is freed from prison and exonerated . It will allow her to run for election, grant amnesty to anti-government protesters . It also annul constitutional amendments that expanded the power of the presidency .
 Yanukovich fled Kiev on Feb., and an interim government was put in place . The interim government is now in place.
 The next day, Parliament voted to give speaker Oleksandr Turchynov the authority to fulfill the responsibilities of the president . Parliament votes to give him the power to fulfill his responsibilities .
Avakov issued an arrest warrant for Yanukovich in February . He cited the deaths of civilians during the protests .
 The statements indicated that the country may avert a civil war and edge toward stability . The statements were made by President Barack Obama .
 Demonstrations against the turn of events in Ukraine broke out in Simferopol, the capital of Crimea .
 Masked gunmen, believed to be ethnic Russian extremists, took over several government buildings and raised the Russian flag .
 The gunmen refused to answer questions about their allegiance or who was commanding them .
 The next day, on Feb. 2, gunmen appeared at two airports in Simferopol, California .
 There were no reports of violence by the gunmen, but officials feared a separatist revolt may break out .
 The Black Sea Fleet, a Russian military base, is located in Crimea . Acting president Turchynov warned Russian troops not to intervene .
 He said Crimea should not seek independence from Ukraine . However, he said he does not believe Crimea should seek independence .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin dispatched troops to Crimea on March 1, 2014 . He cited the need to protect ethnic Russians and Russian citizens from extremist ultranationalists .
 Russian troops surrounded Ukrainian military bases and took over government buildings and airports . The Russian troops took over the Ukrainian government buildings, airports .
 Putin said he didn't see an immediate reason to initiate a military conflict . Russia "reserves the right to use all means at our disposal to protect" Russian citizens and ethnic Russians in the region .
 In the middle of the crisis, Russia test-fired a nuclear-capable intercontinental ballistic missile . It was scheduled before the turmoil began and was not related to the political turmoil .
 U.S. secretary of state John Kerry traveled to Kiev in a show of support for the interim government .
 He visited shrines erected in memory of slain protesters and pledged $1 billion in aid and loans to Ukraine . He also pledged to help Ukraine in the future .
 Russia was set to host the June meeting of the G8, but other member nations halted planning for the event . The G8 meeting was scheduled to take place in June .
 On March 6, the United States imposed sanctions on officials, advisers, and others involved in the underminding of democracy in Crimea .
 The sanctions involved revoking visas for those who hold them and refusing visa for those seeking them . The sanctions also included those who refused visas to travel to the United States .
 Crimean Parliament approved a referendum on March 16, asking voters if they want to secede from Ukraine and be annexed by Russia . The referendum is scheduled for March 16 .
 Ukraine's acting president, Oleksandr Turchynov, threatened to dissolve the Crimean Parliament . The acting president has been in charge of Ukraine's Crimean Parliament for more than two years .
 Nearly 97% of voters in Crimea chose to secede from Ukraine in the referendum on March 16, 2014 .
 Crimean Parliament declares region independent and formally sought annexation by Russia . The next day, the Crimean Parliament declared the region independent .
 Obama told Putin that neither the U.S. nor the international community would recognize the results of the referendum .
 The sanctions freeze assets held in the U.S. and ban Americans from doing business with those sanctioned . The sanctions also ban people from doing businesses with sanctions .
 Putin signed a treaty stating that Russia had annexed Crimea on March 18 . He was reclaiming territory that was part of Russia from 1783, when Empress Catherine II took it over from the Ottoman Empire .
 Putin gave a speech that both defended his move, denounced internationally as a land grab, and lashed out at the West .
 The move further deteriorated Russia's relationship with the U.S. and Europe . Russia's relations with the United States and Europe further deteriorated .
 It complicated any hopes for a peace agreement in Syria and cast a cloud over the talks over Iran's nuclear program . It also complicated any hope for a deal in Syria.
 Neither the U.S. nor the European Union recognized Crimea as part of Russia .
 On March 21, the European Union and Ukraine signed a portion of the EU Association Agreement . Former President Yanukovich refused to sign the deal, sparking unrest .
 The section that was signed lends Ukraine political support. The economic part will be enacted once a new president is elected . The section is signed by Ukraine's president .
 Former President Yanukovich refused to sign a U.S. deal that he had agreed to. The deal sparked unrest after Yanukovich's refusal to sign .
 kraine withdrew its military from Crimea on March 24, citing a threat to the soldiers and their families . The section that was signed lends Ukraine political support. The economic part will be enacted once a new president is elected .
 The members of the Group of 8 industrialized nations suspended Russia from the group on March 24 . The group moved the upcoming meeting from Sochi, Russia, to Brussels .
 One hundred countries voted in favor, 11 voted against, and 58 abstained . The majority of the vote was in favor .
 On the same day, the International Monetary Fund agreed to loan Ukraine $17 billion as long as the country implemented austerity measures . The United States Congress approved a $1 billion aid package .
 The aid will boost the faltering economy and help it meet its debt obligations . It will help the economy meet its debts and help the country meet its obligations .
 Putin continues to deploy troops on the southern and eastern border with Ukraine . Fears that he may attempt to take over additional regions of the country .
 By the end of March, there were as many as 40,000 Russian troops stationed on the border .
Pro-Russian protesters and armed militants took over several government buildings and police stations in early April . Those fears were realized in the eastern capital cities of Donetsk and Kharkiv .
 Ukraine has announced they are forming an independent republic . They also announced they would hold a referendum on secession from Ukraine and annexation by Russia .
 Pro-Russian armed militants carried out similar actions in other cities in the region . About a week later, pro-Russian forces carried out a similar action in another city .
 Oleksandr Turchynov, Ukraine's acting president, threatened the pro-Russian militias with an "antiterrorist operation" if they didn't withdraw .
 The militants ignored the ultimatum and Turchynov asked the UN to dispatch a peacekeeping force to the eastern part of the country . The UN has not yet responded to the request .
 Putin and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov repeatedly denied the government orchestrated the demonstrations . Putin and Sergei Lavrov have repeatedly denied they orchestrated the protests .
 U.S., Russia, Ukraine, and European Union reached an agreement intended to de-escalate the tension in eastern Ukraine . The agreement was reached in Geneva on April 17 .
 The agreement stated that all illegal armed groups will lay down their arms and all buildings seized illegally will be surrendered . The agreement was signed by the United States.
 Both sides agreed to end violence and intolerance, with anti-Semitism being singled out . Both sides agree to end the violence, intolerance and anti-Semitic violence .
 Protesters who are not suspected of committing capital offenses will be granted amnesty if they surrender their arms . Protesters who do not commit capital offenses would be granted an amnesty .
 The statement also said while drafting a new constitution, Ukraine will make the process inclusive, transparent and accountable .
 Russia did not commit to withdrawing the 40,000 troops it has massed on the Ukrainian border . Russia has been massing on the Ukraine border .
 The diplomats discussed a proposal by acting Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatseniuk to decentralize power and give regional governments increased authority . Federalism was not covered in the agreement .
 The pro-Russian separatists refuse to vacate the buildings they have occupied . They say they will not leave until the government in Kiev steps down .
 Turchynov ordered ""antiterrorist operations" against the pro-Russian militants on April 22 . But quickly withdrew troops without dislodging them from occupied buildings .
 The United States imposed additional sanctions in late April on seven Russian individuals . The sanctions are targeting some of the country's wealthiest and most powerful businessmen .
 The sanctions, announced on April 28, put a travel ban on the individuals and froze the assets of the officials and the businesses . The travel ban was put on May 28 .
 They also restricted the import of U.S. goods that could be used for military purposes . The restrictions also restricted import of United States goods.
 The EU in general has been more reluctant than the U.S. to impose severe financial sanctions on Russia because of the closer economic ties between many European nations and Russia . Russia is a source of energy.
 sanctions have begun to take a toll on Russia's economy . Nevertheless, the sanctions have taken a toll.
 Standard & Poors cut Russia's rating, leaving it just one notch above junk status . Investors have withdrawn about $50 billion from the country, and the stock market has fallen 13% in 2014 .
 Acting president Turchynov acknowledged pro-Russian separatists were in control of much of eastern Ukraine . The separatists had met little if any resistance when taking over government buildings .
 The Ukrainian government launched an offensive in the rebel-held eastern city of Sloviansk on May 2 . Turchynov's statement about the inept police has been criticized .
 The separatists shot down two Ukrainian military helicopters in the fighting . The separatists have been fighting in Ukraine for months .
 The turmoil spread to Odessa, a strategically important port city in the Black Sea area . About a dozen people were killed in battles between separatists and advocates of Ukrainian unity .
 More than 40 people, mostly pro-Russian separatists, died in a fire in Odessa . The building they had locked themselves in went up in flames .
 Putin announced the withdrawal of 40,000 troops from the border with Ukraine on May 7 . He urged separatists to abandon plans for a referendum on autonomy, called the nationwide elections set for May 25 in Ukraine . Russia said Russia would participate in negotiations to end the crisis .
 Both the U.S. and European officials responded with a heavy dose of skepticism that Putin would follow through . Both the United States and European Officials responded with heavy doses of skepticism .
 The pro-Russian separatists said they would hold the referendum on May 11 despite Putin's request . The referendum will be held in the Russian capital, Moscow .
 The referendums on regional autonomy were held in Donetsk and Luhansk on May 11 . The referentums were held on the same day .
 Both provinces overwhelmingly approved the referendums . 90% of voters in Donetsk voted in favor of self-rule, and 96% did in Luhansk .
 The U.S. and several European nations also dismissed the referendums . The United States and several other countries also dismissed.
 Polls showed that the results were not an accurate reflection of how a majority of eastern Ukrainians felt about independence .
 Most prefer to remain part of Ukraine; only those in favor of autonomy turned out to vote . Most of Ukraine's population want to remain in Ukraine .
 Russia expressed little appetite for annexing either region, reluctant to take on the economic burden or risk further sanctions . Russia expressed no appetite for annexation or taking on economic burden .
 Thousands of unarmed steelworkers and miners took to the streets in Mariupol, the region's second-largest city .
 Rinat Akhmetov is Russia's richest man who employs the miners and steelworkers . He said they may lose their jobs if Russia annexed the region .
 Mariupol was the site of deadly battles between government troops and separatists a week earlier . The clashes took place a week ago .
 As many as 20 separatists were killed when troops fired on the police headquarters building that the separatists had attempted to seize .
 Petro Poroshenko, a pro-European billionaire, breezed to victory in the special presidential election on May 25 . He previously served as a finance and foreign minister .
 Poroshenko inherited a country mired in a civil war and financial disarray . The Chocolate King made his fortune in the candy industry .
 Pro-Russian separatists attempted to take over the airport in Donetsk .
 The government in Kiev dispatched the military and fighter jets to take back the airport . The airport was taken back by the government .
 The militants later shot down a military helicopter, killing 14 people . The helicopter was shot down by the militants .
 Russia withdrew its troops from the border with Ukraine days before Ukraine's presidential election . The move was a clear sign Putin was beginning to back off his antagonistic stance toward its neighbor .
 Putin praised the election and promised to work with Poroshenko . In addition, Putin praised Poroshenko and said he would work with him .
 In late June, he requested that the upper house of Parliament rescind its authorization for Putin to use force in Ukraine . The upper house has since rescinded its authorization.
 Putin once again inserted himself in the crisis, cutting off gas supplies to Ukraine . In early July, Putin again actively inserted himself into the crisis .
 arms continued to flow from Russia to the separatists and Putin did little to stem the violence . In addition, arms continue to flow.
After the rebels shot down a military transport jet and killed 49 people, Poroshenko declared a week-long, unilateral ceasefire on June 20 .
 The rebels agreed to observe the temporary ceasefire after initially resisting .
 Poroshenko ended the ceasefire after ten days . He claimed the rebels continued to attack government troops .
 Crash occurred in territory where pro-Russian separatists have been battling Ukrainian troops . The crash occurred in the territory where Ukrainian troops are fighting pro-Russia separatists .
 Ukrainian, European, and American officials said the plane was shot down by a Russian-made surface-to-air missile . U.S. officials said satellite images showed the plane being shot down .
 The plane took off from Amsterdam and was headed to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia . The plane was headed for Malaysia .
 Poroshenko accused the separatists of launching the missile, which they denied .
 President Obama said he believed the rebels shot down the plane . The crash happened a day after the crash .
 He faulted Putin for continuing to arm the rebels and for not stopping the fighting . He called the crash a "global tragedy" and blamed Putin for failing to stop fighting .
 Analysts say rebels may have thought they were targeting a military transport plane rather than a commercial jet . Most analysts say they may have been targeting military transport planes .
 The United States imposed further sanctions on Russia in response to Putin's refusal to stop arming the separatists . The U.S. imposed further restrictions on Russia on Monday .
 The latest round of sanctions are the most punitive yet against Russia . They target large defense and energy firms and banks . The sanctions are most punitiveyet against Russia.
 Previously, only Russian individuals and businesses directly related to the destabilization in Ukraine had been sanctioned .
 The United States began providing rebels with nonlethal aid, including military advice, intelligence, and body armour . The U.S. also began providing military advice and intelligence .
 Officials from the U.S., Ukraine, and NATO say they believe Russia is also firing rockets from inside Russia . The rebels are fighting in Ukraine and Ukraine .
 The European Union and United States imposed a coordinated round of broad sanctions on Russia on July 29 . The EU and U.S. imposed the sanctions on the Russian government .
 The sanctions place an embargo on new weapons sales to Russia, limit the sale of some technology and equipment to the oil industry . Europeans and European companies are banned from doing business with Russian-owned banks .
 The sanctions are the toughest imposed on Russia since the Cold War . Businesses and individuals closely connected to Putin were also affected by the sanctions .
 Putin banned the import of food from countries involved who imposed the sanctions . In response, Putin banned food from the countries involved .
 The rebels were criticized for denying outside access to the bodies of the victims and to the crash site . The rebels have been criticized for not allowing outside access.
 The bodies were transported to refrigerated train cars in Torez, another rebel-controlled city in eastern Ukraine .
 They were accused of removing important evidence from the crash site . They were also accused of removal of important evidence .
 The rebels transported bodies and flight recorders to Kharkiv, a government-controlled city . They still refused to allow inspectors to investigate the wreckage .
 It did rule out either pilot error or a mechanical problem with the plane . It did not rule out any pilot error.
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk resigned on July 24 after two major parties, Svoboda and Udar, bolted from the governing coalition . Yatsenuk was the prime minister of the country for three years .
 The Ukrainian military began an aggressive campaign in early July, using airstrikes to back up ground troops . The Ukrainian army has been using airstrikes in recent months to bolster its forces .
 The military forced rebels from the towns of Sloviansk, their military headquarters, and Kramatorsk . The military took control of some of the border crossings through which Russia had been arming the rebels .
 Russia responded by massing about 20,000 troops on the border with Ukraine . Russia responded to the request for more troops to be sent to Ukraine .
Government troops moved into Luhansk and Donetsk, former rebel strongholds . The rebels continued to struggle into August, as government troops moved in .
 NATO: Russia sent 1,000 troops into Ukraine from the southeast, opening a new front in the conflict . Poroshenko and Putin met to discuss options to end the conflict, NATO says .
 The Ukrainian government, the Russian-backed separatists, Russia, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe announced that they had agreed on a ceasefire .
 The terms include an immediate end to fighting, the exchange of prisoners, amnesty for those who did not commit serious crimes . A 6-mile buffer zone along the Ukrainian-Russian border, decentralization of power in the Donbass region .
 It also said local elections will be held under terms of Ukrainian law . Local elections will also be held in Ukraine under the terms of the law .
 Ukraine's parliament and European Parliament ratified the EU Association Agreement on September 16 . Yanukovich refused to sign the deal, sparking protests that led to his ouster .
 The agreement will not be fully implemented until the end of 2015, leaving some concerned that it will be watered down by the time it's in place .
 Ukraine's parliament also voted to give rebel-controlled areas of the Donbas region increased autonomy and self-governance and maintain Russian language rights .
 In October 2014, Human Rights Watch said it had evidence that the Ukrainian army attacked civilian-populated areas of rebel-held Donetsk with cluster bombs .
 The bombs scatter dozens or more bomblets, which are banned by some countries . The bombs, which scatter dozens of bombs, are also banned by may countries .
 Ukraine denied the accusation, which if proves correct, could discourage the population in the east from engaging with the government .
 Pro-Western parties of President Poroshenko and Prime Minister Yatsenyuk dominated . Neither won an outright majority .
 Crimea did not participate in the election, nor the rebel-held areas, which said they would hold their own elections . Crimea is not part of Crimea, but the region has not participated in the elections .
 The Opposition Bloc, made up of loyalists of former President Yanukovych, garnered 9%, enough to take seats in parliament . The opposition Bloc was formed by a group of supporters of the ex-president .
 The new government will have to carry out reforms, including scaling back the size of government and rooting out corruption . The International Monetary Fund will receive aid from the IMF .
 Russia also needs to make a $1. billion debt payment to Russia, else jeopardize future oil deliveries . The country also needs the funds to make the payment .
 Elections were in fact held in Luhansk and Donetsk, separatist-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine, in early November 2014, in violation of the cease-fire agreement signed in Minsk in September .
 The Ukrainian government, U.S., and EU said they would not recognize the results of the election . The Ukraine government, the EU and the United States said they wouldn't recognize the election results .
 The elections in Luhansk and Donetsk in November 2014 were hardly the only violations of the cease-fire .
 Violence was rampant almost since the agreement was signed, with both the separatists and the Ukrainian military accusing each other of attacks .
 Between the signing of the cease-fire and early December, about 1,000 civilians and soldiers were killed . About 25% of the total 4,300 military and civilian fatalities were killed.
 NATO reports that Russia has continued to supply the rebels with combat troops, vehicles, backing up claims by the Ukrainian government . In addition, NATO reported that Russia had continued to support the rebels .
 The cease-fire was all but shattered in January 2015 when rebels took over the Donetsk airport . Evidence mounted that Russia was supplying the rebels with increasingly sophisticated weapons .
 President Poroshenko said as many as 9,000 Russian soldiers were taking part in the fighting in Luhansk and Donetsk . Russia denied the claim .
 leaders of Russia, Ukraine, Germany, and France met in February 2015 to try to resurrect the peace agreement signed in September 2014 in Minsk . The Minsk Protocol was called the Minsk protocol .
After 16 hours of negotiations, the parties agreed to a cease-fire, which would go into effect on Feb. Feb. The cease-fires would end the Ukraine war in eastern Ukraine .
 Some are skeptical that the cease-fire would hold . However, some terms of the agreement left many skeptical that it would hold.
 separatist regions of Donetsk and Luhansk would be given "special status" and foreign troops and weapons will be withdrawn . Both sides agree that both sides would remove heavy weapons and release prisoners .
 Debaltseve is a contested town that's the site of a railroad hub that links Donetsk and Luhansk, rebel strongholds . Between the signing of the accord and its implementation, shelling continued in the town .
 Some 8,000 troops had been under seige in the town since the fall of 2014 .
 Rebel leader Aleksandr Zakharchenko said the cease-fire did not apply to the town . The cease- fire does not apply.
 On Feb., rebels took control of Debaltseve and Ukrainian troops withdrew from the town . On Feb. 27, rebels took over the town from Ukrainian troops .
 Facing bankruptcy, Ukraine appealed to the International Monetary Fund . Ukraine appealed.
 In February 2015, the IMF pledged $17. billion and potentially $40 billion over four years if Ukraine complied with economic reforms that will promote economic growth . The IMF pledged the money to Ukraine in February 2015 .
 Ukraine requested additional military aid and a peacekeeping force for the Donbas region . Ukraine requested more military aid in April 2015 .
 The EU said further aid is contingent upon Ukraine implementing further reforms . The EU, however, said that further aid was contingent on Ukraine implementing more reforms .