 Post-Soviet politics has always been notable for its unique terminology . It reflects the uniqueness of local political practices .
 The term is now widely used on the outside of prison . It is symptomatic of the inter-penetration of organised crime and politics in countries like Ukraine and Russia .
 Smotryashchie may represent organised crime in politics, but it is also used for those who look after the interests of oligarchs and regional clans .
 The money flows and keep an eye on decisions that are supposed to favour their sponsors . They control the money flows.
 In Ukraine the term has a long history, but it came into wider use after 2014 . The term has been used in Ukraine for a long time .
 The centralised pyramid of corruption from the Yanukovych era was no longer around . The centralisation of corruption in Yanukovych era is no longer in place .
 The slogan of ‘de-oligarchisation’ was largely meaningless, but leading oligarchs took a step back from more visible schemes of the old era .
 New President Poroshenko grew his business empire while he could . He was not as crooked, but grew his empire.
 Kuratory on the other hand, exist because the normal authorities, who are themselves steeped in informal culture, chose to shift certain functions even further into the informal arena .
 Smotryashchie are more like delegates than representatives, and are more closely tied to their sponsors and to certain set of rules . Kuratory are deliberately given a level of operational freedom .
Kuratory exist because the Kremlin has always relied on informal practices and 20 years of political technology . Gleb Pavlovsky is one of the leading architects of the original Putin system .
 In this system, ‘curators’ are ‘semi-official figures through whom state governance flows. ‘Curator’ is ‘Semi- official figures’ in this system .
 Ukraine's aggression against Ukraine took the form of so-called ‘hybrid war’ from 2014 kuratory were perfect agents for disguise and deniability . But with the aggression against the Ukraine, the aggression was perfect agents.
 Defence Minister Sergey Shoigu was at the top of the pyramid in Crimea . In Crimea, he was the Defence Minister of Crimea .
 Belaventsev oversaw the ‘choice’ of leaders for the coup d’état in February 2014 . He emerged out of the shadows to be appointed Putin’s special envoy in Crimea .
 Shoigu protégé Frants Klintsevich organised the flight of ‘170 former soldiers, veterans of Afghanistan and Chechnya’ to Sevastopol on 28 February 2014 .
 For the attempted uprising in eastern and southern Ukraine, there were a number of rival kuratory kuratories . For the tried uprising, there was also an attempt to overthrow the government .