 Politics of Ukraine takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic and of a multi-party system .
 Ukrainian politics is seen as both a legacy of the Soviet system and a fear of separatism . Ukrainian politics has been categorised as 'over-centralised'
 The Economist Intelligence Unit has rated Ukraine as a "hybrid regime" in 2016 .
 Ukraine named a parliamentary commission to prepare a new constitution, adopted a multi-party system, and adopted legislative guarantees of civil and political rights for minorities .
 A new, democratic constitution was adopted on 28 June 1996 . The constitution mandates a pluralistic political system with protection of basic human rights and liberties .
 The Constitution was amended in December 2004 to ease the resolution of the 2004 presidential election crisis . The Constitution has been amended since 2004 .
 The consociationalist agreement transformed the form of government in a semi-presidentialism . President of Ukraine had to cohabit with a powerful Prime Minister .
 The Constitutional Court of Ukraine in October 2010 overturned the 2004 amendments, considering them unconstitutional . The court said they were unconstitutional .
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law, but religious organizations are required to register with local authorities and with the central government .
 Minority rights are respected in accordance with a 1991 law guaranteeing ethnic minorities the right to schools and cultural facilities and the use of national languages in conducting personal business .
 According to the Ukrainian constitution, Ukrainian is the only official state language . Ukrainian is only official language .
In Crimea and some parts of eastern Ukraine, use of Russian is widespread in official business . However, in Crimea and other parts of Ukraine, there are substantial ethnic Russian minorities .
 The failure of the government to conduct a thorough, credible, and transparent investigation into the 2000 disappearance and murder of independent journalist Georgiy Gongadze has had a negative effect on Ukraine's international image .
 Over half of Ukrainians polled by the Razumkov Center in early October 2010 believed political censorship existed in Ukraine .
Official labor unions have been grouped under the Federation of Labor Unions . Official labor unions are grouped under a federation of labor unions .
Independent unions emerged during 1992, among them the Independent Union of Miners of Ukraine . Consultative Council of Free Labor Unions formed in 1992 .
 The right to strike is legally guaranteed, but strikes based solely on political demands are prohibited . In the past, strikes are not allowed to be held on political grounds .
 The President nominates the Prime Minister, who must be confirmed by parliament . The President is the President of the country .
 The Prime-minister and cabinet are de jure appointed by the Parliament on submission of the President and Prime Minister respectively .
 Prior to 2006, half of the members were elected by proportional representation and the other half by single-seat constituencies .
 The Verkhovna Rada initiates legislation, ratifies international agreements, and approves the budget . The Rada also ratifies the international agreements .
Ukrainian parties tend not to have clear-cut ideologies but incline to centre around civilizational and geostrategic orientations .
 A faction of nonpartisan deputies under the name Reforms for the Future existed between 16 February 2011 and 15 December 2012 . The Reforms For the Future was a faction of deputies.
 A faction of nonpartisan deputies under the name For Peace and Stability existed between 2 July 2014 and 27 November 2014 . The faction was called For peace and Stability .
 In 1998 2000 there was another parliamentary faction Labour Ukraine that existed without its political party until it was registered by the Ukrainian Ministry of Justice in June 2000 .
 Originally scheduled to take place on 29 March 2015, the date was changed to 25 May 2014 following the 2014 Ukrainian revolution .
 Yulia Tymoshenko, who emerged with 12.81% of the votes, was the closest competitor . His closest competitor was YuliaTymoshenko. He won the vote by 12. 81% .
 The Central Election Commission reported voter turnout at over 60% excluding those regions not under government control . Crimea and a large part of the Donbass were not included in the vote .
 Since Poroshenko obtained an absolute majority in the first round, a run-off second ballot was unnecessary . Poroshenko won a majority of the vote in the second round .
 The Orange Revolution led to a series of peaceful protests that resulted in the nullification of the second round . The first round was followed by the Orange Revolution .
 The Supreme Court of Ukraine ordered a repeat of the re-run to be held on December 26, 2004 . It asked the law enforcement agencies to investigate cases of election fraud .
 The Supreme Court of Ukraine declared the results of the November 21, 2004 run-off ballot invalid .
 The re-run ballot was held on December 26, 2004 . The Constitutional Court of Ukraine was the first to hold the ballot .
 Laws, acts of the parliament and the Cabinet, presidential edicts, may be nullified by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine . They are found to violate the Constitution of Ukraine.
 The Supreme Court of Ukraine is the main body in the system of courts of general jurisdiction . It is the first court in Ukraine to hold a court in the country's general jurisdiction.
 Some courts provided for by legislation as still in project, as is the case for,g., Court of Appeals of Ukraine .
 The Prosecutor General of Ukraine is granted with the broad rights of control and supervision . Important is also the Office of the Prosecutor General.
 The current administrative divisions remained the same as the local administrations of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union is now the most populous country in the world .
 The heads of the oblast and rayon are appointed and dismissed by the President of Ukraine and serve as representatives of the central government in Kyiv .
 Regional elites compete fiercely for control over the central government and the position of the president . This system encourages regional elites to compete for control of the government .
 During 1992, a number of pro-Russian political organizations in Crimea advocated secession of Crimea and annexation to Russia .
 During USSR times Crimea was ceded from Russia to Ukraine in 1954 by First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev to mark the 300th anniversary of the Treaty of Pereyaslav . In 1954, First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev ceded Crimea to Ukraine .
 In July 1992, the Crimean and Ukrainian parliaments determined that Crimea would remain under Ukrainian jurisdiction while retaining significant cultural and economic autonomy . The Autonomous Republic of Crimea was created in July 1992 .
 The Crimean peninsula served as site for major military bases of both Ukrainian and Russian forces . The peninsula was heavily populated by ethnic Russians .
 Ukraine's pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovich, was kicked out of power by Ukraininans . In early 2014, Ukraine's Pro-Russian President, Viktor Yanukovych, was kick-out of power with brute force .
 The legitimate parliament of Crimea which was elected based on the Ukrainian legislation announced a referendum . The Crimean parliament was elected on the basis of the Ukrainian law .
 Results of the Referendum held in March 2014, in Crimea, with 97% of voters backing joining Russia .
 Russia and the new, self-proclaimed Republic of Crimea signed a treaty of accession of Crimea and Sevastopol in the Russian Federation on 18 March 2014 .
 UN General Assembly passed non-binding resolution 68/262 declaring Ukraine's referendum invalid . In response, the General Assembly voted to support Ukraine's claim to Crimea . The vote was followed by a vote to declare the referendum invalid.
 Russia administers the peninsula as two federal subjects . Ukraine and the majority of countries do not recognise Russia's annexation .
 Center for Adaptation of Civil Service to the Standards of EU public institution established by the Decree of Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine to facilitate administrative reform .