 Civil Society rating decreased from 2.25 to 2.50 due to growing impact and visibility of intolerant, extremist groups in the public space .
 Local Democratic Governance rating improved from 5.25 to 5.00 due to the strengthening capacity of local governments . decentralization reforms and the growing financial sustainability of local authorities are key factors .
 Judicial Framework and Independence rating improved from 6.00 to 5.75 due to the launch of judicial reform implementation pursuant to the newly adopted law and constitutional amendments .
 Corruption rating improved from 6.00 to 5.75 due to the creation of the new national anticorruption agencies . Public procurement reform implemented with essential anticorrupt implications .
 Ukraine has faced significant challenges since the ouster of former president Viktor Yanukovych and his semiauthoritarian regime by the Revolution of Dignity in 2014 . Russia's military intervention and the urgent need to rectify the country’s obvious shortcomings in democracy and rule of law.
 Crimea is still annexed and the rights of the local population, especially the indigenous Crimean Tatars, are widely violated . Crimea was annexed by the Crimean government .
 The internationally mediated Minsk Agreements of February 2015 for Donbas in eastern Ukraine did not result in a resolution of the conflict . The affected territories remained under de facto Russian control and without a stable ceasefire .
 Russia continued to deliver arms, military equipment, ammunition, and unregistered military personnel as “volunteers’ to the conflict zone. Despite internationally sponsored attempts at peace-building, Russia continued.
 The total number of deaths since the start of the conflict in April 2014 has reached almost 10,000 people from both sides . 2,000 civilians have been killed in the conflict since April 2014 .
 The de facto, Russian-managed local administrations in Donbas were strengthened institutionally during 2016 . The removal of less-controllable elements, sometimes through mafia-style violence, was seen as part of the change .
 The transformation of the ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ into Russian-controlled provinces has been mostly accomplished, making it less and less likely that Ukraine will accept their reintegration under continued Russian dominance .
 The Ukrainian government has managed to stabilize the economic and political situations in 2016 . Despite these severe security challenges, the Ukrainian government continues to stabilize .
 In April, a new cabinet of ministers was appointed following the resignation of Arseniy Yatsenyuk and his cabinet .
Petro Poroshenko Bloc and People's Front left only two political parties in the coalition . This makes it fragile and dependent on non-coalition political parties and individual members of parliament on a case-by-case basis .
 At the same time, the current coalition is strong enough to avoid early general elections to the Rada, which the opposition strongly desires . The opposition strongly wants to avoid the election .
 President Petro Poroshenko strengthened his political position during the year . Despite a drop in his public opinion ratings, President Poroshenko's political position remained strong .
 The new prime minister, Groysman, was publicly viewed as being controlled by the president . In contrast to Yatsenyuk, he was widely perceived to act as Poroshenko's “equal’s ‘equal,’
 Groysman has no political backing of his own, which makes him dependent on coalition factions, especially the president’s party . Unlike Yatsenyuk, Groysmen has no backing of the president's party .
 Groysman took steps to secure his relative political independence during the formation of his cabinet . He resisted the president’s pressure regarding the appointment of the first deputy prime minister .
 provisional elections for the Verkhovna Rada took place in seven single-mandate constituencies on 17 July . The opposition and the coalition had partial success in the elections .
 On 11 and 18 December, the first local elections were held in newly amalgamated communities established under local governance reform that began in 2015 .
 Central Election Commission members' terms expired in 2014 . Failure to expediently replace most of the members poses a challenge to the legitimacy of any elections .
 Political parties have started to release official reports on their budgets . Political parties received the first installments of public funds as a result of the reform of political financing .
 Civil society remains the strongest element in Ukraine’s democratic transition .
The sector is playing a crucial role in driving reforms aimed at building functional democracy and the rule of law . The sector is also playing a key role in building functional democracies .
 Since the revolution, civil society has grown in terms of capacity and diversity, says the U.S. government . Since then, the country has seen a rise in diversity and capacity .
 At the same time, the war and Russia’s occupation have emboldened extremist organizations, including violence . The war has emboldened extremists, which are increasingly influential in shaping public sphere and political debates .
 The Ukrainian media landscape is pluralistic, and criticism of the government is widespread . The Ukrainian government is widely criticized .
 At the same time, the largest media outlets are still controlled by oligarchs, making them dependent on outside political agendas .
 A new public broadcaster has been formally established, but its effective operation has been delayed due to bureaucratic resistance and budget constraints . The new broadcaster was formally established by the government .
 Well-known political journalist Pavlo Sheremet was killed on 20 July in Kyiv . The investigation into his death has been inconclusive .
 The Inter TV studios were attacked by unknown individuals in September . The Inter television studios were targeted by unknown people .
 Local governance reform continued in 2016, including further voluntary amalgamations of local communities . Local communities were amalgamated in 2016 .
 Fiscal decentralization brought more financial independence to the municipalities and local communities . Local budgets increased by 35 to 50 percent on average in comparison to the previous year .
 The process has slowed due to the lack of further legislative changes, including some that require constitutional changes . However, the process has been slow due to a lack of legislative changes .
 Judicial reform finally accelerated after a long period of stagnation with constitutional amendments and new framework legislation introduced in July .
 The reappointment of judges will occur only after assessing their skills and credibility . The new legislative provisions stipulate that the reappointment will occur after assessing the judges' skills .
 implementation phase only started on 30 September . However, it would be premature to assess the effectiveness of the reform as the implementation phase is only 30 September.
 The government undertook significant institutional steps in 2016 to counter corruption . The government took steps to combat corruption in 2016 .
 The reform of public procurement procedures was accomplished, and a transparent online mechanism, “ProZorro,’ was introduced for all procurements . The reform was achieved, and the reform was accomplished .
 The first phase of e-declarations resulted in 107,050 public officials declaring their assets by the end of 20164 . Despite evident resistance, the first phase ended with 107,000 declaring assets .
 The disclosures demonstrated the deeply rooted culture of nontransparent personal enrichment among the Ukrainian ruling class . The disclosures were published in the Ukrainian newspaper, The Guardian .
 The government accomplished energy tariff reform by raising tariffs to the market level . The government had been a cause of corruption in the energy sector for decades .
 The anticorruption accomplishments of 2016 were the result of synchronized efforts by local civil society and the international community . The anti-corruption efforts have laid foundations for a more sustainable anticorrupt policy in the future .
 Ukraine’s political leadership applies sufficient political will. It is clear, however, that further improvements are possible only if political will is applied .
 There are few opportunities to resolve the territorial conflict in the east . Despite international efforts, there are few chances to resolve it .
 Ukraine is unlikely to accept the Russian scenario of Donbas’s reintegration as a Russian protectorate . No other option is realistically available .
 Ukraine’s economy most likely will continue its gradual revival, but economic growth will remain slow . Ukraine's economy is most likely to continue its gradually revival.
 The narrow parliamentary coalition could well survive, but a lack of confidence, growing energy tariffs, and external efforts to destabilize the country could provoke turbulence . The narrow coalition may well survive.
 Most likely, some reformists will be forced to quit the government under pressure from populists, even if the cabinet survives . Some reformists may have to quit under pressure.
 Judicial reforms, improvements in the investment climate, and countering corruption are key policy areas . But reforms will move ahead slowly, but reforms will continue slowly .
 Political parties will maneuver with a view to the future elections, either regular or early, which may further reduce political support for reforms . Political parties are maneuvering with the view to future elections .
 The players who advocate for reforms in Ukraine may be preoccupied with growing global problems that reduce their attention to Ukraine’s issues .
 It plays a crucial role in driving reforms aimed at building a functional democracy and rule of law . It is also a key role in building afunctional democracy andRule of Law .
 Civil society coalitions and networks, such as the Reanimation Package of Reforms, help drive reforms through drafting and advocating legal acts .
 At the same time, the trauma of invasion and occupation have empowered extremist and far-right groups, which play an increasingly visible role in Ukraine .
 Far-right groups use public holidays to demonstrate their strength, such as the march of the Azov Civic Corps, the political wing of theAzov Battalion .
 The attack on Inter and the release of personal information about journalists who have worked in Donbas showed how extremist actions can gain public support and may have tacit approval from officials .
 Official tolerance for radical groups may pose a threat to pluralism and civic initiatives . Official tolerance of radical groups could pose a risk to democracy and pluralism .
 New civil society initiatives are emerging to mobilize people locally and regionally with the aims of establishing civic control over local administrations, creating and maintaining public spaces, developing local civic infrastructure .
 The Ivano-Frankivsk-based Warm City network is one of the most notable civil society initiatives . The network is comprised of smalland medium-size businesses, NGOs, and individual civic activists .
 The overall diversity and heterogeneity of civil society is also growing, according to the study . The total number of people in civil society has increased in recent years .
 The latter groups are inclined to use violent methods against opponents, as happened in Lviv during an LGBT festival in March 2016 .
 The Revolution of Dignity in 2014 ushered in a new period of transition from kleptocracy and semiauthoritarianism to functional democracy .
 Ukraine’s painful transformations are not likely to be fast, as the ‘old system’ is deeply rooted in the practices of governance and therefore not easily eliminated .
 While the scope of positive change is significant, it is not yet fully consolidated, it's still not fully consolidated .
 More than just a territorial, cultural, or ethnic dispute, the Russia-Ukraine conflict is, to a large degree, about identity . The conflict is more than just territorial and cultural, but it's about identity, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia and its president, Vladimir Putin, are attempting to challenge the very core of Ukraine’s national identity by claiming that Ukrainians are a ‘single people’ with Russia .
 Putin perceives a successful and democratic Ukraine as a vital challenge to the sustainability of his regime . Putin sees a successful Ukraine as an important challenge.
 The conflict with Russia is unlikely to be resolved soon. Under these circumstances, it is unlikely that it will be resolved .
 Crimea remains under Russian occupation, and the civil rights of the local population are widely violated .
Russia continues to deliver arms, military equipment, ammunition, and officially unregistered military personnel as “volunteers’ to the conflict zone . The Minsk Agreements involved Germany and France and were signed in September 2014 and updated in February 2016 .
 During 2016, the de facto Russian-managed local administrations in Donbas have been institutionally strengthened .
 The buildup of the Russian-controlled statelets, “Donetsk People’s Republic” and “Luhansk People” has been mostly accomplished . The buildup has been largely accomplished .
 In occupied territories, independent political activities and political parties are banned, nongovernmental organizations do not operate . Free press is nonexistent in these occupied territories .
 It is unlikely that these territories will be efficiently reintegrated into Ukraine as Russia is unwilling to withdraw from the conflict zone . Ukraine is averse to the restoration of the lost territories as de facto Russian political and military protectorates .
 Political components of the Minsk Agreement, including elections in the conflict zone, cannot move forward without ensuring security, a stable ceasefire, and establishment of at least basic prerequisites for free and fair elections in Ukraine .
 Only two political parties remain in the coalition, making it fragile and dependent on non-coalition political parties .
 The former speaker of Ukraine's Verkhovna Rada was appointed following the resignation of former prime minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk .
 Groysman's cabinet successfully continued a number of essential reforms relating to governance and the development of democratic institutions .
Government launched civil service reform in accordance with legislation adopted in 2015 . In particular, the government launched a civil service reforms in 2015.
 Open competitions for vacant job positions at the highest levels of civil service have been conducted . Open competitions have been held for vacant jobs at the top level of civil services .
 Commission for the High Corps of the Civil Service is tasked with selecting leaders of regional administrations and state secretaries of ministries .
 Civil society voices are included with 4 representatives of the sector among the 12 Commission members .
 At the same time, the government has a strong hand in the commission, and most appointees are favorable to the president’s administration .
 Yatsenyuk's resignation and Groysman's appointment strengthened his political position despite the decline of his public confidence ratings . President Petro Poroshenko's personal confidence ratings have fallen in recent years .
 Some observers have identified a growing trend towards concentration of power in the hands of the president .
 Prime Minister Groysman was perceived as being under the president’s thumb . Yatsenyuk was widely seen to act as an ‘equal’ to Poroshenko .
Groysman does not have his own base of political support, which makes him dependent on coalition factions . Unlike Yatsenyuk, Groysman has his own party's political party .
 Groysman managed to secure his relative political independence during the selection process for cabinet ministers . At the same time, by withstanding pressure from the president.
 Groysman independently selected the first deputy prime minister, Volodymyr Kistion, as well as cabinet members including social policy minister, Andriy Reva .
 The Ukrainian media landscape is pluralistic, and criticism of the government is widely presented . The Ukrainian press is widely criticized, but it is also widely presented.
 The largest media outlets are still controlled by oligarchs, hence dependent on their political and business agendas . At the same time, the largest media outlet is controlled by the oligarchs .
 Some popular TV channels are owned by members of the political opposition or the former regime . Some TV channels have been owned by former regime members .
 Critical coverage is also available via neutral or even state-owned TV outlets . Critical coverage can also be viewed via neutral, or even by state- owned TV outlets.
 The main TV channels reported the disclosures made by top officials in the newly instituted e-declaration of property . The disclosures include information concerning their cash deposits and luxury lifestyles .
 A public broadcaster has been formally established, but its operation has been delayed due to bureaucratic resistance and budget constraints .
 Zurab Alasania, director of the potential National Television and Radio Company, resigned due to a lack of political will . The main political players are not likely to be interested in the fast success of the public broadcaster, as it challenges the usual way state-owned media is used for political
 Continuing conflict with Russia raises challenges and dilemmas for Ukrainian media freedom . The conflict has raised questions for Ukraine's media freedom.
 The limits of legitimate restrictions on media freedom in the context of Russia’s ‘information war’ are a subject of ongoing disputes . Russian TV channels that have been banned in Ukraine since 2014 have been suspended .
 In September, the studio of Inter was attacked by a group of unidentified individuals .
Serhiy Lyovochkin was chief of staff to former president Viktor Yanukovych . He raised concerns that the attack’s target was the current political opposition .
 Inter also voiced suspicions that the attack was orchestrated by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and committed by far-right radicals close to Minister Arsen Avakov .
Inter is perceived as more than just an opposition player in Ukraine . However, Inter is perceived to be more than a player in the Ukraine .
 Leaked e-mails written by Maria Stolyarova, a Russian citizen and former chief of Inter’s information service, disclosed direct connections between Stoyarova and armed Russian proxies in Donbas .
 Stolyarova was fired from the position and deported from the country before the leak . The incident fueled negative public perceptions of the channel .
 In May, Mirotvorets released and subsequently updated a list of journalists registered by the “DNR’s and “LNR” de facto authorities . They implicitly accuse them of cooperation with Russian occupiers and armed separatists in Donbas .
 The release was widely criticized as a violation of media freedoms . The release created a security threat to journalists working in the conflict zone .
 In 2016, the new municipalities created pursuant to the 2015 reforms received more significant financial independence . The new municipalities in 2016 received moresignificant financial independence.
 They also gained more power over education, healthcare, social protection, territorial development, architectural and construction control, and in the near future, authority over the land within the local self-governance bodies .
 The significant increase in local budgets had an immediate positive effect on local governance . The increase in budgets had a positive effect in local governance.
 The courts and prosecutors’ offices continue to be the least-trusted public administration institutions . Only 8 percent of the population trust the courts, with only 8 percent trusting them .
 The system of law enforcement in Ukraine has not met the needs of society or international democratic standards for a long time . The system has not been met by society or democratic standards.
 judicial and anticorruption reforms are the most highly anticipated changes from the transition . The transition is expected to take place in 2015 .
 In June 2016, the Verkhovna Rada launched new judicial reforms, amending the constitution and adopting an updated Judicial System Law . New legislation on the execution of court decisions was also introduced .
 Instead of four courts of cassation, there will be a new ‘High Court’ with judicial recruitment based on open call and competition .
 The reform carries the possibility of the appointment of judges from outside the judicial system . The reform is expected to take place in the coming years .
 The present quaternary judicial system will be changed into a three- component system made up of local courts, appeals courts, and the High Court . The High Court will be replaced with local courts and appeals courts .
 New procedures to be introduced regarding judges’ qualifications and certifications . New procedures will be introduced to evaluate judges' competencies, integrity and ethics .
 Judges who fail the evaluation will be dismissed, as will judges who cannot prove information on the origin of his or her income . Judges who failed the evaluation can be dismissed .
 The Citizens’ Integrity Council was created on 11 November . Members of the community may participate in evaluating judges and observing the competition for judicial appointments .
 The Council consists of 20 representatives from NGOs, and its functions include collecting, checking, and analyzing judges’ information . The Council also assists in the work of the Higher Qualification Committee of Judges .
 Judges must declare all relatives working at courts, bar commissions, prosecutors’ offices, or any other high posts . Judges must also declare all family members working at court or bar commissions .
 They may be subject to disciplinary action for failing to provide accurate information . They may also face a disciplinary action.
 The High Justice Council will play the major role in appointing and dismissing judges . The parliament and the president will play a detached role in the decision-making process .
 The majority of High Justice Council members will be chosen by other judges by 2019 . The majority will be selected by other Judges by 2019.
 The reforms will also see a significant reduction of judges’ privileges . The reforms are also expected to see a reduction of Judges’ rights .
 Judges will be subject to ordinary rules of detention in cases of arrest at the scene of a serious crime or immediately after its commission . These crimes include receiving an unlawful profit .
 One must obtain consent for arrest or detention from the High Council of Justice . In other cases, one must obtain permission for arrest and detention .
 Judges have often enjoyed impunity, as permission to arrest or detain a judge was previously sought from the parliament . The parliament often could not respond to such situations .
Private enforcement officials started operating in June, enforcing court decisions on business issues . The state executive service is also operating in the state .
 Competition should reduce corruption in this area and improve enforcement. Competition should also reduce corruption, improve enforcement .
 Eka Zguladze resigned as deputy Minister of Internal Affairs in May . Khatia Dekanoidze left her position as head of the National Police .
 Some have assessed that these resignations were the result of external pressure . There were also personal reasons and preliminary agreements regarding the terms of their work .
 Both Zguladze and Dekanoidze helped create the foundations for further transformation and reforms of the judiciary and the fight against corruption . The two men helped create a foundation for further reforms and reforms.
 The reform process continues to be hindered by the “old cadres,” who resist any changes to the bureaucratic system that has prevailed within the judiciary for decades .
 84 percent of former executives were again appointed Prosecutors General at the newly created local prosecutors’ offices .
 The prosecution remains a tool in the hands of political power . The newly formed prosecutors’ agencies remain loyal to the Attorney Prosecutor General .
 These newly formed agencies only gain legal authority on 15 April 2017 . They are only allowed to do so after 15 April 2016 .
 The State Bureau of Investigation will investigate cases involving law enforcement officials, judges, and high officials . The law entered into force on 1 March 2016 .
The selection process for the director and his or her deputies started in November . The selection process began in November and the selection process started in October .
 Corruption remains one of the main challenges preventing Ukraine’s reforms from succeeding . Corruption remains a main challenge to Ukraine's reforms.
 Ukrainians no longer believe that the country’s difficulties are caused by the war in the east . Instead naming corruption as the main reason for the current socioeconomic crisis .
 Ukraine has made progress in legislative reforms over the last two years, experts say . Ukraine has been widely recognized by experts domestically and abroad .
 The country has adopted new anticorruption legislation, created new institutions to implement anticorcorruption policies . In particular, the country has taken steps towards transparency in political party financing and public procurement .
 At the same time, these changes are not enough if unsupported by governance practices, authors say . They say .
 Reform of Ukraine's energy tariff system, accomplished in 2016, improved governance of Ukraine’s energy policy and has clear anticorruption implications . Reform of the energy tariffs system, achieved in 2016.
 The government stopped the practice of hidden energy subsidies . The practice was a source of corruption for decades .
 By ending the purchase of natural gas from Russia, Ukraine also achieved relative energy independence from its dominant neighbor .
 Ministry of Justice introduced changes to the law on registration for LLC and PE business entities . Changes reduced and simplified old procedures .
 The changes include the possibility of using electronic keys and signatures to approve and send documents to various tax and state agencies . The changes also introduced the long-awaited system of online services .
 Oleksandr Sushko is the research director of the Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation in Kyiv, Ukraine . He is also the research head of the International Economic Cooperation in Ukraine .
 Olena Prystayko is Executive Director of the Ukrainian Think Tanks Liaison Office in Brussels . She is also the Director of Ukrainian Think tanks Liaison office in Brussels.
 Prior to this position, she was Project Manager at the Directorate of Internal Oversight of the Council of Europe . She was Assistant Professor at the National Academy of Public Administration under the President of Ukraine .