 Medvedchuk said that he did not consider Russia an aggressor, and told about rest in Crimea . He said he does not think Russia is aggressor .
 F-15 fighter jet and US-130 military airliner arrived in Ukraine to conduct "Clean Sky-2018" multinational military exercises . The exercises are part of a series of military exercises in Ukraine .
 The main base for the training of combat aircraft will be the airfield in Starokonstantinov Khmelnitsky region . The airfield is located in the city of Starok onstantininov.
 Servicemen from the USA, Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, the United Kingdom and Ukraine will participate in the Clean Clean-2018 military exercises .
 The purpose of the maneuvers is to improve the interaction between Ukraine and NATO . The maneuvers are to strengthen regional security, and improve interaction .
 Britons can "turn off the light in the Kremlin," according to sources in the U.S. security services .
 Great Britain can leave Moscow without electricity in the event of Russia's attack on one of the NATO countries . Britain can also leave Russia without electricity.
 The opportunity was discussed at a secret meeting held by the British government this week .
 In Britain, there is not enough power to resist Russia without using nuclear weapons . Russia has not been able to use nuclear weapons in Britain .
 Estonia has islands that they can capture to test the commitment of NATO to Article 5 . Most likely, they will not start a full-fledged war, but in Estonia there are islands that can capture .
 "We can attack and disconnect the light in Moscow so that they understand what's wrong," says a top-notch source .
 The Netherlands announced the deportation of four Russians suspected of cyberattacking by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World Anti-Doping Agency . The four Russians were also accused of attempting to steal documents of the investigation into the Boeing MH17 disaster over the Donbas .
 The Netherlands argues that expelled people are working on Russian intelligence . The Netherlands says expelled people work on Russia's intelligence .
 The U.S. has accused three more likely employees of the Russian GRU to be involved in cyberattacks . The United States has accused the GRU of a cyberattack .
 Great Britain conducted the most recent military exercises in recent months .
 Also inafort, three bank accounts and one life insurance policy are confiscated . Also in Manafort, three banks accounts and three life insurance policies are confiscated.
 Truman Paulafort agreed to blame the charges against the United States and conspiracy to impede justice brought to him by Robert Mueller .
 The jury found him guilty of five charges of tax fraud, as well as concealment of foreign bank accounts and bank fraud . The jury also convicted him of five counts of concealment.
 On September 17, prosecutions against Paulafort were due to begin with lobbying and advocacy . The prosecution was due to start with lobbying.
 Offenses were discovered by the Attorney General Mueller, who is investigating the alleged interference of Russia in the 2016 U.S. election .
 Victor Medvedchuk, leader of the Ukrainian choice, said he does not consider Russia an aggressor . He said he doesn't consider Russia a aggressor.
 The politician says he believes that this is an objective truth .
 He spoke about sociological research showing the attitude of Ukrainians towards Russia . He also spoke about the attitudes of Ukrainians to Russia .
 It did not indicate which organizations conducted these surveys . However, it did not reveal which organizations did .
 "In no way is it a reality," Medvedchuk said . "The term"" aggressor ""is a propaganda stamp for me," he said .
 Viktor Medvedchuk said he did not consider Russia an aggressor in the war on the Donbas . In an interview with Deutsche Welle in April, he said he didn't consider Russia a aggressor .
 The Verkhovna Rada adopted a law on the reintegration of Donbas on January 18, 2018 . It recognizes Russia as an aggressor and invader .
 The Kyivan people walked from the cinema ""Kievan Rus"" to Babyn Yar, which on September 29 and 30, 1941, the Nazis led the people to death . Kyiv, October 7, on the anniversary of the massacre of Kiev Jews in Babyn
 Come, take candles, photos of the dead, take children and grandchildren . This is a simple civil event, Come, Take candles, take photos and take children, grandchildren .
"We want this event to be annual, and let your children and grandchildren then bring their grandchildren to her," said in the announcement of the event .
 The clash of 07.02.2018 is already 58 people . The confirmed number of dead and wounded wounds of Wagner mercenaries is 58 .
SBU reported information about Wagner's mercenary from Uzbekistan Mamadzhanova Dilshod Mashrabzhanovich . In addition, the SBU reported that Wagner is a mercenary.
 He was seriously injured and taken by a Russian military aircraft in February 2018 from Syria to the Russian Federation . He was taken by the Russian military plane.
 The passport shows no marks on the passage of border control in Syria . It indicates the concealment of the participation of Russian troops in terrorist activities onterritories of other countries .
 This is reported on Sunday by Spiegel with reference to the military department of the Federal Republic of Germany . The military department is in the German military department .
 The driver of the armored vehicle crashed into a tree during the maneuvering at the Pabrad landfill .
 A soldier driving a car with an open manhole suffered heavy head injuries from which he died .
 The case is being investigated by the German military police and the Lithuanian authorities . The Lithuanian government is also investigating .
 The purpose of the maneuvers is to demonstrate that NATO troops are at the helm of the Alliance's eastern flank . The maneuvers are intended to demonstrate NATO troops at the forefront of the alliance's eastern front .
 NATO decided to strengthen the Baltic States and Poland with the presence of its troops after Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 Ukrainian military will conduct large-scale training in the Sea of ​​Azov . At present Germany is represented in this country by the 393th Panzer Battalion and the 37th Panzer Brigade .
 NATO's Strategic Training Trilogue 2018 will be held in Norway from 25 October to 7 November . In Norway, from 25October to 25 November, the event will take place .
 29 Allies and two of its partners Finland and Sweden are among the participants of 29 Allies .
 The Armed Forces of Ukraine will participate in exercises, the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine says . The armed forces will also take part in exercises .
 To work in the sections of the headquarters of the multinational coalition 5 Ukrainian officers were involved . To work for the Ukrainian government, they were involved in the operations in Ukraine .
 They passed the stages of theoretical training and operational coordination . They will soon go on to carry out assignments in Naples, Rammstein and Stavanger .
 NATO's multinational coalition carries out a large-scale military operation to liberate the illegally occupied northern part of the Kingdom of Norway .
 At the end of September seven CIS countries, headed by the Russian Federation, began training on air defense .