 Its members are alarmed by Russia's violations of international commitments and increased military activity in Europe . Russia's military activity has increased in recent years .
Russian recently updated basic strategic documents are full of indications about Moscow's world vision and security concerns . Russian recently updated strategic documents.
 Russia's claim to be one of the 'centers of influence' in the emerging multipolar world order. They indirectly point to a tension between Russia's internal (economic, demographic, societal, societal) weaknesses .
 The West is perceived as a major challenger to Russia's great power ambition and security . The West, including the EU, is clearly perceived as the main challenger to both Russia and the EU .
 Moscow is probably not fully confident that it will obtain a gratifying role in the emerging new international landscape . At the same time, various indicators suggest that Moscow is likely to be less confident .
 Russia has relied heavily on its restored military capabilities, while pursuing a very active diplomacy . The relative importance of the EU has declined in recent years .
 The EU has an important role to play in promoting the second engine of the 'double-track Russia strategy' that the West has been pursuing . The EU, NATO, the United States have been pursuing — strengthening defenses on the one hand, pursuing dialogue and cooperative engagement on the other hand
 This paper was requested by the European Parliament's Sub-Committee on Security and Defence . It was requested.
 The content of this document is the sole responsibility of the author . Any opinions expressed in the document do not necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament . The content is the only responsibility.
 It is addressed to the Members and staff of the EP for their parliamentary work . It's addressed to members and staff for their work .
 Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorised, provided the source is acknowledged and the European Parliament is given prior notice .
 New strategic documents for a radically transformed security context 6 1.1 . The security context has been transformed into a new security context .
 The EU's effort to rebuild relations with Moscow in a profoundly modified geopolitical landscape is difficult . Such is the difficult background of the EU's attempt to rebuild ties with Moscow .
 The conflict in Ukraine has left deep scars. The conflict initially was an indirect product of the tensions between the two players' policies in their shared neighbourhood .
 The complexity of the new strategic situation on the European continent makes it all more important to understand Russian security perceptions, international motives and goals .
 The idea is widespread in Europe that the cause of Russia's recent assertive international behaviour is to be found in the need for Vladimir Putin to restore the legitimacy of the regime after the 2011 elections .
 Moscow's criticism of the Western-led international order has been a very stable element in Russian foreign policy line since the mid-1990s . This is certainly a factor that should be taken into account .
 Many international relations scholars have emphasized the worth of being aware of 'the other's' — the partner's, the adversary's — mental frame and perceptions, which seems even more important in tense or conflictual contexts .
 Russia has provided its international partners and challengers with plenty of relevant clues and indications about its state of mind and assessment of the international situation . Russia has updated several of the strategic documents that frame its security, defense and foreign policies .
 Russian political scientists often state that the practical importance of these documents should not be exaggerated . But they nonetheless offer a valuable synthesis of Russia's world vision .
 President Putin articulated the basic tenets of the foreign policy vision at the Munich security conference in 2007 . This trend has only grown stronger since in 2007, according to President Putin .
 In substance, he vehemently criticized the United States' and its allies' international conduct . He blamed them for creating hotbeds of international instability and for illegitimate use of force .
 A Global Strategy for the European Union's Foreign And Security Policy, June 2016, was released . The strategy was released by the EU's Foreign and Security Policy.
 The movement originated in the demonstrations that developed in Kiyv after President Yanukovych decided to suspend the signing of an association agreement with the European Union .
 Russia put a lot of pressure on the Ukrainian government, mixing threats and incentives . This decision occurred after Russia, in the preceding months, put a big pressure on Ukrainian government .
 Russia and the EU on the future of the 'shared neighbourhood' will be described further in this report . This reflected a wider and profound divergence of perspectives between Russia and EU on future of ' shared neighbourhood'
 Its Security strategy integrates various parameters including political and societal stability, as well as economic, health, demographic, environmental, military dimensions .
 Moscow's foreign and security policy has tended to rely massively on military and hard power tools . In recent years, Moscow has relied heavily on military, hard power and security tools .
 One quarter of the Security strategy is devoted to defense issues and international considerations . In an unconventional manner if one considers the hierarchy of Russian strategic documents, the updated military doctrine was adopted .
 The study aims to contribute to the necessary discussion on such a strategic issue . It will provide an assessment of Russia's security and military policy .
 This points to Russia's perception that its security environment has been radically transformed . Russia's security environment is being radically transformed, according to the Russian government .
 The idea that Russia should be recognized as a great power is a key parameter that has driven Moscow's posture on the world stage for several centuries . Russia has been seen as the world's great power for centuries .
 Moscow has always claimed a role in all major international strategic issues . Moscow has never accepted a limitation of its authority to regional matters .
 Russia's Orthodox identity, position between Europe and Asia and the immensity of its territory. This positioning also reflects the nostalgia of the Cold war era .
 Russian officials' frequent references to the 'special responsibility' that their country shares with the U.S. in world security affairs . This nostalgia is illustrated, among other things, by Russian officials.
 Russia, the new Security strategy says, has become a great power again . Russia's new security strategy says it has become an important power again.
 A new polycentric world is emerging but it is characterized by rising regional and global instability . A new Polycentric world has emerged but it's characterized as a new regional world .
Russian strategic thinking has been dominated by the idea that the country faces threats and challenges in all strategic directions . For centuries, Russian strategic thinking was dominated by ideas of the country's future .
 Russia's entrenched inclination to surround itself with buffer zones as a protection from invasions and external instabilities . In strategic terms, this reflects Russia's intensely indefence to surround itself as a protect from invasions .
 Russia should be able to control either militarily or politically neighboring spaces and countries . This means, as the Russians see it, that Russia should control both militarily and politically .
 Russia has been viewed as one of the 'centres of influence' in the budding polycentric world . In a more contemporary approach, such a control has been seen as the key to Russia asserting itself .
 Integration processes with countries in the former Soviet Union (Commonwealth of Independent States, Eurasian Economic Union, Collective Security Treaty Organization) are important vectors.
 The authors of the 2015 Security strategy do not propose a peculiarly rosy picture of Russia's internal situation . They underline that the Russian 'economy has been able to maintain and strengthen its potential' despite sanctions .
 The Strategy seems to integrate the economic crisis, or at least stagnation or slim growth rates, as a parameter that is here to stay, in the mid-term perspective .
 President Obama's claim that Russia 'doesn't make anything' is not justified by its real capacities and strengths . Russia is also endowed with a number of comparative advantages, including relatively well educated population .
 In 2014, the country accounted for merely 2. % of total world exports, and its share of world imports was only 1.2% . In 2014 it accounted for just 2.% of world exports .
 Military spending will not 'naturally' be questioned as a burden on the economy as it has been in European countries facing a budget crunch .
 Russia considers its place in the top 5 of the world arms exporters as a great power attribute . The defense industry is meant to become a locomotive of the development and modernization of the national economy, says the Russian government .
Investing in defense is not just a source of military security, but also of Jobs, money and prestige . In other words, investing in defense isn't just a military security source.
 Russia has always perceived internal weaknesses as vulnerabilities that the outside world can take advantage of to erode Russia's strength . This should not overshadow the fact that traditionally Russia's internal weaknesses are perceived as vulnerabilities .
There is an obvious preoccupation about the possible dangerous interactions between domestic challenges and the external environment . The Kremlin sees it as a potential threat to Russia's great power and security interests .
 Russia's reliance on military levers to impose its status as a great power is likely to distract from its flawed integration in the global economy . This is likely a factor of Russia's strong reliance on its military levers, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia is a Regional Power Showing Weakness over Ukraine, The Guardian, March 25, 2014 .
 Foundations of National Power in the Asia-Pacific, National Bureau of Asian Research, 2015 . Foundations in the Asian-Pacific.
 Russia's national security strategy and military doctrine and its implications for the EU 1.2 billion people . Russia's military doctrine is a key part of the EU's strategy .
 'The West' is the focus of Russia's threat and risk assessment, while China is not explicitly and directly mentioned .
 The current confrontation between Russia and the West is in fact the product of tensions accumulated before the Ukrainian crisis . The Ukrainian crisis has been exacerbated by it, according to Russian media .
 One has only to read Vladimir Putin's 2007 Munich speech to be convinced of this fact . One has to read the speech to believe this is true .
 The 'Western world' is perceived as the main challenger in Russia's strategic thinking . Russia's search for buffer zones is seen as the great power claim . The search forbuffer zones is the biggest challenge in Russia .
 Grievances connected to the enlargement of NATO, the location of its military infrastructure close to Russian borders, its 'offensive capabilities' and the trend towards the Alliance acquiring 'global functions' of the United States efforts to retain absolute military supremacy .
 Global Strike capabilities, militarization of space were mentioned in the previous versions of these doctrines . All these problems were mentioned by the previous version of the doctrines .
 Western criticism of Russian policies in the postSoviet space is all the more resented in Moscow . The Kremlin considers that NATO and the EU have expanded their own 'spheres of influence' through their enlargement .
 A newer element receives particular emphasis in these documents . The documents should be paid attention to a newer element .
 The Security strategy denounces threats to the security of the state and of the society . It describes attempts to destabilize an internal situation by means of inspiring colour revolutions .
 All these are direct references to the colour revolutions that took place in Georgia, Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan, the Arab spring, and finally, the Ukrainian 'Revolution of Dignity', which Russian officials continuously describe as an anti-constitutional coup supported by the West .
 The 'securitization' of such issues, by their inclusion in an official document, points to a hardening of the Kremlin's policy . The document is to expose 'the system of officially adopted views by the State on the preparation to armed protection'
 Cooperation with the United States, NATO and the European Union must be based on the principles of equality and respect for each other's interests .
 The Russian military has become again a tool in Russia's assertion on the world stage . Since the mid-2000s, the Russian military have become a tool.
 The Kremlin decided to use force in Georgia in 2008 . The move was considered by many as a turning point in Moscow's international strategy .
 The financial effort devoted to the modernization of its military is seen from the Kremlin . The country faces a tense and complex international environment the country faces .
 Russia perceives that possessing a credible military force is one key condition of its diplomatic and security interests being taken into account by others . Russia's motivations and positions in all these directions are, of course, diverse, but it perceives this as a key condition .
 Russia's revitalised capabilities and threat assessment has been pursued after the Georgia war . The Georgia war displayed the numerous weak points of Russia's military organization .
 Russia had attained its strategic goals in the South Caucasus . Russia's military was still plagued with many flaws and problems, the military said .
 The main goal of the 2008 reform was to improve the combat readiness of available troops and to enhance the ability to use them swiftly . The main aim of the2008 reform is to improve combat readiness.
This implied cutting the number of understaffed, ill-equipped formations to replace them with more agile and more potent units . This implied cutting a number ofunderstaffed formations.
 In the army, the traditional division was suppressed and replaced by the brigade as the main formation . The brigade became the main brigade in the army .
 The ultimate goal is to bring these smaller brigades to full strength and to have them better equipped and more autonomous than the former divisions . The aim is to have these smaller brigade brigades better equipped, more autonomous and better equipped .
 The Guardian, 15 March 2015. Quoted in Shaun Walker, 'Syrian Mission Restores Pride in Russian Military after Years of Decay'
Only airborne troops retained divisions . Only the airborne troops were retained .
 The VDV stand at the core of the rapid reaction force that the Russian military is establishing . Together with the Special Forces, the V DV stands at the heart of the Russia's rapid response force .
 The military leadership has also done much to streamline the command structure in order to enhance the general coherence and coordination of the armed forces .
 The number of military districts was cut from six to four in 2010 . The four districts perform administrative and logistical functions, but become joint operational-strategic commands .
 Joint Strategic Command 'North' was created in late 2015 on the basis of the Northern Fleet . It was a response to Russia's concerns over its security situation in the Arctic .
 The West is perceived as posing security challenges to Russia . As was stressed previously, the West is seen as posing a security challenge .
 Flowever has made the previous model of preparing for war with the West obsolete . The Western technological advance in the military field has made it obsolete .
 'frontal engagements of large formations of forces at the strategic and operational level are gradually becoming a thing of the past', says General Gerasimov . 'Long-distance, contactless actions against the adversary' are becoming a major means of achieving one's goals .
 Russia is seen as offering a solid hedge vis-a-vis these risks . The nuclear deterrent has accelerated since the mid-2000s, combined with the multi-tier aerospace defense system .
 Russia has been involved in anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden . Russia has also participated in the Syria operation, but only for limited operations, with clearly delineated goals .
 More ambitious plans might be considered for the longer term as they will depend on the economic situation, the evolution of the international security landscape and Russia's ability to get access to military facilities of foreign countries .
 Ambitions are also constrained, in the current situation, by the Russian navy and shipbuilding, at least as concerns blue-water surface ships .
 The basic plan that has supported the military reform launched in 2008 is in fact aimed at making the armed forces more efficient for the contingencies that they are most likely to face .
 Russia's foreign policy is a major priority in Russia's Foreign policy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "These are local conflicts, deleterious activities of militant or even transnational crime groups"
 The Kremlin imposed on the military right after the Georgia war . It was these contingencies that dictated the 'shock therapy'^® the Kremlin imposed .
 Only recently has the Russian military obtained the funding to build the new aerospace defense system . The Russian military has overcome bureaucratic infighting that had long hampered the realization of the corresponding vision .
 Military reform has been backed by strong political will on the part of the political leadership . Military budgets have been steadily increasing in recent years .
 Russian government is trying to modernize the armed forces, in particular their re-equipment . In recent years, the growing share of GDP devoted to defense has reflected the effort .
 This effort paid off, as one can conclude from the rather well organized and efficient operations in Crimea and Syria . This effort was well organized, as well as the efforts in Crimea, Syria .
 The Russian military has now decisively departed from the sorry state it was in when Vladimir Putin became the president of the Russian Federation in 2000 . The military is now in a better position than it was when Putin became president .
 Russian jets have increasingly tested the defenses of NATO members, sometimes violating their airspace . The Kremlin presents as the product of a direct clash of interests between Moscow and NATO .
 Numerous large-scale military exercises and mobilization activities have fueled the image of the Russian military as a resurgent force .
 The trend showing a more active Russian military on the world stage appeared earlier this year .
 In 2007, Russia resumed regular bomber flights, which had stopped after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The Russian Navy has widened its presence on the world seas, especially in the Mediterranean . Russia has resumed a permanent presence in 2013, albeit on a much smaller scale than in Soviet times .
 Combat training has been a key focus in the Russian MoD's effort to rebuild national military capabilities . Combat training was sacrificed in the Yeltsin era due to the financial crunch .
 In the past few years, Russia has significantly increased the pace and size of its military exercises . Russia has also increased the size and pace of its exercises .
 Army, air, naval, nuclear and airborne forces have all been involved, separately or together, in manoeuvres held in all military districts . Sometimes with foreign countries .
 Russian leadership is all the more inclined to spend a lot of money on combat training . Military exercises allow to impress neighbours and potential adversaries and send strategic messages .
 Russia's Political Use of its Military in Europe since 2014, www.ecfr.eu.eu, December 19, 2016 .
 Johan Norberg, Training to Fight Russia's Major Miiitary Exercises, is training in Russia . Norberg is training with Russia's National Guard . He is also training with the U.S. National Guard.
 The military factor has clearly been brought to the fore as an important element in the effort to reasserting Russia's prestige and authority on the world stage after more than a decade of diplomatic drawdown . The military and Russia's international ambitions under Vladimir Putin have been brought
 In the previous years, the crisis of the armed forces had almost 'neutralized' Russia as a military power .
 Russia has never ceased to claim such a status since the sixteenth century . Russia has, under Putin, tried really hard to regain it .
 The period from the 1990s to the mid2000s that saw the Russian state downplay was out of necessity . The role of military instruments in the advancement of its international interests is unquestionably over .
 Vladimir Putin has always been unambiguous in expressing his belief that without a credible military force, a country is exposed to pressure by other states . Vladimir Putin is unambiguous.
 The question will soon be asked of whether resources of global significance should be declared above national sovereignty . It is no wonder that some voices say that 'objectively' the question will be asked .
 We must exclude any such possibility, even a hypothetical one, with respect to Russia . We must also exclude any possibility of such a hypothetical Russia .
 A number of domestic and international events have come to stimulate Vladimir Putin's eagerness to strengthen the country's military capabilities . This means that we should not tempt anybody with our weakness, says Putin .
 Vladimir Putin is convinced that things might have turned up differently in Serbia or Iraq had Russia been able to show its military muscle to try and influence these situations .
 This should be taken into account in attempts at comprehending the motives behind Moscow's decision to use force in Ukraine or in Syria . This is not the first time Moscow has used force in the past.
 Moscow's resolve to avoid further unfavorable political and geopolitical changes in places where it considers having strategic interests to defend . It was spurred by Moscow's desire to avoid more unfavorable political, geopolitical changes .
 Vladimir Putin obviously judges that acting from a position of strength is also the right way to respond to perceived Western challenges . Putin also judges to 'contain' those of the West's initiatives that might be contrary to its interests .
 NATO members or of partners of the Alliance and of partners. This is clearly a factor of the multiplication of provocative military moves close to the territory or the airspace of NATO members .
 The notion that Russia faces stiff competition there, especially from Western powers, has been comforted by the conflict in Ukraine . The 'near abroad' features more prominently in the 2014 version of the military doctrine .
 Garantii natsional'noy bezopasnosti dlya Rossii' [Being Strong: The Guarantees of National Security for Russia], Rossiyskaya Gazeta .
 The Collective Security Treaty Organization was created in 2002 on the basis of the Tashkent Collective Security treaty signed in May 1992 . The Collective security treaty was signed in 1992 .
 Armenia has complained more openly that its CSTO partners show insufficient interest in supporting its position in the conflict with Azerbaijan .
 Russia's CSTO partners did not follow its lead in recognizing the 'independence' of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in 2008 .
 The CSTO's potential remains limited despite constant talk of building up its military component . In terms of actual capabilities, the CSTO remains limited .
 This is due to both the members' lack of political will and of military resources . This is because of both the member's lack ofpolitical will and the lack of militaryresources .
 Russia and Central Asian states share concern about the rise of radical Islam in connection with the troubled situation in the Middle East and in Afghanistan . Russia, Central Asia states share a genuine concern about radical Islam .
 Integration with the former Soviet republics in the field of hard power is implicitly conceived as a factor that makes Russian regional imprint more significant than that of other powers .
 Moscow is not pushing too hard for a more pronounced show of solidarity within the CSTO . It is convinced as it is that the disparity of its members' security interests and their voiced concern with Russian domination instincts might Jeopardize this formal integration scheme .
 Moscow's view of military integration in a multilateral framework under Russian leadership is important in Moscow's perspective .
 Comparisons with NATO are sometimes induced by similarities in the respective agendas and functionalities of the two organizations .
 The recent effort to transform the Russian armed forces has produced a military that is fully combat-ready, professional, well trained, and able to conduct complex operations . Tackling perceived asymmetries with the West, the Russian military has produced parts of which are fully combat ready, professional
 Crimea and Syria operations have partly illustrated this evolution, especially as concerns special forces and airborne troops . The quite calibrated Crimea and Syrian operations have part illustrated this.
 The operations have not been of a scale that allows to draw general lessons about the real state of the armed forces . But these operations have been of the scale that allow to draw lessons about what the armed force is in .
 The bulk of the Russian military, relying on conscription and uneven levels of modern equipment, does not offer Russia the operational capabilities that would allow to cover the quite extensive and multifaceted threat assessment that was described in the first section .
 Russian conventional military power continues and will continue to lag behind the United States and NATO in terms of size and technological level . The U.S. and NATO are still in the process of developing their military capabilities .
 Russia could face external military pressure in the future, strategists believe . Russia has developed at an accelerated pace anti-access /areadenial capabilities .
 NATO officials have expressed concern that these capabilities can limit the Alliance's possibilities for action . NATO officials say they are concerned that this could limit the alliance's possibilities.
 Electronic warfare set to become more prominent in Russian military toolbox . Electronic warfare is also set to be more prominent.
 Nuclear weapons appear to keep an important role, as was suggested by nuclear signaling and gesticulation in the context of the Ukrainian conflict . Russia is now de-emphasizing the nuclear component of its security and defense policy .
 The Russians feel that the deterrence rationale has been increasingly challenged in the past fifteen years . The Russians say that the deterrent rationale is increasingly challenged .
Russian strategists take all these parameters into account when they think in prospective terms . Quite certainly, Russian strategists are very careful .
 At the current stage, it seems that they seek to keep the widest range of tools as possible . However, at the present stage, they seem to be trying to keep a wide range of weapons .
 In 2016, nuclear weapons are still very much present in defense planning, providing Russia with strategic comfort in front of the West's perceived pressure .
 The scenario of the various exercises that have featured nuclearfirst use, since 1999, has remained on the table . The scenario has been the same since 1999 .
 Non-military instruments too seem to play an increasingly prominent role. Non- military instruments too appear to play a more prominent role .
 NATO is concerned that Russia could resort more frequently to the complex mix of tactics and tools it used in Crimea and Donbas . Russia is also concerned that it could resort to more complex tactics and tactics .
 Military tools were combined with cyber-attacks, political and economic pressure, and intensive disinformation campaigns . Military tools are used but they were used by cyber-attackers, political, economic pressure.
 Russia's toolbox for coercive action is not situated only in the military field . Russia's military factor promises to take on very ambiguous forms in the future .
 Russia could play the same complex game with a NATO member country and complicate decision-making within the Alliance . NATO officials fear Russia could create ambiguous situations and intimidating some of the members .
 Russia would consider these options only as a response to perceived hostile action by an opponent . Russia would be prepared to resort to them in a more offensive, opportunistic mode . Russia's traditionally very defensive outlook that guides Russia's foreign and security policies is problematic .
 The Russians consider that this complex mix of instruments is actually what Western powers have practiced in various places of the world in recent years . It should be noted that the Russian consider that the Russians consider this mixture of instruments.
 Russian representative to NATO, Alexander Grushko, quoted by Interfax, 12 May 2016 . Grushka is Russian representative for NATO .
 Experts say Russia is developing very low yield and low collateral damage nuclear weapons . This argument is countered by experts that stress that Russia's nuclear weapons are very low .
 Special Forces and military intelligence in particular used to distract attention from actions elsewhere and to intimidate or create doubts about Moscow's military intentions .
 Units were deployed along Ukraine's border in a show offeree aimed at deterring the Ukrainian government from acting . It was aimed at displaying Russia's determination to defend its perceived interests in the conflict .
 Gerasimov: 'The information confrontation opens wide asymmetric possibilities to reduce the combat potential of the adversary'
 Russia is facing a very hostile world, and that only credible military tools can protect it . The Russian leaders' determination to use all means available to defend what they see as the country's strategic interests is the second factor .
 Russia's standing as one of the new 'centres of influence' is widely recognized . It is meant to impose the idea of West's declining influence in world affairs .
 Russia has combined military action with intense diplomatic action on Syria . On Syria, indeed, Russia has been involved in a number of incidents .
 Russia has modified the political landscape around the conflict by using its military . Russia has been able to talk to all involved players in the conflict .
 Moscow has not attained its initial goal of obtaining an international coalition that would have seen it siding with Western states 'on an equal basis' It has made it unavoidable for Washington to discuss Syria with Moscow .
 Russia has also promoted an agenda of denunciation of the West's, especially the United States' role in undermining the rules of the international game . Russia has been trying to affect its credibility by trying to undermine its credibility .
 The Security strategy denounces the weakening of the system of global security and system of treaties and agreements in arms control sphere .
 Russia's constant criticism of Western military operations that were conducted without a mandate of the UN Security Council . Washington's unilateral withdrawal from the ABM treaty is a reference, among other things .
 Introduction of Russian Futures 2025, by Hiski Haukkala and Nicu Popescu, 7.7.
 Russia-India-China strategic triangle was initiated in 1998 by Moscow . It gathers once a year at the foreign minister level and is supposed to be another incarnation of the multipolar order .
 The Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the BRICS grouping have been of particular value to the Kremlin . In this perspective, the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation and theBRICS grouping are of particular importance .
 Russia has worked to convince the rest of the world of the rising influence of these organizations/groupings . Russia has also promoted the importance of the G20 as a more legitimate and appropriate forum than G7 .
 The SCO's decision to integrate India and Pakistan as new members and the BRICS' progress in building up its own system of financial institutions are worth advertising .
 The best option to meet such challenges resides in regional or sub-regional agreements, says the U.S.
 Russia's diplomatic activity is not only a function of the crisis in Russia-West relations, it is also a function in Russia's relations with the West .
 Moscow's international position reflects realism on Moscow's vulnerability of its international position . It reflects realism about Moscow's part about its position in Russia .
 Russia's move to a more active Asian agenda since the early 2000s is of course a consequence of its degraded relations with Western powers . Russia's moving to more active Asia agenda is a result of its degradation of relations with the West .
 Flowever it also means that Moscow recognizes the weakness of its positions in Asia. Flowever also means Moscow recognizes its weakness in Asia .
 This is in large part due to the historically rooted Western-centrism of its international policy . This is due to a historically rooted West-centreism of the international policy.
 In its current situation, Russia is probably not completely confident that it will get a gratifying role in it . Russia is likely not fully confident that its situation will improve .
 The Chinese and Russian presidents' decision to connect the Eurasian Economic Union and the new Silk Road looks more like an attempt by Moscow to use the dynamics of Chinese projects . Russia's own integration project has been hurt by the Ukrainian crisis and the wariness it has inspired Russia's partners,
 Russia's permanent show of military force is also an indirect message to other great powers such as China . In the micl-2000s, Russia had already assessed that future demand for Russia's oil and gas exports would be far higher in Asia than anywhere else .
 This corresponded in time with the Kremlin's becoming increasingly concerned about the situation in its deindustrialized and depopulated far eastern territories . This corresponds to the growing concern over the situation.
 The global recession of 2008-9 reinforced this 'Asian vector' in Russian foreign activities . The 'Asian vectors' are seen in Russia's foreign activities.
 Russia's national security strategy and military doctrine and its implications for the EU are not favorable to Russia . Russia needs to be taken seriously, says Russia, despite its internal and international weaknesses .
 An active diplomatic presence on all strategic fronts is considered as a hedge against possible risks of international downgrading . Anactive diplomatic presence is considered to be a hedge.
 The relationship between Russia and the EU is still supported by quite a solid economic basement and a diversified fabric of human ties . It remains to be seen whether this sense of Russia's vulnerability in the emerging world order could benefit .
 The EU seems to feature quite low in the priorities of Moscow's foreign policy agenda . The EU is mainly in a regional, not global, context, according to the report .
 Russia's vision of the European Union has become less prominent in Russia's general strategy . In recent years, seeking a strategic partnership with the EU has been less prominent .
 This evolution had gathered speed even before the EU decided to impose sanctions on Russia . This evolution has gathered speed before sanctions were imposed .
 partnership with the EU appears less valuable in terms of Russia's international standing than strategic convergence with China and other major rising powers .
 Relations with the United States have featured much more importantly in Moscow's security and strategic agenda for several years . It is obvious that despite their rather unfriendly atmosphere, relations with the U.S. have featured more importantly.
 The looming relative decline in energy relations will likely contribute to this trend . The looming Relative decline in power relations is likely to contribute to the trend .
 Moscow invests a lot of hope and political energy in forthcoming elections in a number of EU member states . Of course, Moscow invests much of hope.
 The Kremlin expects that, if leaders with a 'pro-Russian' orientation come to power in Paris or Berlin, the already fragile EU consensus would be broken . Russia's room for maneuver in Europe would be expanded .
 Russia is skeptical of the EU as a strategic partner. But it would not necessarily change Russia's rather skeptical assessment of EU as strategic partner .
 The EU's ability to strengthen itself as a strategic player will depend on future U.S. administration's transatlantic and Russia policies, says David Frum .
 Andrei Zolotov, 'Detachment ratherThan Estrangement Will Save Russia-European Relations'
 In November 2016, Chancellor Merkel said she thought that Russia may try to influence the 2017 German elections through cyber attacks and a disinformation campaign . In November, Merkel said that she thought Russia may attempt to influence 2017 elections .
 The widespread idea that Moscow sees the EU as a lesser challenge to Russian interests should therefore be modulated . The idea that the EU is a less challenge to Russia's interests should also be modulate .
 The European Union appears as a major challenger to the Russian Union, according to Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Moscow has emphasized its intention to develop relations with Brussels 'on the principles of equality and respect for each other's interests' The EU-Russia relationship is focused on the preservation of its 'sovereignty'
 This is in the context of the negotiations on a new EU-Russia partnership and cooperation agreement, which has been deadlocked for several years . This has been expressed in thecontext of the talks on the new agreement .
 Russia is concerned that its neighbours' gradually absorbing EU norms and standards will lessen its influence over them . The influence often materializes through inter-elite channels, informal, sometimes corrupt economic and investment schemes . Russia is definitely concerned about the influence of its neighbours .
 Ukraine was supposed to be part of the Eurasian Economic Union, but it still is to contain the rapprochement of its members with the European Union . Ukraine is now part of a group that has been in talks with the EU .
 The EU's assertion that it 'will stand united in upholding ... each country's right to choose its future freely' appears as a clear reference to its rejection of Russia's claim to a 'sphere of privileged interests' in the former Soviet Union .
 This issue used to be considered as a possible testing ground for future Russia-EU security cooperation .
 'frozen conflicts' have been used by Moscow as one of the vectors aimed at asserting its influence over former Soviet republics . However, this potential has remained atrophied due to the fact that 'f Frozen conflicts' are used by the Russian government .
 EU countries that are also NATO members have repeatedly opposed Russia's critical positions on NATO's policy . This perception has been compounded by the need for the Alliance to reassure Central European members of the Alliance .
 Russia long hoped that the EU might take on a more serious defense and security role . There would be a potential to develop defense and Security cooperation with it .
 This was a key goal of Vladimir Putin's foreign policy line during his first term . This was the goal of Putin's first term as president .
 Moscow considered this a credible prospect at that time because in 1999 the EU adopted its first 'common strategy' to draw post-Soviet countries into its orbit .
 Russian efforts to establish the Eurasian Economic Union. This seriously derailed those Russian efforts, which actually resulted in the Ukraine crisis, according to a Moscow school .
 Samuel A Greene, 'Future Approaches to the US', Russian Futures 2025, 43, is the author of a new book, "The Future of Russia"
 A Global Strategy for the European Union's Foreign And Security Policy,33.33. A Global strategy for the EU's Foreign and Security Policy .
 Germany and France used to be Russia's major interlocutors inside the EU . The considerable degradation in relations with Germany and French has contributed to this interpretation .
 In a situation where EU members' foreign policy interests generally diverge rather than converge, such a show of unity was — and remains — remarkable .
 The very active influence policy that Russia is deploying towards Western countries has created more mistrust in European capitals . The real impact of Russia's influence is difficult to measure, although its real impact is difficult.
 Moscow's strong inclination to rely on military power and intimidation is an essential source of growing distrust on the part of the EU . The EU is much more reluctant to use these tools.
 Hopes that Russia may become more amenable again out of a need to attract more European investments, technology transfers or industrial partnerships proved short-sighted .
 Maintaining unity has been and will continue to be a constant test, since all EU members do not see the 'Russia problem' in the same way . All EU members don't see the Russia problem in same way.
 The military challenge that Russia represents is not the subject of an EU consensus, according to the European Union .
 Poland considers Russia as a military threat, and the idea is widespread in this country that a conflict with Moscow is a possibility for the future .
 The Kremlin has not altered its course in Ukraine and sanctions have not impacted the popularity of the Russian president . Resilience in this case means that although the economy has suffered from the sanctions, the Kremlin hasn't changed its course .
 EU members even do not see eye to eye on the kind of dialogue the Union should develop with Moscow . In the same way, not all EU members have a strong interest in the eastern neighbourhood .
Russia's behaviour in Ukraine has seriously challenged Germany's traditional Ostpolitik . Russia's behaviour has been seriously challenged by Germany's Ostpolitika .
 Berlin still views Moscow as a central actor in European security, albeit a negative one . However, Berlin has promoted the most extensive dialogue as possible .
 The only perceived way to move fonward is through negotiation and cooperation . The bilateral partnership in its previous form was a bilateral partnership .
 The EU is trying to tackle the real challenges that it raises, how to establish cooperation with Moscow when interests concur . But these differences directly affect the ability of the EU to consider in a unified manner .
 Both sides express reservations on possible cooperation in their strategic documents . The door is not fully closed, but both sides express their reservations .
 Mutual distrust, disillusionment and frustration do not shape a strategic environment that is conducive to cooperation . Mutual distrust and disillusionment do not help cooperation, says the author .
 cooperation prospects appear quite grim and will remain so should the current political circumstances persist in the future .
 Economic and energy cooperation will continue, although at a reduced pace, because of the sanctions and of the economic stagnation on both sides .
 cooperation can take place if sides identify common concerns and interests . However, even in difficult political contexts, cooperation can be difficult .
 The two sides do not seem to see eye to eye on the potential mutual cooperation agenda . Both sides are interested in the potential cooperation agenda.
 The EU Global Strategy proposes, 'in addition to those foreign policy issues on which we currently cooperate' The list includes climate, Arctic, maritime security, education, research and cross-border cooperation .
 Many people in EU countries consider that solving a number of global issues requires having Russia on board .
In recent months, Russia's credibility on some of these issues has declined . However, it has been seen as less as viewed from many European capitals .
 Russia has been recognized as a rather constructive player on non-proliferation . Russia has also been recognized on Iran and on North Korea .
 Moscow's recent decision to suspend the U.S.-Russia Plutonium Management and Disposition Agreement has deteriorated its image as a contributor to non-proliferation . Moscow's decision to outline conditions for the resumption of this cooperation is not related to the object of the agreement .
 The developments in Syria, where Russia and Western states' visions and interests have not been reconciled, have made anti-terrorist cooperation a more complex endeavour .
 Russia hopes that overtime, some European states will be willing to attenuate the sanctions regime for the sake of developing more cooperation with Russia on this front .
 EU will continue to leave it primarily to member states to pursue ad hoc cooperation with Moscow . In such a context, the EU, for fear of spoiling its consensus on Russia, will continue.
 The problem is that their strategic documents show that they consider the other to be the one that has contributed to the weakening of this architecture . The problem was that their documents showed that they considered the other one that had contributed to this architecture.
 The EU section on the European security order underscores the EU's perception that Moscow has 'challenged the EU security order at its core' and explains by Russia's behaviour .
 The EU may be willing to try and improve the quality of dialogue with Russia for the sake of a more relaxed European security landscape . However, the EU may also want to rebuild trust over the longer term .
 The European Union has an important role to play in promoting the second engine of the 'double-track Russia strategy' The West has been pursuing since the beginning of the Ukraine crisis .
 The EU may also want to use such an effort to retain some level of leverage over Russia .
 The EU proposes as potential fields for engagement in its Strategy appear as low-key starters . Russia might be willing to make overtures without sending the signal to its non-Western partners, says Peter Bergen .
 There have been precedents of Russian cooperation with the West in maritime security . There are precedents to Russia's cooperation with West.
 Russia has invested in the deployment of new military capabilities in the Arctic . It also pursued a cooperation line that it could extend to the EU to show willing .
 Kremlin has shown a propensity to view that kind of interaction more suspiciously . Cultural and people-to-people contacts and exchanges can only be useful .
 In more strategic terms, the EU could also consider developing interaction with the Eurasian Economic Union .
 Russia has tended to say to the West that it is expected to take the initiative . It remains to be seen whether Russia will be prepared to make the effort .
 Andrew Monaghan, 'Russia Wants the West to Learn to Agree', www.chathamhouse.ora.com .
 concerns that the new president may neglect European security and clinch some kind of a deal with Russia over the heads of Europe and of the former Soviet republics that have tried to escape Russia's embrace .
 France and Germany may have a more 'pro-Russia' orientation in the upcoming elections . It is also anticipated that in France and in Germany the forthcoming elections might bring to power leaders with a more pro-Russia orientation .
 Russia is not completely comfortable with the changing world order as it is not so sure, given its problematic internal situation, of the place it can build for itself in it .
 The 'Eurasian' dimension refers to the idea of a 'bipolar Europe' that Russia has promoted in recent years . Russia has been promoting the idea in the past .
 Europe is still in Russia's mind, but in a much more complex geopolitical setting than in the not so distant past . Europe is in the mind of Russia, but it's more complex than the past .
 The EU could face very different situations in the evolution of its dialogue with Moscow . Depending on the future global balance of forces, the EU could be facing different situations .
 The evolution of Russia's relations with its neighbours should be followed closely . Russia's inclination to coerce them into Eurasian integration has proved rather counterproductive, says author .