 In November 2013, the people of Ukraine assembled en masse in Kyiv’s Maidan square .
 It began a chain of events that led to the Russian annexation of Crimea and to the ongoing war in the Donbas .
 Ukraine's political leadership changed the political leadership and set Ukraine on the rocky road to reform . And it changed the leadership of Ukraine and set the country on a rocky road.
 effective reform has long eluded Ukraine, in part because reform isn't just about improving the transparency of the state apparatus . Effective reform is not just about better transparency, but it's about improving transparency of state apparatus.
 Ukraine was one of the most ‘Sovietised’ republics in the USSR . It has carried forward many of its worst organisational characteristics .
 Ukraine’s reform efforts have made some progress over the last two years . Ukraine's reform efforts are making some progress in the past two years.
 Reforms are ongoing in almost every arm of the state, including in the media . Ukraine has had to deal with its territorial integrity and Russian aggression within its internationally recognised borders .
 Ukraine has made great strides in some sectors, including the defence sector, the banking sector, and the agricultural sector .
 reforms in key state institutions, such as the judiciary, have failed to deliver results . But reforms in state institutions such as judiciary have failed.
 The EU and its constituent member states have helped Ukraine on the path to reforms by providing financial assistance and expertise . The EU, its constituent states have provided financial assistance.
 The EU has always been in a strong position to help Ukraine, having helped reform efforts in other post-communist countries .
 EU members are able to share best practice with Ukrainian interlocutors . Now that those countries are themselves EU members they can share best practices with Ukrainians .
 The EU has been particularly helpful on regulatory issues, rural development, and energy-sector reform . The European Union has been especially helpful on rural development and energy reform .
 Despite teething issues, support from the EU and member states has been a success to date . The EU and members states have been supportive of the EU in recent years .
 It has helped to bring about more change and reform than Ukraine has seen since its independence . It has brought about more changes and reform since Ukraine's independence .
 Ukraine has passed more laws in the years since Maidan than any other European country .
 More controls have been put in place to stifle corruption. Transparency has increased, and more controls are in place .
 The EU's efforts at assistance have not helped spur effective judicial and administrative reform, says the EU .
 The lack of progress in this area hampers reform efforts in other areas, says the government . There are also problems in other parts of the country .
 More than two years after Maidan, it is clear that the EU should have placed more pressure on the country's leadership to deepen judicial reforms .
 The Minsk process is locked in a stalemate . Instead, much diplomatic energy has been wasted on the Minsk Process .
 Ukraine fatigue and defeatism is taking hold in some European countries . Ukraine fatigue is taking place in some countries .
 Ukraine's governments should know that Ukraine can reform. But the governments of these countries should know they can reform, says David Frum .
 There are things the EU should be focusing on now to help Ukraine reform. Sometimes support and guidance has missed the mark, but there are things to focus on now .
 There is also a regional divide in the willingness of EU member states to assist Ukraine . The EU is also divided over whether to help Ukraine .
 northern and eastern member states actively support Ukraine's transition . There is a lack of engagement by many western and southern member states .
 This imbalance undermines the idea of European solidarity and cohesion, says the European Union .
 France, Spain, and Italy together provide less than any of the individual Baltic states . France and Spain, Spain and Italy are the three Baltic states.
 The EU needs to communicate with the Ukrainian public to give them evidence of the impact of reforms, progress on Minsk, and to reassure them that separatists in the east of the country will not gain influence .
 The EU needs to help win the hearts and minds of Ukrainians by keeping their communications consistent and clear .
 The absence of such communications will bring on further disillusionment with the protracted reform process . The absence will lead to further disillusionments with the process .
European diplomats and experts into Ukrainian administrative structures. One way of helping to support reforms of the judiciary and administrative functions is to embed European diplomats into the country's administrative structures .
 This will allow for the transfer of advice and experience, but also give some control over the reform process . This will let for theTransfer of advice to be transferred to the next generation .
 The EU will have greater leverage for pushing forward these reforms if it is able to stick to its commitments to Ukraine . The EU has more leverage to push forward its reforms to Ukraine.
 Ukraine must make good on its promises to receive benefits, such as visa liberalisation . If Ukraine achieves reforms, it risks alienating Ukrainians from the reform process .
 One of the key factors holding back reform efforts in Ukraine is the lack of specialised task forces to implement reforms . The lack of specialised task forces is the key factor holding back reforms .
 EU should advocate for specialised reform bodies in each Ukrainian ministry, so that there are dedicated people working on reforms .
This will help ensure that reform is treated as a priority in government ministries . This will help to ensure that reforms are treated as priority in the government .
 Ukraine’s reform process rumbles on, so does the conflict in the east of the country .
 The EU should make sure that it is also supporting Ukraine in this fight, the EU should also support Ukraine .
 The EU should step-up efforts to reform the Ukrainian armed forces, so that they are better equipped to combat the Russian threat . EU should also be open to lethal aid, if the requisite conditions are met, if necessary .
 Local economies in Ukraine are weak and there is a high degree of financial uncertainty . Local economies are weak, there is high level of economic uncertainty .
 The EU should ensure that it is aiding Ukraine’s economic transition and de-oligarchisation process by opting to support small and medium enterprises .
 The EU should continue to support rural development as agricultural reforms mean that many small farms will face hard times ahead .
 Ukraine has one of the largest agricultural sectors in Europe . By offering increased support to reforms in this sector it can ensure that the transition to European standards is as smooth as possible .
 The EU needs to be blunt about the shortcomings of Ukraine’s reforms, the EU says .
 European diplomats should be as straightforward as possible when pointing the finger at those responsible for delaying reforms .
 The reform of Ukraine will by its very nature be a long and drawn out process . The reform will be long and Drawn out process, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Kyiv government in Kyiv is more committed to reforms, but it would take years to bear fruit. Even if the government inKyiv was more committed, the effort could take years .
 Ukraine cannot give in to its Ukraine fatigue and needs to support the country in its journey to EU membership . It must support Ukraine in the EU membership, lest it contribute to even greater instability on the EU’s eastern periphery .
 The Minsk process focuses too much effort on transforming the war in the Donbas from a full-scale armoured manoeuvre war into a sitting-war .
 The Minsk format is still useful to deal with practical issues on the front line, but the Minsk agreement does not provide a proper roadmap to peace . There is progress on implementation of a precondition for military de-escalation .
 France and Germany have invested a lot of diplomatic leverage and pressure to push the political agenda of Minsk . The U.S. and the EU have also put pressure on Minsk to push its political agenda .
 If the same effort had been devoted to reforming the judiciary, there would have been much more progress in Ukraine by now, and the Donbas would be in more or less the same situation .
 The Minsk II implementation process was diplomatically well-coordinated, but represented a communication failure of the first order . The Ukrainian government, particularly President Petro Poroshenko, was not well- coordinated .
 The West failed to explain the agreement to a wider audience in Ukraine, particularly lawmakers and reformers . It failed to engage with those who shape public opinion about its merits and shortfalls .
 The discrepancy between public statements from French and German foreign ministers has created unnecessary confusion . The discrepancy has caused confusion between the French and Germans .
 If Europe wants to pressure Ukraine on Minsk, it first needs to reassure Ukrainian society, not just diplomats, that the separatists will not gain influence in Kyiv .
 All other reforms on domestic issues, including the fight against corruption, will be unsustainable if the judiciary remains in its current state . The judiciary is currently in a state of a state.
 The top priorities should be abolishing the influence of political affiliation on promotions within the judiciary, says the judge .
 Push harder for specialised reform-implementation bodies in each Ukrainian ministry . Push hard for specialise reform bodies.
 Deputy-ministers and high-level officials are too busy with their other duties to effectively dedicate time to pushing through reforms .
Special bodies should focus on reform of judiciary, decentralisation, and administrative reform . Instead, there should be special bodies focusing on this task .
 The EU and the EBRD are negotiating the installation of specific programme coordination officers in each ministry . EU and EBRd are negotiating to install specific programme coordinators.
 The current deadlock over financial oversight of the programme needs to be overcome . This would be an important step forward, but it would be a major step forward .
 Embed European diplomats and experts into Ukrainian administrative structures . Embed EU diplomats, experts into Ukraine's administrative structures.
 European experts into Ukraine’s state structures would give the EU insight into the process of implementing reforms . European experts would help Ukraine transition to European standards and procedures .
 EU-Twinning is sending administrative personnel to a partner country to assist the practical implementation of EU laws and regulation .
 For the time being, such experts are only provided by a handful of member states . But this should be a much more common phenomenon, says the author .
 Ukraine's rural areas will undergo an enormous transformation in the wake of the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area agreement .
Public services and administrative structures will be closed as decentralisation reform gets underway . European food-safety standards for agriculture-products will be more difficult for smalland medium-sized farms and enterprises to implement .
 programmes for rural development are crucial to support the transition of businesses in these regions . It is crucial to keep up public support for the reform process .
 Ukraine's eastern regions are hit hard by Russia's economic sanctions . This is especially true for Ukraine's east, which is hit by the sanctions .
 EU support for Ukraine is one of the unsung success stories of EU support, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: The programmes on rural development and agricultural transition should be encouraged .
 To aid Ukraine's economic transition and the process of de-oligarchisation, support for SMEs is essential . To help Ukraine's economy, support is essential to help the country's economy .
In a time of financial uncertainty, loan-guarantee funds are one measure that the EU could easily and effectively implement .
 Supporting SMEs is a way that donors could provide assistance without becoming involved in Ukrainian politics . Donors could help SMEs without becominginvolved in Ukraine's politics .
 The Ukrainian armed forces have already been the subject of reform, and progress made in this field exceeds that of all other state-agencies .
 There are areas that need improvement and the country is still at war . Still, there are areas of need improvement .
 There are also shortfalls in equipment and technology, particularly on safe communication, electronic warfare, C² systems, anti-tank defence, and artillery tracking technology .
 If the EU agrees to deliver Ukraine certain benefits in exchange for progress on reforms, it must stick to its promises . Ukraine must fulfill the relevant criteria once Ukraine fulfils the criteria .
 The postponement of the visa liberalisation process due to difficulties in Europe such as the refugee crisis, and the rise of populism, was one of the biggest blunders the EU has made since Maidan .
 The EU’s stalling on visa liberalisation did great harm to the credibility of both the Union and the reformists themselves .
 Ambassador Jan Tombinski should be as straightforward as possible when pointing the finger at those responsible for delaying reforms .
The protests triggered a national uprising that deposed the government and paved the way for elections . The protests triggered the national uprising. The protests sparked a nationwide uprising that led to elections .
 The core demands of the protesters were intensive reform of the economy, government, and institutions, and to place Ukraine on the path towards European integration .
 Russia has annexed the Crimean peninsula and launched a campaign of hybrid warfare in the Donbas . Russia's response is the price of Ukraine’s decision to turn towards Europe .
 Since 1989, the EU and its member states have vowed to support Eastern European countries in their attempts to reform and strengthen democracy, the rule of law, market economies, and open societies .
 Ukraine's struggle for a new future turned out to be a messy and prolonged battle . Ukraine's struggles for the new future have been messy and protracted .
 The war in Donbas entered a quieter phase in summer 2015, but the real battle for Ukraine’s future may not be on the military frontline but in the offices of bureaucrats .
 In the two years since Maidan Ukraine has made progress, but much less than expected . In the past two years, there has been little progress in Ukraine .
 Corruption, graft, and nepotism are still ubiquitous in political and administrative life . The corruption, graft and corruption are still prevalent in political life .
 Informal relations, personal ties and dependencies shape politics, and formal institutions are weak . Informal ties, personal links and dependency shape politics.
 There is growing suspicion among civil society regarding the will and ability of the Ukrainian government to carry out meaningful reform .
 For the EU, Ukraine’s transition to a functioning and prosperous state is of paramount importance . For the European Union, Ukraine's transition to the EU is of crucial importance .
 It will be the litmus test for whether the EU is still able to project stability into its neighbourhood . The EU has been weakened by internal crisis and strategic divisions .
 A failure in Ukraine would play into the hands of extreme forces in the Kremlin, says the Kremlin . Eastern-Slavic societies are unable to build a state based on the rule of law and democracy, the Kremlin says .
This would push internal developments in Russia even more worrisome directions . This would push Russia's internal developments even more worrying directions .
 At the same time, a collapse of the Ukrainian state would cause major economic instability in Central Europe . A collapse of Ukraine would be a major economic destabilization in Europe .
 The EU was a key player in facilitating the post-Communist transition across Eastern Europe . The EU has a variety of tools to facilitate reform in Ukraine .
 Many EU member states have successfully been through a similar transition after 1989 . Many EU members have successfully transitioned after 1989.
 The EU and several member states have expressed their support and provided assistance . The EU institutions and several members states have also provided assistance.
 Report sets out to assess Europe’s aid to Ukraine . It considers whether the EU currently provides the right type of support for Ukraine .
 It considers bilateral assistance by member states, and sets out the gaps, the success stories, and lessons learnt from efforts to lend assistance to Ukraine so far .
 The EU makes recommendations for how the EU should step up its support for Ukraine . It also recommends how to encourage greater commitment to Ukraine among other member states .
 This paper’s assessment of the diplomatic, military, and economic challenges facing Ukraine after Maidan is based on the findings of 28 interviews conducted in Kyiv in February and March 2016 .
 Interviewees include officials from the EU, selected member states, and non-EU international donors . Ukrainian government, civil society, political parties, and think-tanks are among those interviewed .
 Ukraine's reform process is a fast-changing moving target, it is important to recall the timeline of the research phase . Ukraine’s reform process has been described as a 'moving target'
 In July 1990 the London declaration was issued by the 22 NATO and Warsaw Pact states . The declaration was published in July 1990 .
 The declaration guaranteed every European state the freedom to freely choose its alliance . The declaration also guaranteed every state's freedom to choose their alliance .
 Moscow has used domestic and territorial conflicts to impose its preferences on neighbouring states . Since the declaration, Moscow has been using its preferences to impose on neighbouring countries .
 Russia was only willing to ‘solve’ the country’s frozen conflict if Moldova became its de facto vassal . Moldova has been frozen since 2008 .
 The then-President of Moldova, Vladimir Voronin, thought that Russian security concerns had been addressed through a constitution that declared Moldova a permanently neutral state . Moldova banned foreign troops from its soil .
 Ten years later, the then-Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych fell into the same trap .
 Russian intelligence services granted unprecedented powers to work in Ukraine . Ukraine declared a neutral state by law, and declared Ukraine a neutral states by law . Russian Black Sea Fleet was given a contract to host the Russian Black sea Fleet until 2042 .
 He thought that by cutting these agreements Russia’s security interests would be covered . He thought it would be a mistake to cut these agreements .
 Russia threatened to impose sanctions, product bans, travel bans, and travel bans against Ukraine . Russia has threatened to cut economic ties and impose punitive measures against the Ukraine .
 Russia has stepped up preparations for military and paramilitary campaigns on the Crimean peninsula and in eastern Ukraine . Since 2008 Russia had step up preparations.
 Yanukovych bowed to Russian pressure, and in doing so, lost power . Ultimately, Yanukovych bowed.
 The Maidan protesters used Ukrainian and European flags as their symbol . It was no surprise that the protesters used the Ukrainian and EU flags .
 The EU Association Agreement would have included passages to strengthen rule of law, reform the judiciary, increase press freedom and reform the security sector .
 Facilitating the transition from weak states with oligarch-run economies to functioning democracies with free market economies has always been a core aim of European foreign policy .
 Russia's quest to claim sovereignty over other states and people without their consent was unprecedented in Europe . If accepted by the EU, it would have meant the end of the European order as we know it. However, in Ukraine, the issue was larger .
Self-serving local elites could easily manipulate the geopolitical context to demand European support on their own terms . It became clear that self-serving locals could easily manipulation the geopoliticalcontext to demand EU support on own terms.
 Yanukovych tried to rally European support for Ukraine by placing its quest for the Association Agreement in the frame of a geopolitical contest with Moscow . Even before Maidan, Yanukovych had tried to rallies European support.
 His interest was in accessing the economic benefits of the agreement, while trying to ensure that Europeans asked as few questions as possible about the regime’s dealings with the opposition, media, and competing businesses .
 The EU was rightly sceptical of Yanukovych, and insisted that any assistance was contingent on structural reforms being pushed through and an end to politically motivated prosecutions .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea posed an unprecedented challenge to the European order . Russia's annexed Crimea posed a challenge to Europe's European order.
 It was the first time since 1945 that a European power had used force to annex the territory of another European country . It was first time in 1945 that an EU power had taken control of another country .
 The possibility of a state signing a free trade agreement was used as a pretext for armed aggression by another country . It was the first time in modern history that a state signed a freetrade agreement.
 The annexation happened so quickly and took the West by such surprise that no effective strategy was developed for countering it, even if the will was there . No effective strategy for countering the annexation was developed .
 Only a week passed between the abdication of Yanukovych and the influx of some 25,000 armed men .
 The increasing military build-up on Ukraine's borders pointed to an all-out invasion .
 Russia could have used any response from Kyiv as a pretext for a larger intervention . Georgia in 2008, Georgia in 2009, could have been used by Russia in 2008 .
 Given the dismal state of the Ukrainian armed forces at the time, there was little Kyiv could do about it .
 Russia created a fait accompli that Europe could not recognise, but could not reverse . Russia created an accompli.
 sanctions against individuals involved in the occupation were largely symbolic, and spared those occupying top administrative posts in President Vladimir Putin’s inner circle . Later, sanctions against those involved were mostly symbolic .
 The call for a “peaceful solution’ was diplomatic cover for having little plan of how to move forward . The call was called for a "peaceful Solution’s"
 Putin never even considered putting Crimea on the negotiating table . Military roll-back was out of the question and Putin never considered putting it on the table .
 It has not reacted to administrative changes in the Russian occupation regime, nor to the increasing repression of ethnic and religious minorities on the peninsula . The Tartars are particularly the Tartars .
Until summer 2014, the challenge was subversion rather than a substantial military threat . Until summer 2014 it could have been dealt with by even a modest EU mission .
 Russia was forced to send in the regular army, including surface-to-air missiles, to save its proxies from defeat . The Ukrainian military machinery started its engines .
 The Ukrainian defeat at Ilovaisk and the shooting down of MH17 civilian airliner on 17 July 2014 transformed the war from a hybrid campaign to an undeclared inter-state war and an international crisis .
 The developments prompted the West to impose tougher sanctions on Russia . The sanctions include a prohibition on selling arms and dual-use goods .
 The Minsk I protocol – an agreement signed on 5 September – was brokered by the OSCE Contact Group . It was based on a peace plan drawn up by Poroshenko .
 The agreement included a ceasefire, withdrawal of heavy weapons, an amnesty law, and provisions for OSCE control of the Russian-Ukrainian border . The agreement also included a law on self-governance for the rebel-held territories .
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission was granted full access to the separatist-held areas of Ukraine or to the Russian-Ukrainian border . It was meant to monitor the places it was intended to monitor .
 Ukraine witnessed the most intense and destructive phase of the war after the deal . On the contrary, Ukraine saw the most intensity and destructive phases of the conflict .
 The deterioration of the conflict was the main incentive for German Chancellor Angela Merkel to try to use her leverage to bring Putin to the negotiating table on a ceasefire agreement .
 The attempts to bring an end to the fighting in Donbas culminated in a marathon negotiation in Minsk in February 2015 .
 The agreement signed on 12 February resembled the first Minsk agreement . But it contained some points that would make it more difficult for Ukraine to push through the agreement domestically .
First, that the law on self-governance of the separatist areas should be supplemented by a constitutional amendment . First, that that law should be supplemented by aconstitutional amendment .
Under Russia's interpretation, Ukraine and the West pay for the Donbas while Russia ruled it . Second, a provision that social and other payments from Kyiv to Donbas should resume .
 The agreement postponed control of the Russian-Ukrainian border to the very end of the entire implementation process . Third, the agreement postponed the control of Russia's border to a very end.
 The agreement included some timelines and conditions relating to points from Minsk I, including the ceasefire, withdrawal of heavy weapons, and prisoner exchange . However, it also included some timeline and conditions .
 Each party had an interest in at least one of the provisions . Linking these basic provisions to maintaining a ceasefire should have provided incentive for both sides to comply with the package .
 The French and German governments at that time were de-escalation. It is worth recalling that the prime objective of the French and Germany governments at the time was de- escalation .
 There was a lot of doubt as to whether the agreement would actually hold, or whether it could be developed into a comprehensive peace plan .
 Immediately after the negotiations, diplomats around Merkel were highly sceptical about whether the agreement would hold at all .
 The Minsk II agreement was later elevated to the status of dogma in European diplomatic circles . However, the Minsk 2 agreement was then elevated to a position of dogma .
 Any scepticism about the accords vanished once the implementation process was passed from heads of state to foreign ministries .
 Key points of the agreement were negotiated between Ukrainian President Poroshenko and Putin's special advisor on Ukraine, Vladislaw Surkov, rather than being imposed by French President Hollande and Angela Merkel .
 The terms of the Minsk agreement were so vague that they were not implementable for either side . Still, the terms were not implementedable for both sides .
 An agenda of clear points and timelines for the security-related and political aspects of the agreement had to be established in subsequent negotiations in Paris in March 2015 .
 For many Ukrainians, Poroshenko went too far, providing Russia a de-facto role in Ukraine's domestic politics . For many Ukrainian, it was too much for Poroshenko to go too far .
 Many would have preferred an agreement that didn’t make Kyiv responsible for the occupied territories under any circumstances . The agreement would seal off the areas that had been lost .
 Ukrainian president portrayed himself as the victim, and Ukraine as being forced to accept the deal . In the domestic debate, the president portrayed his country as a victim .
 Minsk is nothing but the evolution of Poroshenko's own peace plan and the result of his negotiations . However, the contrary was true, as Poroshenko is nothing more than the evolution.
 Ukrainian government continued to negotiate in Paris, whilst denying any active role in the process at home . At the time, the Ukrainian government was still negotiating in Paris .
Communication failure meant that the discussion in Ukraine developed in directions that differed from the government’s position, and reinforced resentment towards the Minsk deal .
 Donetsk and Luhansk Peoples’ Republics special-status was due to be voted on in parliament on 31 August 2015 . Domestic tensions boiled over when the law was granted .
 The amendment was seen as a concession to the enemy, and the Ukrainian government seemed willing to sacrifice Ukrainians for the sake of its reputation abroad . To most people, the amendment was viewed as a concessions to theenemy .
 Poroshenko had offered this concession as early as summer 2014 . But in fact, he had offered the concession as soon as August 2014 .
 The amendment polarised the Ukrainian political spectrum, and split the reformist camp . The amendment was designed to polarise the political spectrum .
 Even pro-Western and pro-reformist parties such as Samopomich expelled key lawmakers who supported the bill .
 It was difficult to convince the Ukrainian audience that the special status law – granting separatist-controlled areas more autonomy – should be passed .
 The continuing Russian aggression and the deteriorating economic situation were causing bitterness . The Russian aggression was causing bitterness, according to the Russian media .
 At times when gas prices soared for home consumers and pensions had to be cut, it was almost impossible to convince the public that Ukraine should make concessions to the separatists .
 The next communication failure occurred around the so-called ‘Morel plan’ on regional elections . The next communications failure was around the 'Morel Plan'
 If there were free and fair elections in proxy-held areas, the current proxies would lose the elections as they were not particularly popular . If there are free and free elections in the proxy- held areas, they would lose.
 Any freely elected government in separatist areas might push its own agenda rather than stick to Moscow’s line .
 The OSCE's Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights would not approve the elections as free and fair . Moscow tried to manipulate the elections, exerting pressure through military presence, violence, or abductions .
 The original idea was to pass the special-status law only on a preliminary basis . It was originally intended to be a preliminary law .
 ODHIR would enter into force only if it confirmed the local elections as free and fair according to Ukrainian law . Ukrainian law.
 Kyiv would have had the right to scrap the special-status law altogether and pin the blame for the failure of Minsk on Russia . If not, Kyiv could have had to scrap it altogether .
 If Russia allowed fair and free elections, this would have meant a huge leap forward on Minsk . But the chance of this happening was remote. If, on the other hand, Russia would have allowed fair elections .
 Poroshenko denies having agreed to the Morel plan and dismisses it as Pierre Morel's private opinion .
 Ukraine was part of all the negotiations and meetings undertaken by the group working on the plan . This is very unlikely to have been the case, as Ukraine was not part of the negotiations .
 Poroshenko has been accused of being a victim of foreign pressure . But it was easier to portray himself as a victim to foreign pressure than to engage in a difficult domestic debate .
 German and French diplomats had to fight to maintain sanctions on Russia in an increasingly difficult diplomatic environment in Brussels . The double game in Kyiv was a bitter disappointment for German andFrench diplomats .
 Western foreign ministers and officials had tried to “balance’s critiques of Minsk implementation between the Russian and Ukrainian sides .
 To Ukraine, this "balanced critique" was especially corrosive, says CNN's John Sutter . Ukraine is the victim of Russian aggression, the weaker state, and unlike Russia, a democracy .
 Ukraine fears that Ukraine would be forced to accept a “peace’s favourable to others . It gave rise to the fear that Ukraine had been forced to accepted a ‘peace” that would mean their sacrifices to date had been in vain .
European diplomats kept pressing Ukraine to hold elections in the Donbas without making any reference to Russia's obligations on troop withdrawal or security . Even worse, after the Minsk agreement and the Morel-plan hit a dead end, European diplomats kept pressing Ukraine.
 Lacking the leverage to insist on holding elections according to Ukrainian law, the move would have been a mere rubber-stamp exercise legitimising the Russian occupation .
 The reformists feared that international rhetoric, which was almost exclusively focused on Minsk and the special-status law, might destroy the legitimacy of the reform project .
 Ukraine is constantly criticised for not implementing Minsk, while Russia, the main culprit for the war, is spared .
 Possible rewards, like the easing of sanctions on Russia, are discussed in Europe . To add insult to injury, possible rewards, are also discussed .
 Ukraine could also substitute reform implementation with a geopolitical narrative that stresses their own importance . ‘geopolitical’ logic about the importance of Ukraine and Russia’s respective places in the world will always trump real implementation success .
 There is a fear in Kyiv that Europeans are looking for an excuse to normalise ties with Russia . It creates a great deal of suspicion when it comes to taking further steps in the Minsk process .
 The weak Western rhetoric on Moscow has helped the cause of nationalists, who seek to denounce those Ukrainian actors in favour of passing the special-status law as traitors .
 reform-minded Ukrainian politicians have tried to change how they discuss Minsk . They want more domestic freedom to defend the agreement .
 Neither have achieved any tangible improvement in Ukraine's security situation, which would make it easier to legitimise concessions . Neither have been able to achieve any tangible improvements in the security situation .
 The “school-year’s ceasefire of October 2015 was short-lived. The ceasefire was agreed to be effective from the beginning of the school year .
 Ukraine has not received any security benefits outside of the Minsk framework, such as lethal military assistance, that could reassure Kyiv . Prisoner-swaps take place only occasionally .
 There is no provision that could be granted to assure Ukrainians that the separatists will not gain influence over Kyiv or use their position to prepare a new offensive .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin has been in power for more than a decade . He has also been in charge of his country's most important political and economic affairs . Putin's government has been criticized for its policies in recent years .
 Too little effort has been made to explain Europe's aims and tactics in Ukraine to a wider audience . There has been no diplomatic effort to address them, and too little effort to explain them .
 In Kyiv, foreign policy is devised by a narrow circle of elites . The president, the prime minister, the Foreign Ministry, and few members of parliament are frequently consulted .
 Most actors in Ukraine's domestic politics are not involved and do not follow diplomatic battles and manoeuvres . Most actors don't follow the diplomatic battles in Ukraine .
Foreign policy continues to play an immense role in Ukraine's day-to-day politics and its political discourse . But foreign policy continues.
 Many politicians immediately denounced the Morel plan from the beginning without considering the diplomatic logic behind it .
 Christoph Heusgen, Merkel's chief advisor on foreign and security policy, tried to meet wider groups of political stakeholders to explain German intentions . Heusen was Merkel's top advisor on Foreign and Security policy .
 Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Jean-Marc Ayrault tried to do the same in spring 2016 . But their attempts were soon overshadowed by events taking place closer to home .
 Western governments see the Minsk deal as the main reason for the de-escalation of the war in the Donbas in autumn 2015 . As a result, they have put the deal at the heart of their Ukraine policy .
 There are other factors that explain the transformation of the war in the Donbas to a “sitting war” There are also important lessons for the continuing reform process .
 Despite the Minsk implementation agreement being signed on 12 February, the ceasefire did not come to effect until the 15th . Despite the agreement, the agreement was not signed until the 14th .
 Russian forces needed until 19 February to fully occupy the city of Debaltseve . However, Russian forces had to wait until February 19 to fully occupied the city .
 The Battle of Debaltseve saw intensive use of regular Russian military formations . The battle was the first of its kind in Russia .
 Pro-Russian separatists and Russian volunteers played only minor roles to guard flanks or seal the combat zone .
 The conflict followed the pattern of rotation of the regular Russian troops deployed in the Donbas .
 The Russian army needed to keep the absence of regular troops from their home garrison at a minimum and the overall number of casualties low . To keep the narrative of a “Ukrainian Civil War” alive in its propaganda, the Russian army needs to keep a
 One battalion from each brigade within the Russian armed forces is deployed to the war zone at any given time . One battalion is relieved by another after a few months .
 Intensive troop movements in Rostov-on-Don and a calm front indicated that the rotation was ongoing .
 Fresh troops, re-supplied and re-trained to fight together, carried out the first attacks on 5 June .
Ukrainian army proved stronger and better coordinated than anticipated . But the Ukrainian army proved weaker and bettercoordinated than expected .
 Moscow faced with the decision to either commit significantly more troops – making it difficult to hide the true extent of Russian involvement from its own public – or reduce intensity of the war .
 Russia chose the latter, switching to a phoney war with phases of relative calm . It was similar to the period after the September ceasefire, and relatively active phases of shelling from Russia .
 The Ukrainian Army gained strength in the Donbas for the first time, a serious obstacle to Russian regular military forces . But key to the relative decrease in hostilities was the Ukrainian Army gaining strength .
After Crimea and the war in the Donbas, the Ukrainian armed forces went through a series of ad-hoc reforms . All of them were ineffective, says the author .
 The problems in the defence sector were the same as those in all other branches of Ukraine's public services – and sometimes worse . The problems are the same in the public services.
 Stocks of arms and ammunition, supplies, fuel, medical equipment, and medical equipment had been illegally sold off . The stock of entire field hospitals had been illegal sold off.
 Russian spies and subversive forces were ubiquitous in Ukraine . Russia tried to gain a hold on Ukraine's defence sector under Yanukovych .
 Clearing up this mess was no easy task, as the president only trusted those with ties to him and his circle .
 The first reshuffle in the defence apparatus in summer and autumn 2014 had little effect . First reshuffle had little impact on defence apparatus .
 After Minsk II, it was clear that there would neither be an internationalisation of the conflict . Neither would Russia stop the fighting, nor would Russia stopped the fighting .
 The next round of defence reforms, conducted in April-May 2015, propelled many front-line commanders to posts within the Defence Ministry, the general staff, and other key positions that dealt with the war effort .
 The war itself imposed a steep and bloody learning curve on Ukraine's armed forces . The war has been described as a 'steep and bloodylearning curve'
 With little training or preparation for such a war, they learned many tactical and operational leadership skills and combat procedures .
 Evaluations of how each commander performed were behind the first systematic meritocratic promotions in the Ukrainian bureaucracy since Maidan . The effects were clearly visible.
 Six top-level generals within the Defence Ministry were sacked due to incompetence . In December 2015, six generals were sacked.
 Between 2008 and 2014 the Ukrainian armed forces had no combat exercises at brigade-level . Now they have 12 such exercises per year .
 Ukraine's increased focus on training mirrors Russia’s recent efforts to step up its own training and manoeuvres to increase the effectiveness of its armed forces . Ukraine's increase in training mirrors Russian efforts to increase their own training.
 The army is transitioning from the Soviet-style rigid battalion-brigade structure to a more flexible structure with tactical battalion combat teams .
 This means it will be more adaptable, versatile and have better combat performance . This will mean it will also be better adaptable and have more combat performance. This will also mean it is more versatile and more versatile .
 The other main reason for the success of Ukraine's army was the tremendous effort of voluntary organisations . The Ukrainian army is one of the largest armies in the world .
 In early 2014 voluntary battalions had to substitute the army in many combat roles . By late summer, the army was able to take over most combat operations .
Without the support of NGOs, the army could not have prevailed, says the army . The army has not been able to win over the opposition to the government .
 They were crucial in supplying the armed forces, performing medical evaluation and medical services, repairing vehicles and combat systems . They were also crucial in developing secure communications .
As the army's inherited supply apparatus was plagued with corruption and mismanagement, voluntary organisations were also responsible for storing and distributing non-lethal goods to the troops at the front .
Bookkeeping experts have expertise in bookkeeping, verification, and documentation of the use of assets .
As most independent civil society organisations were dependent on Western programmes and project funding for survival during the Yanukovych era, their accumulated knowledge about Western requirements on documentation and transparency were crucial . As most independent Civil society organisations, they were dependent upon Western programmes .
 Most of Ukraine’s personnel protection gear is still delivered through NGOs . Most of the Ukraine's personnel protection equipment is delivered by NGOs .
 The full gear for one soldier costs about $5,000 . purchasing these for a 250,000-strong army is beyond the means of the Defence Ministry .
 Combat brigades in the east still request some night-vision devices and soldiers' gear directly from NGOs . But formal logistics are getting better, it is still slow to react to specific needs .
 Volunteers also reformed the government’s communications on the war and on defence reforms . Volunteers also reform the government's communications on war and defence reforms.
In 2014, confusing or contradicting reports on the situation in Donbas increased the public sense of uncertainty . In 2014, confusion or conflicting reports on situation in the region increased public sense.
 Russian propaganda on the war was strong and professionally produced, and inadequately countered by the Ukrainian authorities . Russian propaganda was strong, professionally produced.
 A new, professional information policy was set up in autumn 2014 with the help of the Ukrainian Crisis Media Centre and other volunteer groups .
 Defence Ministry took several key personnel from NGOs and incorporated them into formal structures . The Defence Ministry also incorporated several key people from NGOs .
 No other ministry in Ukraine saw such a large influx of civil activists and new faces into its structure as the Defence Ministry .
 The Economy Ministry under Aivaras Abromavičius and the Finance Ministry under Natalie Jaresko tried to attract civil society experts for governmental posts . The Defence Ministry never achieved the levels of the Defence Ministry .
 The learning curve and voluntary effort are regarded as the key factors that enabled the Ukrainian military to stand its ground . The voluntary effort and the learning curve are the two factors.
 There are other interesting features of the defence sector that are worth mentioning . But there are otherinteresting features of defence sector.
 The regular army took over most combat tasks in the autumn and winter of 2014 leading into 2015 . In the fall and winter, the regular army take over mostcombat tasks .
 Ukraine's voluntary units were Ukraine's saving grace in summer 2014 . They were not equipped to withstand the onslaught from the regular Russian army that followed in autumn .
 Some battalions were initially supported by local oligarchs — particularly in the east — stoking fears that they might develop into private armies . Some of the battalions are now being supported by the oligarchs .
 In 2015 they were integrated into the regular army as a territorial reserve force, or into the Interior Ministry as a national guard . But in 2015, they were also integrated in the regular Army as a reserve force .
Professional officers were put in command and integrated in regular command and control structures . The disciplinary law of the armed forces applied to them. This meant that professional officers were placed in command .
 These troops now receive a state salary, rather than one from private donors, instead of a private donor .
 This transition within the armed forces was smoother than media reports made it seem . This transition in the armed force was smoother.
Only Pravy Sektor and Azov — two of the 40 Ukrainian paramilitary battalions — refused to be integrated . Only PravY Sektor, Azov, and two of 40 battalions, were integrated .
 Some arrangements were made with Azov on tighter control of their forces by the state . But Pravy Sektor is less willing to cooperate .
 The West believes Ukraine’s armed forces to be more poorly organised and chaotic than they really are .
 Many in the West overestimate the role of the voluntary forces due to the level of media coverage they have received . Many in West also overestimate role of voluntary forces because of the media coverage .
 Some Ukrainian politicians have tried to draw attention to their role in the war . They claim they were responsible for preventing Russia marching on Kyiv .
 At times, they do this by playing down the regular army, creating the impression that the voluntary forces are better organised than the actual army .
 voluntary organisations usually try to highlight their role and significance for the war-effort in order to raise funds and attract volunteers . This involves bashing the regular armed forces .
 There are also more reports on the voluntary forces, as they are more open to the press . They often have embedded journalists in order to attract further attention and funds .
 The picture of the Ukrainian armed forces in the West's mind is more negative and chaotic than it is in reality. Because of this, the West’s mind is less negative than in reality .
 The biggest disciplinary problems in the Ukrainian armed forces are caused by former volunteers . Former volunteers fail to integrate into normal society and instead opt to conduct “security-related business on their own’s own .
 The Defence Ministry has an independent bottom-to-top performance evaluation . The other unique feature of the Defence Ministry is an independent top performance evaluation.
 In every bureaucratic institution, reports are passed up the chain of command . In every bureaucracy, reports can be passed up to the top level .
 In many cases, issues that are pressing on lower levels are omitted by careerist civil servants or bureaucrats . The further such reports travel upwards, in order to veil mistakes or negligence .
 Four-man teams are made up of a psychologist, a priest, an inspector and a political officer . They interview soldiers and field commanders about their mood, their concerns and their concerns .
 The procedure was initially met with scepticism, but after some shortcomings were tackled by the Ministry, the procedure was increasingly accepted .
 In almost all other Ukrainian ministries, there are complaints that the implementation of reforms on a local level are barely supervised . The politicians in Kyiv are out of touch with the situation on the ground, they say .
 The lack of direct feedback links was a complaint made by almost everyone engaged in assessing reforms . The complaint was made by nearly everyone in assessing reforms .
 The Ministry of Defence was the only exception, proving the value of such initiatives to monitor the situation .
 The Ministry of Defence and the National Bank are the only two institutions in Ukraine that pay competitive salaries .
 The Ministry of Defence introduced competitive salaries in spring 2016 to keep competent personnel within the organisation as well as increase discipline among soldiers .
 The salary of an ordinary Non-Commissioned Officer was increased from 2,000 to 7,000 Hryvna per month . For example, the salary of a non- commissioned officer was increased to 6,000 .
 The average salary in Ukraine is officially around 3,200 Hryvna . Most salaries are paid cash-in-hand, meaning that the official average salary is not accurate .
Ukrainian government rejected increase of salaries for public servants for populist reasons . Military salaries for soldiers that risked their lives on the frontline was not a controversial issue .
Non-competitive salaries are an issue that seriously endanger reform-success. In all reform projects regarding the administrative and juridical system, non- competitive salaries are a serious problem .
 The new deputy defence minister is still not allowed to fully audit the “old’s logistical and acquisition systems. The new defence minister – a reformer – is a new deputy defense minister . The new minister has been named as a new minister .
 The armed forces were the first to adopt and use new electronic procurement systems that act as a control against corruption . The new ones do work, however, and the armed forces are first to use them .
 The success of Ukraine's defence reform is even more remarkable as it was achieved with little external assistance . Ukraine's success of defence reform was achieved without external assistance.
 The primary actor was the US, which trained only national-guard soldiers and border police .
 The U.S. also advised other services within the Defence Ministry, as well as supporting NGOs that manage information and logistics .
 UK established a sizeable presence of advisers in the Defence Ministry . Among the European powers, the UK is engaged in reform efforts .
 Other European states channelled their support for the Ukrainian defence sector through the NATO mission in Kyiv .
 Canada, the UK, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Estonia, and Latvia are the most active in this regard . Canada, Britain, the U.S. and the UK are most active .
 Sweden and Norway also have smaller programmes with the Ukrainian navy . Sweden, Norway and Ukraine also have small programmes with their navy .
 Most Western European nations abstain from these efforts for political reasons, not wishing to stir up anger in Moscow . Many interlocutors in Kyiv choose to remain anonymous .
 European assistance to the defence sector is extremely limited . Overall, European assistance is very limited to the defense sector .
 NATO’s efforts in Ukraine focused on promoting military-to-military relations, and preparing Ukrainian contingents for international missions . In the past, even during Yanukovych's rule, NATO's efforts were aimed at promoting military and military relations .
 The US-Canadian-UK Joint Multilateral Training Group aims to improve Ukrainian troops’ abilities in the field . The group is focusing on combat training for battalion-levels and below .
 Training Special Forces has become another area of cooperation for the group . The group has also become a part of cooperation with the Special Forces .
 Lithuanian and Estonian personnel also participate in this trilateral training initiative . Lithuanian, Estonian and Lithuanian personnel are part of the initiative .
 Non-lethal aid is predominately contributed by the United States or Canada . Some Central-Eastern European countries and Turkey have made smaller donations through NATO and NGOs .
 Some European member states are entirely indifferent, if not sceptical, towards assisting the Ukranian defence sector . France and Germany are among those who are not concerned about the UK's defence sector.
 NATO first built up a presence in Ukraine in 1997 to assist with defence reform and help Ukraine to cooperate with Western armies on international missions . NATO has been in Ukraine since 1997 to help Ukraine cooperate with the West .
 The Country Action Plan outlines NATO’s support and programmes for Ukraine . Ukraine has made much better use of the PfP framework since 2015 .
 Some member states are calling for restraint, so as to signal to Russia that NATO is not the "winner" following the Maidan revolution and the change of government in 2014 .
 All initiatives beyond the PfP/CAP framework have to be conducted bilaterally with the respective member states .
 For NATO, every cooperation programme has to go through a rigid bureaucratic evaluation process . For the EU, all cooperation programmes have to be evaluated by the EU .
 Kyiv bureaucracy is gradually improving on this. This lack of programme planning capability is common in Ukraine, but it is slowly improving .
 The European effort is mostly about reforming the Defence Ministry, its logistical apparatus, and its education structures .
 Poland started to train Ukrainian officers in 2015, but with the new government in Warsaw reviewing all its programmes, Ukrainians are not sure whether this will continue .
 Estonia is leading an expert group to create an NCO corps in the Ukrainian army . Estonia is also leading an Expert Group to create a NCO Corps in Ukraine .
 Professional NCOs greatly increase the effectiveness of platoons, squads and small teams in combat . Professional N COs increase discipline, morale and discipline among troops .
 Russia had introduced a new NCO corps during reforms initiated by Defence Minister Anatoly Serdyukov from 2007-2012 .
 The competitive advantage that Russian troops had compared to their Ukrainian counterparts was visible in the Donbas . Russian troops have a competitive advantage.
After the first encounters with regular Russian troops, the mismatch in tactics, planning, and leadership skills became obvious .
 Through combat experience, Ukrainian troops have improved on a tactical level . Ukrainian troops are now more prepared for combat than ever before .
 Lithuanian-Polish-Ukrainian brigade had been under discussion since 2008 . But only in 2014 was there enough political will to realise the project .
 In autumn 2015 the brigade was declared operational, and the headquarters opened in Lublin in January 2016 .
 The brigade will give one Ukrainian battalion and Ukrainian staff officers the opportunity to train and work alongside NATO members to learn combat tactics and planning procedures of Western armies .
Both Ukrainian and NATO experts agree that the defence reform is far from complete . Both say that the process is still not complete .
 Leadership training, tactical and operative procedures, and combat techniques still need to be improved . Leadership training and tactical and operational procedures, including combat techniques, still needs to be better .
 In Kyiv, the entire model of defence planning, procurement, and so on, needs to be brought up to Western standards . In Kyv, the whole model of defense planning and procurement, is needed to be changed .
General staff were independent from the Defence Ministry and reported directly to the president . For example, in the past the general staff wereindependent from the defence ministry .
 Many regulations will affect the public service, and are embedded in a wider process of reforming Ukraine's government . Many regulations are expected to affect public service.
 The lack of strategic thinking and understanding of strategic-military organisation was another. The lack in strategic thinking was another reason for a lack of understanding .
 Europe has not been part of Ukraine's biggest reform success story to date . Because of this, Europe hasn't seen a major success story in Ukraine .
 The question of delivering lethal aid was one of the most controversial topics regarding Ukraine . The issue of deliveringlethal aid was a controversial topic in Ukraine .
 The argument was that Russian soldiers being killed by NATO weapons would be the perfect pretext for Russia to escalate the war . The argument is that Russia is trying to escalate its war with NATO .
 Russia was waging a limited war for domestic reasons, holding back its war machine to keep the conflict simmering at a low heat . However, Russia was holding back the war machine for domestic purposes .
 The more efficient the Ukrainian army became, the quicker these restraints would curtail the Russian military campaign . Russia's more efficient army became.
 More serious arguments were made in discussions between some Central and Eastern European states and their Ukrainian counterparts in 2014 . The state of the defence sector, level of corruption and the practical ability to distribute goods were discussed .
 The fact that international donors were resorting to NGOs to distribute equipment was problematic, according to the authors .
 Non-lethal aid such as personal protection gear is freely available to civilians, and so can legitimately be distributed by NGOs .
Sale of weapons and munitions is restricted to governments under national and international law . But the sale of weapons is not allowed to be sold under international law.
 Ukraine has made progress in reforming the defence sector . But it would be wise for small, exposed nations to deliver such goods without a dedicated common policy on lethal aid .
Uniforms, personnel gear, protective equipment, and vehicles have improved the chance of survival for individual soldiers . There is still a high demand for one area of non-lethal aid — communication equipment .
Russian troops regularly jam and intercept Ukrainian military communications . Russian troops regularlyJam and intercept Ukraine's military communications.
 Cell-phone is highly vulnerable to jamming and deciphering . In many instances, commands are passed on by cell-phone, which is very vulnerable .
 During the initial stages of the war the Ukrainian army could do little to help the local population in the war zone, causing much bitterness and disappointment in eastern Ukraine . The fight for hearts and minds is crucial in the eastern Ukraine.
 Western armies could use their capabilities to rebuild damaged infrastructure, or provide food, medical, and other humanitarian support to the local population . Western armies, if employed to combat zones, could help rebuild infrastructure and provide food and medical support .
 CIMIC has become an important initiative to support the local population . In 2014, the Ukrainian army logistics system was totally broken and could not even provide basic services for its own troops .
 NATO also benefits from Ukraine's experience in the war against Russia . NATO also benefit from the experience in Ukraine's war with Russia .
 There is no other army that has fought a conventional enemy on the scale of the Russian military .
 The lessons learned from Ukraine are important for the West, which needs to be prepared for Russian military actions elsewhere on its periphery .
 Ukrainian National Security and Defence Council, with NATO, are setting up a study centre on hybrid warfare . The study will focus on best practices arising from experiences fighting Russia .
 Some nations also train bilaterally with Ukrainian Special Forces, learning lessons on Russian tactics from those who have fought in Donbas .
 Defence reform is the biggest success story of post-Maidan Ukraine . Some initiatives should be replicated and implemented in other branches of the bureaucracy .
Political resistance to reform was overcome in many instances, even if it was a hard fight . Above all, political resistance to reforms was overcome.
 If pressure is high enough – in the case of defence reforms it was existential – reforms will be implemented . If the pressure was high enough, reforms would be implemented, says the author .
As set out, competitive salaries, direct feedback on pre-implementation, and meritocratic promotions are key issues for reform areas .
 The EU-Ukraine Association Agreement was negotiated under President Viktor Yuschenko, and later President Yanukovych . Issues like human rights and the state of the judiciary also played a part .
 Initially the effort was tailored towards trade negotiations, but ultimately state-building became its central task . State-building is now the main focus of the effort .
 It was plain that the weak state and its institutions were a vulnerable point that could be exploited by Russia . Russia's weak state could be vulnerable point to exploit by Russia, it was plain .
 The EU wanted Ukraine to set out its own reform agenda, which considerably delayed the effort . At first, the EU wanted the Ukraine's own agenda .
In a time of war and political turmoil, few politicians had time to ponder the details . But in a time.
 When the first agenda was drafted, it comprised of 62 different areas of reform without any priorities, timelines, or precise working agendas . The first agenda included a list of 62 areas that had no priorities or timelines .
Local ownership is a principle of EU support, but there are many reasons why this should not strictly be applied in Ukraine .
 The EU’s politically correct hesitation hardened into a more robust approach eight months after Maidan .
 The Ukrainian government established the National Reform Council to coordinate the work of international donors and supporters . Dmytro Shymkiv was then deputy head of the presidential administration .
 The council was divided into 18 working groups, comprised of Ukrainian government officials, civil society representatives, members of parliament, and international donors . The council is comprised of government officials and civil society members .
 It was intended to review drafts, develop programmes, coordinate reform efforts across the government . It was also intended to evaluate progress on reforms .
 There are meetings twice a week, but it is very much down to the ministers to make best use of them .
 During Arseniy Yatesnyuk's government, there was little interest in the NRC from the presidential administration or the prime minister's office . The government regarded it as an attempt by the presidency to meddle in its affairs .
 As it was presided over by the deputy head of the presidential administration, it was the only institutional body in which the administration and government officials worked together .
 At least one decision has been carried out, but there haven't been many of them .
 In addition, there is little coordination between the different working groups . In addition to the lack of coordination, there's little coordination.
 If it were not for the EU's own internal coordination among member states and the EU representation, there would be no coordination at all .
 Non-EU donors often raise the issue of a lack of inter-group coordination . Those who are meeting at the European table have fewer concerns regarding cross-reform group coordination .
 Top officials like deputy ministers or heads of cabinets are often tasked with heading reform committees or steering groups within ministries .
Despite their personal support for reforms, they are unable to get into the details . They are generally so overburdened in their day jobs that they are not able to get in to the details.
 In 1989, Central and Eastern European states, special reform task forces were created in each ministry . They were created to coordinate and coordinate the reform of that ministry .
 No such groups have yet been formed in Ukraine, which is one reason for delays and interference with the reform process . No group has been formed.
 EU and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development intend to fund “project management officers’ in each ministry to coordinate reform efforts . However this is due to be addressed, as the EU and the EU plan to fund the officers .
 The NRC represents the first structured approach to reform . The effectiveness of the NRC varies depending on the willingness of the respective ministries to cooperate .
 The EU is responsible for donor coordination in four of the working groups, and shares responsibility with Sweden and Germany respectively in two other groups .
 Lithuania is in charge of coordinating NATO programmes in Ukraine . Lithuania is currently in charge in Ukraine.
 Lack of coordination between the different ministries, the presidential administration, and the government is recognised as a key shortfall . Lack of strategic planning on the Ukrainian side is recognised by Ukrainian and international experts .
 EU's push towards driving forward a reform agenda in Ukraine, rather than waiting for a plan to emerge from Kyiv . The importance of the EU’s push to drive forward a reforms agenda is important .
Ukrainian government appoints Ivanna Klympush-Tsintsadze as deputy prime minister for European integration . The new Ukrainian government is trying to address coordination shortfall .
 Her work to push the reform agenda within the government has been highly appreciated by European donors . She has been praised for her work in the government .
 The EU is pushing other member states to throw their efforts behind them . These four areas receive the most attention and support, according to the EU .
Three reform working groups, judicial reform, reform of the public administration, and decentralisation all depend on each other . But they are divided between three different working groups .
 If courts functioned properly in Ukraine, many of the issues around the failure of implementation could be solved .
 If agencies were not implementing new legislation, they could be held accountable . For example, if agencies weren't implementing new laws, they may be held responsible .
 The efficiency of the courts depends in many ways on the effective reform of the bureaucracy . On the other hand, the efficiency of courts depends on the effectiveness of the judiciary .
Decentralisation, shifting of administrative competences and resources to the oblast, county and municipal levels will change the operational procedures for Ukraine's public administration .
 All are central to creating a ‘new Ukraine’ that functions efficiently, runs according to the rule of law, and respects citizens’ rights . All are key to creating an “new Ukraine, that functions properly, run according to law, respects citizens.
 The Ukrainian legal system is not only over-centralised and over-regulated, it is also very rigid . It is very rigid. The Ukrainian law system is also over- centralised, over- regulated, and very strict .
 Many issues regulated through administrative decrees in other European states are regulated by law in Ukraine . Many issues that are regulated through Administrative decrees are regulated in Ukraine.
 Reforms are easily stalled, because one of the relevant laws is not amended . Reforms can be easily stalled because the relevant law is not changed .
 Reforms can easily be hijacked by attempts at political bargaining. And reforms can be hijacked.
 The Ukrainian parliament is one of the busiest in Europe . To read and vote on all the proposed legal reforms is simply beyond the capacity of the parliament .
 Since November 2014, the 8th Verkhovna Rada has submitted 6,755 draft pieces of legislation, out of which 1,333 have passed into law . The 8th Rada is in charge of legislation .
 To reform the portfolios of the ministries and disentangle their competences is an important step in streamlining and facilitating the work of government . To reform their portfolios is a key step to streamline and facilitate government work .
 Ukraine was one of the most Sovietised republics of the USSR . Moscow wanted to make sure that it remained Russian .
 Ukraine has inherited many of the worst traditions of Soviet administration, including administrative chaos .
 In Soviet times, duplicating competences and dividing them among ministries was a common practice . The practice was common in the Soviet times.
 In 2015, a new law on the cabinet of ministers could have paved the way for a wider re-organisation of the ministries, departments, and the distribution of competences .
 Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman's cabinet was formed during a time of governmental crisis . However, little change was made in the ministries .
 Public administration reform and the restructuring of the civil service is hampered, above all, by inflexible structures and non-competitive salaries . Public administration reforms are hampered, as well as the restructuring.
 The new Ukrainian Civil Service law regulates employment, rights, duties, and accountability of civil servants . It fits with international standards and practices and is praised by European experts . The new law was introduced in Ukraine in 2012 .
 Ukraine is too conservative, giving too much emphasis on protecting the rights and privileges of civil servants . It's difficult to reform the bureaucracy, given the current circumstances in Ukraine, it's too conservative .
 A more rigid contractual framework for civil servants increases their independence, as has been seen in most other developed states in Europe . The new framework protects civil servants from being sacked or transferred.
 It has proven difficult to fire bureaucrats, even when they are judged incompetent . It has been hard to fire.
 In the few ministries where people have been laid off, those affected have appealed in court . Those affected have been in court to appeal .
Fears of impending court cases make ministries worry about firing underperforming staff . The fear of court cases makes ministries worry.
 To prove incompetence in such a way that it can be held up in a court of law is difficult and time-consuming . To prove incompetent is difficult to do, says the judge .
 In a situation where entire ministries need to be restructured, this is hardly possible, says the author .
State employment was used in Ukraine as a means of subsidising people who would otherwise be unemployed . In many post-communist countries, state employment is used as a way to subsidise people .
 Officials are expected to perform, but this practice cannot be sustained . Now that officials will perform, this practice can't be sustained, officials say .
 Many ministries fear laying off surplus staff who can't be retrained would heighten social tensions in Ukraine .
 Under civil service reform, state employees will have to go through a re-admission exam every two years to ensure they are sufficiently competent and not corrupt .
 This should reduce the number of civil servants over time, but it will be at least four years until the process comes into effect . This will reduce the amount of civil service over time .
 The Civic Council on Oversight of Lustration will impact on further civil service reform . The creation of the Civic Council will also impact on civil service reforms .
 There are now other bodies and bureaucratic structures that can block the re-admission of incompetent bureaucrats and fire people .
 There are independent bodies to ensure that ministers can’t be held accountable for change . This adds an extra layer of accountability to the system, as even if ministers try to prevent change .
 Non-competitive salaries are one of the biggest problems of the current system. Non- competitive salaries are the biggest problem of current system .
 Neither civil servants, judges, prosecutors nor politicians are able to live on their salaries . Neither civil servant, judges or politicians can live on salaries .
 In the lower ranks, they support themselves by receiving other small kickbacks for skewing decisions . In other words, they earn extra on the side through corruption .
 Those higher up in the system are embedded in unofficial networks of oligarchs’ money . The system is known as ‘Oligarchs' money .
 These revenue streams are the real deciders of loyalty and the factions that operate in the political system . The political system is a source of revenue for many political parties .
 Such corrupt practices are fundamentally incompatible with the demands of the Maidan protesters, says the author . Such corrupt Practices are not political and legal accountability, he says .
 President Poroshenko and former Prime Minister Yatesnyuk were millionaires . They benefited from the system, and no attempt was made to change it . As both were millionaires, they benefited from it .
 An average civil servant earns the equivalent of around €100 to €150 per month . An averagecivil servant earns around €150 to €100 a month .
 Some ministries hired young, foreign-educated, reform-minded personnel for key positions to help implementing reforms . Some ministries hire young, Foreign-educated people for key roles .
 They took the jobs living on their partners’ or parents’ money, or even their savings . They took their jobs.
 Two years after Maidan, their resources are running low, and it is increasingly hard to hire qualified people for government jobs . The salaries of qualified people are so low, it is harder to hirequalified people for jobs .
 Andriy Pyvovarsky resigned in protest against low salaries . He was the former infrastructure minister, who was in charge of infrastructure .
 Lacking sponsors and refusing to engage in corruption, he had no option but to take a job in the private sector . Lacking other sponsors, he was forced to take the job in private sector.
 Both the U.S. and the EU have put pressure on Ukraine to increase salaries for public sector employees .
 The United States does not pay these salaries itself, with the exception of the new patrol police . The U.S. doesn't pay the salaries itself .
 SIDA – the Swedish government’s aid agency – has funded reformist officials and top bureaucrats in the Economy Ministry .
 Many Ukrainian and international private donors regarded the approach as a success . This approach was regarded by many Ukrainian and International private donors as a successful approach .
 To raise the salaries at the highest level of Ukraine's administration would cost an estimated €40 million per year . To raise salaries to competitive levels would cost around €40m per year.
This sum could be raised from the EU, and by restructuring the national budget . This sum could also be raised by restructuring national budget, or raising it from EU .
 There is no systematic approach to this issue – neither from Kyiv nor from Brussels . But for the time being, there is no systematically approach to it .
 The overall support package for hiring experts and programme officers is worth about €100 million . Some of which will be used to increase salaries for other officials .
 Kyiv and Brussels can't agree on the delivery of this support, as the EU demands strict oversight and a say in how these funds are allocated . Kyiv refuses to grant the funds, something which Kyiv refused to grant .
 The success of the public administration reforms has been underestimated, says Ukrainian and international experts . Still, to many Ukrainian experts, the success of these reforms have been underestimated .
 Many steps will take at least another year to take effect, but will change the Ukrainian public administration in the long term . Many steps are expected to take place in the next year .
 The coordination of security sector reform through the NRC is a very slow process . NRC has been criticised for its lack of transparency in the security sector .
 The patrol and municipal police, investigative police, secret service and prosecutorial service are to be reformed at once . progress has only been made in very few, isolated fields .
 The new patrol police, introduced in 2015, was an American concept also applied in Georgia .
 The United States funds competitive salaries for the new police . Corruption has diminished in the U.S.
 The old ‘militia’ was one of the most corrupt bodies in Ukraine . It is one of most visible and popular reforms, especially because of the old “militian’s’d. It is a popular and visible reforms.
 The details of the programme were not negotiated with Kyiv for the sake of local ownership, but were implemented as Washington suggested .
 There remain issues of sustainability, but this illustrates that programmes initiated by international donors can effectively initiate reforms .
 EU and U.S. are trying to embed the new patrol police in a newly reformed communal police force .
 Legislation on the law enforcement reform has hardly been implemented, or even adopted . Many key administrative decrees and new procedures are not yet in place .
 The current laws on reform of the law enforcement sector leave the border police and the financial police untouched .
 The degree and means of cooperation between these new forces and the prosecutor’s office, as well as the new local police .
 Civil society experts also criticise the lack of oversight and control over the new law enforcement agencies .
 In the past, these structures were hotbeds of inefficiency and waste, says author . They were intended to offer privileges to compensate for inadequate salaries, he says .
 A general complaint about the Interior Ministry is the lack of transparency of the reform process . A lack of involvement of independent experts is also a general complaint .
 Many of the experts interviewed for the study complained that there are no law enforcement officers with practical experience involved in drafting the reform agenda or working within the reform working groups .
 Interior Minister Arsen Avakov is resistant to advice, and reluctant to adopt new ideas . Many experts and civil society activists say the Interior Minister is reluctant to accept new ideas.
Civil society involvement in security sector reform is low and often merely for show . Civil society involvement is often just for show, and it's often for show.
 The exception to this rule is the re-admission of local police officers who apply for the new communal police . The exception is the process of re-Admission.
 The new communal police will report to communal or county authorities rather than the central police bureau . The new police bureau will be based in the city of Manchester, England .
 The use of this re-admission instrument still depends on the province and the local community . Comments on this process, from the press, experts, and polls have been positive .
 demand for reform of the police is particularly high, since they were one of the most abusive arms of the old system . Demand for reform is especially high.
 The lack of transparency, the disciplinary oversight, independent disciplinary commissions and independent bodies investigating the abuse of power within the Interior Ministry are particularly disturbing for the reform movement .
 The security sector has a clear catalogue of competences, and removes administrative overlaps between the different services within the security sector .
 community police are becoming a service-oriented modern force. Reforming community policing with new training and leadership techniques . New training and training techniques are being used to make community police more service-orientated .
 Ukraine's vibrant domestic politics, such training is needed to prevent unnecessary escalation of demonstrations . Ukraine is a country with a vibrant political scene and vibrant political culture .
 This will make it more difficult for Russian provocateurs to derail peaceful protests . This will also make it harder for provocateur to derail protests, this will also be harder for them to do so .
 Ukraine's police and other security service personnel through training schemes, and improvements to career paths, contracts, employment, and salaries. Improving the quality of Ukraine’s police, other security services personnel .
 Reform of criminal investigations, to end bureaucratic overlaps and to enhance inter-service cooperation and exchange of information .
 The EUAM is also involved in reform of border security, customs, the secret service and the judiciary . The European Union is involved in a smaller scale.
 Other donors, particularly the U.S. and Canada, take the lead on these topics .
 The EUAM is due to open offices in Lviv and Kharkiv to evaluate and support police reform in those regions . EUAM will also evaluate the police reform of those regions in the region .
 On paper, Ukraine is a highly centralised state, but actual administrative practices in the regions differ greatly .
 EUAM is the only body allowed by the European Council to open offices elsewhere . EU staff in Ukraine generally recognise that a presence outside Kyiv is needed .
 It is too early to assess the new regional offices’ impact on the work of the mission, but it will be important to monitor this and draw lessons for other support efforts .
 As many law enforcement agencies are conducted outside Kyiv, supervision requires a presence beyond the capital . The work of many agencies is predominantly conducted outside the capital.
 EU-US cooperation is the main driver behind the international support effort . There is an effective division of labour on programmes and projects, particularly with the US .
 reform of the security sector is hampered by bureaucratic obstruction and a lack of political will . As in other sectors, reform of security sector has been hampered by bureaucracy .
 There are individuals in the Interior Ministry that are pushing forward the reform agenda . However, there are individuals who are pushing for reform in the ministry .
 European officials have found that they require a trial-and-error process to identify key reformist officials on each project .
 Some of the bigger EU member states that are conducting individual missions and programmes on security sector reform lack the experience of Kyiv’s bureaucracy to find reformists on their own .
 The EUAM has facilitated bilateral programmes of individual member states to navigate these obstacles .
 These include a Romanian project on Ukraine's prison system, a Swedish project with Ukraine's intelligence services, and a British programme on asset recovery .
 Italy and France are seen as the biggest stallers of EU efforts to reform Ukraine's security sector . The two countries are seen to be the biggest stallsers of the EU's effort to reform the security sector.
 To some in Kyiv this clumsiness is interpreted as Russia-appeasement – which it is not . To some, it is considered Russia-Appeasement, which is not.
 Germany, Sweden, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Finland and Finland are the most active contributors . Canada, Turkey, Switzerland and Norway also make positive contributions .
 The Ukrainian secret service is another body whose reform has yet to begin – or even to be planned . The secret service's reform is not yet planned .
 It functions outside the normal law, with very weak oversight but significant powers to gather information and to play a role in ordinary investigations . It is not a normal investigation, but it has significant powers.
 The SBU acts as an intelligence, counter-intelligence, and intelligence-oversight body at the same time . It acts as a counter- intelligence, intelligence, and Intelligence-overseen body .
 It may supervise and monitor the activities of other security agencies and anti-corruption-agencies . It may also supervise or monitor other security agency activities .
 There is suspicion that the agency also protects vested interests from prosecution . This vulnerability coincides with broad powers and lack of oversight .
 Key legislation has not yet been implemented, though key legislation has been passed .
 Constitutional amendments are currently being assessed by the constitutional court . Constitutional amendments on reform of the judiciary are being assessed .
 There is a vibrant discussion about the extent of political influence on the judiciary . There is also a vibrant debate about the influence of political power in the judiciary.
 Both the president and the parliament use their far-reaching powers to appoint judges to influence verdicts and settlements in their favour . Both use their powers to influence decisions and settlements .
 Despite a constitutional overhaul of many paragraphs regarding the judiciary, there has been too little change on this . There has been little change in the judiciary since the Supreme Court's decision to make changes .
 Former Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin dismissed prosecutors who dared to investigate corruption by Poroshenko allies in spring 2016 . Shokin's dismissal illustrates this problem, says former Prosecutor General .
 The constitutional amendments do not break from the Soviet tradition of a strong hierarchy within the judiciary . In addition, the constitutional amendments don't break from a strong structure within the courts .
 President can appoint key allies to senior positions, who can use their positions to achieve political control of the entire system . The president can therefore appoint key ally to senior position, which can also be used to gain political control .
 Granting the Anti-Corruption Court greater freedom from this hierarchy is a key demand of reformists .
 Lustration and re-admission of judges will be in September 2016 . The process is designed to ensure that all judges are free from corruption and fit to serve in the public interest .
Too few investigations, not enough legal and disciplinary consequences for bad behaviour, and weak disciplinary oversight . There are too few investigations and too few disciplinary consequences, and there are too many investigations .
 There is no special disciplinary commission within the judiciary as there is in most Western countries . The lack of competitive salaries amplifies the problem of the judiciary .
 Venice Commission of the Council of Europe comments on draft legislation . European support for this reform process predominantly comes from Venice Commission .
 The EU has linked progress in reform of the judiciary to key benefits such as visa liberalisation . The EU also has linked reform of judiciary to the benefits of visa liberalising .
 Ukraine has fulfilled all of the EU’s requirements for visa liberalisation . But domestic squabbles in key member states prevent the EU from moving ahead .
 This is particularly corrosive to EU efforts, given the pivotal importance of judicial reform for the overall process of transforming Ukraine . This is especially corrosive for EU efforts to reform Ukraine .
 The postponement of the visa liberalisation process has discredited the carrot-and-stick method as a tool for driving reform .
 National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine to investigate cases of corruption, monitor electronic declarations and officials' income . Special Anti-corruption Prosecutor’s Office supervises the NABU and brings the cases to court .
 The Bureau might highlight some cases, but only a working reformed judiciary throughout the country can reduce systemic corruption . The Bureau may highlight some Cases, but some cases may be overlooked .
 The Special Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office is still struggling to gain independence from political influence and from the Prosecutor General’'s Office .
 Cooperation between the prosecutor-service and the NABU was stalled for political reasons for quite some time . It is not as efficient as it could be, and it's not as effective as it should be .
 Prosecutors missed the chance to demand the extradition of key Yanukovych figures and officials, and recover stolen assets, prosecutors say .
The prosecutor service failed to produce extradition requests that were up to international standards . The prosecutor service did not produce extradition request that were not up to International standards .
 This was a huge setback for the government’s public image, as the population suspects them of protecting operatives from the old system . This was the government's public image.
 More than two years after Maidan, anti-corruption reforms have still barely begun to take effect . More than 2 years after the Maidan revolution, the reforms have yet to begin to take place .
 The key areas that need reform are public procurement, the media, the political system, the judiciary, and the judiciary .
 Some steps already taken, such as the new electronic public procurement system, have been a success and are yielding results . Some steps have been taken, but others have not been successful .
 New laws on party financing and privatisation still need to be implemented . New systems for the electronic declaration of assets still needs to be introduced .
 The issue of public servants’ salaries has not yet been systematically addressed. Importantly, the issue is not yet systematically addressed by public servants .
 Reform of Ukraine’s tortuous regulations is another key strand of the fight against corruption .
Financial and tax regulations, anti-corruption laws, and business laws are overly complicated and full of loopholes . The financial and tax rules, and anti- corruption laws, are too complicated, too complicated .
 Large-scale corruption presents a much greater challenge. While low-level corruption is easy to track, large-scale, systemic corruption presents much greater challenges .
 Specialised agencies with professional investigators are needed to tackle and out instances of top-level corruption .
 The new Special Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office can't fill this void . It is insufficiently separate from the hierarchy in the prosecution service as a whole, as well as being understaffed, and lacking access to files .
So far, investigative journalism, increased transparency of public finances, and pressure from the public and international partners are the only counterbalance to systemic corruption . So far, Investigative journalism has increased transparency and increased transparency.
 There is competition between the 15 different agencies, offices and bureaucratic institutions .
 Information monopolies are seen as the most powerful weapon in these bureaucratic wars . Information is rarely shared, to the detriment of investigations, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The failed reform of the prosecutorial service, and the failure of prosecutors to investigate asset theft and corruption during the Yanukovych era, is embittering people . The failure to investigate corruption and asset theft during the Yanukovich era is embittersing people.
 The problem has been ignored for too long by the president and government, and both are fast losing public support . The president and the government are both fast losing support, according to the president .
 Reform of public finance and procurement has long been on the agenda of the EU . It is a major risk area for corruption, as it is a key risk area.
 Sweden and Germany have tried to push several Ukrainian governments to implement reform . But without much success, they have failed to achieve much success .
After Maidan, public pressure for change was high, as was pressure from the international community . After Maidan,. public pressure was high.
 A new wave of Western money, credit, and assistance arrived, and international donors started to look more carefully at how their money was being spent . The money is being spent by international donors .
 The biggest success so far has been the introduction of an electronic tender and procurement system called ProZorro . The system is based on a system known as Prozorro.
 The system makes tender processes and procurement much more transparent and efficient . The system is more transparent than ever .
 Ukrainian and international experts say the system works reasonably well . It is a huge leap forward against corruption – particularly at the local level .
 A large number of corrupt deals at the local government level were organised through rigged public tenders, which is now much more difficult to do . The corruption is now more difficult.
 After the financial crisis it made its public procurement system electronic, simplified it, and made it more transparent .
 Ukraine reviewed recent experiences of southern EU countries in reforming public finances . Ukraine judged Portuguese approach to procurement to be the most suitable .
 ProZorro also provides open and real-time data on all public spending, down to each individual hospital or kindergarten . The company also provides real time data on each hospital and kindergarten .
 Each has to register their spending on a single, publicly accessible platform, effectively centralising all data . The platform is available on a public platform .
 The next step, currently being planned, will be to create regulatory authorities to monitor the online declarations made by public servants and officials . The current plan is to monitor public servants' online declarations .
 Finance Minister Natalie Jaresko strongly supported the idea . This idea came from civil society — particularly NGOs that international donors use to monitor compliance with financial transparency requirements .
Too few people – even journalists – know about the new system . It is becoming increasingly difficult to hide waste and graft from the public .
 It is only a matter of time until Ukraine’s media and NGOs learn how to use these new instruments to put pressure on those in power .
Public procurement reform is making progress against low-level corruption, but it is a much greater challenge . State-owned enterprises, especially in state-owned businesses, are at risk of corruption, say officials .
State-owned companies have become more important for corruption networks since Maidan . Financial dealings of state agencies have come under increasing scrutiny since the Maidan.
 Few of those enterprises are run on a commercial basis, with many employing their workers on public contracts .
Political leaders are usually managed by associates of political leaders . They reshuffle the governing board and appoint affiliates to CEO posts in order to tap into the wealth of companies .
 The large-scale corruption organised via state-run companies poisons the entire political machine . Low-level corruption hampers the public administration on a day-to-day basis .
 It buys loyalties, it influences decisions, and it warps the political process in favour of certain interest groups . It buysLoyalties and influences decisions. It warps political process and warps a political process .
 The "Donetsk Clan" within the Economy Ministry became infamous for using state-run enterprises as a money laundering machine . Former President Yanukovych was affiliated with the clan .
After Maidan, Ukraine's new political actors clamoured for access to it . But after Maidan's election, Ukraine’s new political actor clamour for access .
 Aivaras Abromavičius tried his best to reform this quagmire by either restructuring state-owned enterprises as independent bodies with reduced state control or by privatising them .
 There was enormous resistance from the ministry, the presidential administration, and parts of the parliament . But there was enormous Resistance from the government and the parliament.
 The restructuring of the national oil and gas company Naftogaz was demanded by international donors . The state-owned railways was much more difficult than the oil company .
 Quarrels about the appointment of new CEOs finally led to Abromavičius's resignation . Abromvičius resigned as a result of his resignation .
 Ihor Kononenko is deputy head of the Poroshenko bloc . He was pushing for a list of political appointees to be made CEOs in certain state-owned enterprises .
 The crisis triggered by the decision ultimately led to the downfall of Prime Minister Yatesnyuk in April 2016 .
 The new government that replaced him has made little effort to solve this problem . The government is led by a close affiliate of the president .
 A programme to reform the governance of state-owned enterprises was initiated by the previous government to disguise the absence of privatisation in the restructuring of these state- owned enterprises .
 One of the major drivers of oligarchs’ influence is their control over the media . The media is one of the main drivers of the oligarchs' influence .
 More than 50 percent of Ukrainian population cite the TV as their main source of news and commentary . More than half of the Ukrainian population cites the TV for their main sources of news.
 The reform of Ukraine’s media is an important task, both for improving the quality of political debate and to counter Russian propaganda .
 Ukraine's public broadcasting network is helping to reform and modernise Ukraine’s public broadcasting system . It also supports alternative non-oligarch funded media outlets and investigative journalism .
 Alternative, non-oligarch owned media outlets are replacing the traditional media with some audiences, particularly among the younger middle-class population .
 Social media accounts of politicians and journalists have built up a base of followers that is comparable in numbers to conventional media outreach .
 Independent newspapers and TV stations receive funds from the EU, Scandinavian member states, and the Visegrád Fund – run by the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia .
 The ratings are much lower than the major TV outlets, but they have a big impact in shaping discussions among opinion leaders .
 Independent media have a larger reach among younger, urban, digitally-connected Ukrainians . Independent media has an outsized impact on young, urban Ukrainians .
Well-networked, they organise rallies to protest against corruption scandals . They feed into a network of civil-society and watchdog organisations .
 Investigative journalism is at times the only effective check on state institutions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 European funding in this field is critical for the survival of Ukrainian democracy . European funding is crucial for Ukrainian democracy, according to the EU .
 Mainstream media outlets are generally owned by oligarchs, though their ownership is hidden by complicated schemes of holdings . The ownership of media outlets is often hidden in complicated schemes.
 The extent of which these channels are able to steer public opinion is questionable . But the extent to which they can steer public opinions is questionable.
 Kolomoisky owns the most watched channels in Ukraine . He was still unable to prevent the government removing him from the post of governor of Dnipro province .
 channels spread a negative attitude towards politics in general – depicting all politicians as corrupt and self-serving . However, the channels spread the negative attitude to politics .
 The channels attack each and every political initiative, and focus on private scandals rather than political issues . The channels focus on each and each political initiative.
 populist politicians toe the same line as the media, causing an upsurge in widespread populist belief . These things all resonate further when populist politicians are seen as populist politicians .
 Ukraine passed the framework law on public broadcasting in 2014 and the law in March 2015 gave Ukraine at least on paper . The law incorporates best practices from Europe.
 The reforms involved merging 32 independent companies and 28 regional stations into this one company . The reforms involve merging 32independent companies and 29 regional stations .
 A lot of bureaucratic resistance had to be overcome, and some issues were settled in court . Some issues were resolved in court, but others were settled.
 The whole company is overstaffed, with about 8,300 employees in total . Only about 1,400 actually work in broadcasting .
Being state-run, salaries are not competitive with those of private TV channels . So it is hard to project an image of professionalism or attract top talent .
 It will take at least three years before current plans for restructuring are concluded . The company will be restructured in the next three years .
 The public TV network is receiving a budget of some €200,000 from the government . At present, the public TV station is receiving some € 200,000 .
Employees remain public servants and the same barriers to firing staff exist as in other parts of government . As long as this continues, employees are public servants, and the barriers remain .
 The advisory board of the network has been formed, with nine members elected from civil society, and eight representing political parties .
 There are plans to charge about 50 Hryvnia a month per household to make the station independent from state funding .
 The introduction of fees for public media has been postponed after inflation shocks of 2014/2015 and the increase in gas prices .
Supporting the implementation of the laws on public broadcasting is proving to be more difficult than supporting drafting the law . State-run outlets are being transformed into a single broadcasting company .
 The Council of Europe and the EU were active in advising the government on the law . There has been little follow through on implementation of the new law .
 The U.S. is not very interested in public broadcasting, because it does not exist in their country . So the political work on the matter falls to the Europeans .
 There isn't enough funding to replace old Soviet-style programmes with attractive new ones . TV network is concentrating on programmes that require it to employ as few resources as possible .
 International donors provide about $1. million in funding for specific programmes . International donors give about $2.5 million in each year for specific projects .
 The BBC is the biggest supporter of the BBC, contributing about $400,000 in total . Among the European broadcasting companies the BBC is biggest supporter .
 Greater certainty about future of funding would help the restructuring of the companies . Greater certainty would help restructuring of companies .
 For the moment, the funding of unbiased news sources are donors’ top priority . For the time, funding is the top priority for the moment .
 The collapse in the ratings of regional outlets has facilitated their reform . Local oligarchs and politicians care less about defending their influence over them, says the author .
 Ukrainian channels, which can only be received through terrestrial analogue antennas, are frequently jammed or detonated by saboteurs . This is because Ukrainian channels are only received through analogue antennas .
 The United States has donated former military mobile transmitters to support efforts to continue broadcasting . The U.S. has donated the transmitters.
 One of the demands of the Maidan protests was to restore Ukraine’s 2004 constitution . Yanukovych was trying to strengthen his own position in power .
 “constitutional reform’ in Ukraine usually involves simply backtracking on Yanukovych’s changes, rather than carrying out far-reaching reform . “ constitutional reform” in Ukraine often involves just backtracking.
 The previous constitution had major problems that have plagued Ukraine since its independence . There is public discussion about whether more radical change is needed .
 Most constitutional amendments passed or currently under review are small-scale fixes that concern reform of the judiciary and decentralisation . However, for the time being this has not resulted in action, and most constitutional amendments have not been passed .
 Ukraine's overly complicated election law is a key piece of legislation where change is needed . Ukraine’s overly complicated elections law is one of the most complex laws in the country .
 regional and national elections took place in October 2014 and 2015 respectively . However, the few changes that did take place before the elections were merely cosmetic .
Single-seat tickets for the parliament benefit bigger parties, which are particularly vulnerable to oligarchic influence . Currently, the single-seat ticket for the Parliament benefits bigger parties .
 support from oligarchs is a pre-requisite to win, especially in the east of the country . Support from oligarch is aPre-requisite for success in the East of the nation .
 Once oligarch-dependent members of parliament are installed they block reform legislation . They trade their vote for support on certain issues and concessions in other fields, such as privatisation .
 Oligarchs pull strings to prevent anti-corruption efforts, or preserve the status quo in the judiciary and bureaucracy . Oligarchy pull strings.
 Creating a new, simpler, and more transparent electoral system has been one of the goals of all post-Maidan governments . The new electoral system will be a more transparent system, according to the government .
 There is no blueprint of what a new system could look like. However, even now there are no plans for a new generation of technology .
 Early elections would hardly improve the stability of the governmental coalition or the quality of political representation . Early elections are discussed at various stages of the political crisis .
 election campaigns in Ukraine have traditionally been relatively expensive, hurting the chances of parties without oligarchic backing . Furthermore, election campaigns are traditionally expensive .
 New provisions on party financing and transparency were approved in July 2016 . However, new provisions on parties receiving public funds in proportion to their representation were approved .
 So far, only parties that entered parliament in the 2014 national elections will receive funding . It will make it difficult for new, reform-minded parties to get funding .
 It could also force reformers that are now in parliament to join forces. On the other hand, it could force the reformers to join the parliament .
 Decentralisation is the other pressing issue in reforming the Ukrainian state . The Ukrainian state has been in turmoil for years.
 Ukraine has chosen the Polish model, which means that, though laws are made in the capital, regional governments have the freedom to decide how to implement them . The Polish model is similar to that of Ukraine .
 They are responsible for administrating and implementing policies, and running schools, hospitals, hospitals and other public services . They are also responsible for running schools and hospitals .
 Everything in Ukraine was highly centralised until recently. From a European perspective this may not seem particularly dramatic, but everything in Ukraine is very centralised .
 The central Treasury paid every cleaning lady in every town hall in Ukraine . Even administrative decrees such as notifications on construction work were issued .
 There was no local management, and no right to decide on local affairs . There wasno local management. There were no local managers, and there was no right for local affairs.
Decentralisation is important not only to create a more efficient Ukrainian administration but to increase the sense of ownership and responsibility . Decentralization is also important to create more efficient administration .
 In the past, average citizens were often disengaged from politics, as there was a feeling that local affairs couldn't be changed anyway .
 Initially, decentralisation enjoyed high levels of support from the government, parliament, and the international community .
 constitutional amendments were linked to the law that gave special status to separatist areas under the Minsk agreement . Because of this wide support, the amendments on decentralisation were linked.
 It was thought that the lack of domestic support for Minsk could be overcome with the promise of decentralisation . Minsk was thought to have a lack of support for the city .
 Protests and harsh public critique of the proposed special-status law were put on hold .
 decentralisation means local administrations must develop planning and management capabilities . Local administrations must build up a stock of experts and additional governance structures .
 EU launched the programme ‘U-Lead’ with €100 million allocated in funding . To support this, the EU launched “U- lead’s” programme “ U-Lead.’
 The U.S. Agency for International Development launched its own initiative, Decentralization Offering Better Results and Efficiency . $50 million was allocated to assist local authorities .
 The Treasury has increased local administration budgets by 40 percent . This international support is supplemented by a 40 percent increase in local administration budget .
 There have never been any bodies that planned, decided and managed programmes on their own . Training is the top priority for many bodies .
Few operatives within the Ministry for Regional Development speak English . Few operatives in the Ministry of Regional Development are able to speak English.
 USAID has set up 24 regional offices with support from Europe . To facilitate training, USAID sets up 24 offices in Europe .
 Sweden has created a task force in the Finance Ministry to facilitate fiscal decentralisation . This is still in its early stages, but this is in the early stages .
 Some states, as yet unnamed, have developed programmes without consulting or informing others . But coordination between the US, the EU, the Council of Europe and some European states has been smooth .
 The biggest obstacle to decentralisation is the lack of coordination between the Ukrainian ministries . But the biggest obstacle is a lack of cooperation between the ministries .
Disentangling state bodies from the post-Soviet chaos of competences and accountabilities has delayed reform, despite the fact that decentralisation is supported by Prime Minister Groysman and others .
 Ministry for Regional Development reached out to the relevant other ministries in early 2015 to gather information on infrastructure in each province .
 The new regional governments could brief the new governments on their role and tasks . They did this so that they could brief them on their roles and tasks.
Education and Health Ministries unable to say exactly how many facilities are in each region and how many people are employed . Staff in hospitals, schools, and other facilities are paid by Finance Ministry .
 The Finance Ministry was then occupied with restructuring the banking system and keeping Ukraine solvent . It had little time or resources to gather the necessary data .
 Some ministries have been reluctant to cooperate with decentralisation reforms . Some ministries, particularly the Health Ministry, have been unwilling to cooperate .
 The Education Ministry wants to complete its reform of the education system first . Meanwhile, the Education Ministry is seeking to complete the reform first .
 Both ministries fear regional governance will interfere with their restructuring efforts . Both fear that regional governance is interfering with their efforts .
 Neither has received much foreign assistance or advice, and at the highest level, personal rivalries between officials on decentralisation .
 The topic of decentralisation has become ideologically fraught because it was linked to the special status law according to the Minsk accords . The topic has become politically fraught because of the special law .
 Groysman has always been open to suggestions on decentralisation . There is hope he will be able to push this agenda forward even further as prime minister .
 Ukraine's government gives incentives to voluntarily merge smaller communities . To reduce the number of communities and raions in Ukraine, the government gave incentives .
 The progress of decentralisation reforms depends greatly on the participation and mobilisation of those who live in the countryside .
 EU and USAID programmes to assist decentralisation in the communities play a vital role in raising awareness about the reform and how it will affect citizens .
 Kyiv prescribes reforms, while most communities are faced with the difficult task of implementing them . Most communities face difficult task, and sometimes even even understanding them .
 A few cities and provinces are making active use of the new laws . But most are just trying to adapt as best they can .
 Many Ukrainians see decentralisation as a tool of ‘federalisation’ and hence capitulation to the separatists . The government’s communication on this issue has been poor, and many Ukrainians say decentralisation is a tool.
 Attempts to explain the reform to ordinary people have come late, and are still insufficient . The reform is still insufficient, according to experts .
 Local politicians fear for the loss of their powers, and campaign against them . The lack of information about what the reforms would entail made many local politicians fear .
 decentralisation will lead to many schools, hospitals, and other public services being closed . At the same time, it is inevitable that decentralisation is also inevitable .
 The Soviet Union's surplus of facilities inherited from the Soviet Union is unsustainable . But this is an overdue development, as maintaining the surplus is unsustainable, it says .
 decentralisation runs the risk of looking like a centrally imposed austerity programme, rather than a means of local empowerment . If this restructuring is not accompanied by a plan for regional development, decentralisation is a risk .
 The war in the Donbas, deteriorating relations with Moscow, has hit Ukraine hard . The contraction of the Russian market has hit the country hard . Russia's economic sanctions against Ukraine have hit the Ukraine hard.
Ukrainian economy is suffering from structural weakness and over-reliance on obsolete industries . The crisis only put a spotlight on the structural weakness of the Ukrainian economy, says the writer .
 The crisis and economic shock were exacerbated by the war and by Moscow's hostile behaviour . The weaknesses of Ukraine's economy had already been unveiled by the 2008 financial crisis and subsequent collapse of the steel price .
 EU standards in order to tap into export markets beyond post-Soviet space would have been necessary regardless of geopolitical situation . Economic restructuring, diversification, and adoption of EU standards would have had been necessary, says the author .
After Maidan, an annual budget deficit of 10 percent of the GDP was forecast . After Maidan the annual deficit was forecast of 10% of GDP .
Few creditors would lend money with reasonable interest rates. This would have been unsustainable under any circumstances, but particularly at a time of political uncertainty .
 If its money had been invested, invested, and taxed in a more efficient way, it would have a prospering economy .
 For this to be a reality in future, deeper structural reform is required, says the author . But for this, he says, for a future, it is needed to be more structural reform .
Before giving Ukraine access to international loan facilities, the International Monetary Fund demanded drastic reform . Ukraine was given access to the IMF's loan facilities .
 Among the most urgent was the restructuring of the National Bank of Ukraine and of state-owned gas supplier Naftogaz . A reform of the financial sector was also needed .
 Ukraine is at war. That was more than the total expenditure on national defence . Ukraine has spent more than any other country .
 Few SOEs are easy to privatise, and most are enormously inefficient and unproductive . Few SOE are hard-to- privatise .
Consumer gas prices increased to market level after winter of 2014/2015 . Despite big challenges, the gas market was liberalised and consumer gas prices rose .
 A special fund was introduced to take care of underprivileged consumers, particularly pensioners . The fund was designed to help those in need .
 The reform was difficult for poorer members of society, but widely regarded a success . The reform has been widely regarded as a success by many .
 This does not mean that the reform of Ukraine's energy sector is complete . However, this doesn't mean that it is complete, according to the government .
 Naftogaz has been opened to foreign investment, but the coal sector is still dependent on government subsidies . The coal sector remains dependent on the government's subsidies .
 The problems with reforming the coal sector were compounded by the war in the Donbas . The Donbas is a region well-known for its coal industry .
 Some of Ukraine’s largest mines have also split off from the state . In the long run, it was questionable how long the mines in the Donbas could be maintained .
 The European Commission was also key in brokering the “winter packages’ – contracts between Naftogaz and Gazprom over pricing, means of payment, and delivery of natural gas .
This deal was key to guaranteeing Ukraine’s gas supply during that period . This deal was also key to guarantee Ukraine's gas supply in that period.
 Kyiv’s medium-term goal is still to become independent from Russian gas sources through increased production and reverse flow substitutes .
 Slovakia is the biggest supplier, at 14. billion cubic metres per year, followed by Hungary at 6.6 billion cubic meters .
 Budapest suspended flows in 2014 due to Russian pressure. BCM per year, though Budapest suspended flow in 2014 .
 Poland will expand its export capacity in the years to come, up to 8 BCM per year . Poland will be able to expand its exports by up to eight BCM a year .
 Reduced consumption due to decreased industrial production and increased domestic production will make up the difference, says Ukraine energy independence leader . Reduced consumption and increased production will help Ukraine's energy independence .
 The reduction of gas imports, competitive pricing and gas diversification have stabilised Ukraine’s finances and improved its resilience .
 Naftogaz needs to be privatised, and competition on the market increased . But to finalise gas market reform, Naftogsaz also needs to become privatised .
 The liberalisation of energy pricing would give Europe opportunities to further support Ukraine's energy transition, particularly in the field of renewables . Europe would be able to support Ukraine in the future .
Bio-gas is a by-product of Ukraine’s huge agricultural sector . Europe has not yet come up with a coherent plan or programme to support this .
 The other big structural reform demanded immediately by the IMF was in Ukraine's financial sector . The IMF also demanded immediate structural reform in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian banks ordered to carry out “stress tests’ to assess their liquidity and financial health . After Maidan, the National Bank of Ukraine ordered Ukrainian banks to conduct the tests .
 The state of Ukraine's financial sector was much worse than anticipated . The results were bleak, and the state of the financial sector is much worse .
 The NBU was given increased powers to inspect, order tests, and if necessary, liquidate banks . In the aftermath, the NBU had increased powers.
 Ukraine's banking sector has been on a slow but steady course towards stabilisation . Since then, Ukraine's banks have been on slow and steady course to stabilise .
 Banks are required to balance their capital reserve ratio by the end of 2016 . Banks must build up capital reserves of at least 10 percent after three years .
 The supervision regulations have been brought in line with EU standards . The deposit guarantee has been established – a requirement under the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area agreement .
 International donors have helped to create a deposit guarantee fund . The EBRD is particularly involved in the financial securities committee .
 Recommendations and analysis from the United States Treasury and the EU Directorate-General for Financial Stability provided further guidelines for international donors and other financial institutions .
 IMF and the World Bank have implemented their programmes in their respective programmes . These recommendations have been implemented by the IMF and World Bank in their own programmes .
 UK and Germany are active on financial sector reform, having implemented bilateral restructuring and rescue programmes. Bilaterally, the UK and German are active in the financial sector .
 The Vienna Initiative supports Ukraine’s efforts to implement common standards on foundation, ownership, management, oversight and control of private banks .
 The reform and restructuring of Ukraine's state-owned banking system is one of the biggest EU projects in Ukraine . The reform was supervised by the EU Directorate for Financial Stability .
 Under Yanukovych, state-owned banks were primarily used to lend funds to the president’s cronies . Much of this money is now gone for good .
 This systemic abuse of funds has led the sector into deep financial troubles, says the author . "This systemic abuse has led to deep financial problems," he says .
 After Naftogaz was reformed, state-owned banks became the biggest sinkhole for government money . State-owned Banks became the largest sinkhole in the country .
 In 2015, 20 to 25 billion Hryvnia had to be poured into the sector, and another 16 billion will be needed in 2016 . In 2016, the sector will need more than 20 billion more than that .
 These sums will just cover the banks’ losses, and will not be used for any active programmes . The sums will only be used to cover the bank’s losses .
 In 2008, 5 to 6 percent of Ukraine's GDP had to be used to re-liquidate state-owned banks . The collapse of the steel market led to the collapse of its steel market .
 To maintain the banks in their current state would mean prolonging a financial liability for the government without gaining any benefit .
 Two of the state-owned banks will be restructured and put under new management . The banks are regarded as economically important and will be put under a new management.
 Two have been shut down, another will be shut down by the end of the year, and the rest are due to be sold . The rest of the rest will be sold, with the rest being sold .
 Ukraine can't sell government assets below book value, which is hardly realistic in the case of these banks .
 Unless Ukraine makes an exception for them, the situation will drag on . Ukraine is not expected to make an exception .
 The EBRD is trying to assess whether it would be possible to reform and restructure these banks . It is also trying to sell them at a profit after five years .
 New regulations increase the minimum capital needed to set up a new private bank . They are intended to make it more difficult for oligarchs to create banks and use them to get loans .
 In the past, oligarchs abused the Central Bank to re-capitalise their banks after having embezzled their banks' finances .
 Ukraine’s then-Finance Minister Natalie Jaresko said it made it much more difficult for oligarchs to steal taxpayers’ money . This was one of the most effective policies by the then-finance minister .
 Ihor Kolomoisky, one of Ukraine's wealthiest oligarchs, controls 30 percent of the Ukrainian banking market . He demands large amounts from the deposit-security fund to cover losses of his banks .
 60 percent of Ukrainians receive their salaries in accounts with these banks . But from a political standpoint it is not very easy to shut them all down .
After Maidan, the Central Bank received extra attention and funds from international donors .
 It was wisely governed and underwent harsh structural reforms, laying off about 50 percent of staff and paying competitive salaries to those that stayed . But it was wisely governs and underwent tough structural reforms .
 The bank also coordinates with international donors, making them aware of overlaps in the system .
 Ukrainian authority is involved in coordinating the efforts of donors . In few other sectors is the Ukrainian authority as involved in organizing donors .
 There is no proof that Moscow uses Russian banks in Ukraine as a political tool . There are strong indicators that this is the case, according to analysts .
 Former KGB officers tend to know more about subversion than about finance . They are all headed by former KGB officers, who tend to have more knowledge of subversion .
 Russian banks are re-capitalised by Moscow. Despite losing almost all their private customers and being kicked out of Ukraine's ATM network, Russian banks have been re- Capitalised .
 Many Ukrainian and Western experts suspect that the military campaign in the Donbas has hit a dead end . Subversion, corruption, and blackmail are again the Kremlin’s best tools with which to destabilise Kyiv .
 Austria is the only EU member state whose national bank has no agreement with Ukraine’s Central Bank to cooperate on investigations into transnational financial transactions . Austria has not helped to investigate the suspicious dealings of its Meidl bank, which has engaged in dubious business in Ukraine .
 The reluctance of Austrian financial regulators to cooperate with their Ukrainian colleagues undermines European credibility in the fight against corruption . The reluctance to cooperate undermines European credibility in the battle against corruption.
 Another vital step to increase Ukraine’s fiscal stability is tax reform . The country's economy has been hit by a slump in recent years .
 The tax reforms rushed through in December 2015 were, above all, designed to increase the proportion of people in formal employment and with declared income .
 Income tax was levelled at 18 percent and social security contributions decreased to 22 percent of income . VAT refunding harmonised with European standards .
 The decrease in tax revenues should, in the medium-term, be offset by increased revenues as Ukraine reforms are reforms, says the government .
Lower production, lower employment costs, increased domestic consumption and exports, higher number of people in registered employment and therefore paying tax . This higher revenue will come from lower production, higher employment costs and lower employment cost .
 Some of the effects are already visible, according to preliminary reports . Some of these effects have already been seen .
Tax reforms put in place so far have received positive feedback from international experts . Further work on reforming other taxes and tariffs are to be implemented .
 All of Ukraine’s biggest reforms – including reform of the gas market, and independence of the Central Bank – were direct results of pressure from the IMF and World Bank .
 This means that if the IMF grants Ukraine money the Union does so as well as the IMF does so, it will grant Ukraine money . This means the IMF gives Ukraine money to the Union, and the IMF also does so .
 The Union communicates the same demands to Kyiv as the IMF and accepts satisfactory implementation of those demands when the IMF does .
 The IMF is much more publicly outspoken about its demands than the Union . However, the IMF is more outspoken about the Union than the IMF .
 The IMF hasn't stopped its macro-financial assistance to Kyiv, though delivery of the current package has been postponed until the end of summer .
 There is hesitation in Brussels about using macro-financial assistance as political leverage . But it is by far the largest and most direct form of assistance .
 The war in the Donbas caused the near-collapse of Ukraine's heavy industry . It triggered the eventual de-Sovietisation of the economy .
 mining and machine-industry accounted for almost 50 percent of Ukraine's industrial exports . Before Maidan, mining and machines accounted for more than 50 percent.
 The collapse of the steel price after 2008 and the ongoing economic crisis in Russia hurt these sectors . However, the collapse of steel prices after 2008 hurt the prime export market.
 industrial output in the west and north of the country grew significantly faster than in the east and south . After 2010, the industrial output of the north and west grew significantly.
 At the same time the share of light industry products started to grow, while heavy industry remained in recession . Light industry products began to grow.
 The war in the Donbas and Russia's economic sanctions only accelerated the country’s transition from heavy industry to light industry . The country's transition from an east-orientation to west.
 The question for the EU is how it can best facilitate this transition, and soften its negative effects . The question is how the EU can best help the EU transition .
 Agricultural sector reform is one of the unsung success stories of Ukraine's post-Maidan transformation . Agricultural sector reforms are a success story of the country's transformation .
 Ukraine's fertile soil and unused agricultural land are among the factors behind its transformation . This is due to the willingness of Ukrainian authorities to reform, and international support for this transformation .
 The then-Minister for Agriculture Oleksiy Parlenko led one of the most open and cooperative ministries . Donor coordination has been effective and efficient .
 Ukraine’s agricultural sector has become one of the few sources of growth in the country . The agricultural sector is one of Ukraine's few sources.
 The IMF and the World Bank are pushing the top levels of the political class to facilitate reform in this sector . The IMF is also pushing to facilitate reforms in the political sector .
 The IMF, International Finance Corporation, and EBRD work with larger agricultural enterprises . The IMF and E BRD have worked with larger agriculture enterprises .
 Canada, the EU, and Switzerland are working on programmes to link agricultural policies to rural development . Canada, EU, Switzerland, Canada, and the EU are working to link agriculture policies to agricultural policies .
 Small farms are granted access to processing facilities and regional markets . This means they can access competitive insurance and financial products. This means granting small farms access toprocessing facilities and markets .
 Rural areas can only develop if small and medium farms can profit from the investment in agriculture . Rural areas are only able to develop if the investment is made by small andmedium farms .
 Donor contributions to this effort range from small-scale contributions for financing shared-processing machinery for multiple farmers . Donors are also helping develop new financial products for banks and insurance companies .
 The coming implementation of the EU-Ukraine DCFTA will transform the agricultural sector . The latter is crucially important given the coming implementation, which will transform agriculture .
 The DCFTA will open the European export market for Ukraine's agricultural sector . It will be the first time the EU has opened the market for the Ukrainian agricultural sector.
 Adopting EU standards across the sector will also make it easier for Ukraine's agricultural enterprises to export to other markets, particularly in Asia and the Middle East .
 implementing standards in the regulatory framework and adopting production is not an easy task . However, implementing these standards is a difficult task .
 A National Strategy and Action Plan for Agriculture and Rural Development has been drafted through the NRC . The NRC is currently being implemented .
 Europe, U.S. and Canada have given support and advice on this action plan . The three countries are coordinating closely .
 The EU plays a pivotal role, as EU norms and standards will be implemented in all programmes . The EU is a key part in the development of the European Union .
 Adjusting to European standards is more difficult for small farms than for large agro-businesses . New production facilities are needed for new production facilities .
Small and medium-sized farms can't get access to the financial services required for these investments . But it is much more difficult for smalland medium-size farms to get access.
 Large farms are already used to producing for the European or world market . Many small farmers in eastern Ukraine had exported most of their goods to Russia .
 This market collapsed with the expansion of Russia’s import ban in January 2016 . The market collapsed after the ban was imposed in January 2015 .
 UkrSpirit, the state-owned alcohol distiller, was the first to be sold . It was sold by the company's owner, the company that owns the distiller .
 To an extent, the success of the trade pact is dependent on deregulation . To a extent, it is dependent upon deregulation .
 The EU has committed to finance a Better Regulation Delivery Office in Kyiv for three years . 70 experts and lawyers will help draft the necessary reforms .
 Ukraine has made considerable progress on adapting new technical regulations . A lot still needs to be done when it comes to certification, services, capital market regulations, inspections, and control .
Under Yatesnyuk government the most reform-minded ministries were involved in the process . Many experts considered the climate was constructive by many experts .
 Given the vast amount of change needed, reform progress is slow but steady . Reform progress in the U.S. is slow and steady .
 Europe could reinforce its support for Ukraine's economic transition in other areas . As the regulatory framework improves, Europe could support Ukraine's transition .
Experts highlight limited access to capital due to constraints and uncertainties in the banking sector .
 Others include financial support for start-ups in sectors with growth potential, such as the IT sector .
 The EU should also consider creating specific support programmes for east Ukraine, where instability and the continuing war scares off many investors .
 Some of them are quite restrictive, and will have a major impact on business in Ukraine . Some of the restrictions are very restrictive, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Ukrainian experts doubt whether it is wise to jump directly from Ukrainian-style over-regulation to EU standards . Some Ukrainian experts question whether it's wise to leap directly from Ukraine to EU .
 Georgia carried out a general deregulation programme first . They point instead to the model of Georgia, which carried out general deregulation first .
 Ukrainian business will have to adjust to EU standards sooner or later, experts say . Many European experts are sceptical on this point, noting that Ukrainian business may have to adapt to the EU standards . The Ukrainian business is expected to tap into the global market .
 Ukraine is one of the worst in terms of having standardised business regulation . But even compared to other former Soviet states, Ukraine is a poor country .
 The DCFTA is slowly taking effect, though the slump in commodity and food prices is still taking effect .
 EU should maintain support for Ukrainian SMEs and regional development programmes in order to soften the shock in some areas and make growth more sustainable .
 The age old observation about EU member states is demonstrably true when it comes to Ukraine . The EU is too small and weak to play a strategic role alone, but can when they join forces .
 The EU is a major player in aid to the country, alongside the IMF, the US, Canada, Japan, and the World Bank . The EU, the IMF and Canada, are also major players in aid.
 In 2014/15 the biggest EU member-state single donors were Germany, which contributed €700 million, €200 million of which was macro-financial assistance . Poland contributed approximately €100 million, of which €89 million was Macro- financial assistance .
 How well the donors communicate, how programming is organised, and so on play a major role in the effectiveness of reform efforts .
 This section will address how the EU is doing on these issues, and what role the member states play in the reform process . This section includes the EU's role in the EU reform process and how it is doing .
 First, the EU support group, created after Maidan to help Ukraine’s reform efforts, has proved less efficient than initially hoped . First, it has proved more efficient than originally hoped .
 The lack of any permanent staff in Kyiv means that it is hard to keep up with events on the ground . The biggest flaw of the group from the beginning is the lack of permanent staff .
 This has become increasingly evident over time, as the political situation in Kyiv has developed . This has been increasingly evident in the country's political situation .
 In summer 2016, a small number of officials were sent to Kyiv and headquartered there . In July 2016, the Kyiv-based government was in charge of a small amount of officials .
 The absence of an on-the-ground presence has not meant that the support group is totally useless . Instead, it has adjusted its mission, instead, and has adjusted the mission .
 The support group is increasingly used to coordinate bilateral initiatives between member states and to square them with EU's policy goals .
 The EU coordinated its programme funding with Sweden and Germany . The EU also asked other member states to join the effort .
 This linking of practical implementation on the ground and lobbying in Brussels should also improve the member states’ abilities to design their own policies . This link also should improve member states' ability to design own policies.
 The EU and its personnel in Kyiv have built up experience and knowledge, and can advise member states on the needs, shortfalls, and traps of reform in the country .
 The EU is often criticised for being slow to react to developments on the ground . The EU has been criticised for not reacting to developments in the past .
 The rule of thumb for EU project or programme funding is that it takes three months to discuss the application . Three months to decide on the programme, three months for all documents, and the funding finally arrives one year later .
 Most urgent projects are funded via bilateral agencies, Council of Europe, or private foundations in Kyiv .
 The EU is keen to shorten the delay between need assessment and implementation, and sees coordination between Brussels and the capitals as the key .
 There is acknowledgement among policymakers that the EU cannot change its procedures just for Ukraine . But there is acknowledgement that there is no change in the EU's procedures for Ukraine.
 These are usually designed for longer-term assistance and advisory missions, and do not work as well under conditions of war, political unrest, and crisis . These are often designed to help people in war and political unrest .
Foreign policy decisions are executed without having to undergo a myriad of panels and steering committees . But individual member states' foreign policy apparatuses are much more agile .
Once Ukraine's needs have been identified, national programmes and initiatives should react quickly to supplement the EU's efforts . The EU's support group coordination is needed to help Ukraine .
 Compared to the US, Japan, and to other international organisations, the EU’s support measures lack visibility . The EU's support measures have been criticised for lack visibility.
 The EU contracts international or national aid organisations. To deliver development assistance, support for internally displaced people .
 The EU does not have its own personnel on the ground doing practical work on refugees . Ukrainians often are not aware that the aid they are receiving is financed by the EU or its member states .
 Only the German development agency, the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zussamenarbeit, has staff on the ground . It provides direct support to internally displaced persons in eastern Ukraine .
 USAID, in contrast, has a wide network of people in eastern Ukraine, and can provide assistance at short notice .
 In many instances, effective assistance to displaced persons is not a matter that requires large budgets, but quick fixes to immediate shortfalls . In many cases, effective aid to displaced people is not an issue that needs large budgets .
 Personnel on the ground who can carry out these small-scale corrections are an invaluable asset . Personnel who can do the corrections are a valuable asset, according to experts .
 Most EU support to Ukraine takes the form of technical assistance or traditional donor programmes . Most EU help is not directly into ministries or institutions to give advice .
 Few member states apart from Poland, Hungary and the Baltic states have a large number of experts who speak Ukrainian or Russian .
 These secondments are capacity multipliers rather than capacity builders, and they help existing structures and institutions to run more efficiently than before .
 Officials monitor the implementation process and accelerate feedback from the administration to donors . The key advantage is that the officials monitor the Implementation process .
 The key shortfall is sustainability of impact – when experts go back home, their expertise goes with them . The key problem is sustainability.
 If the assignment of personnel to work within the Ukrainian civil service was better coordinated between EU member states, it could be used more effectively .
 technical experts are sent to work in mid-level administration or policy development . The mechanism of “twinning’s” is a helpful tool, but usually confined to mid- level administration .
 Some countries actively use the instrument to send their experts to Ukraine . Others are more passive and passive .
 In 2014, Ukraine proposed including Commission representatives in each reform group and placing larger numbers of Commission experts into the reform council's experts groups .
 Ukrainian experts highlight that the EU needs to supervise the implementation of its aid more closely . Ukrainian experts say the EU should supervise its aid implementation more closely.
 Oversight efforts focus on paperwork of programmes, rather than on whether they achieved their aims . Oversight efforts are more focused on paperwork than on aims .
In Ukraine, as in other post-Soviet countries, the culture of policy analysis and review is not well-established . The EU has not helped to introduce one of its own policy analyses .
 Clear criteria on the desired outcomes are lacking for many EU programmes, and so it is hard to evaluate and monitor performance objectively . Clear criteria are lacking.
 There are a lot of courses and training programmes for Ukrainian officials in European institutions . Few officials in Ukraine have enough knowledge of English or French to be able to take part .
 The EU is breaking political and administrative deadlocks that hinder the implementation of Ukraine’s reforms . The EU needs expertise and monetary assistance for Ukraine's reforms .
 Draft laws are still diluted and bent to specific interests in many cases . Draft laws still diluted, bent to certain interests in some cases .
 The law originally demanded that all government officials and politicians publicly declare their assets . The prime example of this happening was the law on electronic declaration of assets .
 The draft law allows corrupt officials to transfer assets to their relatives . But when the draft law was read in the parliament, the time limits for declarations were extended .
Only fierce criticism from the IMF, the U.S. and particularly the EU forced a change of course .
 EU ambassador to Ukraine Jan Tombinski warns watered down law would endanger Ukraine's path to visa liberalisation . Tombinski made forceful public statements warning that such a watered-down law would be dangerous .
 Parliament amended the law once more to address criticisms made of it . Two days later, parliament amended it again to address the criticisms .
Administrative delays and interference with reforms are only the tip of the iceberg when it comes to administrative delays . But this is only a tip of a iceberg.
 In some cases, even small changes to administrative procedures simply are not implemented by the local and regional bureaucracy .
 The EU has no staff to evaluate what is going on in the countryside . Some of the Ukrainian ministries are not engaged with these issues .
 Most civil society organisations are located in Kyiv, even though the EU is increasingly trying to fund groups in the countryside .
 To lobby or to gain access to international funding, a presence in the capital is essential . To lobby, or to get access to foreign funding, is essential, says CNN .
 Many reformers are from other provinces, but few work there on a regular basis . Few work in other provinces .
 Over-regulation of EU grants also causes the EU's efforts to be centred on the capital .
 An official letter of recommendation by the government can only be issued in Kyiv . It is a pre-requisite for winning grants for most programmes .
 Kyiv is a very different environment to the rest of the country. Politically, Kyiv has a very Different environment to other countries .
 Increased flexibility in bureaucratic requirements would help the EU to increase its presence and visibility beyond the capital . Increased flexibility would help to increase the EU's presence.
 Ukrainian experts say the EU is often too polite and hesitant to criticise the Ukrainian government .
 Kyiv is overly reliant on Kyiv coming up with plans, instead of pushing its own agenda . Kyiv refrains from getting directly involved in Ukrainian government processes .
 EU Ambassador Jan Tombinski is blunt about what the EU expects from Kyiv, and what has gone wrong . The exception to this culture of restraint is Tombinski, the EU Ambassador .
Every one of the non-EU experts interviewed for this paper specifically mentioned the positive role Tombinski plays in the role .
 The U.S. and the UK are more forthright in the demands they make of Ukraine, and do not hesitate in applying direct pressure on the government in Kyiv to achieve their ends .
 An increasing number of NGO quasi-experts are popping up in Kyiv, sometimes working in concert with the political class .
 In practice, officials cite documents that would supposedly resolve each issue, but in practice these are never implemented . They leave foreign donors with an overly positive picture of affairs in Ukraine .
 The donors only realise their mistake when their project money has been wasted and no results delivered .
 European countries and politicians who do not know the political establishment in Kyiv are prone to fall into this trap .
 Coordinating assistance with the EU's representatives in Kyiv can help to avoid this . The EU has more experience in the country.
 EU donor coordination has improved considerably since the Maidan revolution . EU donor cooperation has improved significantly since the revolution .
 The EU Mission in Kyiv meets regularly with member states representatives on the ground . The EU needs to look elsewhere to prevent duplication of efforts – specifically to European capitals .
 In spring 2016 there were five separate fact-finding missions and five rule of law missions launched by EU member states in Kyiv .
 Several EU member states offer very similar training to law enforcement and judicial personnel . Several EU members also offer similar training.
 These plans are made in national foreign ministries without consulting Brussels .
 Representatives of the Ukrainian government travel abroad to lobby for certain initiatives without consulting the relevant ministries at home . Some have their origin in Kyiv – when they travel abroad.
 The member states then try to conceive their own programmes to tackle the particular shortfall – often through similar or overlapping programmes that duplicate effort . The members of the member states are then trying to conceive own programmes .
 The EU tries to use greater use of the support group as a coordination tool . To counter this lack of coordination, the EU is trying to make greater use.
 The EU often calls on member states to engage more in Ukraine . But few have responded to the calls .
 There are states that abstain from assisting Kyiv for strategic reasons, particularly France and Italy . There is little enthusiasm in Brussels or Kyiv to try to bring them on board .
 Most people engaged in Ukraine only want to work with those states that actively support the new government . They would be perceived as spoilers, and most people would be seen as spoilers . Most people in Ukraine would only work with states that support new government.
 Few member states participate regularly in the EU's donor-coordination meetings . In Kyiv, few member states are participating in the meetings .
 Other states do whatever is on their bilateral agenda, or visit the working groups on an infrequent basis . Other states also visit their working groups.
 There are too many meetings, working groups, and initiatives assigned to staff based in Kyiv . In most embassies, this is due to staffing issues .
 In most embassies, there was little increase in staffing after Maidan, despite the fact that the number of tasks grew .
 One issue on which coordination through the EU framework could be stronger is that of programme supervision, evaluation, and management .
 The European support effort will continue for the foreseeable future . evaluation and performance-management is key, according to the European Union .
 Kyiv will not be done by Kyiv, as Ukraine lacks the necessary capacities and skills . This will not been done by Ukraine, as Kyiv lacks the skills and capacities to do this .
 At the time of writing, this evaluation is performed on an ad-hoc basis by different EU and national institutions .
 setting up a structured process should be Brussels' key initiative, says Brussels . But setting up structured process is Brussels' main initiative .
 Europe could make greater use of programmes targeted at specific regions . Europe could also make greaterUse of programmes targeting specific regions.
 Hungary and Romania have set up regional partnership programmes for the provinces on their borders . The two countries have also set up partnerships for each other .
 The EU could increase the range of such programmes beyond the border regions . Smalland medium-sized countries could partner with one or more specific provinces .
 Kyiv's limited funds would have little impact if spread across the whole country . For them, it is better to focus their efforts on a smaller territory than to duplicate programmes in Kyiv .
 Regional partnerships could strengthen decentralisation, enable local governance, and redistribute money away from Kyiv and towards the regions . Such regional partnerships could help local governance and redistribution .
 The most important partners for the EU in Kyiv are the U.S. and Canada . The EU's biggest partners are the United States and Canada.
 Practical coordination and cooperation of staff engaged in implementing programmes is smooth and they have good working relationships. Practical cooperation and cooperation is smooth, according to staff .
 The EU on the other hand is the central norm-setting authority, as European standards, procedures, and benchmarks have to be met in most reform-areas .
 In many cases, U.S. and Canadian programmes are responsible for implementing EU reform-goals .
 Europe should be aware that the quest for Ukrainian self-determination is the background to all of its dealings with Kyiv . Europe should also be aware of Ukraine's quest for self- determination .
 To Vladimir Putin, Ukraine is not a legitimate state and Ukrainians are not an independent people, he says . To Putin, Ukrainian people are not independent people .
 Ukraine is merely a territory that Russian has a right to, regardless of who lives there . Ukraine is just a territory. Ukraine is only a territory Russian has right to.
 As long as these attitudes persist in Moscow, there can be no real solution to the conflict, regardless of how hard the West tries .
 Minsk process will at best be a tactical manoeuvring-ground to provide Ukraine with time to reform . For the time being, the Minskprocess will at least be a Tactical manoeuvring ground .
 For Ukrainians, it is important to be a subject in this process, and not a mere object . For Ukrainians it is crucial to be the subject in the process .
 Kyiv has barely been able to shape the negotiation process on Minsk implementation on its own terms . Despite this, Kyiv hasn't taken the initiative and reacted rather than taking the initiative .
 Ukraine is not a hopeless case, and the project of the Maidan protests is not doomed to fail . Ukraine's transformation of Ukraine into a functioning democracy and market economy is not hopeless, says the author .
Despite the chaos and inefficiency that still hobbles Kyiv, there is progress, says Kyiv .
 This progress is directly correlated with the degree of pressure placed on the government to reform . But this is not the same as the pressure put on the Government to reform.
 Those with vested interests can find a way of preventing or holding back on reforms . Without this pressure, little happens, little will happen, and little happens .
 The threat to the country from Russia’s intervention was existential, says Peter Bergen . It was clear to Ukrainian leadership that no one would help them but themselves, he says .
 Any European assistance to Kyiv needs to be a part of a broader political effort to push the government to reform . Any European aid to the government needs to help Kyiv.
 Ukraine's civil society is usually more outspoken than the EU in terms of criticising the government in Kyiv . However, it is usually much more outspoken.
 Politicians weary of dealing with Kyiv tend to forget that Ukraine is more than just a government . Politicians tend to remember that Ukraine's government is more of a government than a government.
 By the end of 2015, it was clear that the initial momentum for reform after the revolution had died out .
 Many experts complained that the old habits of doing politics were creeping back . Many experts – both Ukrainian and international – complained that it was creeping back.
 The window of opportunity to change Ukraine quickly and radically seems to have passed . Poland or the Czech Republic after 1989 has passed .
 The crisis that followed on the heels of the ousting of Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin was an indication of how precarious the situation in Kyiv was .
 The EU must support the reformers in a long-term struggle to change their country, despite hurdles they face . Instead of quick fixes, the EU must help reformers to change the country .
 The Ukrainian government has not lived up to expectations. The country's reform-minded civil society is not living up to the expectations of the EU .
Civil society is not satisfied with a simple change in government anymore . But, unlike in the Orange Revolution of 2004-2005, civil society has started to work within government or governmental programmes .
 civil society activists have been forced to engage in almost every field of state action . Civil society activists were forced to take part in almost all of the field of action .
 Through this struggle, they are becoming the new political class themselves . They are becoming a new political group .
Cross-party group in Verkhovna Rada exerts constant pressure on government to reform . Their work often depends on EU funds and in parliament .
 They don't have the majority needed to pass laws, but they are well connected, informed, and have a public audience . They are well-connected, informed and have public audience whenever they criticise defective laws or propose alternatives .
When their voice is echoed by international donors or organisations, their critiques are taken especially seriously . And when they are echoed, their criticisms are taken particularly seriously .
 Even if the changes and amendments they are pushing for are seldom spectacular, they are gradual steps towards change .
 Both President Poroshenko and former Prime Minister Yatesnyuk bear some of the blame for the delays in reform . Both presidents blame each other for the delay in reform.
 President Poroshenko was not interested in reforming the judiciary, the Prosecutor General’s Office, or law enforcement agencies .
 If Ukraine had enjoyed presidential support, Ukraine would be in a much better position today . If those reforms had enjoyed President Obama's support, they would have been better today .
 Yatesnyuk, on the other hand, was unable to push for the implementation of reforms in terms of regulation . He was protecting his allies in the energy sector, state-owned enterprises and big business .
 Neither was particularly keen to push the anti-corruption agenda or privatisation . Neither were particularly keen on pushing the anti -corruption agenda .
 Both governments performed better than any other Ukrainian government before them . Still, both performed better. Still, they were not the best government in Ukraine .
 During Yanukovych's time, the monopolistic control of the media led to many scandals being suppressed . During Yanukovych’s time, many scandals were suppressed .
Independent media is actively reporting on nepotism and corruption . Now, a resurgent independent media is reporting on corruption .
 This can give the international community the impression that the new government is no better than the old. This can be seen as a sign of the old government .
 Today's scandals would be business as usual under Yanukovych. However, this is misleading, as today's scandals will be business under Yanukovych .
Drastic reforms are often undertaken sporadically, without much strategic communication . Drastic reforms – although necessary – are often done sporadical, but need to be more strategic .
 This makes the public feel insecure, and means that they don't see the long-term benefits of the reform process . This makes them feel insecure. This means they don’t see the benefits of reform process.
 The government has missed many opportunities to improve the life of Ukrainians . The Ukrainian government has failed to do so so far .
 The ‘one-stop-shop office’ in Odessa where people can get licences and government documents in a single day has received much positive feedback . The office is being emulated in other provinces, including Odessa .
 Mikheil Saakashvili is the former Georgian president who now serves as Odessa’s governor . He has not been systematically rolled out by the government .
 There is no broader plan yet for how to speed up deregulation in such a way that people can benefit from it in their daily lives .
 Syria remains a bloodbath, and support to Ukraine should not be dropped from the policy agenda . As the euro crisis continues, the EU talks are yet to get underway, and the crisis continues .
 Ukraine-fatigue is setting in among some EU member states, but reform efforts are starting to show results . Ukraine is gradually moving forward .
 Discussions with Europe have at times served to unite groups from across Ukraine's polarised political spectrum .
 Ukrainian MPs from rival factions were invited to Brussels in February 2016 . It was one of few occasions where they refrained from blaming one another .
 Europe should also be careful not to underestimate the power of symbolism. Europe should not underestimate the symbolism of symbolism, according to the European Union .
 The visits of G7 delegations or members of the European Parliament to the conflict zones of the Donbas have a wide impact in Ukraine .
 It gives people the feeling that those in Europe have not totally forgotten about them. It gives them the feeling they are not merely objects of greater power politics .
 Ukraine is a new state, but it still suffers from a Soviet hangover .
 EU accession is the idea that unites the country, and so the EU is in a unique position to help the country change for the better . EU accessions are the idea of uniting the country and uniting.
 To achieve this, EU should put all politeness, sensitivity and political correctness aside, and be blunt, brute, and direct .
 U.S. Secretary of State Joe Biden had to get personally involved in order to remove Ihor Kolomoisky as governor of Dnipro province . Ambassador Jan Tombinski's protest against watering down of the law on electronic declaration of assets saved it in the end.
 It makes little sense for the EU to complain about missed opportunities in hindsight when no one insisted on reform at the time when it was threatened .
Many in Brussels still defend local ownership as a principle that should be applied under all circumstances . Many in Brussels are still defending local ownership in all circumstances.
There are several reasons to re-think or abandon the principle in the case of Ukraine . The principle may be appropriate for much development assistance .
Almost every poll in Ukraine shows that society wants more reform than the government is delivering . Almost every poll shows that people want more reform in Ukraine .
 This makes local ownership and pressing for reform into mutually exclusive positions . This makes Local ownership and local ownership a mutually exclusive position. This makesLocal ownership and reform into mutual exclusive positions.
 This paper strongly recommends dropping the former in favour of the latter . The paper also recommends dropping a former in favor of the second .
 reforming Ukraine is not rocket science, but simply a question of overhauling a post-Soviet and post-Communist country . Second, reforming Ukraine isn't rocket science; it's a question for overhauling the post- Soviet and Post-Communists country .
 The implementation of the Association Agreement will be more like an accession process than like the implementation of a free trade agreement with a distant nation . The implementation will be like anAccession process, rather than a freetrade agreement .
 The EU does not grant its partners “local ownership’ over which parts of the law they want to implement, or not . The EU doesn't grant partners ‘local ownership,’ says the EU .
 Ukraine is close to the EU, but it's not clear if it will be allowed to join the EU . EU membership may not be spelled out for political reasons .
 IMF is the international community’s main tool of leverage via the IMF . EU's main tools of influence are its moral authority and the prospect of closer ties .
 increasing assistance would increase the EU's leverage and influence over various reform- projects . Still, increasing assistance could increase the European Union's influence over reform-projects .
 Too much money with too little control is more corrosive to the political climate than too little money . But this needs to be done in a smart way, says David Cameron .
 In Ukraine, donors should strengthen their supervision and control instruments in the country . Donors should strengthen control instruments and supervision of the country.
 Many EU member states fear that Ukraine could become overly reliant on international donors . Many EU members fear Ukraine could be overly reliant.
 There is already a growing industry of “grant seeking’s organisations, and some bureaucratic bodies are overly reliant on external contractors .
 The EU is hesitant to directly fund the salaries of officials or the basic costs of administrative structures . This is why the EU is reluctant to commit itself to directly pay the salaries or basic costs .
 European assistance programmes contribute to waste and corruption . Unfortunately, there are cases where European assistance programs contribute to corruption .
 Ukrainian reformists are aware of this, and have brought such cases to the attention of European donors .
 As they fight to eradicate nepotism and corruption at home, they are acutely aware that sloppiness in the delivery, coordination, and monitoring of international aid has a corrosive effect .
 The EU would subsidise salaries to make the judiciary and the highest levels of the administration more independent . On the other hand, subsidising salaries would increase the EU’s leverage .
 Germany has earmarked €300 million for the reconstruction of the Donbas, which will not happen in the foreseeable future . The Donbas will not be rebuilt in the future .
Money could be used to pay a competitive salary to Ukraine's judges and prosecutors . If Ukraine made structural changes, the money would be used for something useful in the short-term .
 Judicial reform is the make-or-break reform, on which the success of all other reforms depends . The success of the reforms depends on how successful they are .
 Functioning courts would reinforce the implementation of anti-corruption measures, decentralisation, administrative reforms, and deregulation .
 Without functioning independent courts, reforms remain in limbo, and are blocked by those who rely on their informal ties for protection . Without functioningindependent courts, these reforms are in limbo .
 The EU would be well advised to increase the amount of flexible funds it makes available for advisory staff . The EU could hire experts to work on specific legislation or reform programmes .
 advisers should be placed within the ministries, in order to get insight and first-hand information on processes and obstacles within the system .
 EU programmes on regional development, small-scale farms, and SMEs are among the most successful programmes from the Ukrainian side . Other areas where more investment would have a big impact would have big impact include EU programmes.
 The EU has offered a lot of support to this effort already, but this area won't disappear from the to-do list any time soon . The more support it gets, the better, and the better it gets.
 Civil society actors give a very positive assessment of EU programmes . Despite all the complaints about the sluggish pace of the EU programmes, civil society actors say they are positive .
 The EU is open to new ideas, and responds to requests from Ukrainian civil society . Even if it moves slowly, the EU is still open to ideas .
 In Ukraine, the Europeans and their transatlantic partners are broadly in agreement, and value each other’s contributions .
New anti-corruption instruments have already been implemented in the regions . Raise awareness in the region about new anti- corruption instruments that have been implemented .
 EU support for civil society, independent think-tanks and watchdog organisations are still crucial . EU support is still crucial for the civil society and for independent organisations .
 There are few new reform-minded individuals in the public administration, the judiciary or the Prosecutor General’s Office .
 For the EU, directly supporting reformers in the government is an exception, and an approach that it usually avoids . The EU usually avoids directly supporting government reformers .
 They can push for reforms from within, and build their knowledge into the bureaucratic apparatus . They can also push for reform from within .
 External consultants have little insight into bureaucratic processes, and cannot assess the shortcomings and resistance of bureaucratic structures, or the degree of implementation of reforms .
 Defence Ministry brought in new faces from civil society on a large scale after Maidan .
 The Economy Ministry under Abromavičius was another positive example, as he took steps to include experts from private sector and civil society .
 It is not clear whether this has continued after his departure in February 2016 . But it's not clear if it has continued since then .
 Former General Prosecutor Viktor Shokin fired or prosecuted all young foreign-educated, reform-minded newcomers . In the Prosecutor General's office, the opposite happened .
 Increasing transparency in government has been the biggest achievement of the EU and reformists so far in the fight against corruption in Ukraine . Increasing transparency has been a big achievement for the EU.
 Many of today’s scandals would have been suppressed or simply never discovered in Yanukovych's time . Many of the scandals would be suppressed or just never discovered.
 Ukraine has made progress, but the system is not ready to deal with the issue yet . Most corruption cases are only revealed by investigative journalists and NGOs .
 Expanding its support for civil society and independent media is one pillar of this . Expanding the network of trusted NGOs and experts is another .
 EU has done this in Kyiv, but lack of direct presence elsewhere is preventing the expansion of such networks beyond the capital .
 More than 1,000 NGOs are registered in Ukraine, but many were founded by officials, politicians, or their allies . Many of them are founded by politicians, officials, or allies .
 These organisations rubber-stamp proposals by their sponsors, and provide little if any independent work . These organisations provide little to independent work.
 "Agency for Prevention of Corruption" is supposed to advise the government on the fight against corruption, but in fact represents oligarchic interests .
 Those ‘dependent’ NGOs have taken seats earmarked for civil society representatives in some non-reform minded ministries and in the National Reform Council .
 These include the Culture Ministry, the Social Policy Ministry, and the Youth and Sport Ministry . The Youth and Sports Ministry is also a ministry for the Youth, Sport and Culture Ministry .
 Some ministries are seen as being more open to independent advice .
 Jaresko's Finance Ministry, Economy Ministry, Infrastructure Ministry, the Infrastructure Ministry and the Internal Security Ministry are among the government's most important ministries .
 Embedding European experts and diplomats into Ukrainian governmental structures would facilitate both advice and supervision of the implementation of Ukrainian government structures . The move would facilitate the implementation.
 It would also speed up the feedback loop on whether European assistance programmes deliver the desired results, and what could be changed . It would speed up a feedback loop.
 Twinning programmes represent the first step towards the free flow of expertise on both sides . Twinning is a first step to the free Flow of expertise.
 A lack of language skills is the biggest obstacle to expanding this effort. For the time being, language skills are the biggest obstacles to expanding the effort .
 The EU needs to increase its pools of experts who speak Russian or Ukrainian for such endeavours .
 Ukraine might not be the last Eastern European state that needs Europe to facilitate deep reform .
 All efforts to give advice or pressure Ukraine will be futile if the EU does not stick to its own promises . But all efforts to help Ukraine are futile if it does not adhere to its promises .
 If Ukraine completes all reforms necessary for visa-liberalisation and the EU denies it because of domestic political squabbles in some member states, it does huge harm to the EU’s own reputation, but also to the entire reform effort in Ukraine .
 The risk of Europeans turning inwards and giving in to populism seems to be one of the biggest dangers for EU-Ukraine policy today .
 The other downfall of the European effort is the European prioritisation of Minsk over reforms . Minsk has been a key part of the EU's effort to reform Minsk .
 The Minsk accords are not the primary arbiter for relative calm in the Donbas . Minsk is a city in the region of Belarus .
 Kyiv's slogan that “there is no alternative to Minsk’s’ is less and less credible. Hence for Kyiv, the European slogan that is “no alternative to the Minsk.’
 Minsk has been a disaster from the side of the Ukrainian government as well as from France and Germany, the member states leading it . Minsk's communication policy on Minsk is a disaster, according to a report .
 There is little faith in the agreement and the proposed implementation process among the Ukrainian population, experts, and politicians . This is why there is very little faith, says the author .
 The Ukrainian government has failed to use the Minsk accords as a diplomatic tool to outmanoeuvre Russia . Ukraine has been accused of using the accords to undermine Russia .
 Many Europeans fail to understand that the preconditions for the political steps that Russia demands are not met at all . If Minsk were to be implemented on Russian terms, it would mean the end of Ukrainian sovereignty .
 Working groups established under the Minsk agreement might be useful to diminish the suffering of the local population . But the agreement as such is “unimplementable’s from the Ukrainian side under current circumstances .
 To de-Sovietise Ukraine is an unavoidably long-term project. In conclusion, to de- Sovietise Ukraine will be a long- term project .
 Kyiv government is committed to reforms, but it would take years to bear fruit . Even if the government was more committed to reform, the effort could take years .
 Massive over-regulation, chaotic distribution and overlapping competences, and excessive employment benefits for civil servants would all stall reforms under any circumstances . Massiveover-regulation and chaotic distribution of employment benefits would stall reforms .
 The EU needs stamina, as the reform effort will have to continue for at least a decade . The EU must also need stamina to continue its reform effort .