 Jacques Baud The Operational Situation As of March 25, 2022, our analysis confirms the observations and conclusions made in mid-March .
 The offensive follows to the letter, defined by Vladimir Putin on February 24 . This offensive follows the objectives defined by Putin on the letter .
 Russia's objective is to take over the Ukraine and overthrow its government, says CNN's John Sutter . But, listening only to their own bias, Western “experts’ and politicians have gotten it into their heads, he says .
 Kiev is the “center of gravity of Ukrainian forces’s Ukrainian forces, they say . They see Kiev as the ‘center ofgravity’ of Ukraine's forces .
 Clausewitz says the “center of gravity’s” is the element from which a belligerent derives his strength and ability to act .
 Westerners have systematically tried to take control of capitals in the wars they have fought . This is why Westerners are trying to take over capitals in their wars .
 Ukrainian General Staff has applied the same logic, focusing on strengthening the defense of Kiev and its surroundings, while leaving its troops helpless in the Donbass, along the axis of the Russian effort .
 Russian coalition is not to take over Ukraine, but to remove any threat to the Russian-speaking population of the Donbass . If one had listened carefully to Vladimir Putin, one would have realized that the strategic objective of the Russian coalition was not to taking over the Ukraine .
 The Russian coalition is trying to target the bulk of the Ukrainian armed forces massed in the southsoutheast of the country . According to this general objective, the "real center of gravity" is not Kiev .
 Western experts have concluded that the Russian offensive is aimed at Kiev . The offensive is doomed to failure because they will not be able to hold the country in the long term .
 The Western narrative about a Russian offensive that is bogged down, and whose successes are meager, is also part of the propaganda war waged by both sides. That being said, the Western narrative is also a propaganda war .
 The French journalist evaluated the territory taken by the Russian coalition as the equivalent of Switzerland or the Netherlands . The territory was evaluated by the journalist on February 23rd .
 The map of the French Ministry of Armed Forces gives a slightly more honest picture of reality . It also carefully avoids mentioning the Ukrainian forces encircled in the Kramatorsk cauldron .
 The Situation as of March 25, 2022 . The Situation will be announced on March 25 .
 The red dotted line shows the maximum advance of Russian coalition forces . It is the most significant advance of the Russian forces .
 Ukrainian forces are never indicated on our maps, as this would show that they were not deployed on the Russian border in February 2022 . They were regrouped in the south of the country, in preparation for their offensive .
 Russia was only reacting to a situation initiated by the West, as we shall see . This confirms that Russia was reacting to the Ukraine situation, by way of the Ukraine .
 The Russian coalition is being methodically fragmented and neutralized, little by little, by the Russian coalition . At present, it is these forces that are encircled in the Kramatorsk cauldron .
 The vagueness maintained in the West about the situation of the Ukrainian forces, has other effects, says CNN .
 The West seeks to prolong the war, instead of encouraging a negotiation process, the West wants to prolong it . The West has been trying to end the war with Russia .
 The European Union and some of its member countries have sent weapons and are encouraging the civilian population and volunteers to go and fight, often without training and without any real command structure .
 In a conflict, each party tends to inform in order to give a favorable image of its actions . We know that in a conflict each party tend to inform.
 The image of the Ukrainian forces is based exclusively on data provided by Kiev .
 It masks the profound deficiencies of the Ukrainian leadership, even though it was trained and advised by NATO military . The Ukrainian government was advised by the NATO military.
Military logic would have the forces caught in the Kramatorsk cauldron withdraw to a line at the Dnieper, for example, to conduct a counteroffensive .
 Ukrainians were applying “Western-style’ schemes, totally unsuited to the circumstances, and in the face of a more imaginative, more flexible opponent, who possessed lighter leadership structures .
 The West has made it impossible for the West to help the Ukrainian general staff make the right decisions . In the end, the partial view of the battlefield given to us by our media has made the West impossible.
 The West has led the West to believe that the obvious strategic objective is Kiev . “demilitarization’ is aimed at the Ukraine’s membership in NATO, and that “denazification’is aimed at toppling Zelensky .
 Vladimir Putin's appeal to the Ukrainian military to disobey was interpreted as a call to overthrow the government . This legend was fueled by Vladimir Putin’s appeal to Ukrainian military.
 The appeal was aimed at the Ukrainian forces deployed in the Donbass to surrender without fighting . However, this appeal was meant to be aimed at Ukraine forces deployed to the region .
 The Western interpretation caused the Ukrainian government to misjudge Russian objectives and misuse its potential of winning. The Ukrainian government has been accused of misjudging Russia .
 The Russian coalition was never “on the run” or “stopped’ by heroic resistance, it simply did not attack where it was expected . Thus, the Russian coalition wasn’t ‘on therun’ or ’s
 We did not want to listen to what Vladimir Putin had explained to us very clearly . We didn't want to hear what he said to us, he said .
 The West has become the main architect of the Ukrainian defeat that is taking shape . This is why the West has thus become—volens nolens—the main architect for the Ukraine defeat . The West is now the most powerful force in the West .
 Ukraine is in this situation today, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It is probably because of our self-proclaimed “experts and recreational strategists on our television sets that the Ukraine is today .
Politicians or so-called military experts relay Ukrainian propaganda. The Conduct of Battle is a major military strategy .
 strategists in neckties are trying to overdramatize the situation in order to exclude any negotiated solution . The problem here is that our strategists are clearly trying to overramatized the situation .
 Some Western military personnel have spoken out and offered a more nuanced judgment . This development is prompting some military personnel to speak out and offer more nuanced judgement .
 The West likes to “soften up’s battlefield with intensive and prolonged strikes, before sending in ground-troops . The Russians prefer a less destructive, but more troop-intensive approach .
Journalist Mélanie Tarvant presented the death of Russian generals on the battlefield as proof of the destabilization of the Russian army .
 The Russian army's traditions and modes of operation of the Russian army are misunderstood . But this is a profound misunderstanding of the traditions and mode of operation.
High losses in the upper echelons of command, already observed in Afghanistan . But it also tells of the much more rigorous selection of staffpersonnel than in the West .
 DIA analyst noted that “the vast majority of the airstrikes are over the battlefield’s battlefield . Russian aircraft provide ‘close air support’ to ground forces .
 Russian operations differ fundamentally from the Western concept of the same. In fact, Russian operations are different from the West's .
 The West’s obsession with having no fatalities in their own forces leads them to operations that are primarily in the form of very lethal air strikes .
In Afghanistan or in the Sahel, Westerners killed more civilians than terrorists did . This is why, in Afghanistan and in theSahel, more civilians were killed than terrorists .
 Afghanistan, the Middle East and North Africa no longer publish the number of civilian casualties caused by their strikes . This is why Western countries are no longer publishing the numbers of casualties . The number of civilians killed in Afghanistan is not published .
 The Russian coalition operates almost exclusively in the Russian-speaking zone, according to a map of linguistic zones .
 The Ukraine has deployed its ultra-nationalist paramilitary fighters in major cities, such as Mariupol or Kharkov . The militias can fight even at the cost of heavy civilian casualties, writes Peter Bergen .
 The atrocities that are currently being uncovered remain hidden by the French-speaking media, for fear of losing support for the Ukraine, as noted by media close to the Republicans in the United States .
 Russian strategy was to bypass the urban centers, and to envelop the Ukrainian army, “pinned down’ by the Donbass republics .
 The “decapitation’ is not intended to annihilate the general staff or the government, but to sunder the leadership structures so as to prevent the coordinated maneuver of forces . It is important to remember that the ‘decapitations’ are not intended.
 The aim is to preserve the leadership structures themselves in order to be able to negotiate a way out of the crisis. On the contrary, the aim is not to preserve leadership structures .
 Russia has sealed the cauldron of Kramatorsk which denied any possibility of retreat to the Ukrainians . On March 25, 2022, Russia has practically fulfilled its objectives . All that remains is to concentrate its efforts on reducing the pockets of resistance .
 The Western press has claimed that this is not a reorientation or a resizing of its offensive . This is the methodical implementation of the objectives announced on February 24 .
 European governments allow or encourage citizens to go and fight in Ukraine . A particularly disturbing aspect of this conflict is the attitude of European governments that allow or encourages their citizens to fight in the Ukraine .
 Volodymyr Zelensky's call to join the International Legion for the Territorial Defense of Ukraine has been greeted with enthusiasm by European countries . He recently created a new military force in Ukraine .
 Many young people head off on a hunting trip, imagining they are going on hunting trip . Many of these young people are surprised by the media that present a routed Russian army .
 Testimonies show that “amateurs’ often end up as “cannon fodder,” without having any real impact on the outcome of the conflict .
 The arrival of foreign fighters brings nothing to a conflict, except to increase its duration and lethality . The experience of recent conflicts shows that foreign fighters bring nothing to the conflict .
Several hundred Islamist fighters from the Idlib region, an area under the control and protection of the Western coalition in Syria, should arouse our concern .
 The weapons we are supplying to the Ukraine are already partly in the hands of criminal individuals and organizations . The weapons are already beginning to pose a security problem for the authorities in Kiev .
 The weapons that are being touted as effective against Russian aircraft could eventually threaten our military and civilian aircraft . Not to mention the fact that the weapons could be used against Russia could threaten the military .
 The volunteer proudly presented by the RTBF on the 7:30m. news of March 8, 2022 . The volunteer was an admirer of the “Corps Franc Wallonie,’s’ volunteers who served the Third Reich .
 Distributing weapons indiscriminately could well make the EU a supporter of extremism and even international terrorism .
 The result is to satisfy the European elites more than the Ukraine itself . The result, we are adding misery to misery, in order to satisfy European elites .
Documents found in Ukrainian headquarters in the south of the country confirm the Ukraine was preparing to attack the Donbass . OSCE observers observed the firing as early as February 16 heralded an imminent outbreak in days or weeks .
 The West's intelligence services did not see what was happening, or the political decision-makers chose not to listen to them. Here, some introspection is necessary for the West .
Russian intelligence services have far superior analytical capabilities than their Western counterparts . We know that Russian intelligence services are far superior to the West .
 The U.S. and German intelligence services knew Ukraine was preparing to attack the Donbass . We also know that the American and Germany intelligence services had very well understood the situation .
 The U.S. and European political leaders deliberately pushed the Ukraine into a conflict that they knew was lost in advance, says CNN . This allows us to deduce that the American and European politicians deliberately pushed Ukraine into the Ukraine conflict .
 The reason Zelensky did not deploy his forces to the Russian border, and repeatedly stated that his large neighbor would not attack him, was presumably because he thought he was relying on Western deterrence .
 He was clearly told that the Ukraine would not be part of NATO, but that publicly they would say the opposite . This is what he told CNN on March 20th .
 The objective was the closure of the North Stream 2 gas pipeline, announced on February 8th, by Joe Biden, during the visit of Olaf Scholz .
Since the end of 2021, no effort has been made by the West to reactivate the Minsk agreements . Reports of visits and telephone conversations, notably between Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Putin.
 France, as guarantor of the Minsk Agreements, has not respected its commitments, says the U.N. Security Council . France is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. Ukraine is experiencing a situation that the Ukraine is facing today .
 There is even a feeling that the West has sought to add fuel to the fire since 2014 . There is also a feeling the West is trying to fuel the fire in the past year .
 Vladimir Putin's placing of nuclear forces on alert on February 27 was presented by our media and politicians as an irrational act or blackmail .
Jean-Yves Le Drian made a thinly veiled threat that NATO could use nuclear weapons three days earlier .
 Putin did not take this “threat’s’ threat seriously, but wanted to push Western countries to abandon the use of excessive language . It is likely that Putin didn't take this threat seriously.
 The Vulnerability of Europeans to Manipulation is increasing today, says John Sutter . Sutter: The perception that the Russian offensive has broken down is that Vladimir Putin is crazy, irrational and therefore ready to do anything to break the deadlock .
 There is no indication that the Russians are using such weapons. Yet there is absolutely no indication they are using them .
 The Russians finished destroying their stockpiles in 2017, while the Americans have not yet destroyed theirs . Besides, the Russians have not destroyed their stockpile.
 Jacques Baud is a former colonel of the General Staff, ex-member of the Swiss strategic intelligence, and specialist on Eastern countries . He is also a former member of the Switzerland's strategic intelligence.
 As a UN expert on rule of law and security institutions, he designed and led the first multidimensional UN intelligence unit in the Sudan .
 He was for 5 years responsible for the fight against the proliferation of small arms . He has worked for the African Union and was for five years at NATO .
 Within NATO, he followed the 2014 Ukrainian crisis and later participated in programs to assist the Ukraine .
 He is the author of several books on intelligence, war and terrorism, including Le Détournement . He has also written a book on intelligence and war .
 This article appears through the gracious courtesy of Centre Francais de Recherche sur le Renseignement, Paris .
 The Road To War for years, from Mali to Afghanistan, I have worked for peace and risked my life for it . The Road to War is the latest in a series of books by the author .
 It is not a question of justifying war, but of understanding what led us to it . It is therefore not a Question of justifying War, but what led to it. It's therefore not the question of justify war, it's not of justifying it .
 The "experts" who take turns on television analyze the situation on the basis of dubious information, he says . "We no longer manage to understand what is happening," he writes .
 The problem is not so much to know who is right in this conflict, but to question the way our leaders make their decisions . The issue is to question how leaders make decisions .
 Those who have been talking about "separatists" or "independentists" from Donbass for eight years have been speaking out . Donbass has been in the news for eight months .
 The qualifier "pro-Russian" suggests that Russia was a party to the conflict, which was not the case . The term “Russian speakers’ would have been more honest.
 These referendums were conducted against the advice of Vladimir Putin . Also, they were conducted by the Russian president .
 The Republics were not seeking to separate from Ukraine, but to have a status of autonomy, guaranteeing them the use of the Russian language as an official language .
 The first legislative act of the new government resulting from the overthrow of President Yanukovych was the abolition of the Kivalov-Kolesnichenko law of 2012 . The law made Russian an official language .
 French and Italian would no longer be official languages in Switzerland . A bit like if putschists decided that French and Italians would be no longer official languages .
 At the end of summer 2014, only the self-proclaimed Republics of Donetsk and Lugansk remained . Only the self proclaimed Republics and Donetsk remained .
 Ukrainian general staff subdued the enemy without managing to prevail . At this stage, too rigid and engrossed in a doctrinaire approach to the art of operations, the Ukraine general staff.
Ukrainian general staff systematically and mechanically applied the same operative schemes. The examination of the fighting in 2014-2016 in the Donbass shows that the Ukrainian general staff systematically applied the same operational schemes .
 With a more flexible and less doctrinaire approach, the rebels were able to exploit the inertia of Ukrainian forces to repeatedly “trap’s” them .
 NATO was trying to detect Russian arms deliveries to the rebels to see if Moscow was involved . In 2014, he was responsible for the fight against the proliferation of small arms .
 There were no deliveries of weapons and military equipment from Russia . The information we received from Polish intelligence services did not “fit with the information coming from the OSCE .
 The rebels were armed thanks to the defection of Russian-speaking Ukrainian units that went over to the rebel side . The rebel side was armed due to the defecting of the Ukrainian units .
 As Ukrainian failures continued, tank, artillery and anti-aircraft battalions swelled the ranks of the autonomists .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko launched a massive anti-terrorist operation against the Donbass . The operation was launched just after signing the Minsk 1 Agreements .
 Minsk 1 and Minsk 2 (February 2015) Agreements did not provide for separation or independence of the Republics, but their autonomy within the framework of Ukraine .
Agreements are written in all letters that the status of the Republics was to be negotiated between Kiev and the representatives of the republics . Those who have read the Agreements will note that very few of those who actually have .
 Russia has systematically demanded their implementation while refusing to be a party to the negotiations . That is why it was an internal matter of the Ukraine .
 The West tried to replace the Minsk Agreements with the “Normandy format,’ which put Russians and Ukrainians face-to-face . On the other side, the West, led by France, tried to change the format .
 OSCE observers have never observed the slightest trace of Russian units operating in the Donbass .
 U.S. intelligence map published by Washington Post on December 3, 2021 does not show Russian troops in the Donbass .
 In October 2015, Vasyl Hrytsak, director of the Ukrainian Security Service, confessed that only 56 Russian fighters were observed in the Donbass .
 This was exactly comparable to the Swiss who went to fight in Bosnia on weekends, in the 1990s, or the French who fight in the Ukraine today . This is exactly like a Swiss who goes to fight on weekends. This is the same as a French who go to
 The army was undermined by the corruption of its cadres and no longer enjoyed the support of the population . In fact, the army no longer enjoys the support.
 British Home Office recall of reservists in March/April 2014 . 70 percent did not show up for first session, 80 percent for second, 90 percent for third, and 95 percent for the fourth .
 In October/November 2017, 70% of conscripts did not show up for the “Fall 2017’s recall campaign .
 This is not counting suicides and desertions, which reached up to 30 percent of the workforce in the ATO area . This is often over to the autonomists .
 Young Ukrainians refused to go and fight in the Donbass and preferred emigration, which also explains, at least partially, the demographic deficit of the country . Young Ukrainians refuse to fight and prefer emigration .
 NATO asked by NATO to participate in a program to restore the image of the Ukrainian armed forces . U.N. has worked on similar projects within the framework of the United Nations .
 Ukrainians wanted to move quickly. But this is a longterm process and the Ukrainians wanted a quick move quickly .
 Ukrainian government resorted to paramilitary militias to compensate for the lack of soldiers . The militias are called paramilitary militias .
 extreme right-wing militants. They are essentially composed of foreign mercenaries, often extreme right wing militants . They are often composed of foreigners, often foreign mercenaries .
 In 2020, they constituted about 40 percent of the Ukrainian forces and numbered about 102,000 men, Reuters says .
 They were armed, financed and trained by the United States, Great Britain, Canada and France . They were trained and armed by the U.S. and Great Britain .
 Western countries have thus clearly created and supported Ukrainian far-right militias, according to reports . Western nations have so far supported Ukraine's far- right militias .
 In October 2021, the Jerusalem Post sounded the alarm by denouncing the Centuria project .
 These militias had been operating in the Donbass since 2014, with Western support . They had been in the region since 2014 .
 Even if one can argue about the term “Nazi, the fact remains that these militias are violent, convey a nauseating ideology and are virulently anti-Semitic .
 The term “Nazi’s anti-Semitism is more cultural than political, which is why the term is not really appropriate . The term "Nazi" is more culturally than political .
 Their hatred of the Jew stems from the great famines of the 1920s and 1930s in the Ukraine . Stalin's confiscation of crops to finance the modernization of the Red Army .
 This genocide was perpetrated by the NKVD, whose upper echelons of leadership were mainly composed of Jews . This genocide is known in the Ukraine as the Holodomor .
 Ukrainian extremists are asking Israel to apologize for the crimes of communism, the Jerusalem Post notes .
 These militias, originating from the far-right groups that animated the Euromaidan revolution in 2014, are composed of fanatical and brutal individuals .
 The Azov Regiment is revered in Ukraine for liberating Kharkov from the Soviets in 1943 . It also carried out the 1944 Oradour-sur-Glane massacre in France . The best known of these is the Azov regiment, whose emblem is reminiscent of the
 Roman Protassevitch was arrested in 2021 by Belarusian authorities following the case of RyanAir flight FR4978 . Among the famous figures of the Azov regiment was the opponent Roman Protsevitch .
 On May 23, 2021, the deliberate hijacking of an airliner by a MiG-29 was mentioned as a reason for arresting Protassevich . Information available at the time did not confirm this scenario at all .
 President Lukashenko was a thug and Protassevich a “journalist who loved democracy’s. But then it was necessary to show that President Luk as a thug, he was a journalist .
 An investigation produced by an American NGO in 2020 highlighted Protassevitch’s far-right militant activities .
 The Western conspiracy movement then started, and unscrupulous media ‘air-brushed’ his biography . The Western Conspiracy movement then began, and the media then started.
 The MiG-29 took off 15 minutes after the RyanAir pilot decided to land in Minsk . In January 2022, the ICAO report was published and showed that Belarus acted in accordance with the rules in force .
 Protassevitch, cruelly tortured by the Belarusian police, was now free . He was released from prison .
 Those who would like to correspond with him can go on his Twitter account . Those who want to follow him can follow him on Twitter .
 The characterization of Ukrainian paramilitaries as “Nazis” or “neo-Nazis’ is considered Russian propaganda . The characterization is considered Russia's propaganda .
 The Times of Israel, the Simon Wiesenthal Center or the West Point Academy’s Center for Counterterrorism are not the view of them . But that's not the views of the Times of Israeli, or the Center for counterterrorism .
 In 2014, Newsweek magazine seemed to associate them more with the Islamic State . But that's still debatable, because it's not clear what they were .
 Swiss government has been quick to take sanctions against Russia . But it has not adopted any against Ukraine, which has been massacring its own population since 2014 .
 Ukraine has long condemned the actions of these groups, but have not been supported by our governments . In fact, those who defend human rights in the Ukraine have long condemned these groups .
 In reality, we are not trying to help the Ukraine, but to fight Russia . We are not helping the Ukraine. Because, in reality, they are trying to fight the Russia, in fact .
 The integration of these paramilitary forces into the National Guard was not at all accompanied by a “denazification,’ as some claim . Some claim.
 A militia group from Svoboda. Declared a neo-Nazi that emerged integrated into army later responsible organization by the World . Its members form Interior .
 The National Guard depends on the Ministry of the Interior . It is organized into 3 army corps and composed of maneuver formations . It's organized into 5 territorial commands .
 The National Guard is therefore a territorial defense force that is not part of the Ukrainian army . The Ukrainian army is not the National Guard .
 It includes paramilitary militias, called *volunteer battalions, also known by the evocative name of “reprisal battalions," and composed of infantry . It is also known as ‘repriso battalions.’
 Primarily trained for urban combat, they now defend cities such as Kharkov, Mariupol, Odessa, Kiev, and Odessa .
Former head of the Warsaw Pact forces in the Swiss strategic intelligence service . He says his services are no longer able to understand the military situation in Ukraine .
 The self-proclaimed "experts" who parade on our screens tirelessly relay the same information modulated by the claim that Russia and Vladimir Putin are irrational .
 Since November 2021, the Americans have been constantly threatening a Russian invasion of the Ukraine . The Outbreak Of War has been dubbed the Outbreak of War .
 Volodymyr Zelensky issued a decree for the recapture of the Crimea . He began to deploy his forces to the south of the country .
Several NATO exercises were conducted between the Black Sea and the Baltic Sea . At the same time, several exercises were carried out along the Russian border .
 Russia conducted several exercises to test the operational readiness of its troops . Russia then conducted a series of exercises to show it was following the evolution of the situation .
 Things calmed down until October-November with the end of the ZAPAD 21 exercises . The troop movements were interpreted as a reinforcement for an offensive against Ukraine .
 Ukrainian authorities refute the idea of Russian preparations for a war . But even the Ukrainian authorities say there had been no change on its border since the spring .
 Ukraine was conducting air operations in Donbass using drones, including at least one strike against a fuel depot in October 2021 . In violation of the Minsk Agreements, Ukraine was using drones .
 The U.S. press noted this, but not the Europeans; and no one condemned these violations . No one condemned the violations . The American press noted that the European press did not .
 Emmanuel Macron reaffirmed to Vladimir Putin his commitment to the Minsk Agreements on February 7 . Macron will repeat the commitment after his meeting with Volodymyr Zelensky the next day .
 Vladimir Putin noted that Macron had made empty promises and that the West was not ready to enforce the agreements . Putin said the West had been doing the same for eight years .
 The Russian Parliament became alarmed and asked Vladimir Putin to recognize the independence of the Republics . He refused to do, and the Russian Parliament was alarmed .
 President Joe Biden announced that Russia would attack the Ukraine in the next few days . On 17 February, President Biden announced the attack .
 Since the 16th, the artillery shelling of the population of Donbass has increased dramatically . The OSCE observers show that the population has increased .
 Neither the media, nor the European Union, nor NATO, nor any Western government reacts or intervenes .
 The European Union and some countries have deliberately kept silent about the massacre of the Donbass population . This would provoke a Russian intervention, according to the European Union .
 Donbass fighters intercepted saboteurs, who spoke Polish and were equipped with Western equipment . They were seeking to create chemical incidents in Gorlivka .
 The Donbass Republics. Could have been CIA mercenaries, led or “advised’ by Americans, to carry out sabotage actions . They could have been Ukrainian or European fighters .
 The massive increase in shelling against the population of Donbass on February 16 told the Russians that a major offensive was imminent .
 Putin recognizes independence of the Republics and considers intervention under Article 51 of the UN Charter . This is what led Putin to recognize independence of Republics .
 He knew that whatever its nature or scale, the intervention would trigger a storm of sanctions . But he knew thatWhatever its nature and scale, it would trigger an intervention .
 The price to pay would be the same if Russian intervention was limited to the Donbass . Whether Russian intervention were limited to Donbass or went further to put pressure on the West for the status of Ukraine, the price would be same .
 He recognized the independence of the two Donbass Republics and signed friendship and assistance treaties with them . On that day, he agreed to the request of the Duma .
 The two Republics asked for military assistance from Russia on 23 February . The Ukrainian artillery bombardment of Donbass continued .
 Vladimir Putin invoked Article 51 of the United Nations Charter . It provides for mutual military assistance in the framework of a defensive alliance .
 In order to make the Russian intervention totally illegal in the eyes of the public, we deliberately hid the fact that the war actually started on February 16 . The Russian intervention is totally illegal, says the author .
 The Ukrainian army was preparing to attack the Donbass as early as 2021 . Some Russian and European intelligence services were well aware of the threat .
 It is not a question of taking over the Ukraine, nor even, presumably, of occupying it . So, it is not an attempt to destroy it, and certainly not to take over it .
 The course of the operation allows us to understand how the strategic objectives were translated on the operational level . But fairly quickly, the course of this operation allows the operation to be understood .
 The Russian offensive was carried out in a very “classic manner’s” way . The Russian military was also carried out by the military .
 The Israeli Air Force destroyed the ground of the air force in the very first hours of 1967 . The Israeli air force was destroyed in the first hours .
 Chernobyl was occupied immediately to prevent acts of sabotage . In the north, the Chernobyl power plant was occupied.
 The images of Ukrainian and Russian soldiers guarding the plant together are of course not shown .
 The idea that Russia is trying to take over Kiev, the capital, comes typically from the West . The idea is what they did in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and what they wanted in Syria with the help of the Islamic State .
 Russia seeks to keep him in power by pushing him to negotiate, by surrounding Kiev . Instead, Russia wants him to stay in power .
 Many Western commentators were surprised that the Russians continued to seek a negotiated solution while conducting military operations . The Russian military continues to conduct military operations.
 The explanation lies in the Russian strategic outlook since the Soviet era, according to the Russian government .
 This allows one to create pressure on the adversary and push him to negotiate . This allows the adversary to be pressured to negotiate. This allows a person to put pressure on a person who is trying to negotiate with him .
 The bulk of the Ukrainian army was deployed in the south of the country in preparation for a major operation against the Donbass . The bulk was deployed to prepare for the major operation in the country .
 Russian forces were able to encircle it from the beginning of March in the ‘cauldron’ between Slavyansk, Kramatorsk and Severodonetsk . A thrust from the East through Kharkov and another from the South from Crimea .
 Troops from Donetsk and Lugansk Republics are complementing the Russian forces with a push from the East . Troops have been deployed in the region for several years .
Russian forces are slowly tightening the noose, but are no longer under time pressure . At this stage, Russian forces are gradually tightening theNoose .
 Ukrainian forces no longer have an operational and strategic command structure . Their demilitarization goal is all but achieved and the remaining Ukrainian forces are no longer in control of the Ukrainian forces .
 The ‘slowdown’ that our “experts’ attribute to poor logistics is only the consequence of having achieved their objectives. The “slow down’s’ll be only a consequence of achieving their objectives, says the author .
 Russia does not seem to want to engage in an occupation of the entire Ukrainian territory . Russia doesn't seem to be interested in the entire Ukraine territory .
 Russia is trying to limit its advance to the linguistic border of the country . In fact, it seems that Russia is limiting its advance .
 Our media speak of indiscriminate bombardments against the civilian population . Dantean images are broadcast in a loop .
 Gonzalo Lira presents us with a calm city on March 10 and March 11 . Lira is a Latin American who lives in the city of Los Angeles .
 It is true that it is a large city and we do not see everything, but this seems to indicate that we are not in the total war that we're served continuously on our screens .
 Donbass Republics have “liberated’s own territories and are fighting in the city of Mariupol. As for the Donbass republics, they have ‘liberated their own territories’
 In cities like Kharkov, Mariupol and Odessa, the defense is provided by paramilitary militias . Denazification is a form of defense in cities such as Odessa and Kharkova .
 "They know that the objective of *denazification" is aimed primarily at them. They know that they know the objective is aimed at them .
 Russia is seeking to create humanitarian corridors to empty cities of civilians and leave only militias to fight them more easily . This is why Russia is trying to create a humanitarian corridor for civilians .
 These militias seek to keep civilians in the cities in order to dissuade the Russian army from fighting there . Conversely, these militias want to keep people in the city .
 Russian officials are reluctant to implement these corridors and do everything to ensure that Russian efforts are unsuccessful . This is why they are reluctant. They can use the civilian population as “human shields.’
 Videos showing civilians trying to leave Mariupol and beaten up by fighters of the Azov regiment are of course carefully censored here . Videos of civilians being beaten by Azov fighters are also carefully censored .
 It was therefore forbidden to glorify it, and “posts’ that were favorable to it were systematically banned . It was also banned to glorified it .
 Facebook changed its policy and allowed posts favorable to the militia on February 24 . On February 24, Facebook changed the policy. But on February 25, Facebook allowed posts that were favorable to militia .
 In March, the platform in the former Eastern countries called for the murder of Russian soldiers and leaders . The platform was authorized, in the same spirit, in March, in former Eastern nations .
 The European Union to finance the distribution of arms to the civilian population .
 The UN's peacekeeping doctrine head of peacekeeping. He worked on the issue of civilian protection .
Violence against civilians occurred in very specific contexts, we found . We found that violence against civilians was very specific .
In particular, when weapons are abundant, there are no command structures . In particular, there is no command structure in the military .
 The EU is turning citizens into combatants, with the consequential effect of making them potential targets .
Without command, without operational goals, the distribution of arms leads to settling of scores, banditry and actions that are more deadly than effective . Without command, "without operational goals" is more dangerous than effective.
 30,000 black Africans were massacred with weapons parachuted by France . This is what happened in Tawarga from 11 to 13 August 2011 .
 The British Royal Institute for Strategic Studies does not see any added value in these arms deliveries .
 By delivering arms to a country at war, one exposes oneself to being considered a belligerent . Also exposing oneself to be considered belligerent, one says .
 Russian strikes of March 13, 2022, against the Mykolayev air base follow Russian warnings that arms shipments would be treated as hostile targets .
 The EU is repeating the disastrous experience of the Third Reich in the final hours of the Battle of Berlin .
 War must be left to the military and when one side has lost, it must be admitted . The military must also be admitted when one team has lost .
 Facebook authorizes calls for the murder of Russian soldiers and leaders . "We are pushing citizens to go and fight and at the same time," he says .
 Some intelligence services see this as a way to use the Ukrainian population as cannon fodder to fight Vladimir Putin's Russia .
 This kind of murderous decision should have been left to the colleagues of Ursula von der Leyen's grandfather .
 It would have been better to engage in negotiations and thus obtain guarantees for the civilian population than to add fuel to the fire .
 The Maternity Hospital at Mariupol is not the Ukrainian army that is defending Marioupol . The Azov militia is composed of foreign mercenaries .
Independent Russian media Lenta.ru published the testimony of civilians from Marioupol who told that the maternity hospital was taken over by the militia of the Azov regiment .
 The Russian ambassador confirmed the statements of the Russian ambassador a few hours earlier . The statement was made by the Russian government .
 The hospital in Mariupol occupies a dominant position, perfectly suited for the installation of anti-tank weapons and for observation . The hospital is located in the city's main city center .
 17 people were wounded, but the images do not show any casualties in the building . There is no evidence that the victims are related to this strike .
 EU leaders see this as a war crime. This does not prevent the leaders of the EU from seeing this as war crime, says EU chief .
Russian forces struck a position of the Azov regiment and that the maternity ward was then free of civilians . But the sequence of events tends to confirm that Russian forces struck the position .
 The problem is that the paramilitary militias that defend the cities are encouraged by the international community not to respect the customs of war .
Ukrainian firm Hill & Knowlton staged Kuwait City maternity hospital in 1990 for $10. million in order to convince the United Nations Security Council to intervene in Iraq for Operation Desert Shield/Storm .
 Western politicians have accepted civilian strikes in the Donbass for eight years, without adopting any sanctions against the Ukrainian government .
 Western politicians have agreed to sacrifice international law towards their goal of weakening Russia . We have long since entered a dynamic where Western politicians are sacrificing international law .
Ex-intelligence professional says Western intelligence services have been absent over the past year . Conclusions: The total absence of western intelligence services in the representation of the situation over the last year .
 Switzerland has been criticized for not providing a correct picture of the situation .
 It seems that throughout the Western world, intelligence services have been overwhelmed by the politicians .
 The best intelligence service in the world is useless if the decision-maker does not listen. The problem is that it is the politicians who decide, says David Cameron .
 Some intelligence services had a very accurate and rational picture of the situation . Others clearly had the same picture as that propagated by our media .
 In this crisis, the services of the countries of the "new Europe" played an important role, says David Frum .
 In some European countries, politicians have deliberately ignored their services in order to respond ideologically to the situation . Second, it seems that in some European nations, politicians are deliberately ignoring their services .
 All the documents presented to the public during this crisis were presented by politicians based on commercial sources . It should be noted that all the documents that were presented to public during the crisis were given by politicians .
 Anthony Blinken's attack scenarios were only the product of the imagination of a Tiger Team working for him . He did exactly as Donald Rumsfeld did in 2002, who had thus “bypassed the CIA and other intelligence services that were much less assertive about Iraqi chemical weapons
 In other words, we can naturally deplore and condemn the Russian attack . We can naturally condemn the attack .
 We show compassion for the Ukrainian people and the two million refugees . The Ukrainian people are two million people in Ukraine .
Donbass refugees sought refuge in Russia for eight years after being massacred by their own government . But if we had had a modicum of compassion for the refugees, none of this would probably have happened .
 For years, the West remained silent about the massacre of Russian-speaking Ukrainians by the government of Kiev . The West has never tried to bring pressure on Kiev .
 Whether the term ‘genocide’ applies to the abuses suffered by the people of Donbass is an open question .
 The definition given by the Genocide Convention is probably broad enough to apply to this case . But the definition of this case is likely to be broad enough, says the Convention .
 Sanctions seem to have become the preferred tool of our foreign policies. Sanctions have become a preferred tool for our foreign policy .
 If we had insisted that Ukraine abide by the Minsk Agreements, none of this would have happened . We had negotiated and endorsed the agreement, which we had negotiated .
 Emmanuel Macron, Olaf Scholz and Volodymyr Zelensky have respected their commitments . However, neither Emmanuel Macron or OlafScholz have respected the commitments of both men .
 The European Union was unable to promote the implementation of the Minsk agreements . The EU did not react when Ukraine was bombing its own population in the Donbass .
 The EU distinguished itself by fueling the conflict, the EU says .
 On February 27, the Ukrainian government agreed to enter into negotiations with Russia .
 Ukrainians felt that they did not need to reach an agreement. From then on, the Ukrainians felt they didn't need an agreement .
 In Ukraine, those who are in favor of a negotiation have been eliminated . In the Ukraine, with the blessing of the Western countries, they have been removed .
 Denis Kireyev, one of the Ukrainian negotiators, was assassinated on March 5 by the Ukrainian secret service . He was too favorable to Russia and was considered a traitor .
 Dmitry Demyanenko was the former deputy head of the SBU’s main directorate for Kiev and its region . He was assassinated on March 10 because he was too favorable to an agreement with Russia .
 The UN and some European countries have demanded the closure of this site . The Rada has been criticized by the Rada .
 Vladimir Putin will likely achieve the goals he set for himself. In the end, the price will be high, but Putin will probably achieve his goals .
 China is emerging as a mediator in the conflict, while Switzerland is joining the list of Russia’s enemies .
Juan Guaido is leaving the scene for good and the United States has to piteously backtrack on sanctions imposed on its enemies . The Americans have to ask Venezuela and Iran for oil to get out of the energy impasse they have put themselves in .
 We recognize that Russia is a democracy since we consider that the Russian people are responsible for the war . Thus, we recognize that the Russians are a democracy . We consider that they are responsible.
 collective punishment is forbidden by Geneva Conventions. Let us remember that collective punishment was forbidden by the Geneva Convention .
 The lesson to be learned from this conflict is our sense of variable geometric humanity . The lesson is to learn how to deal with this conflict.
 The integrity of the media is measured by their willingness to work within the terms of the Munich Charter . The integrity. of the press is also measured by the ability to work in accordance with the Munich charter .
 The Russians succeeded in propagating hatred of the Chinese during the Covid crisis . Their polarized message leads to the same effects against the Russians, says the author .
 The more the sanctions against Russia are disproportionate, the more the more we have done nothing to highlight our racism and servility . The more we do nothing, says the author of the book, "The More the sanctions are disproportionate," she says .
 Jacques Baud is a former colonel of the General Staff . He is an ex-member of the Swiss strategic intelligence, specialist on Eastern countries .