 The Russian government-funded broadcaster RT published a story that focused on remarks President Vladimir Putin made during a television interview . Putin claimed that the United States and its Western allies “cheated’s Russia by supporting an armed coup in Ukraine in February 2014 .
 Putin then claimed that his Western “partners” gave no warning about what he called a “coup,’ which he alleges they supported . He then claimed they supported it, which he said he supported .
 Putin: ‘It was a case of agents stepping out of line, but we will fix it and turn everything into the bounds of the law’
 There is no credible evidence that protesters were “agents of the United States or any other country. In fact, what occurred in Ukraine in February 2014 was not an armed coup, and there is no evidence that it was a coup .
 A small minority of protesters acquired rudimentary weapons, including pistols, air rifles, and hunting rifles . Dozens of protesters were killed by government snipers and riot police on February 20 .
 None of these weapons proved a match for trained police armed with fully automatic Kalashnikovs and a variety of sniper rifles .
 Only a handful of buildings in the center of Kyiv were ever occupied by protesters . Some were non-governmental buildings that voluntarily allowed protesters to use their facilities .
 Putin, like other Russian politicians and media figures, has repeatedly implied that the U.S. somehow exercised control over the protesters . Putin has said that he ignored the agreement and led an all-out assault to seize power .
 Protest leaders have said they received phone calls from commanders of individual police units asking for safe passage out of Kyiv . The request was granted .
 Yanukovych left his private residence of Mezhyhirya outside the city by helicopter . He was bound for Kharkiv in the eastern part of the country .
 Eyewitnesses said the disappearance of riot police guarding his residential compound coincided with Yanukovych’s flight . Protesters showed up later.
 Yanukovych traveled from Kharkiv to his native city of Donetsk, then to the Crimea, and wound up in Russia . He resides in Russia, where he resides to this day .
There is evidence that Viktor Yanukovych was already planning to leave Kyiv before signing the February 21 agreement .
 Security camera footage shows his staff removing valuables from his Mezhyhirya compound on February 19 .
Security footage shows valuables being removed on February 21, clearly during the day . Other security footage shows the removal of valuable items .
 The agreement was signed in the evening, when it was already dark in Kyiv .
 The Ukranian leader said while in Kharkiv that he had not resigned, but it became clear soon after leaving that his party allies had abandoned him .
 When he failed to leave on a plane from Donetsk airport, he left by car and made his way to Crimea and later Russia .
 Yanukovych's plan to leave was in place before riot police began abandoning their positions . Yanukovych’s plan was to leave, but riot police had to abandon their positions.
 A coup d’etat is when members of a country’s political elite, most often military officers, seize power by force .
 The military played virtually no role, and the only military unit mobilized during these events was ordered to come to Kyiv to help suppress the protesters . The military did not help suppress protesters, not help them.
 Those personnel were blockaded in their barracks and never made it to the capital . Those personnel had never been in the capital.
 Viktor Yanukovych was not removed as the result of machinations of his country’s political or military elite .
 He provoked protests through his own actions, and then planned to flee the capital . He planned to rebuild his power base outside Kyiv until planned December 2014 elections .
 Putin is quoted on the topic of post-Maidan Ukraine . Later in the RT article, he is quoted in the same article on the subject of the Ukraine crisis .
 Putin and the RT article neglected to mention the Russian invasion and annexation of the Crimea and the presence of Russian nationals fighting with separatists of Ukraine’s Donbas region, which lead to the breakdown in Russian-Ukrainian relations .