 When the Russian inquest finally comes, the answer will be clear, says Elizabeth Pond .
 French Election 2022 Emmanuel Macron falls to earth . This analysis is plausible, according to the analysis of the French election .
 The New Statesman's weekly newsletter helps you make sense of the economic slowdown . Use this weekly newsletter to help you understand the economy's slowdown .
 The Crash A weekly newsletter helps you fit together the pieces of the global economic slowdown . The Crash a weekly newsletter is published by the Financial Times .
 The New Statesman's politics team is a team of politicians from the New York State Department's political team .
 World Review The New Statesman’s global affairs newsletter, every Monday and Friday, is published .
 The New Statesman Daily is a weekly, off-beat look at the best of the New Stateman . Use this weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.
 The New Statesman’s weekly environment email on the politics, business and culture of the climate and nature crises in your inbox every Thursday .
 The Culture Edit Our weekly culture newsletter – from books and art to pop culture and memes – is sent every Friday .
 Weekly round-up of some of the best articles featured in the most recent issue of the New Statesman .
 Ideas and Letters A newsletter showcases the finest writing from the ideas section and the NS archive . It covers political ideas, philosophy, criticism and intellectual history .
 Events and Offers sign up to receive information regarding NS events, subscription offers and product updates .
 He called the collapse of the Soviet Union the “greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the 20th century’s 20th Century. He called it the ‘greatest political catastrophe’ of the20th century .
Data data can help revive our high streets in the age of online shopping . Data is a vital piece of levelling up.
 Akhmetov is the son of a coal miner who rose to become the ‘godfather’ of the Donetsk clan . He has his coal and iron base in the Don Basin and relies on Moscow’s goodwill there .
 Firtash controlled the distribution of Russian gas through Ukrainian pipelines to Europe . He is also dependent on Russia, which he controlled under President Yanukovych .
 Russian oligarch Vasily Anisimov asked to pay record Austrian bail of €125m in cash to get him out of jail . In spring 2014, he asked the oligarch to pay a record £125m bail for him .
 Firtash is barred from leaving Austria as he awaits the final legal decision on a U.S. extradition request . He is accused of international bribery .
 Poroshenko and Klitschko brokered a division of power between them in the run-up to the May 2014 presidential election . But from Vienna he still wields his political clout, funds several Ukrainian parties across the political spectrum .
 They returned to tell journalists that their greatest wish was simply for the fighting to stop . They said they wanted the fight to stop and that they wanted it to stop.
 The war there had caused 8,000 deaths and forced 2. million people from their homes . The war had caused 2,000 people to flee their homes.
 Ukraine has lost the Revolution of Dignity to Ukraine . Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin is expected to make a final decision on Ukraine's future .
 Elizabeth Pond is based in Berlin and is the author of several books about Germany, Europe and the Balkans . She is also a former member of the German National Council .