 Presidential candidate Roman Bessmertny and editor-in-chief of Charter97.org Natallia Radzina spoke about it on air of Vitaly Portnikov's program on Radio Svoboda .
 Radio Svoboda has invited the Ukrainian politician, former Ambassador of Ukraine to Belarus Roman Bessmertny and Belarusian journalist Natallia Radzina to discuss it . The Ukrainian politician is a former ambassador of Ukraine .
 The topic of possible annexation of Belarus by Russia by Russia appeared at the end of 2018 . The topic was the subject of a debate on the future of Belarus .
 The approval by Russian President Vladimir Putin of the military doctrine of the ""union state" and the establishment of an integration working group at the initiative of Moscow served as the reason .
 The Framework Union Treaty between the two countries was signed more than twenty years ago . The FrameworkUnion Treaty between two countries is signed more Than 20 years ago.
 The document implies the creation of a confederated state with a common currency, market, judicial system, foreign policy, common energy, transport and communication systems . The document also implies a common Currency, market and judicial system .
 Discussions on the possible accession of Belarus to the Russian Federation have resumed against the background of economic contradictions between Minsk and Moscow related to new oil and gas duties .
 The Kremlin refutes the fact that Russia intends to annex the neighboring state . The Kremlin says it will not annex the neighbor state .
 Russian capital increasingly calls for the creation of a real ""union state" and Putin's goal, experts believe, is to head it .
 Putin, without violating the Russian Constitution, will be able to retain power for another presidential term . Thus, Putin, who has been in power for more than a decade, can retain power without violating Russian Constitution .
 Belarusian ruler Aliaksandr Lukashenka called Russia not a brotherly state, but only a partner . He said Russia's economic pressure has increased economic pressure .
 Lukashenka has recently stated that he does not oppose a common currency in the ""union state" If it is not the Russian ruble, it is also not the Russian ruble .
 Analysts talk about Moscow's plans to turn neighboring country into its military outpost .
 There were suggestions that Russia might prepare an invasion into Ukraine through the Belarusian territory .
 If the annexation occurs, the Russian troops will deploy on the border with Poland, and it will worsen the strategic position of Ukraine . The annexation of Ukraine will worsen Ukraine's strategic position .
 Belarusians will defend their independence, but they will not turn into republics of the Russian Empire . But I know that the Belarusians are not one of the Russians .
 Belarusians have been fighting for their freedom and democracy for 25 years . For 25 years the Belarusians are fighting for democracy and freedom .
 A great number of people were in prisons, many lost their lives and health, but they did not give up . Many people lost their life and health but they didn't give up.
Presidential candidate for upcoming elections Mikalai Statkevich has declared that it will be the second Afghanistan if Russia attempts to occupy Belarus .
 Belarus has always suffered bloody battles spurred by independence, ethnic or territorial issues .
 Putin does not need a Belarusian, because he needs to be worried about, he needs support . And Putin needs support, and he needs it, he says .
 Putin needs military bases, outpost to attack Europe and to pose a threat, says Putin . In this situation Putin needs bases, outposts, to attack European countries, he says .
 Belarus needs just the territorial dependence of Belarus on Russian policy to govern the world .
 Belarus is a weak territory in terms of security for Europe, according to the Warsaw NATO memorandum .
 No matter how NATO creates the security system in Central Europe, this gap has always been a historical one . The gap has been a historic one .
 This is the ground for a breakthrough either in one or another direction, and an information or an armed sense does not matter here . This is a ground for an information breakthrough, or a breakthrough, according to the author .
 Belarus air bases delpoyed in Belarus, it is a huge threat to the European Union . Even from the point of view of the two air bases, the two are a threat to Europe .
 Minsk has maintained conditional neutrality in the Russian-Ukrainian conflict since 2014 . Since 2014 Minsk is maintaining conditional neutrality.
 Kiev hopes for no military actions against Ukraine to be carried out from Belarusian territory . On the other hand, Kiev hopes no military action against Ukraine is carried out .
 The Ukrainian leadership is trying to preserve this idea by constant contacts with the Belarusian leadership . The Ukraine leadership has been in contact with Belarusian leaders since 2014 .
 Lukashenka himself does not control his territory today, it proves . It proves that Lukasenka himself doesn't control the territory today .
 NATO declares expressly that the Belarusian Army is a part of the Russian one . Belarusian special services are a part the Russian ones . NATO declares that Belarusian army is part of Russian army .
 Belarus under Lukashenka is a potentially hazardous territory for both Ukraine and the West .
 It is alleged that this is for cross-border cooperation, but it's ridiculous . It's ridiculous, it's alleged. It's alleged that it is forCross-Border cooperation .
 The Ukrainian security services are already concerned about the construction of the road .
 Lukashenka is a guarantor neither for Belarus' independence nor his own word . Of course, he is not guarantor for Belarus's independence or his own words .
 He will not be able to survive without it and will collapse in a moment . He will be unable to survive. He will collapse without it, he says .
Russia and Ukraine do not have a vast common border, as if the Russian direction is closed . On the other hand, we are talking about some military actions from Belarus .
 One should always remember that whatever Putin and the Russian army are, it's just the Redland .
 The use of foreign territories is what the Redland used to suffer from . The Redland has a history of using foreign territories in the past .
 Pay attention to actions in Syria, in the Caucasus, even in Crimea, in Crimea. Pay attention.
 Belarus is the Redland's classics. To strike a blow from the northern territories through Belarus is a Redland classic .
 Belarus is a participant of the Belarus-led process . It's crucial to hook up Belarus as a participant in this process .
 At first, the Ukrainian military command paid attention to this direction . At first. The Ukrainian military paid attention.
In the last two years the Kremlin has literally and figuratively twisted hands, starting with Lukashenka and ending with the government . So much so, that in the last 2 years, the Kremlin is now deploying either troops, or equipment, or to carry out other exercises .
There is civil society, but there are also armed forces, which are almost the key element to preserve statehood under authoritarian regimes .
 The leadership of the armed forces is now directly tied to the Russian generals, says the author . He says they can follow orders from the Kremlin .
 As for the middle class, I belong to the family of military intellectuals, he can say that neither my relatives nor my father will support invaders in this situation .
 Russia spends much money on its war against Ukraine and the Syrian adventure . It is necessary to support satellite formations such as South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Transnistria and Crimea .
 If Belarus is seized now, then it will inflict heavy financial and political damage to Russia . Russia's economic and political relations with Belarus will be severely affected .
 I would offer not only to discuss the probability of possible seizure of Belaru by Putin, but also to say that only a free democratic Belarus can be a major element to ensure security in the region .
Free democratic Belarus means absence of free democratic Ukraine and Russia . Absence of free democracy means absence from Russia and Ukraine .
After all, the geopolitical influence of Belarus in the region is enormous. After all, Belarus has a huge influence on the region .
 Belarusian democratic forces, independent media, and civil society should be discussed . Lukashenka's dictatorship for 25 years has been resisting Putin's aggression for years .
 Roman was an ambassador to Belarus under President Viktor Yushchenko . He actually appointed you, Roman .
 President Yushchenko kept in touch with Belarus, which is neither democratic nor European . Belarus is not a member of the European Union .
 Ukraine could become a Belarusian lawyer in Europe, says Belarusian officials . Poland served as a Ukrainian lawyer then . Ukraine could also become a lawyer in the EU .
There were no relations between Yanukovych and Lukashenka at all, because the opposition candidate Sannikov was like a Belarusian Yanukovych . There were no ties between the two at all .
 Today we know who Yanukovych is, but at that moment the situation differed . At that time, Yanukovych was in power, but that situation differed.
 The assistance to the opposition is the issue Europe and Ukraine should focus on today if they want to help defend Belarus . Europe should focus today on the issue of Ukraine and Ukraine, says the EU .
 Lukashenka travels everywhere, but over 25 years he has never been to these districts . He has never visited these districts in 25 years .
 If Ukrainian archives can add information to Belarusian ones, the history will tell us much. If Ukraine archives can be added to Belarusians, it could tell us a lot .
 Belarusian democrats, Belarusian opposition and the Belarusian statehood in general. One should try to take an unbiased look at capabilities and forces of Belarusian democracy .
 Some countries or some players suddenly sit down at the table, as it was many times in history and decide a lot without our involvement . And then some players sit down.
 Many decisions on Ukraine are made without involvement of the Ukrainian leadership . Many decisions were made without the involvement of Ukrainian leadership.
 Putin, Merkel and Macron, to say nothing of Putin and Trump, have their own issues to discuss . Putin, Macron and Trump have theirown issues.
 Belarus is an official country in Belarus . Belarus is a country in Russia . The country is considered a major part of the country .
 No matter who comes to power, democrats or authoritarian leaders in Ukraine, they still keep in touch with the dictator and ignore the Belarusian democratic forces .
 Ties between Poroshenko and Lukashenka are getting closer and still democratically-focused citizens of Belarus are still ignored . Ties are still getting closer.
 Ukraine will be attacked from the territory of Belarus tomorrow or the day after tomorrow .
 We should finally start to think strategically and build some kind of policy towards the neighboring state, which is potentially dangerous today . We should also start to build some sort of policy toward neighboring state .
 Such a policy does not exist, and this is what should be discussed . But, unfortunately, such policy doesn't exist .
 Yanukovych had been trying to prove to us several years before Maidan that he was about to sign an association agreement with the European Union .
 Ukraine should do something to help democratic forces of Belarus, says Ukraine . Ukraine should help Belarus's democratic forces .
 We expected waves of freedom would spread on the region, but, unfortunately, it did not happen . We expected wave of freedom to spread across the region .
 Belarus is the only source from the point of view of providing separate fragments . The military-technical cooperation is a key part of the military cooperation .
 It's what can be objectively considered as a reason for cooperation. And it's what we should do to help each other .
Ukraine is 70% dependent on Lukashenka's fuel and lubricants . But I do not understand why today Ukraine is 70 per cent dependent on the fuel .
 Medvedchuk has not appeared in the Minsk process at all since last spring . He has not been in Minsk since last year .
 He was once banned from visiting Russian regions . We remember how he was integrated into Russian politics .
 May he be more integrated into Ukrainian politics and business than we think . We think he is more integrated in Ukrainian politics than we thought .
 Lukashenka is first of all integrated into the Ukrainian business it is completely obvious . Lukasenka is one of all the first to be integrated into Ukrainian business .
 Ukrainian oligarchs have their own interests and contacts with Belarusian dictator . It's possible that the Ukrainian leadership has some corrupt ties with the dictator .
 Belarus is the ground to bypass sanctions and tensions between Russia and Ukraine, and Russia and Western countries . It's quite clear Belarus is a ground for bypassing sanctions .
 Ukraine prefers to keep silent, not to criticize Lukashenka's regime, because there are certain interests, primarily economic ones . Today we can see that, among other things, Ukraine prefers not to criticize Lukashenko's regime . The Ukraine government prefers to
 I am very grateful to Roman Petrovich for raising this topic all the time . I am also grateful to him for raising the issue all the times .
 I will always be grateful that you ignored the inauguration of the dictator in 2010, when we were all in prisons, says the former dictator . "You called and supported me when I was released," he says .
 Many diplomats were afraid to do it, but Roman Petrovich was not . Many diplomats, including European ones, were afraid of it .
 This gesture reminds us that in politics, especially in the post-Soviet space, a deed always matters between uprisings . This gesture is a sign of respect for the people of Russia, the country's former president .