 He is desperate to prevent Moscow's sphere of influence being shattered once more . Now he is trying to stop Moscow’s sphere of power being shattered .
 Ukraine is the most important member of the old Soviet bloc after Russia itself . Officials are frantically trying to maintain Moscow's ancient dominance through a combination of military intimidation and political barbs .
 If Putin can't land a decisive blow soon, he may end up being condemned by future generations of Russian nationalists as the man who lost Ukraine .
 For a leader who has promised to restore his country’s reputation as a major power, this outcome would be disastrous . For a president who wants to restore the country's reputation, this is disastrous .
 Putin has consistently criticized those who oversaw the break-up of the USSR 30 years ago . Putin has been trying to reverse the decisions they made in the USSR .
 He faces being cut off by the country which has closer links to Moscow than any other . The country has close ties to Moscow and has a close relationship with Russia .
 The two nations were also entangled in a web of linguistic and cultural ties . The two countries were also involved in linguistic andcultural ties .
 Around one in 20 Ukrainians identifies themselves as ethnic Russian and the majority of the population speak both languages .
 Moscow has long regarded Kiev as its fiefdom, dating back to the Tsars and the appendage they called 'little Russia' and the long history of Soviet rule has entrenched this opinion .
 Putin, who claims Russians and Ukrainians are one people, has made it his mission to honor this legacy . Putin claims Russians, Ukrainians and Russians are one person .
 Putin has spent the last four years waging a proxy war in the eastern Donbass region . He has backed pro-Russian separatists with money, intelligence and even troops .
 Moscow has imposed sanctions on hundreds of Ukrainians and staged several provocative acts, including the erection of a fence along the Crimean border . Some analysts believe the campaign costs $2 billion a year .
 Putin's approval ratings are plummeting due to unpopular domestic reforms . Western observers fear that the Russian leader is preparing a full-scale offensive .
 This concern was sparked by November’s spat in the Kerch Strait when Russia seized three Ukrainian vessels and captured 23 sailors .
 The Kremlin shows no sign of freeing the prisoners or apologizing for its aggression . The latest reports suggest a major build-up of Russian military firepower in Crimea and along Ukraine's eastern border .
 Poroshenko claims that 80,000 troops have been assembled, backed by tanks, aircraft and rocket launchers . Poroshenko says the troops are backed by aircraft, tanks and rockets .
 Ukrainian leader has turned muscle-flexing to his advantage, says Russian media .
 Putin says Ukraine is “firmly on the path’ towards the EU and NATO . He’s used it to further his pro-European agenda . Putin is simply bitter about its progress, he says .
 He’s even used the Russian provocation as the pretext to build closer relations with Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron, two heavyweight European leaders who support him .
 Since succeeding pro-Russian Yanukovych, Poroshenko has steadily inched Ukraine away from Moscow and towards Brussels . Since succeeding the pro- Russian Yanukovych, he has steadily, inexorably inchedUkraine away from Russia .
 He’s severed a friendship treaty with Russia while driving a key constitutional change that will facilitate both EU and NATO memberships . He's severed the friendship treaty while driving the change.
 A new association agreement with the EU has triggered a huge rise in bilateral trade . Ukrainian has become the required language in secondary schools as part of a campaign to marginalize Russian and encourage indigenous culture .
Most significant change has been the secession of the Ukrainian Orthodox from the Russian Patriarch . But the most significant change was the secession from the Patriarch .
For centuries, religion has been the central nexus linking Moscow and Kiev . For centuries, it has been linked to religion .
 Russian Orthodox Church has claimed Ukraine as part of its patrimony since 1685 . The two sides trace their faith to a single event in the tenth century .
Ukrainian conclave formally created their own church in December . This cord was finally broken in December when a Ukrainian conclave officially created its own church .
 Ukraine will hold fresh elections in March, pitting Poroshenko against firebrand former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko . The election will be held in March .
 Tymoshenko has promised to reverse Poroshenko’s reforms . She is widely suspected of maintaining links with the Kremlin .
 Many remember the alliance she formed with Moscow back in 2008, to challenge then-President Viktor Yushchenko . Many wonder whether she will do another deal with Putin to restore Russian hegemony .
 Her populist pledges resonate with a population which, despite strong economic growth, have yet to see any discernible improvement in the healthcare system or rise in pension payments .
 Many suspect Russia will throw its own weight behind the opposition campaign . Such concerns play directly into Putin’s hands, and many suspect he will throw his own weight.
 Ukrainian intelligence sources say Russia has allocated an extra $350 million to its intelligence agencies in an attempt to destabilize Ukraine . Ukraine is expected to vote in the forthcoming vote on Ukraine's future president .