 To form the Ukrainian of a new era – a patriot, the page’s description reads .
 The children sing military-patriotic songs every day as a part of the camp's program . The songs are one of the more popular activities for the kids .
 patriotic songs dating back to Ukraine's previous struggles for independence in the early-20th century .
 Azov spokesman Stepan Badai says children are not taught songs that call for the killing of Russians or anybody else . Azov's spokesman said that the children were not taught the songs .
 "These are the real patriots of their homeland," she said . "I like those that have words about people who fight to the death"
 Stepan Bandera was a Nazi sympathizer who left behind a horrific legacy . He was lionized as a nationalist hero.
 Western journalists traveled to Kiev in late 2013 to cover the Euromaidan protests . They encountered a historical figure few recognized .
 Stepan Bandera's youthful black-and-white image was seemingly everywhere . It was on barricades, over the entrance to Kiev's city hall, and on placards held by demonstrators .
 The Russians said he was a fascist and an antisemite, but Western media were quick to disregard that as Moscow propaganda .
 Whoever Bandera was, all were in agreement that he couldn’t have been as nasty as Putin said he was .
 The Life and Afterlife of a Ukrainian Nationalist, it now seems clear: those terrible Russians were right .
 He used his growing influence to steer an already-violent group in an even more extreme direction . He is now a member of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists .
 In 1933, he organized an attack on the Soviet consul in Lviv, which only managed to kill an office secretary . In 1933 he organized the attack, which was only killed by a secretary .
 A year later, he directed the assassination of the Polish minister of the interior . He was killed in a car crash .
 He ordered the execution of a pair of alleged informers and was responsible for other deaths . OUN took to robbing banks, post offices, police stations, and private households in search of funds .
 Rossolinski-Liebe’s massive new study takes us through the times and the politics that captured Bandera's imagination .
 Polish-controlled western half was incorporated into the newly established Republic of Poland in 1918 . Ukrainian-dominated eastern portion was not absorbed until 1921, following the Polish–Soviet War and a brief period of independence .
 Ukrainian nationalists refused to recognize the takeover of Polish-owned farms . In 1922, they responded with a campaign of arson attacks on some 2,200 Polish- owned farms .
 Polish farmers brought in to settle the district and radically change the demographics of the countryside . Many of them were war veterans, many of them war veterans .
Ukrainian students use the somewhat more vague “Ruthenian’s” instead of ‘Ukrainians’ It closed down Ukrainian schools and even tried to ban the term “ Ukrainian” Instead .
 Warsaw resorted to mass arrest when the OUN launched another arson and sabotage campaign in summer 1930 .
 By late 1938, as many as 30,000 Ukrainians were languishing in Polish jails .
 Polish politicians were talking about the ‘extermination of the Ukrainians’ while a German journalist who traveled through eastern Galicia in early 1939 reported that local Ukrainians were calling for ‘Uncle Führer’ to step in and impose a solution of his own on the
 The conflict in the Polish-Ukrainian borderlands exemplified the ugly ethnic wars that were erupting throughout eastern Europe as a new world war approached . The conflict was the latest in a long line of ethnic wars in eastern Europe .
 Bandera might have responded to the growing disorder by moving to the political left .
 liberal Bolshevik cultural policies in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic had caused a surge in pro-Communist sentiment in the neighboring Polish province of Volhynia .
 Dmytro Dontsov was a member of the group's "spiritual father" and translated Hitler's Mein Kampf and Mussolini’s La Dottrina Del Fascismo . He taught that ethics should be subordinate to the national struggle .
 Entry into the OUN also plunged him into a milieu marked by growing antisemitism .
Anti-Jewish hatred had been deeply bound up with the concept of Ukrainian nationhood since at least the seventeenth century . Thousands of Ukrainian peasants maddened by the exactions of the Polish landlords and their Jewish estate managers .
 Ukraine was the scene of even more gruesome pogroms during the Russian Civil War . Ukraine was a scene of more than a dozen pogoms in the country .
 antisemitic passions rose a further notch in 1926 when a Jewish anarchist named Sholom Schwartzbard assassinated the Ukrainian leader Symon Petliura in Paris .
 French jury acquitted him in just thirty-five minutes . He was acquitted after hearing testimony about impaled babies, children cast into flames .
Only when Russia falls in Ukraine will we be able to settle the Jewish question in our country in a way that suits the interest of the Ukrainian people. Only when Russia fall in Ukraine.
 German takeover of western Poland began on September 1, 1939 . He made his way to Lviv, the capital of eastern Galicia . He was able to escape following the German takeover .
 The Soviet incursion on September 17 sent him fleeing in the opposite direction . But the Russian incursion sent him flee in the same direction .
 OUN leadership settled in German-controlled Cracow, about two hundred miles to the west, where they set about preparing the organization for further battles still to come . Eventually, he and the rest of the OUN leader settled in Germany-controlledCracow .
 The OUN leadership seems to have gotten wind of months ahead of time . The Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union was the moment they had been waiting for .
 The Ukraine has been in a single state for more than a decade . It has not yet been able to unify all Ukrainians in the single state . The Ukraine is still in the Soviet state .
 A month earlier, Bandera and his chief lieutenants had put the finishing touches on an internal party document . The document entitled “The Struggle and Activities of the OUN in Wartime’s. A to-do list for when the Wehrmacht
 We try before their coming to put life in order, on our own as it should be. We try to try before they come to their come to life, on their own .
 Ukrainian authorities are ready to establish friendly relations with the army, in order to fight together against Moscow . The OUN is under the control of the OUN under the leadership of Stepan Bandera .
 Bandera and his followers would later try to paint the alliance with the Third Reich as no more than “tactical’s” The alliance was in fact deep-rooted and ideological .
 Bandera envisioned the Ukraine as a classic one-party state with himself in the role of führer, or providnyk . He expected that a new Ukraine would take its place under the Nazi umbrella .
British naval blockade of World War I had caused as many as 750,000 deaths from starvation and disease . He was determined to block any similar effort by the Allies by expropriating eastern grain supplies on an unprecedented scale .
 The Ukraine is the great granary on the Black Sea . Ukraine is one of the most important countries in the world .
 Grain seizures on such a scale would mean condemning vast numbers to starvation . Twenty-five million or more in all would be affected by the seizures .
 Nazis' plans for a racial makeover of what they viewed as the eastern frontier . The Nazis did not care, but annihilation on such a scale accorded perfectly with their plans .
 Nazi blueprint called for killing or expelling up to 80 percent of Slavic population . Volksdeutsche, settlers from old Germany, and Waffen-SS veterans were among those behind the plan .
 There was no room in such a scheme for a self-governing Ukraine, it was said .
 Stets’ko announced the formation of a Ukrainian state ‘under the leadership of Stepan Bandera’ in Lviv . A couple of German officers warned him that the question of Ukrainian independence was up to Hitler alone .
Nazi officials gave Bandera the same message a few days later at a meeting in Cracow . Nazi officials gave the same messages to BanderA at the same meeting .
 Bandera and Stets’ko were escorted to Berlin and placed under house arrest . Subsequently, they were placed on house arrest.
 Hitler decided on July 19, 1941 to partition the Ukraine by incorporating eastern Galicia into the “General Government,’ as Nazi-ruled Poland was known . OUN members were stunned.
 The Nazis responded by shooting a number of OUN members and, by December 1941, placed some 1,500 under arrest .
Rossolinski-Liebe shows, as Bandera and his followers continued to long for an Axis victory . Still, as Rossolinsky-Lie be shows, the Axis victory continues to be a success .
As strained as relations with the Nazis might be, there could be no talk of neutrality in the epic struggle between Moscow and Berlin .
 Ukrainian nationalism had taken shape “in a spirit similar to the National Socialist ideas’s ideas, he went on . He was needed to “spiritually cure the Ukrainian youth” who had been poisoned by their upbringing under the Soviets .
 The Germans were in no mood to listen, but their attitude changed once their fortunes began to shift .
 Ukrainian division in the Waffen-SS, known the Galizien, would eventually grow to 14,000 members .
 The Nazis had revamped the OUN as a German-run police force . Rather than disbanding it, the Nazis had meanwhile revamped it as a police force.
 The OUN had played a leading role in the anti-Jewish pogroms that broke out in Lviv and dozens of other Ukrainian cities . Now they served the Nazis by patrolling the ghettoes and assisting in deportations, raids, and shootings .
 The UPA killed close to 100,000 Poles between 1943 and 1945, historian says . Orthodox priests blessed the axes, pitchforks, scythes, sickles, knives, and sticks that peasants it mobilized used to finish them off .
 Rossolinski-Liebe carries the story of Bandera and his movement through the Nazi defeat . The Galizien division fought alongside the retreating Wehrmacht and then into the postwar period .
 More than 30,000 people fell victim to the OUN before the Soviets managed to wipe out resistance in 1950 . More than 8,000 soldiers, militia members, and security personnel were among those who fell victim .
 Stepan Bandera is an important book that combines biography and sociology . It lays out the story of an important radical nationalist and the organization he led .
 OUN’s powerful resurgence since the 1991 has been key to its resurgence . But what makes it so relevant, of course, is the OUN's powerful resurgence .
 The movement's long-term prospects did not seem to be very promising, especially after a Soviet agent managed to slip through Bandera’s security ring in Munich in 1959 and kill him with a cyanide spray gun .
 The Banderites seemed to be going the way of all other “captive nations,” far-right exiles who gathered from time to time to sing .
 The speech was an indication of how little things had changed. Except for the omission of the Poles, the speech was a sign of little change .
 The movement was as xenophobic, antisemitic, and obsessed with violence as ever . Now, for the first time in half a century, thousands of people were listening to what it had to say .
 The response was no less unscrupulous than it was during the opening years of the Cold War .
Because they were democratic, their ultra-right trappings had to be inconsequential . Because they are democratic, they had to have their trappings removed . Because of their democratic trappings, they have to be considered inconsequentially .
 The wolfsangel that was formerly a symbol of the SS was now taken up by the Azov Battalion and other militias . The old OUN war cry of “Glory to Ukraine, glory to the heroes’ that was now ubiquitous among anti-Yanukovych protesters .
 Ukraine won a seat on the United Nations Security Council on Thursday . It immediately promised to use the platform to wage a political battle against Russia for annexing Crimea and supporting eastern separatists .
 Fireworks are expected when Ukraine takes its seat alongside permanent member Russia .
 Ukraine is ready to work with other council members “to bring stability and security’ in Africa, the Middle East and elsewhere . It’s about promoting the United Nations Charter and its commitments to peace, sovereignty and human rights, he says .
 Ukraine remains committed in its fight “against Russian aggression,’ says Klimkin . But Ukraine is still committed to its fight against Russian aggression .
 Ukraine will make the case that Russian troops, mercenaries and weapons must leave the country’s east, he says . The international community, the U.N., and human rights monitors must have full access to the region, he adds .
 Ukraine will also be working to keep up “political pressure on Russia to recognize that the Crimea is illegally occupied,’ says Klimkin . Ukraine will be working for U.S. and European sanctions, he says .
 Russia had quietly campaigned against Ukraine’s bid, according to diplomats who spoke on condition of anonymity because discussions have been private .
 The new council could also see clashes between Japan and China, also a permanent member, as well as with Russia .
Violence from Svoboda party activists a concern for some in small northern city .
Residents of Konotop are expressing shock and dismay over the behavior of newly chosen Mayor Artem Semenikhin of the neo-Nazi Svoboda party .
 Semenikhin drives around in a car bearing the number 14/88, a numerological reference to the phrases “we must secure the existence of our people and a future for white children’s children” and ‘Heil Hitler’
 The party managed to improve its standing during recent municipal elections in Kiev . The party obtained some 10 percent of the vote in Kiev and garnering second place in Lviv .
 Svoboda is far from the major worry for Ukrainian Jews that it was only two years ago . For the most part, it is not a major concern for Ukrainians .
 Konotop is a clear case, says Eduard Dolinsky of the Ukrainian Jewish Committee . Konotops is a case, he says .
Ukrainian Jewry representative Ilya Bezruchko says residents voted for Semenikhin because he projected an image of someone who could bring change and reform a corrupt system .
 Semenikhin himself has a history of fraud, having been arrested for posing as an electricity company worker in Kiev in 2012 .
 Bezruchko's late grandfather was the head of the community and his mother currently works for the city council . Semenikhin and his assistant have left angry comments on his Facebook page in response to critical articles .
 The mayor himself posted to say that his mother was corrupt and should be fired from her job . He claimed that someone close to the mayor claimed he would be hospitalized if he returned to Kiev .
 community activist Igor Nechayev says people are shocked it could happen in city . "Nobody believed it could happened here but it happened somehow,’ he says .
 relations between Jewish community and non-Jewish neighbors are cordial, he says . There have been a couple of instances of anti-Semitic graffiti over the past decade . One occasionally hears references to conspiracy theories identifying Ukrainian political leaders as Jews .
 Mayor says he doesn't cross over into outright anti-Semitism . But many things he says can be interpreted in such a way, he says .
 Mayor Semenikhin has refused to apologize for anti-Jewish actions in World War II . He intimated that those responsible for the Holodomor famine of the 1930s were largely Jewish .
 The Holodomor was a manmade famine that came about during the collectivization of agriculture in the Soviet Union . It led to the starving deaths of millions of people .
 Vyacheslav Likhachev is an anti-Semitism researcher . He says Ukrainians are afraid of the Russian threat, not the threat of national radicalism . He said voters were able to support him, not paying attention to the radicalism.
 Likhachev said the current Ukrainian legislation does not allow those with right-wing views to take part in the election . He said there is no way to remove them from the elected positions .