 This year, the anniversary of the annexation of the Crimea falls in the middle of the presidential campaign in Ukraine .
 It was not a reason for joy for the candidates as it is not a good topic to be used in the campaign . It is not the good topic for the campaign.
 The rest does not see any chances for electoral points in the matter of the Crimea . The rest doesn't see any chance of electoral points.
 Yulia Tymoshenko's statement defended her support for the decision rejecting armed resistance in the Crimea caused the greatest agitation .
 The candidate for the presidential seat repeats that at that time Ukraine had neither military nor diplomatic measures to resist the armed Russian invasion .
 Ukrainian secret services possessed information that Russia was only waiting to hear about the first killed Crimean dweller or Russian soldier to start a regular war with Ukraine .
 The President it the most politically responsible person for what happened in the Ukrainian policy towards the Crimea in the last five years . The President is the most political responsible person in Ukraine .
 Ukraine managed to achieve in the last five years is collecting declarations of almost the entire international community that the Crimea is a part of Ukraine .
 The U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo writes in the Crimean Declaration of July 25, 2018 . He writes that the USA jointly with the allies, allies, partners and international community reject the attempt of the annexation of the Crimea by Russia .
 Poroshenko assured that Crimea would be reclaimed by Ukraine in March . The Crimea will be reclaimed.
 Five years after the annexation of the Crimea this topic does not occur in election programmes of part of candidates at all .
Political and diplomatic methods are prevailing and hope for help resulting from the Euro-Atlantic integration . Political and diplomatic method is prevailing and hopes for help from the EU .
 Poroshenko announces changes in the Constitution and granting autonomy to the Crimean Tatars . Pro-Russian Viktor Medvedchuk is against that idea and does not include the issue of regaining the Crimea under Kiev authority .
 Yulia Tymoshenko was among the first to declare the necessity to return to the Budapest format in the matter of the Crimea and Donbas .
In general, candidates avoid the issue of the Crimea because it is very inconvenient, in contrast to Donbas . In general, candidate candidates avoid issue of Crimea because of it's inconvenient .
 The Crimea belongs to Ukraine and Russia claimed the peninsula by force and in an unlawful way . The Crimea is the peninsula that Russia claimed by force.
 Nobody would dare to say that the issue of the status of the Crimea should become an element of negotiations with Moscow .
Authorities in Moscow underline at every opportunity that Crimea will remain a part of Russia forever .
 Neither sanctions, nor pressure, nor a threat of military conflict will change that. Neither sanctions nor pressure will change the situation .
 Russia put much effort to bind the peninsula to the Russian Federation . Since the very first days of the annexation, Russia has tried to bind it to the Federation .
General Aleksandr Dvornikov announced the reinforcement of the Black Sea Fleet with 13 new vessels and sailing units . The Commander of the Southern Military District of Russia announced the reinforcements of the fleet .
 President Vladimir Putin took part in the official inauguration of two new blocks of power plants in Sevastopol and Simferopol in the annexed peninsula .