 Obama exhibits the audacity to call this Putin's “conquest of land’s ‘conquest’ of land, and to say that Russia must suffer for it . But when it happens in a former part of Russia, as a direct consequence
 Obama should be prosecuted for it by the International Criminal Court, but instead he 'prosecutes' Russia .
 Petro Poroshenko acknowledged the coup as early as when the coup had ended on February 26th of 2014 . The European Union's investigator was sent in to find out how this blatantly illegal overthrow of Ukraine’s democratically elected President, in fact, occurred .
 Nuland was there telling the U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine whom he should get placed in charge of Ukraine after the democratically elected President would be gone .
 Even Russia’s newsmedia play-down the extent and significance of this problem . Even Russia's news media play down the extent of the problem .
 America's coup in Ukraine did a lot worse to Ukraine than just harm to Ukrainian agriculture . But actually, America’s coup in the Ukraine did more than harm to Ukraine's agriculture .
 polling by Ukraine’s Sofia Center for Social Studies showed similarly low approval-ratings for the Obama-stooge regime . Subsequently, polling by the Sofia center for social Studies showed similar low approval ratings .
 Gallup's and Sofia's polls excluded the two breakaway regions, one of which had voted 90% for Yanukovych, and the other had voted 75% for him . Both knew the Obama-stooge regime only as bombing them, and so would have had 0% approval for
 The approval-rating for the U.S.-stooge regime was even lower than the lowest-ever approval- rating for the Yanukovych government had been over all of Ukraine .
 Obama and his vassal-aristocracies in Europe and elsewhere are imposing economic sanctions against Russia for Russia’s having allowed the people of Crimea to rejoin Russia .
 George Herbert Walker Bush initiated the plan to take over Russia on the night of 24 February 1990 . But all of this is really about whether the plan was initiated by Bush .
 The U.S. aristocracy's double-cross of Russia left only a one-sided end of the Cold War, while the other side continued it, sub-rosa, right up until the present .
 The NYT’s lies are in service to the forces that are still trying to continue — and to intensify — the Cold War .
 Paul Craig Roberts stated accurately whom those forces actually represent . And Paul CraigRoberts stated accurately who those forces were actually representing .