Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko speaks with UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres in Kiev .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg met in Kiev on Monday . The two discussed the prospect of Ukraine joining the alliance .
 A poll by the Democratic Initiatives Foundation in June found that about 69% of Ukrainians favor joining .
 Ukraine must still pass a number of economic and anti-corruption reforms before becoming a member of the country . Ukraine must also pass an economic andAnti-corruption reform before becoming an member .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin met with France's Total chief executive officer Patrick Pouyanne in Sochi . Putin was at the Bocharov Ruchei state residence.
 Ukraine also cannot have any territorial disputes, which it does in Crimea and the Donbass . Kiev has been battling Russian-backed separatists since 2014 .
 If Ukraine became a member, "you can't rule out additional aggression by Moscow," Herbst says .
Moscow would be limited in how it would respond to its aggression. But at the same time, Moscow would belimited in how its aggression is already causing it .
 Russia has been using hybrid warfare techniques against the former Soviet satellite since the 2014 Ukrainian revolution . Russia has used hybrid warfare tactics since the Ukraine revolution .
 At least 13 high-profile assassinations in Ukraine have been linked to Russia in the last three years . Ukraine has also been the victim of multiple cyberattacks thought to be perpetrated by the Kremlin .
 A Ukrainian soldier smokes a cigarette as gunfire and shellfire rain down in Avdiivka, Ukraine .
 The United States and NATO have already begun to help Ukraine defend against such attacks . The U.S. and NATO are already helping Ukraine defend from such attacks.
 Stoltenberg pledged on Monday that NATO would give Ukraine more hardware to defend against cyberwarfare attacks .
 Members of the Oklahoma National Guard are helping train Ukrainian troops . The United States recently announced that it would help provide Ukraine with more defense equipment .
 Ukraine may not become a NATO member until Russia has a "less beligerent president," says Herbst .