 The head of the Ukrainian Navy, Admiral Berezovsky, defected . He later followed by half of the Ukraine military stationed in the region .
 The Council of Ministers of Crimea was dissolved and a new pro-Russian Prime Minister installed . The new Prime Minister was installed .
 The Supreme Council declared the Republic of Crimea an independent, self-governing entity . It then held a controversial referendum on the status of Crimea on 16 March, which resulted in a majority vote to join the Russian Federation .
 Treaty signed between Republic of Crimea and Russian Federation at the Kremlin on 18 March to formally initiate Crimea's accession to the Russian Federation . Treaty signed by the Kremlin.
 The Ukrainian Armed Forces were evicted from their bases on 19 March by Crimean protesters and Russian troops . The Ukrainian Army was evicted by Crimean Protesters and Russian soldiers .
 Ukraine subsequently announced the withdrawal of their forces from Crimea . Ukraine subsequently withdrew its forces.
 The Russian State Duma officially passed the Federal Law Admitting to the Russian Federation the Republic of Crimea on 21 March . The law was passed by the Russian state Duma .
 This event took place in the aftermath of the Revolution of Dignity and is part of the wider Russo-Ukrainian War . The event was held in the wake of the revolution in the Ukraine .
 On 23 February, pro-Russian demonstrations were held in the Crimean city of Sevastopol .
 masked Russian troops without insignia took over the Supreme Council of Crimea on 27 February . On 27 February, masked troops took over Crimea and captured strategic sites across Crimea .
 Crimean status referendum and declaration of Crimea's independence on 16 March 2014 . This led to the installation of the pro-Russian Sergey Aksyonov government.
 Russia formally incorporated Crimea as two Russian federal subjects on 18 March 2014 . The Republic of Crimea and the federal city of Sevastopol were formally incorporated as two federal subjects in March 2014.
 The annexation led to the other members of the then-G8 suspending Russia from the group and then introducing a first round of sanctions against the country . The annexation was followed by the other member of the group suspending Russia .
 The UN resolution also "underscores that the referendum having no validity" cannot form the basis for any alteration of the status of Russia . The resolution calls upon all states and international organizations not to recognize or to imply the recognition of Russia's annexation .
 The Russian government opposes the "annexation" label . Putin defends the referendum as complying with the principle of the self-determination of peoples .
 Crimean public opinion 5 Ukrainian response 6 Russian response 7 International response 7. Ukrainian response 7 Russian response.
 The names of the Crimean conflict vary. Mapping 8 See also 9 Notes .
In Ukraine, annexation is known as the Temporary occupation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia . In Russia, it is known for the return of Crimea to the Russian Federation and the reunification of Crimea .
 In October 1921, the Bolshevik Russian SFSR gained control of the peninsula and instituted the Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic . The Crimean Aut autonomous Soviet Socialist republic was formed in October 1921 .
 Moscow joined the RSFSR with three other republics to form the Soviet Union the following year . Moscow joined three other Republics to become Soviet Union.
 In 1954, the Crimean Oblast was transferred from the Russian SFSR to the Ukrainian SSR by decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union to commemorate the 300th anniversary of Ukraine's union with Russia .
 By that time, the dissolution of the Soviet Union was well underway . The Soviet Union had already been dissolved .
 The Crimean ASSR was restored for less than a year as part of Soviet Ukraine before Ukrainian independence .
 Newly independent Ukraine maintained Crimea's autonomous status . Supreme Council of Crimea affirmed peninsula's ""sovereignty" as a part of Ukraine .
 Ukrainian Foreign Minister Volodymyr Ohryzko accused Russia of giving Russian passports to the population in Crimea . In September 2008, the Ukrainian foreign minister described it as a ""real problem"
 Sergei Tsekov said then that he hoped that Russia would treat Crimea the same way as it had treated South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 Crimea is populated by an ethnic Russian majority and a minority of both ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars . Crimea is one of Ukraine's largest ethnically Russian populations .
 Yanukovych won the 2010 presidential election with strong support from voters in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and southern and eastern Ukraine .
 Percentage of people that indicated Russian as their native language in the 2001 Ukraine census .
 The Presidium of the Supreme Council considered holding a referendum on the peninsula's status . The Russian government asked the government to guarantee the vote .
 The Security Service of Ukraine responded by opening a criminal case to investigate the possible "subversion" of Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 The 1954 transfer of Crimea from the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic had been a mistake . The Euromaidan protests came to a head in February 2014, and Yanukovych and many of his ministers fled the capital on 22 February .
 The Russian government said that the caretaker government was illegitimate . This new government was recognised internationally, though the government said it was a "coup d'état"
 The Verkhovna Rada of Crimea members called for an extraordinary meeting on 21 February . The meeting will take place in Crimea in Crimea .
 Crimean prime minister Anatolii Mohyliov said that his government recognised the new provisional government in Kyiv . He said the Crimean autonomous government would carry out all laws passed by the Ukrainian parliament .
 In Simferopol, a pro-Euromaidan rally of between 5,000 and 15,000 was held in support of the new government . attendees waved Ukrainian, Tatar, and European Union flags .
 Thousands protested against the new Ukrainian government . In Sevastopol, thousands voted to establish a parallel administration . The new government also created civil defence squads .
Pro-Russian protesters attempted to remove Ukrainian flag from city hall and replace it with the flag of Russia . Russian military convoys were also alleged to be seen in the area .
 Mayor Oleh Osadchy attempted to disperse the crowd and police eventually arrived to defend the flag .
 A fight ensued over the flagpole in Crimea .
 On 24 February, more rallied outside Sevastopol state administration . More rallied outside the city administration .
 Volodymyr Yatsuba, head of Sevastopol administration, announced his resignation . He cited the "decision of the city's inhabitants" made at pro-Russian rally . Local authorities forced local authorities to concede .
Alexei Chaly, a Russian citizen, was elected as mayor of Sevastopol City Council . He was elected by the city's council, which was illegally elected him .
 The Chairman of the Sevastopol City State Administration, appointed by the President of Ukraine, functions as its mayor . Under the law, it was not possible for Sevastopoulos to elect a mayor .
 On 25 February, several hundred pro-Russian protesters blocked the Crimean parliament demanding non-recognition of the central government of Ukraine .
Crowds gathered again outside Sevastopol's city hall on Tuesday as rumours spread that security forces could arrest Chaly . Police chief Alexander Goncharov said his officers would refuse to carry out "criminal orders"
 Viktor Neganov, a Sevastopol adviser to the Internal Affairs Minister, condemned the events in the city as a coup .
 Sevastopol City State Administration chairman Vladimir Yatsuba was booed and heckled on 23 February . He told a pro-Russian rally that Crimea was part of Ukraine .
 Tatars created self-defence groups, encouraged collaboration with Russians, Ukrainians, and people of other nationalities . Tatars called for the protection of churches, mosques, synagogues, and other important sites .
 New Security Service of Ukraine chief Valentyn Nalyvaichenko requested that the United Nations provide around-the-clock monitoring of the security situation in Crimea .
 Russian troops took control of the main route to Sevastopol on orders from Russian president Vladimir Putin .
 A military checkpoint was set up on the main highway between the city and Simferopol . A Russian flag and Russian military vehicles were also set up .
Russian flags were raised over these buildings and barricades were erected outside them . Russian special forcesseized the building of the Supreme Council of Crimea and the Council of Ministers in Simferopol .
 The Crimean parliament held an emergency session . The parliament was occupied by the "little green men"
 Crimean government voted to terminate the Crimean government . It voted to replace Prime Minister Anatolii Mohyliov with Sergey Aksyonov .
 Aksyonov belonged to the Russian Unity party, which received 4% of the vote in the last election . The party was the only party to win the election in Russia .
 The Prime Minister of Crimea is appointed by the Supreme Council of Crimea in consultation with the President.
Both Aksyonov and Konstantinov said they viewed Viktor Yanukovych as the de jure president of Ukraine . The parliament also voted to hold a referendum on greater autonomy set for 25 May .
 The troops had cut all of the building's communications, and took MPs' phones as they entered .
 No independent journalists were allowed inside the building while the votes were taking place . No independent journalist was allowed in the building .
 Donetsk People's Republic separatist Igor Girkin said in January 2015 that Crimean members of parliament were held at gunpoint, and forced to support the annexation .
More troops in unmarked uniforms, assisted this time by what appeared to be local Berkut riot police . These actions were immediately declared illegal by the Ukrainian interim government .
 Ukrainian TV channels became unavailable for Crimean viewers, and some of them were replaced with Russian stations .
 Aksyonov said that he would exercise control of all Ukrainian military and security installations on the peninsula . The blockade of military units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine during the capture of Crimea by Russia in February–March 2014 .
 He asked Putin for "assistance in ensuring peace and tranquility" in Crimea . He also asked him for assistance in ensuring peace in the Crimea .
 Putin's swift manoeuvre prompted protests of some Russian intelligentsia and demonstrations in Moscow against a Russian military campaign in Crimea .
 Russian troops, armour, and helicopters from mainland Russia exercised complete control over the Crimean Peninsula . By 2 March, Russian troops moving from the country's naval base in Sevastopol and reinforced by troops and armour .
 Ukrainian General Staff said there were units of the 18th Motor Rifle Brigade, 31st Air Assault Brigade and 22nd Spetsnaz Brigade deployed and operating in Crimea . The Russian Black Sea Fleet personnel violated international agreements signed by Ukraine and Russia .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin said that Russia had no plans to annex Crimea . Putin said on the same day that Russia has no plans for annexing Crimea .
 He said that it had no plans to invade Ukraine, but that it might intervene if Russians in Ukraine were threatened . He also said that he had no plan to invade the country .
Numerous media reports and statements by the Ukrainian and foreign governments noted the identity of the unmarked troops as Russian soldiers . Russian officials concealed their identity of their forces, claiming they were local "self-defence" units .
 Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov said there were no "excessive Russian troops" in Ukraine . As late as 17 April, Lavrov said that there had been no excessive Russian troops .
 Putin later acknowledged that he had ordered ""work to bring Crimea back into Russia" as early as February . He later acknowledged he had orders to bring the Crimea back to Russia .
Russia eventually admitted its troops' presence in Crimea . He also acknowledged that in early March there were "secret opinion polls" held in Crimea.
 Ukraine complained Russia violated the agreement under which it headquartered its Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol . Ukraine complained that by increasing its troop presence in Crimea, it violated the country's sovereignty .
 Ukraine's use of navigation stations and troop movements were improperly covered by the treaty . Ukraine used navigation stations, troop movements and navigation stations were violated many times as well as related court decisions .
 Russian MP Sergey Mironov introduced a bill to alter Russia's procedure for adding federal subjects . The bill was introduced in February 2014 .
 The declaration directly referred to the Kosovo independence precedent, by which the Albanian-populated Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija declared independence from Russia's ally Serbia as the Republic of Kosovo in 2008 . Russia staunchly opposed the unilateral action .
Crimean authorities' stated plans to declare independence from Ukraine made the Mironov bill unnecessary . Many analysts saw the Crimean declaration as an overt effort to pave the way for Crimea's annexation by Russia .
 This referendum, unlike one announced earlier, contained no option to maintain the status quo of governance under the 1998 constitution . This referendum was held in response to a referendum on the constitution in 1998 .
 Ukraine's erstwhile President, Oleksander Turchinov, stated that Ukraine's authorities in Crimea are totally illegitimate .
 The Crimean status referendum was deemed unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine . The Verkhovna Rada formally dissolved the Crimean parliament .
 Russia massed troops near the Ukrainian border, likely to threaten escalation and stymie Ukraine's response . With a referendum looming, Russia massing troops near Ukraine's eastern border .
 The referendum was held despite the opposition from the Ukrainian government .
 95.5% of voters in Crimea were in favour of seceding from Ukraine and joining Russia . Official results reported about 95. 5% of participating voters were in favor of separating from Ukraine .
 Only 15% to 30% of Crimeans eligible to vote actually voted for the Russian option . The means by which the referendum was conducted were widely criticised .
 OSCE refused to send observers to the referendum, stating that invitation should have come from an OSCE member state in question . OSCE refuses to send observer observers to referendum .
 Russia invited a group of observers from various European far-right political parties aligned with Putin . Russia stated the referendum was conducted in a free and fair manner .
 Declaration of Independence of the Republic of Crimea was short lived . Declaration of independence was short-lived . Declaration was signed in March 2013 .
 The Supreme Council of Crimea declared the formal independence of the Republic of Crimea on 17 March . Sevastopol was granted special status within the breakaway republic .
 Crimean parliament declared the "partial repeal" of Ukrainian laws . It began nationalising private and Ukrainian state property located on the Crimean Peninsula . The Crimean Peninsula is located in Ukraine's Crimea .
 Parliament formally requested that the Russian government admit the breakaway republic into Russia . Parliament also formally requested the government admit that the country is a breakaway country .
Putin officially recognised the Republic of Crimea 'as a sovereign and independent state' by decree on March 17 . On same day the de facto Supreme Council renamed itself the State Council of Crimea .
 On the 21 March the Republic of Crimea became a federal Subject of Russia .
 The Treaty on Accession of the Republic of Crimea to Russia was signed on 18 March 2014 to lay out terms for the immediate admission of Crimea and Sevastopol as federal subjects of Russia and part of the Russian Federation .
 The Russian Constitutional Court decided that the treaty is in compliance with the Constitution of Russia . On 19 March, the court said the treaty was in compliance .
 The treaty was ratified by the Federal Assembly and Federation Council by 21 March . A Just Russia's Ilya Ponomarev was the only State Duma member to vote against the treaty .
 The two casualties had a joint funeral attended by both the Crimean and Ukrainian authorities . Both the Ukrainian soldier and Russian paramilitary "self-defence volunteer" were mourned together . Russian authorities later announced the arrest of an alleged Ukrainian sniper .
 Ukraine's then acting defense minister Ihor Tenyukh authorised Ukrainian troops stationed in Crimea to use deadly force in life-threatening situations . The incident was under investigation by both the Crimean authorities and the Ukrainian military .
 Russian operations to seize the remaining Ukrainian military bases and ships in Crimea did not bring new fatalities . weapons were used and several people were injured . This increased the risk of bloodshed during any takeover of Ukrainian military installations .
 The Russian units involved in such operations were ordered to avoid use of deadly force when possible . The units involved were also told to avoid using deadly force.
 Morale among the Ukrainian troops was very low, and the vast majority of them did not offer any real resistance . The Ukrainian government ordered the full withdrawal of all of its armed forces from Crimea on 24 March .
 Approximately 50% of Ukrainian soldiers in Crimea had defected to the Russian military . Approximately 50 per cent of the Ukrainian soldiers have defected.
 On 26 March the last Ukrainian military bases and Ukrainian Navy ships were captured by Russian troops . Russian troops captured the Ukrainian naval ships on 26 March .
 The Crimean Tatars were ousted from their lands in 1944, and the Armenian, German, Greek, and Bulgarian minority communities in the region that Stalin also ordered removed in the 1940s . Stalin signed a decree formally rehabilitating the Tatars on the same day .
 Until 2016 these new subjects were grouped in the Crimean Federal District . Until 2016 they were grouped. Until 2016 the subjects were grouping in the Crimea Federal District.
 On 8 August 2016, Ukraine reported that Russia had increased its military presence along the demarcation line .
 Ukraine also deployed more troops and resources closer to the border with Crimea . In response to this military buildup Ukraine also deploys more troops, resources and resources .
 The Pentagon has downplayed a Russian invasion of Ukraine, calling Russian troops along the border a regular military exercise .
 Russia claimed two servicemen were killed in clashes with Ukrainian commandos . Russia claimed Ukrainian servicemen had been captured with a total of 40 kg of explosives in their possession .
Russian accounts claimed that Russian FSB detained ""Ukrainian saboteurs" and "terrorists" near Armiansk . Ukraine denied that the incident took place .
 A number of individuals were detained, including Yevhen Panov, who is described by Russian sources as a Ukrainian military intelligence officer and leader of the sabotage group . He is described as a former Ukrainian intelligence officer .
Ukrainian media reported that Panov was a military volunteer fighting in the east of the country . The group was allegedly planning terror attacks on important infrastructure in Armiansk, Crimea .
 Russia also claimed that the alleged border infiltration was accompanied by "heavy fire" from Ukrainian territory, resulting in the death of a Russian soldier .
 85% of non-Crimean Tatar respondents believed that if the referendum would be held again it would lead to the same or "only marginally different" results .
 Crimea was fully integrated into the Russian media sphere, and links with the rest of Ukraine were hardly existent . Ukraine Parliament overwhelmingly backed the imposition of martial law along Ukraine's coastal regions and those bordering Russia .
 Initially after the annexation, salaries rose, especially those of government workers . The Russian Federation and Russian financial crisis began in the 1990s .
 The increase in prices was offset by the depreciation of the ruble . This was soon offset by a rise in prices caused by the devaluation of ruble.
 Wages were cut back by 30% to 70% after Russian authority became established . Wages cut back to 30% after Russia became established.
 Tourism, previously Crimea's main industry, suffered in particular, down by 50% from 2014 in 2015 . Crimea's tourism industry suffered in 2014, down from 2014 to 2015 .
 Crimean agricultural yields were also significantly impacted by the annexation of Crimea . Crimean agricultural yield was significantly impacted .
 Ukraine cut off supplies of water through the North Crimean Canal, causing the 2014 rice crop to fail . The 2014 crop was greatly damaging the maize and soybean crops .
 The annexation had a negative influence on Russians working in Ukraine and Ukrainians working in Russia . The number of tourists visiting Crimea in the 2014 season was lower than in the previous years due to Western sanctions .
 The Russian government attempted to stimulate the flow of tourists by subsidizing holidays in the peninsula for children and state workers from all Russia . All Russia worked mostly for state-owned hotels .
 In 2015, overall 3 million tourists visited Crimea, according to official data . Before annexation it was around 5.5 million on average, before it was 5.4 million .
 The shortage is attributed mostly to stopped flow of tourists from Ukraine .
 Hotels and restaurants are also experiencing problems with finding enough seasonal workers . Most Ukrainian workers were most arriving from Ukraine in the preceding years .
 The annexation of Crimea is economically disadvantageous for the Russian Federation . Tourists visiting state-owned hotels complain about low standard of rooms and facilities .
 Russia will have to spend billions of euros a year to pay salaries and pensions . Russia will spend billions a year on salaries, pensions .
 Crimea has no land connection to Russia and at present gets water, gas and electricity from mainland Ukraine . Russia will have to undertake costly projects to connect Crimea to Russian water supply and power system .
 This required building a bridge and a pipeline across the Kerch Strait . This required a bridge, a pipeline and a bridge to connect the Strait to the sea .
 Russian business newspaper Kommersant expresses opinion that Russia will not acquire anything economically from Crimea . Crimea is not very developed industrially, having just a few big factories, and its yearly gross product is only $4 billion .
 The newspaper says everything from Russia will have to be delivered by sea, higher costs of transportation will result in higher prices for everything . To avoid a decline in living standards Russia will need to subsidise Crimean people for a few months .
 Kommersant estimates the costs of integrating Crimea into Russia in $30 billion over the next decade . Russia's seizing of Crimea gives it access to oil and gas reserves potentially worth trillions of dollars .
 Moscow's acquisition may alter the route along which the South Stream pipeline would be built, saving Russia money, time and engineering challenges .
 It would also allow Russia to avoid building in Turkish territorial waters . It was necessary in the original route to avoid Ukrainian territory .
 The Russian Federal Service for Communications warned about a transition period as Russian operators have to change the numbering capacity and subscribers . Vladimir Putin and his close confidant Arkady Rotenberg are close friends .
 The city codes in Crimea start with 65, but in the area of Kazakhstan the 6 is given to Kazakhstan which shares former Soviet Union +7 with Russia, so city codes must change .
 In the area that now forms the border between Crimea and Ukraine, Ukraine mining the salt lake inlets from the sea that constitute the natural borders .
 The adopted decisions create a legal basis for a checkpoint system at the Russian state border in the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol . In the year following the annexation, armed men seized various Crimean businesses .
 Russian media have noted this trend as "returning to the 90's" The Investigative Committee of Russia announced a number of theft and corruption cases in Crimea in 2015 .
 Russian mobile operators never expanded their operations into Crimea . All mobile services are offered on the basis of "internal roaming," which caused significant controversy inside Russia .
 The first five years of Crimean occupation cost Russia over $20 billion, roughly equal to two years of Russia's entire education budget . Telecoms argue expanding coverage to Crimea will put them at risk of Western sanctions .
 Russia is responsible for multiple human rights abuses, including torture, arbitrary detention, forced disappearances and instances of discrimination, according to the United Nations and multiple NGOs . Russia has been accused of persecution of Crimean Tatars in Crimea since the illegal annexation .
 The UN Human Rights Office has documented multiple human rights violations in Crimea . The Crimean region has been subject to numerous human rights abuses .
 Noting that minority Crimean Tatars have been disproportionately affected, noting that they are disproportionately affected . Noting the Crimean Tatar population is not enough, it is not the only minority affected .
 In December 2016, the UN General Assembly voted on a resolution on human rights in occupied Crimea .
 In March 2014, Human Rights Watch reported that pro-Ukrainian activists and journalists had been attacked, abducted, and tortured by self-defense groups .
On 9 May 2014, the new "anti-extremist" amendment to the Criminal Code of Russia, passed in December 2013, came into force . Some Crimeans were simply "disappeared" with no explanation .
 The Crimean Tatar television station was also shut down by the Russian authorities .
 Russian authorities of Crimea issued a ban on the annual commemorations of the anniversary of the deportation of the Crimean Tatars by Stalin by Stalin in 1944 .
 Previously, when Crimea was controlled by Ukraine, these commemorations had taken place every year . The commemorations were held every year in Crimea .
 The pro-Russian Crimean authorities also banned Mustafa Dzhemilev, a human rights activist, Soviet dissident, member of the Ukrainian parliament, and former Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatars .
 The Tatar community eventually did hold commemorative rallies in defiance of the ban . The community eventually held commemorative gatherings in defiance.
 Alexander Kostenko was sentenced to four years in a penal colony in May 2015 . In response Russian authorities flew helicopters over the rallies in an attempt to disrupt them .
Lawyer Dmitry Sotnikov says his client was beaten and starved . His lawyer says the case was fabricated and that his client had been beaten .
 Sotnikov responded that "there are fabricated cases in Russia, but rarely such humiliation and physical harm"
 In June 2015, Razom released a report compiling human rights abuses in Crimea . The report was released by Razom in June 2015 .
 Emir-Usein Kuku from Crimea was arrested and accused of belonging to the Islamist organization Hizb ut-Tahrir . He denies any involvement in this organization .
 Ervin Ibragimov, a former member of the Bakhchysarai Town Council, went missing on 24 May 2014 . Amnesty International has called for his immediate release .
 CCTV footage shows Ibragimov was stopped by a group of men and forced in their van . CCTV footage from a nearby shop shows he is briefly speaking to the men before being forced in the van .
 Ukraine lodged a memorandum weighing about 90 kg to the UN's International Court of Justice about racial discrimination by Russian authorities in occupied Crimea . Between 2015 and 2019 over 134,000 people living in Crimea applied for and were issued Ukrainian passports .
Support for joining Russia was 23% in a 2013 poll, down from 33% in 2011 . Prior to Russian occupation, support for joining Russian occupation was 23%.
 A joint survey by American government agency Broadcasting Board of Governors and polling firm Gallup was taken during April 2014 .
 82.8% of those polled believed that the results of the Crimean status referendum reflected the views of most residents of Crimea . 6.7% said that it did not have a positive impact on their lives, while 5.5% said they did not know .
 91% of Crimeans polled thought that the vote was free and fair . 88% said that the Ukrainian government should recognise the results . 72% of surveyed Crimean residents said their lives have improved since annexation .
 At the same time only 39% Russians living in the mainland said the annexation was beneficial for the country as a whole .
 The Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs summoned the Provisional Principal of Russia in Ukraine to present a note verbale of protest against Russia's recognition of the Republic of Crimea and its subsequent annexation .
 The Rada called on the international community to avoid recognition of the "so-called Republic of Crimea" or the annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol .
 The Verkhovna Rada declared the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol to be under "provisional occupation" by the Russian military . It imposed travel restrictions on Ukrainians visiting Crimea .
 The territories were also deemed ""inalienable parts of Ukraine" subject to Ukrainian law . The territories are also deemed "inalienables parts of the Ukraine"
 The Rada restricted foreign citizens' movements to and from the Crimean Peninsula . The law also forbade certain types of entrepreneurship .
 The law also forbade activity of government bodies formed in violation of Ukrainian law and designated their acts as null and void . It also bans activity of the government bodies form in violation.
 Following Russia's annexation of Crimea, Ukraine blocked the North Crimean Canal, which provided 85% of Crimea's drinking water . The canal provided 85 per cent of the Crimea's water .
 Ukraine halted all train and bus services to Crimea in December 2014 . On 16 September 2015 the Ukrainian parliament voted for the law that sets 20 February 2014 as the official date of the Russian temporary occupation of Crimean peninsula .
 The Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories and IDPs was established by the Ukrainian government on 20 April 2016 to manage occupied parts of Donetsk, Luhansk and Crimea regions affected by Russian military intervention of 2014 .
 By 2015, the number of IDPs registered in Ukraine who had fled from Russian-occupied Crimea was 50,000 .
 Slutsky announced that he was misunderstood by the Crimean press . No decision regarding simplifying the process of acquiring Russian citizenship for people in Crimea had been made yet .
 On 25 February, he stated that Viktor Yanukovych was still the legitimate president of Ukraine . In a meeting with Crimean politicians, he said he was still a legitimate president .
 Russian Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu said it was for reasons separate from the unrest in Ukraine .
 The Russian Ministry of Transport discontinued further talks with Ukraine in regards to the Crimean Bridge project in February .
 An estimated 27,000 rallied in support of the Russian government's decision to intervene in Ukraine . In Moscow, on 2 March, an estimated 27k rallied in favor of the decision .
 The rallies received considerable attention on Russian state TV and were officially approved by the government . Five people who were picketing next to the Federation Council building against the invasion of Ukraine were arrested .
 On 2 March, about 11 protesters demonstrated in Yekaterinburg against Russian involvement . Some wrapped in Ukrainian flag, some wrapped in the Ukrainian flag .
 Andrey Zubov was fired for his article in Vedomosti, criticising Russian military intervention . He was immediately harassed by passers-by .
 A woman came forward with a fabricated charge against him, of beating up a child . However, her claim, due to lack of a victim and obviously false, was ignored by police .
Andrei Zubov compared Russian actions in Crimea to the 1938 Annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany . Zubov was a professor at the Moscow State Institute of International Relations . He was threatened by the Nazi regime .
 Alexander Chuyev, the leader of the pro-Kremlin Spravedlivaya Rossiya party, also objected to Russian intervention in Ukraine .
 Russia's moves will lead to political and economic isolation, says Boris Akunin . Akunin predicted that Russia's move would lead to economic isolation . He said Russia will be isolated in Russia for years .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin speaks to the press on 4 March 2014, denouncing the Revolution of Dignity as an "unconstitutional coup" Putin insists that Moscow has a right to protect Russians in Ukraine .
 President Putin's approval rating among the Russian public increased by nearly 10% since the crisis began, according to a poll conducted by the All-Russian Center for Public Opinion Research . The highest in three years was the highest in a three-year period .
 More than 90% of Russians supported unification with the Crimean Republic . The same poll showed that more than 90 percent supported unification .
 President Putin said if a revolution took place in Ukraine, it would be a new country with which Russia had not concluded any treaties . Putin expressed his view on the situation in Novo-Ogaryovo, Russia .
 He offered an analogy with the events of 1917 in Russia, when the Russian Empire fell apart and a new state was created . The Russian Empire was created as a result of the revolution, he said .
 Around 100,000 people gathered in Crimean Sevastopol at Victory Day parade . Russian politicians speculated that there were already 143,000 Ukrainian refugees in Russia .
 The Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs refuted those claims of refugee increases in Russia . The Ukrainian ministry of foreign affairs refuted the claims .
 Yevhen Perebiynis said Russia was misinforming its own citizens as well as the entire international community to justify its own actions in Crimea .
Prominent dissident Mikhail Khodorkovsky said Crimea should stay within Ukraine with broader autonomy . Tatarstan is a gas-rich and economically successful republic in Russia .
Tatarstan Rustam Minnikhanov signed an agreement on co-operation between Tatarstan and the Aksyonov government in Crimea on 5 March . The agreement implied collaboration between ten government institutions as well as significant financial aid to Crimea from Tatarst businesses .
 Minnikhanov was in Crimea on his second visit and attended as a guest in the Crimean parliament chamber during the vote on the declaration of sovereignty pending 16 March .
 Mustafa Dzhemilev, a former leader of the Crimean Tatar Majlis, believed forces that were suspected to be Russian forces should leave the Crimean peninsula . He asked the UN Security Council to send peacekeepers into the region . Russian President Vladimir Putin made a comparison between Crimea
 Thousands of protesters in Moscow marched against Russian involvement in Ukraine . Many waved Ukrainian flags .
In February 2015, the leading independent Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta obtained documents allegedly written by oligarch Konstantin Malofeev and others . The Russian government provided the Russian government with a strategy in the event of Viktor Yanukovych's removal from power .
 The documents outline plans for annexation of Crimea and the eastern portions of the country . The documents describe events that followed after Yanukovych's fall .
 The U.S. government imposed sanctions against persons they deem to have violated or assisted in the violation of Ukraine's sovereignty . Lithuanian President, the Lithuanian president, has supported the move .
 The European Union suspended talks with Russia on economic and visa-related matters . Japan announced sanctions including suspension of talks relating to military, space, investment, and visa requirements .
 The European Commission decided on 11 March 2014 to enter into a full free-trade agreement with Ukraine within the year .
 On 12 March, the European Parliament rejected the upcoming referendum on independence in Crimea . They saw it as manipulated and contrary to international and Ukrainian law .
 The G7 bloc of developed nations made a joint statement condemning Russia . They announced that they would suspend preparations for the planned G8 summit in Sochi in June .
 NATO condemned Russia's military escalation in Crimea and said it was a breach of international law . Council of Europe expressed its full support for the territorial integrity and national unity of Ukraine .
 The Visegrád Group has issued a joint statement urging Russia to respect Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 The Indian government called for a peaceful resolution of the situation . A spokesman restated China's belief of non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations .
 Syrian President Bashar al-Assad said he supports Putin's efforts to "restore security and stability in the friendly country of Ukraine" Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro condemned Ukraine's "ultra-nationalist" coup .
Tony Blinken says Russian troops massed on the eastern Ukrainian border may be preparing to enter the country's eastern regions . U.S. deputy national security advisor Tony Blinken said the Russian troops may be planning to enter Ukraine .
 Russian officials stated that Russian troops would not enter other areas . Russian officials said they would not be allowed into other areas.
 NATO's supreme allied commander in Europe warned that the same troops were in a position to take over the separatist Russian-speaking Moldovan province of Transnistria . President of Moldova Nicolae Timofti warned Russia with not attempting to avoid damaging its international status further .
 He undertook to do everything he could to end the conflict in Ukraine . He said Russia needed to build calmly and with dignity, not by confrontation and war which isolated it from the world .
 Voted in favour of the resolution Abstained Vetoed the resolution condemning the 2014 Crimean referendum . Voted against the resolution. Voted for the resolution to condemn the 2014 referendum .
 In favour of considering the referendum illegal Abstained Absent when the vote took place Against adopting the resolution . For a more comprehensive list, see List of vetoed United Nations Security Council resolutions .
 A US-sponsored resolution that went to a vote in the UN Security Council to reaffirm Ukraine's "sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity" was not approved .
On 27 March 2014, the UN General Assembly approved a resolution describing the referendum leading to annexation of Crimea by Russia as illegal . Though a total of 13 council members voted in favour of the resolution and China abstained, Russia vetoed it .
 The resolution tried to underscore that 16 March referendum held in Crimea and the city of Sevastopol has no validity . The resolution said it cannot form the basis for any alteration of the status of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea .
 A fourth, Transnistria, sent a request on 18 March 2014 to join the Russian Federation following the Crimean example and in compliance with the Admission Law provisions . The Crimean example was followed by a fourth and a fourth request for Russian Federation to join .
 The regional councils of Italy's northern regions Lombardy and Veneto have adopted a non-binding resolution on recognizing Crimea as part of Russia . The resolution is not binding, but it has been approved by the regional councils .
 International sanctions during the Ukrainian crisis were imposed to prevent Russian and Crimean officials and politicians from travelling to Canada, the United States, and the European Union . The sanctions were imposed during the Ukraine crisis .
 The Russian Duma unanimously passed a resolution asking for all members of the Duma to be included on the sanctions list . These include suspension of talks relating to military, space, investment, and visa requirements .
Three days after the lists were published, the Russian Foreign Ministry published a reciprocal sanctions list of U.S. citizens . The list includes House Speaker John Boehner, Senator John McCain, and two advisers to President Obama .
 Russia imposed retaliatory sanctions on 13 Canadian officials including members of the Parliament of Canada, banning them from entering Russia . John Boehner, John McCain, Bob Menendez, Dan Coats, Mary Landrieu, and Harry Reid responded with pride at their inclusion on the list.
 Expanded Western sanctions in mid-March coursed through financial markets, hitting the business interests of some of Russia's richest people .
 The EU's initial list shied from targeting Putin's inner circle . The Americans centred on the heart of Moscow's leadership .
 Russian banks braced for capital outflows for the first three months of 2014 to reach $70 billion . Russian government-bond issues plummeted by three-quarters compared with the same period the previous year .
 Novatek, Russia's second-largest gas producer, saw $2.5bn in market value wiped out when its shares sank by nearly 10% . Putin's close friend Gennady Timchenko has a 23% stake in the company, $575m poorer .
 Russia in June 2017 suspended its budget payments to the Council of Europe . Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said payments would not resume until all rights of Russia's delegation were fully restored .
 Council Secretary General Thorbjørn Jagland has suggested lifting the sanctions to avoid the impact of mounting budgetary restraints . Jagland said the sanctions would be lifted if they were lifted .
 National Geographic Society stated that their policy is "to portray current reality" and "Crimea, if it is formally annexed by Russia, would be shaded gray" However, this step does not suggest recognising the legitimacy of such.
 As of April 2014, Google Maps displays Crimea as a disputed territory to most viewers .
 Yandex displays Crimea as part of Russia for .ru and .com domains since the end of March 2014 .
As of March 2014, Bing Maps,OpenStreetMap and HERE displayed Crimea as belonging to Ukraine . As of March 14, Bing maps, OpenStreetMap showed Crimea as belong to Ukraine.
 OpenStreetMap requested users to refrain from editing borders and administrative relations of subdivisions located in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol until 31 May 2014 .
 On 5 June 2014, OpenStreetMap switched to a territorial dispute option, displaying Crimea as a disputed territory . Crimea is disputed territory belonging to both countries .
 Crimea is a region of Ukraine . Larousse corrected the mistake on the Atlas on their internet version, and confirmed Crimea is Ukraine .
 The Italian-language magazine of geopolitics Limes maps Crimea as a part of Russia since December 2015 .
Italian magazine editor Lucio Caracciolo wrote that the map reflects reality .
Russian version of Apple's App Store began to show Crimea as part of Russia on 27 November 2019 . Russian version of the App Store was released on November 27 .
 Ukraine claims 20 February 2014 as the date of "the beginning of the temporary occupation of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia" In 2015 Ukrainian parliament officially designated the date as such .
 The document entered into force on 1 April 2014, but pending that was applied provisionally since very signing .
 Some lawmakers of every level have begun separatist negotiations with representatives of foreign nations .
 OCLC 909325250. The U.N. Security Council held its third meeting on Monday .
 The official medal that was produced by the Russian Federation for the so-called return of Crimea has the dates on it, starting with 20 February . The day before that agreement was brought to the attention of the Security Council by the representative of the Russia Federation .
 The Russian Federation started the annexation of Crimea the day before we reached the first agreement . President Yanukovych was still in power when the annexation took place .
 Russia began returning seized military hardware to Ukraine in March . By March 26, the annexation was essentially complete, and Russia was returning military hardware .
 At least two dozen heavily armed men stormed the Crimean parliament building before dawn on Feb. 27 . They were armed with assault rifles and rocket propelled grenades .
 Aksyonov walked into the parliament after a brief round of talks with the gunmen . A few hours later, he began to gather a quorum of the chamber's lawmakers .
 One Marine's Story Jesse Granger.mil, accessed 27 February 2022 . "Bitter Crimean Anniversary – Victims of Russian Annexation" .
 The world's most important news site is now on the Web . It's also on the Internet .
 The U.S. and Ukraine have released a joint statement by the United States and Ukraine . The statement was published on March 24, 2015 .
 Rada names 20 Feb.14 as official date of Crimea's occupation by Russia .
 September 2015 ^ President recognised 20 February as the official date of Crimean occupation . September 2015 is the first time the Crimean occupation has been recognised .
 German entities have invested roughly €20bn in Russia and some 6,200 companies – mostly small and medium-sized Mittelstand businesses – are active there .
 Deputy economy minister Andrei Klepach estimates that Russian capital outflows will total up to $70bn in the first quarter . More than the $63bn left the country during the whole of 2013 .
 Crimea shall remain in both the Ukraine and Russia administrative relations, and be indicated as disputed . In the short-term Crimea will remain in the Ukraine.
 The region is likely to be indicated as disputed for some time . We recognize that being in two administrative relations is not a good long-term solution .