 Russian soldiers first showed up in Crimea in February 2014 . The young man felt like he was living a nightmare .
 M is soft-spoken with dark features, an easy smile, and a disarming presence . M is a computer programmer by trade .
 M. is a Crimean Tatar, a Turkic ethnic group living in Crimea since the 10th century . M. was born in Crimea, Crimea, in the Crimea region of Crimea .
 During the Soviet era, the Crimean Tatars suffered persecution and a brutally enforced mass deportation to Central Asia . Some historical accounts, by some accounts, killed nearly half of the ethnicity’s population .
 Crimea in October 2014 was a heart-wrenching decision for the young man, pitting his loyalties to his family and ethnic culture against a desire to escape Russian oppression and to live in freedom .
 A few tables away, a man strums a guitar and M jokingly rolls his eyes . A man strumes a guitar. A man jokingly roll his eyes.
 A downtrodden expression spreads over a young man's face . It's atypical for the ordinarily easygoing, cheerful young man .
 Four years ago this month, M fearfully watched as a Russian military convoy came from the direction of Russia’s naval base in Sevastopol . His childhood hometown on the outskirts of Simferopol, where his parents still live, is his childhood hometown .
 Ukrainian troops across Crimea were caught on their heels, unsure whether to take up arms and stand their ground . In the days that followed, Russian invaders massed against them .
 Ukraine's ousted president, Viktor Yanukovych, had fled to exile in Russia . Yanukovych is a Kremlin ally .
 In Kyiv, a new government was rising from the ashes, ostensibly set to champion the revolution’s pro-European, anti-corruption sentiments .
Nearly a quarter-century after the fall of the Soviet Union, it seemed the country had turned a long-overdue corner . Russia has finally achieved escape velocity from Russia’s corrupting influences .
Russian troops appeared in Crimea just days after Yanukovych's ouster. Then, just days later, Russian troops appear in Crimea .
 The post-revolutionary elation took a backseat to a more pressing concern. The looming war with Russia is a pressing concern .
 Russia's invading military forces deployed from the country's naval base in the Crimean city of Sevastopol . Russia’s invasion of Crimea is part of the Crimean naval base .
 On Feb., 2014, Russian Spetsnaz, special forces troops, seized government buildings in Simferopol, Russia .
 By March 2, Russian military forces had de facto control over the entire peninsula . By March 1, Russian forces had control of the peninsula .
 The invasion of Crimea was a textbook execution of Russia’s ‘hybrid warfare’ doctrine, a blend of multiple warfighting domains, including cyberattacks, weaponized propaganda and deception .
 95 percent of Crimean citizens supposedly voted in favor of joining the Russian Federation . The international community has widely condemned the vote as illegitimate .
 One week later, the Russian president signed a law finalizing Russia’s takeover of the newly minted Crimean Republic .
 Ukrainian military forces didn't oppose the Russian invasion and Crimea was spared the ravages of major combat . In the end, Ukrainian forces didn’t oppose Russian invasion .
 Russia's proxy war still simmers after four years of constant combat in Ukraine's Donbas region . There, at the southern terminus of the entrenched, fortified front lines in Ukraine’s embattled Donbas area, Russia is still fighting in the region .
 Ukrainian forces weather artillery fire, rocket attacks, sniper and tank shots from pro-Russian separatists and Russian regulars . Every day, Ukrainian military forces Weather artillery fire and rocket attacks .
 Moscow has fed the war in eastern Ukraine with weapons, cash, and its own troops . Since April 2014, Moscow has been feeding the war with weapons and cash .
 The Kremlin maintains it's not involved in what it insists is a grassroots uprising against the post-revolutionary government in Kyiv .
All Crimean Tatars were to be deported from their homeland of nearly 1,000 years . M.'s grandparents had watched in fear as Soviet soldiers enforced then-Soviet dictator Josef Stalin’s 1944 diktat .
 The families uprooted on 30 minutes notice and sent thousands of miles across the bleak Asian steppes . Many died along the way due to disease or the elements in the cruel confines of sealed off rail cars .
 Red Army recaptured Crimea from Axis forces on May 13, 1944 . Red Army turned tide of war at key battles such as Stalingrad .
 Crimea's Tatars had already suffered years of persecution under Stalin's rule . By that time, Crimea’s Tatars were already suffering years of persecutors .
 Stalin made the decision to forcibly deport the entire nation to Central Asia . Accusing the Crimean Tatars of collaboration with the enemy, he made the move .
 From May 18 to 20, 1944, the Soviets expelled more than 190,000 Tatars from Crimea in what was the most rapid mass deportation in history .
 By the end of July 1944, there were officially no Crimean Tatars left living in Crimea, according to Soviet records .
 At least 7,889 deportees, 4 percent of all Crimean Tatars at that time, were deported . Soviet authorities forced them to endure within bolted-shut freight railcars .
 All four of M.’s grandparents were forcibly deported from Crimea to Uzbekistan in 1944 .
 Their stories illuminate the myriad tragedies suffered by an entire ethnicity . Their stories illuminated the myriad tragedy suffered by a whole ethnicity .
 M.’s maternal grandmother was orphaned during the deportation after her parents died of illness .
 In Uzbekistan, she lived in a children’s shelter for a few years with a younger sister . Their older sister found work and could take them in .
 At the shelter, M.’s grandmother subsisted on a diet that comprised almost nothing other than black bread . M.'s grandmother was orphaned and exiled from her homeland .
 In 1944, M.’s maternal grandfather was deported with his family to Uzbekistan . At the age of 13, he was deported to the country .
 The first few years in Uzbekistan were cruel, with the boy’s family living in a dugout, constantly facing starvation .
 The childhood home of M.’s grandfather still stands in a village called Evpatoria . M.S. has been in the village for decades .
 Three of M.’s grandparents survived to return to their Crimean homeland . They made their returns between 1988 and 1989 .
 His paternal grandfather, however, died of old age before he could go home . His paternal father, also a grandfather, died in his 80s .
 Crimea was the only home M had ever known before Russia's 2014 invasion of Crimea . For his part, prior to Russia’s 2014 invasion, Crimea had been the only place M had known .
 M moved to the western Ukrainian city of Lviv in October 2014, seven months into Russian rule . M is now living in Lviv .
 M. M. left Crimea of his own free will 70 years after Stalin’s forced mass deportations had expelled his grandparents .
 A young man remains deeply conflicted about leaving his homeland behind in search of a better life . The young man is deeply conflicted.
 M brims with a desire to travel and the motivation to work hard to achieve a better life for his family . He hopes to have one day to live in Ukraine .
 Crimea became part of the Russian Federation in March 2014 . The Crimea region has been part of Russia since Crimea was formed in March 2013 .
As Western sanctions against Russia kicked in, career opportunities for information technology professionals in Crimea dried up . For one, as Western sanctions kick in, opportunities in Crimea for information tech professionals like M dried up.
Young Crimean Tatar man found himself living in an Orwellian police state . Those who spoke out against the new Russian regime were silenced .
 Crimean Tatar community has been outspokenly opposed to Russian rule . After Russia’s 2014 takeover, the Crimean community spawned a disproportionate number of those opposed to Russia .
 Crimean Tatars attracted the brunt of the FSB's ire inside Russia’s new conquest .
 M explains that practical realities rather than patriotic convictions spurred the Crimean Tatars’ opposition to Russian rule .
 In 1989, after the Soviet Union nixed its ban on deported ethnicities returning to their native lands, Crimean Tatars scattered throughout Central Asia began returning to Crimea .
 According to a 2014 Russian census, roughly 246,000 Crimean Tatars now live in Crimea . The population is 12. percent of the overall population .
 Facing rampant discrimination after their return, the Crimean Tatars evolved into an insulated, tight-knit community . M grew up outside of Simferopol.
 M seems neither exultant nor reluctant to explain the reasons why he left his Crimean homeland .
 He speaks openly and impassively about the conflicting loyalties now tugging at him as he looks forward to his future . He speaks out openly about his relationship with his former boss .
 The man's family and loneliness are the two main reasons for his loneliness . He says he wants to talk to his family, but that's until the conversation turns to his loneliness.
 M has so far displayed cracks, for a moment, revealing the emotional toll that leaving his homeland has taken on the young man . The evenness that M has shown has been revealed by his family .
 There's no prohibition against M returning to Crimea to visit his family, and he does so two or three times a year . There’s no prohibition on M returning.
Each time he crosses the Russian checkpoints, there's the ever-present fear of Russian security officials . The lines sometimes last up to eight hours .
 Looking forward, M doesn't know what to do next or where his path will eventually lead .
 He wants his family to have career opportunities, the freedom to travel, and freedom from fear . He also wants to be able to travel with his family .
 All things that remain out of reach within Russian-controlled Crimea are out of reaching within Russia .
 The young man has had to rebuild from scratch all he left behind in Crimea . Admittedly, it’s a lonely life, in which the young man is having to rebuild .
 He says leaving Crimea was worth it, in the end, for the sake of freedom . But for all the privation, loneliness, and guilt, he says it was worth leaving Crimea .
 I've made a habit to ask of all the young people I've met in Ukraine who've shouldered the burdens of revolution and war . As our conversation wraps up, I come to that question, which over the years I’ve made an habit of asking of
 The cost of war is a telling barometer by which to measure the true cost of any war . A simple question, while a simple one, is how much war costs .
 Or, perhaps, to thoughtfully compose an idea, which is hard to articulate in any language, even your own . Or, maybe, to thinkfully compose a thoughtfully composing an idea .
 M speaks at a coffee shop in Kyiv in 2018 . His words could just as easily have been spoken by his grandparents in 1944 as they loaded onto Stalin's deportation trains .