 The cease-fire agreed at Minsk for the fate of war-torn Eastern Ukraine from February 2015 is in tatters . It’s been well over a year since Russia annexed Crimea .
 The 70th anniversary of Victory in Europe Day has just passed . This symposium examines the politics behind the crisis in Ukraine and the implications for international security .
 Russia has never acknowledged that it has a military role in eastern Ukraine . Russia has not acknowledged its role in the region .
 At the same time, it has accused the United States of deploying military trainers to eastern Ukraine .
 NATO and Ukrainian reports about the presence of Russian military personnel in the Donbas . There are ample other reports about Russian military equipment in the region .
In February, a pro-Russian journalist reported on the fighting around Debaltseve with several ‘separatist’ tanks in the background . In February, for example, a journalist reported that several 'separatists' tanks were present .
 The tanks could only have come from the Russian military, as they had reactive armor and other equipment that is only known to be in the Russian army's inventory .
 Russia nevertheless is doing well in the information war. State-sponsored outlets such as RT and Sputnik receive considerable funding from the government . Russia nevertheless has been doing well.
 The Russian public largely buys the Kremlin’s line, and it appears to have made in-roads in Europe . Some accept the argument that Russian action in Ukraine is defensive, triggered by NATO and EU enlargement .
 Russia has lost its information war with neighboring countries, including Georgia and Moldova . Russia has also lost its info war with neighbors that are members of the EU and NATO, but also neighboring countries .
 Belarus and Kazakhstan are resisting adhering to Russia’s line on this conflict . They fear Russia could do similar covert interventions in their countries .
 The one exception to this generalization is Russians themselves who live in Russia .
 Putin's annexation of Crimea in March, 2014 has been extremely popular at home and boosted his popular support . Most Russians do not and would not support military intervention in Ukraine .
 Putin's ability to engage in covert, not overt aggression in Ukraine depends on his ability to do so . Putin's domestic benefits of this war for Putin depend on this, says Peter Bergen .
 Russians at home are skeptical of this neo-imperialist undertaking, but I am also sure that, with the recent murder of Nemtsov, opposition is much more problematic. Surely there remain critical and informed Russians who are skeptical.
 More Russians seem to understand what's going on, but it is not clear that a majority do . In Soviet times, the general public was hugely skeptical about what they saw on television or read in the newspapers .
 The Russian public today appears to be far more accepting and far less questioning of what they see, particularly on television .
 By some accounts, the propaganda on Russian domestic media is worse than it was during the Soviet period . Some accounts, however, say it is worse.
weak state capacity and corruption in Ukraine arguably contributed to the country’s vulnerability to Russian intervention and destabilization . Weak state capacity, corruption in the country, according to experts .
 Ukrainian government is now 1, challenging the oligarchs and 2, pushing for anti-corruption reform .
 There will be broad support for challenging the oligarchs and pushing for anti-corruption reform . No doubt, there will be widespread support for reform .
 Most Ukrainians agree that these are serious problems, and they help explain the abysmal performance of the Ukrainian economy . Ukraine became an independent state on January 1, 1992 .
 Poroshenko is signaling with such actions that he is breaking with his past . He is committed to changing the way politics and economics have been conducted in Ukraine .
 Some citizens see Ukraine's actions as threatening their economic livelihood . The actions will help stabilize Ukraine, but they are likely viewed by some citizens .
More successful Ukraine is in dealing with its domestic problems, the more incentives Russia has to continue its aggressive policies . In this sense, this is the more successful Ukraine has to deal with its problems .
 The political risk for Poroshenko is that oligarchs may well push back against efforts to curb their influence . The Ukrainian government already faces a long list of reform and political challenges .
 The crisis in Ukraine represents a much more dangerous threat to Europe than the ongoing economic crisis in Greece . Münchau was arguing that the Ukraine crisis is more dangerous than Greece's economic crisis .
 The economic and political difficulties of Greece are not equal to the existential threats posed to Europe by Russian actions in Ukraine . Greece is facing economic, political difficulties, according to the Greek government .
 Russia has a strong domestic and international interest in continuing its policies of de-stabilizing the country . It is unclear how the Europeans can deter Russian aggression without encouraging more aggression .
The problems of economy and European institutions can easily become issues of war and peace . The problems of the economy and EU institutions can also become issues.
 AFD, UKIP and Le Pen party want to junk it. The union of French and German coal and steel in 1950, whence came the EU, came from this insight .
 Greece and Ukraine can well emulate the experience of ex-Yugoslavia in the 1990s or something worse from the epoch 1919-1939 . If both countries become failed states within Europe, they could well emulate that experience .
 Greece's history in Europe was unhappy in the inter war period, but nothing of its martyrdom in the second war itself . The aftermath of civil war and strife until 1974 was the end of the Greek civil war .
 The fate of Ukraine as a nation that must overcome its past poses a challenge for the EU, according to the Financial Times .
 Both crises must be mastered by policy makers at the same time, while the Middle East goes up in flames . instability in Africa threatens peace and security in Europe, as well .
 Vladimir Putin has shown a readiness to challenge the post-Cold War European security order . Putin has violated the cardinal rule of no use of force to change borders or take territory .
 Europe and the West have to assume that they might, and they need to be prepared to fend off a possible Russian security challenge . Europe has to be ready for a possible Russia security challenge.
 If Russia makes that challenge, Europe does not respond adequately, it will be a greater disaster than a Greek exit from the euro or even a failed Ukrainian state .
 Many first world countries do not punish Russia for violating post-Cold War security . I think history is repeating itself as many first world nations such as the U.S. don't punish Russia .
 Russia is able to do what it wants with Crimea because it isn’t being faced with opposition at the moment by any of the many countries capable of stopping it .
 Putin is still a dictator with more power than one man should have and should be treated as such. Putin should have been treated as a dictator, according to a report .