 Putin might act as he did when a popular revolution overthrew Yanukovych in Ukraine in 2014 . If Nicolás Maduro is removed from office in Venezuela, he might act like he did in Ukraine .
 Ukraine's president is trying to strangle Ukraine's economy in order to subjugate that country to Russia . This time, he may launch a surprise naval and land attack on Mariupol .
 Trump must take immediate preemptive measures to prevent this by increasing naval aid to Kiev . Trump must also take immediate pre-emptive measures.
 In Venezuela, Nicolás Maduro, the illegitimate winner of a reportedly sham election, has created a catastrophe . Maduro has, through his socialist policies, created a disaster, according to a report .
 The struggle between Juan Guaidó and himself is reaching a crescendo . The struggle is between Guaido and his challenger, Juan Guidó, and himself .
 Millions of Venezuelans, suffering under Maduro’s radical regime, have been flooding neighboring Brazil and Colombia . Millions have been flooded by the Venezuelan government .
 Maduro is clinging to power, just as Fidel Castro did in the early 1960s with the aid of Nikita Khrushchev .
 Putin recently deployed two nuclear-capable bombers to Venezuela . Putin is seeking to rescue his beleaguered client as well as his investments in Venezuelan oil and gold .
 Hundreds of “private military contractors who do secret missions for Russia’ are reportedly deployed in Venezuela . In addition, hundreds of ‘private military contractor’s’ were reportedly deployed .
 Putin is undertaking a new destabilization policy directed at the strategically important eastern Ukrainian city of Mariupol . U.S. ships recently sailed through the Black Sea .
 Ukraine depends on the export of coal, steel, and grain through Mariupol, which is the key export port for the whole Donbas region . His strategy is also likely designed to weaken Ukraine, which depends on coal and steel .
 Mariupol could also serve as a land bridge to Crimea . A railroad hub and a key port on the Azov Sea, Mariupols could also be a landbridge .
 Putin appears to have become militarily involved in Venezuela partly to ensure Ukraine will not follow the path of the Baltic NATO countries . Ukraine is the most geopolitically significant country on its western borders .
 He apparently desires that Ukraine will become a weak nation that will eventually reach some sort of economic cooperation with Russia . He apparently wants Ukraine to become a weaker nation. He apparently also wants to see Ukraine become a stronger nation .
 Putin is now using the Russian Navy and Special Forces by sea to strangle Mariupol . A believer in warfare by proxies on land – separatists, “volunteers,’s, and Chechens,” Chechens.
 Russia would love to once again possess the port in Mariupol and dominate the Azov Sea . Russia would like to dominate the sea again .
 Vladimir Putin has never sought to recover the whole Soviet or Tsarist empires . He has never tried to recover all the Soviet and Tsarist Empires .
Russian leader has concentrated on strategically important slices of countries that were part of the former empire . He has focused on those with sizable populations of Russian speakers, Orthodox believers, or Shiite supporters .
 Putin’s aims differ from those of former premiers Nikita Khrushchev and Leonid Brezhnev .
 Putin appears to be seeking littoral slices of countries with assets that he considers strategically valuable for Russia .
 The slices he seems to favor are those linked to the south by strategic waterways and endowed with energy resources . The slices of the south are linked to strategic waterways.
 Russia has a warm water port on the Mediterranean, gas fields, and has been in Syria since President Obama effectively abandoned Syria . The opportunity for Russia to displace or control Syrian leaders, such as Bashar Assad, is now being cleaned out by the US .
 Putin also appears to wish to reacquire ports, coastlines, waterways, and littoral lands lost to Russia during 1991 collapse of Soviet Union .
 Examples include Georgia’s Abkhazia, in 2008, with its Black Sea coastline . In 2014, Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula, the site of the Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol, was the site.
 Putin has also been enlarging naval facilities in Syria’s port of Tartus . He has settled comfortably in an airbase in the Syrian province of Latakia .
 Putin believes that in view of Russia's nuclear capability, America is not interested in risking a large nuclear confrontation .
 They have focused on the evolution of hybrid war scenarios to obtain land in countries that are not NATO members . They have also focused on how to get land in non-NATO countries .
 Ukraine, Georgia, and Syria – and perhaps in the future, Venezuela – are all examples . Ukraine,Georgia, and Venezuela – and, perhaps in a future, Syria – are examples .
 The key national security focus for Russia is still Ukraine, with its crucial geopolitical position and technological and agricultural potential . Ukraine is still a key part of Russia's economic and technological potential .
 Building a new United States base in Poland is critical for the U.S. to ensure security of NATO countries, Poland, and Baltics .
 Russian Navy's attack on three Ukrainian ships on November 25, 2018 . Several Ukrainian sailors were wounded and 24 captured and imprisoned . Mariupol on the Azov Sea and in the east was exposed by the Russian Navy’s attack .
 Russia claims they infringed on internal waters that others claim are international . Russia says it infringes on international waters .
 Putin has learned a few lessons from the overthrow of two of his clients . Putin's clients have been overthrown by his clients.
 Russia abstained at the UN rather than veto a NATO “humanitarian’ intervention against the Libyan dictator .
 Putin was also possibly shaken by the murder in Tripoli of Qaddafi by US-armed “moderate’s rebels . Qaddafi had complied with all United States requests .
 The second lesson came when the corrupt pro-Russian Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych was ousted in 2014 by a popular uprising .
 Crimea is Russia's traditional home base of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet . Russia's Black Sea fleet is based in the eastern Mediterranean . Crimea is a key part of Russia's naval deployment .
 Putin then went for direct intervention by military force from 2015 to 2018 . Putin then organized a multilateral defense against Obama's 2013 planned “red line’s intervention in Syria .
 The reason was purportedly to preserve the rule of Syrian president Bashar Assad . But it was really to expand Russian influence in the region even further .
 Putin has linked the conflicts in Syria and Ukraine by taking advantage of Russia’s peculiar geography .
 Putin can move elements of his Black Sea Fleet to the Caspian Sea and his Sea Flotilla to the Black Sea . The two conflicts can be used in either of the two conflicts . A canal between the Volga and Don rivers allows Putin to move parts of
 The ongoing disputes in both Syria and Ukraine – combined with the Minsk I and Minsk II negotiations – have enabled Putin to manage both conflicts to America's disadvantage .
 Forays into Mariupol by Russian proxies had already begun in 2014, as well as into other eastern Ukrainian cities, such as Donetsk, Lugansk and Kramatorsk .
 Most Western observers and residents of Mariupol had apparently anticipated that the siege of this strategically important city would take place in 2015 . The siege is expected to take place next year .
 Putin froze the Mariupol conflict and redeployed some of his forces to intervene in Syria . Instead, to everyone’s surprise, Putin froze it and rede deployed some of the forces .
 Russia has upgraded its navy and air force facilities in Tartus and Latakia . Russia also has energy investment and energy transfer pipelines in Syria .
 Putin's intervention helped to consolidate Assad's victory in late 2018 and Russia's entrenchment in Syria . Putin’s intervention helped.
 Putin skillfully batted away all U.S. attempts to arm Ukraine with Javelin anti-tank missiles . For years, during Obama’s tenure and ever since Trump took office.
 Initially it appeared that Trump had been persuaded by Putin that Ukraine was not an area important enough for U.S. engagement .
 Ukraine’s possession of the US-made missiles has had a tremendous psychological impact on tank crews in Donbas . Russian tank crews reportedly now refuse to deploy and shell Ukrainian positions .
 President John F Kennedy was viewed by Russia's Khrushchev as weak . Kennedy was seen as a weak leader in Russia .
 The Kremlin views Trump as weakened by ‘Russiagate’ and by the possibility – lustily reported by the media for two years – of his either resigning or facing impeachment . Richard Nixon did in 1974.
 There is little Putin can do to save Maduro’s regime in Venezuela. The cards are stacked in America's favor, according to CNN.
 In Venezuela, there is a legitimate leader, Juan Guaidó, while Maduro’s policies have alienated most of his people . Most of his neighbors as well.
 Maduro is reportedly thought little of by leftists in South America and Europe . Maduro is thought to be a little of the world's most powerful leader .
 The large amounts of humanitarian aid that Maduro is refusing to release to the Venezuelan people should be allowed into the country . The large amount of aid should, of course, be allowed in the country.
 The U.S. should try to avoid bloodshed by continuing to offer Maduro and his supporters safe passage out of the country .
 Putin seems to have been counting on a lack of U.S. resolve regarding Venezuela . He just succeeded in getting China to support him .
 If Maduro is removed from office, Putin might act as he did when a popular revolution overthrew Yanukovych in Ukraine, in 2014 .
 Ukraine's economy is being strangled by Russia in order to subjugate Ukraine to Russia . This time he may launch a surprise naval and land attack on Mariupol, set up a land bridge from Crimea to Russia.
 Trump needs to take immediate preemptive measures to prevent this by increasing naval aid to Kiev . Trump must take immediate action to prevent the increase in naval aid .
 The United States and Britain recently conducted naval drills in the Black Sea . That alone is insufficient, the U.S. and Britain say .
 The Turkish Straits are strictly following the international convention on deployment of foreign ships through the Black Sea . More naval power needs to be brought into play .
 The Ukrainian Navy could be allowed to borrow dozens of small vessels from NATO countries . The U.S. undertakes a rapid program of helping to rebuild and enlarge the Ukrainian Navy .
 President Trump must continue to work towards liberating the Venezuelan people, he says .
This is an edited version of an article published by the Gatestone Institute on February 25, 2019 . This is anedited version of a published version of the article .