 Gallup: 9 in 10 Ukrainians say corruption is widespread in their government . 8 in 10 see the same widespread problem in their country's businesses . 17% of Ukrainians now say they “have confidence … about the national government”
 While the pre-coup President, Viktor Yanukovych, was in office, that figure had been averaging about 23%, and was never as low as Poroshenko’s is now .
 Gallup reports, “fewer Ukrainians now say their leadership is taking them in the right direction than before the revolution,” but that statement calls this coup a ‘revolution’ embodies the propaganda-lie of one of Gallup’s main clients, the United States government
 It was the first coup to be videoed by people from many different angles with their cellphones and by TV cameras . This was not a coup d’etat, such as the U.S. government claims .
 The EU's investigator who had been assigned to report to their Foreign Affairs Minister Cathy Ashton reported to her that it had been a coup . Even Petro Poroshenko himself said that “our side — meaning the anti-Yanukovych people, had done it.
 The new coup-imposed Ukrainian government was already bombing it, starting on 9 May 2014 . It had no say whatsoever in determining Ukraine’s President after the coup .
 Geoffrey Pyatt is the co-founder of one of the two racist-fascist, or ideologically nazi, political parties in Ukraine . Pyatt worked with the U.S. Ambassador in Kiev to organize the coup .
 Pyatt's appointee left the coup's gun-play and military planning to that man's paramilitary friend . The friend had founded the other of the two Ukrainian nazi parties .
 Arseniy Yatsenyuk installed leaders of Ukraine’s two rabidly anti-Russian racist fascist or nazi parties into all of the top security and military positions . He called the ‘Anti Terrorist Operation’ or program to exterminate and drive out the residents
 The Brookings Institution urged Obama to increase the firebombings of Donbass . Obama decided not to follow that advice, at that particular time .
 Obama wants to base American nuclear missiles in Ukraine on Russia’s border . This coup and ethnic-cleansing is how he goes about achieving his goal .
 The entire plan had started under President George Herbert Walker Bush, in 1990 . Every United States President since then has advanced the plan further .
 The United States, ever since around 1980, hasn't been a democracy; it's a dictatorship . The U.S. hasn’t been a dictatorship since 1980 .
 U.S. President Obama imposed the economic sanctions against Russia for Russia's having accepted the pleas of Crimeans to rejoin Russia . Russia’s opposition to the Obama-imposed program to exterminate and/or expell from Ukraine the residents of the Donbass region of Ukraine
 The same European Union that accepted Obama's bloody February 2014 Ukrainian coup have also been accepting his ethnic-cleansing campaign there . Obama insists upon its being ultimately continued, notwithstanding his Secretary of State, John Kerry’s, internal opposition to it .