 Adam Eberhardt The Eurasian Union is Russia’s flagship project . It aims to institutionally subordinate the post-Soviet states to itself .
 Belarus, Kazakhstan and Armenia have been persuaded to join this integration project . The Kremlin has so far managed to persuade Belarus and Kazakhstan, and tentatively also Armenia, to join it .
 The Maidan and the Russian-Ukrainian war have undone this possibility . That still seemed feasible even in 2013, but the Maidan war has undone that possibility .
 Western states recognise the Eurasian Union as a legitimate partner in discussions about a new order in Europe with a view to restoring peace in Ukraine . However, they also opened up an alternative scenario for Russia, one in which the West recognises it as aitimate partner .
 It is worth taking into account the strategic consequences of that scenario. It's worth taking in account the consequences of the situation .
 Russia’s plan to progressively vassalise Ukraine openly anti-Russian sentiments . Russia's plan is to progressivelyVassalize Ukraine.
 Russia’s response to the Ukrainian revoarmed conflict develops and how the political lution develops . The annexation of Crimea and the orsituation changes in Ukraine will remain a politically discredited idea fered Moscow a false sense of triumph . But will in Ukraine for the foreseeable future,
 In the case of Ukraine, this of foreign trade will be strengthened by the exclusion of pro-Russian populations of Crimea and Donof the possible modernisation of the participatbass from the Ukrainian political space .
 Russian tanks mean that the project will no longer serve as in Crimea and Donbass . The main problem does not currently concern the trade sanctions imposed on Ukraine .
 The proposal of economic dialogue between Russia and the EEU is a veiled invitation to seek rations and re-position it firmly in a political compromise with Russia in a new forRussian sphere of influence .
 Russian leaders have been trying to normalise the situaop for constant dialogue between them . The EU and the EEU have a view to contributing to a de-escalation of tension in the region .
 The prospects of any constructive diative have had a welcome reception from some Eulogue . The German Ministion between the EU and the EEU are curter for Foreign Affairs Frank-Walter Steinmeier .
 Russia is interested in transforming Ukraine into a permanently political state, in a way that will serve as interests are a mere excuse . What it is interested triggered by Russia is strictly political in nature, in is transforming Ukraine .
 Europäische Friedensordnungsteht auf dem the current policy turns out to be too costly.
 It is therecle134378688/Europaeische-Friedensordnung-stehtfore in the West’s interest to increase the price .
 This is especially conflict, obliged to make and deliver on comthe case since concessions and a willingness to mitments . This is particularly conflict, says the author .
 It was Russia, not the Eurasian Uncompromise, that annexed Crimea and started the war in in the Russian political culture . ing Ukraine’s border areas from its own territory .
 Russia’s proposal to recognise the in the policy of Russia would be a symmetric step while in fact to foreign policy competences . It would not be. The Eurasian Union is a façade entity anyway .
 The EEU would be a mouthpiece of the ment to force Belarus and Kazakhstan to align regional hegemon's positions with that of Russia .
 The ability of neighbours to distance themselves from Russia is limited already, but it is beneficial from the point of view of the West that they still retain . Making the EEU a party to the negotiations would offer Russia a convenient argument ing Ukraine – it was because of this margin
Transforming the format of negotiations by inin the EU-EEU format would gradually reduce cluding the EEU would have no impact on Ukraine’s role from an active member of talks actual decision-making process .
 As a structure controlled by Russia, already has a military advantage over Ukraine, the EEU would fully represent the Kremlin’s pogreater economic potential .
 There are no reaformat Ukraine would find itself under more sons to believe that Mr Putin or Mr Lavrov pressure . It would be forced to accept sowould be more inclined to make concessions .
 A party to the talks by the Western states would set a precedent with significant consequences for European security . Russia would gain from the impleceived as an alternative to the EU, and not as mentation of the above scenario would concern a complementary structure . A further marginalisation of American influence
 Conducting talks with Russia would not limit itself to establish Russia in the format of two competing inteing a kind of “condominium’s of the EU gration blocs would be conducive to a new and the EEU .
 The line which splits Europe into two parts by the European Union in the East. It would make it easier for the Russian government to move away from discuscommitted .
 Russia would claim to represent because the EEU has been conceived as EEU member states, which it cannot practically an alternative to the EU, and not as a combe prevented from doing, but also to be the plementary structure .
 The Russian side has been unsuccessfully lobbying for an arrangement with the EU . If the EU today agrees to enter inter-bloc conof this kind in previous years, tomorrow it will face an institutionalisation of NATO’s dialogue with Russia .
 The Kremlin’s reaction to the gesture of good will on the If Russia managed to impose a discourse cenpart of the EU,e. The postponement of provitred on the rivalry between geopolitical blocs, sional application of the association agreement that would be a pre
 This is the risk ing Russia is costly, and the West’s ability to exinvolved in allowing Russia to take part in the tract concessions from the Russian leadership at negotiations on behalf of the Eurasian Union is limited . This stage is still limited, and this is
 In this war, which is also a war of nerves, strategic patience is necessary, according to the Ukrainian army .
 The fact that the set of effective sopaid a high price for their European aspirations is limited cannot serve as an argument in and their objection to being incorporated into favour of solutions which are clearly detrimental. The fact of effective sopaid a high price is limited.