 Thousands of railcars ordered up to transport oil are now sitting idle . Current ultralow crude prices have made shipping by train unprofitable .
 U.S. oil inventories swell to their highest level since the 1930s . Traditional storage tanks are running out of room .
 Some industry participants are calling the new practice “rolling storage’s” The new practice is a landlocked spin on the “floating storage” producers use to hold crude on giant oil tankers .
 The combination of cheap oil and surplus railcars has created a budding new side business for traders .
 Fjeld-Hansen tested using railcars for storage last year and found he could profit by putting the oil aside while locking in a higher price to deliver it in a later month .
 Energy Midstream stored an ultralight oil known as condensate on Ohio railcars last month for about 15 days before shipping it to a buyer in Canada .
There are so many unused tank cars that many railcar owners hope to put them to use . Dennis Hoskins, a managing partner at Energy Midstream, says he is constantly hearing from rail car owners .
 The use of railcars for storage could be limited by the cost of track space and safety and liability concerns . High-profile transport accidents have followed a string of high-profile accidents .
 Federal regulations require railroads that store cars loaded with hazardous materials like oil to comply with strict storage and security measures to keep cars away from daily rail traffic .
 Railroads and users face responsibility for leaks, collisions or other mishaps . Railroads are responsible for leaks and collisions, collisions and accidents .
 Ironhorse Permian Basin LLC operates a rail terminal in Artesia, N.M. Khory Ramage says he hears regularly from traders looking to store crude in his railcars .
Underground salt caverns can cost 25 cents a barrel each month . Floating storage can cost 75 cents or more . storing crude on railcars costs about 50 cents per barrel .
 The use of U.S. railcars to transport large volumes of oil picked up steam a few years ago as a byproduct of fracking boom .
 Fields sprung up faster than pipelines could be laid, so producers improvised and shipped their output to market by rail . Fields sprang up faster.
Railroads offered greater flexibility to transfer oil to whomever offered the best price . Companies soon realized railroads had greater flexibility.
 Some pipeline companies even joined the rail business, building terminals to load and unload oil . Some companies even built terminals to unload and load oil .
 United States oil settled Friday at $32.78 a barrel, down nearly 70% from mid-2014 . The U.S. oil market is down almost 70% since the start of 2014 .
 Analysts estimate there are now as many as 20,000 tank cars. One-third of the North American fleet for hauling oil is in storage yards .
 Producers and shippers who signed long-term leases for the cars during the boom are stuck paying monthly rates that typically run $1,500-$1,700 per car .
 Oil bought at the April price and sold through the futures market for delivery a year later could net a trader $8.07 a barrel . Not including storage or transportation costs, not including storage and transportation costs .
 As central storage hubs fill up, oil companies are more willing to pay for expensive and remote types of storage . Tank Tiger keeps a database of companies looking to buy and sell oil storage space .
 Mr Barsamian likened the disappearance of available storage to a coloring book where nearly all the white space has been filled in . He likened it to the disappearance.
 congressional leaders have agreed to lift the nation’s 40-year-old ban on oil exports . The historic action reflects political and economic shifts driven by a boom in U.S. oil drilling .
 The measure allowing oil exports is at the center of a deal that Republican leaders announced late Tuesday on spending and tax legislation . The measure allows oil exports.
 Both the House and Senate still must pass it and President Barack Obama must sign it into law .
 The deal would lift the ban, a priority for Republicans and the oil industry . It would also adopt environmental and renewable measures that Democrats sought .
 A GOP aide says the Obama administration will not block major environmental regulations . These include extending wind and solar tax credits and reauthorizing for three years a conservation fund .
 The agreement hands the oil industry a long-sought victory within days of a major international climate deal . The agreement is aimed at sharply reducing emissions from oil and other fuels .
 More than a dozen independent oil companies have been lobbying Congress to lift the ban on oil exports for nearly two years . They argue that unfettered oil exports would eliminate market distortions, stimulate the United States economy and boost national security .
 A handful of Washington lawmakers representing oil-producing states, including Sens. Sens. John McCain, D.C. and Sen. Joe Biden, are among them .
 Heidi Heitkamp and Lisa Murkowski have been working to convince once-wary politicians to back oil exports . Allay worries that they will be blamed if gasoline prices were to rise .
 Some refineries oppose oil exports, saying their business would be hit if crude oil is shipped overseas to be refined . Others say higher costs might be passed along to consumers .
 The U.S. government doesn't limit exports of refined petroleum products . Those exports have more than doubled since 2007, the government says .
 The spending bill changes an existing tax deduction for domestic manufacturing to benefit independent refineries . To address the refiners’ concerns, Democrats from the Northeast expressed most vocally by Democrats .
 President Obama had threatened to veto separate legislation lifting the export ban . The White House isn't expected to oppose the overall spending bill simply because it includes the measure, aides say .
 Congress moved to ban oil exports under most circumstances following a 1973 Arab oil embargo that sent domestic gasoline prices skyrocketing . The 1973 oil embargo sent domestic gas prices soaring .
 U.S. oil production has shot up nearly 90% since August 2008, helping lower gasoline prices to levels not seen since 2009 . The increased use of fracking and other drilling technologies in recent years has helped lower gas prices .
 Gas prices are less than $2 a gallon in many regions of the country . The U.S. Energy Information Administration forecasts the price will average $2.04 this month and $ 2.36 next year .
Oil prices dropped below $40 a barrel. It took this dramatic drop in oil prices to catapult the policy change to the top of the Republican agenda .
 A grand Washington deal-making has been seen for years on the highly divisive issues of energy and environment . It helped prompt lawmakers of both parties to consider pairing renewable energy support with oil exports .
 The same low prices that generated momentum for lifting the ban could reduce its short-term economic impact . The global market is saturated and United States oil companies have already slowed drilling in response .
Low oil prices have increased the urgency for Congress to lift the ban . John Hess, chief executive of Hess Corp., declined to say whether his company would immediately begin exporting oil if given the opportunity .
 The United States is already exporting nearly 400,000 barrels of crude a day to Canada . The biggest exemption under the ban is the biggest under the law .
 Just 3.8% of U.S. oil produced every day in 2008 is more than nine times as much as in 2008 . That is still just 3.7% of the United States oil produced each day .
 A certain type of light oil is already starting to flow overseas thanks to permission granted in 2014 by the Commerce Department . The Commerce Department allows producers to reclassify oil as a refined fuel, similar to gasoline, which is legal to ship abroad .
 The logistics of a new surge of oil exports would be relatively manageable, especially compared to exporting natural gas . It takes years of federal permitting and billions of dollars to liquefy the gas .
 Extensive networks of oil pipelines and storage tanks already stretch along the Gulf Coast from Corpus Christi, Texas, to St. Louis, Texas .
Nearly a third of U.S. refineries are located in the United States . The oil ports are for now geared toward unloading crude from tankers, not loading them .
 Initially there would be some constrained capacity that caps energy companies’ ability to ship crude out to foreign buyers. So initially there would have been some constrained Capacity .
 Texas is where permitting is easy and such projects face little community opposition . But retrofitting those facilities could happen quickly in a place like Texas, where permits are easy .
 The ports of Corpus Christi and Houston are already undergoing dramatic expansions . The ports are already being expanded by more than 100 percent .
 Shale drillers will see production drop sooner than expected under a U.S. government forecast . The momentum change hints at an eventual price rally .
 The shale oil industry will record its first monthly dip since U.S. officials began weighing output in 2013 . Saudi Arabia put the market into a tailspin by refusing to cut supply despite global glut .
 The decline lags the idling of rigs because of a backlog of already-drilled wells that have gradually been coming online .
 Shale fields make up about half of total U.S. production, Energy Department forecast says . Shale field production will continue growing this year and next, rising to 10. million barrels a day in 2025, it says .
 Crude lost almost 60 percent of its value since late June . Some shale fields are unprofitable to develop, forcing companies to cut back exploration prospects .
 More than half the rigs in the U.S. have been shut down since Saudi statement in November . The Saudi government canceled expansion plans to conserve cash .
 Wells extracting oil from dense shale rock experience “hyperbolic decline rates,’ Pitts said by telephone .
 Comstock Resources Inc. halted all crude drilling at the start of the year . Company expects the oil production decline to begin in its third-and fourth-quarter results .
 Shale producers such as EOG Resources Inc. have been predicting United States output would decline by the end of the year .
 Houston-based company said its own production would reach a nadir during the second and third quarters . In February, the Houston- based company said it would reach its ownProduction.
 Lance says he expects U.S. output to fall in the second half of the year . Prices to recover to as high as $80 a barrel in the next three years, he says .
 Saudi Arabia squelched efforts by some in the cartel to curb output in November, accelerating a fall in oil prices . Saudi Arabia is the dominant member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries .
 Saudi crude has been displaced from some U.S. markets as the flood of domestic shale oil offered refiners a cheaper alternative .
 The five major U.S. shale oil regions will pump an average of 5.561 million barrels a day in May, the Energy Department says . That's down from this month’s estimated 5.618 million barrels .
 The Niobrara formation northeast of Denver will lead the decline with a 3. percent drop, according to the Energy Department in Washington .
 In the Niobrara formation, the production fall-off will be sharper than in other regions, an analyst says .
 Individual wells in the Niobrara don’t produce as much crude, reducing profitability, he says . Compared to other shale-oil areas, individual wells in NiobRara don't produce as many crude .
 The two biggest operators in the Niobrara have been slowing activity and deferring work, analyst says . Anadarko Petroleum Corp. and Noble Energy Inc. have been slowed activity, according to Scialla .
 Denver-based PDC Energy Inc. hasn't slowed down, and that's because they locked in cash flow prior to the oil market's crash with financial instruments called hedges, Scialla said .
 After the Niobrara, the Eagle Ford shale in Texas and the Bakken formation in North Dakota will register the next biggest month-over-month production declines in May, respectively .
 The Permian in Texas and the Utica in Ohio are the other two major U.S. shale oil regions . output is expected to rise in May, Energy Department says .
 Explorers will be cautious about resuming their old pace of drilling out of fear that rising production will deflate prices again .
 Rising oil production and falling demand will combine to drive oil prices lower. Rising production will combine with falling demand to drive prices lower .
 crude oil prices are down by more than half from their June 2014 peak of $107. At about $50 a barrel, crude oil price is down by about half from $107 .
 United States economic growth has averaged 2. percent a year since the recovery started in mid-2009 . U.S. economic growth in 2009 was 2.3 percent .
 That’s about half the rate you might expect in a rebound from the deepest recession since the 1930s . That's about half what you may expect from a rebound.
 Growth in China is slowing, is minimal in the euro zone and is negative in Japan . Meanwhile, growth in China was slowing, and growth in Japan was negative in Europe .
Global oil demand is weak and might even decline, says analyst . U.S. vehicle gas mileage has increased in recent years . It's clear why global oil demand was weak and may even decline .
 At the same time, output is climbing, thanks to increased U.S. production from hydraulic fracking and horizontal drilling .
 United States output rose by 15 percent in the 12 months through November from a year earlier, based on the latest data . imports declined 4 percent .
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is designed to ensure stable and above-market crude prices . Like all cartels, it's designed to keep prices stable .
High prices encourage cheating, as cartel members exceed their quotas . But those high prices are also a reason for cheating, with cartel members exceeding quotas .
 Saudi Arabia must cut its own output to keep prices from falling . For the cartel to function, its leader must accommodate the cheaters .
 Saudis have seen their past cutbacks result in market-share losses . But the Saudis have also seen their previous cutbacks lead to losses .
Saudi Arabia is backed by other Persian Gulf oil producers with sizable financial resources . The Saudis are backed by Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates .
 OPEC said that it wouldn’t cut output, sending oil prices off a cliff . On Nov., OPEC said it wouldn't cut output .
 The Saudis figure they can withstand low prices for longer than their financially weaker competitors . They will have to cut production first as pumping becomes uneconomical .
 Venezuela needs to support its mismanaged economy. Whatever that price is, it is much lower than the $125 a barrel Venezuela need to support it .
 It is betting it can survive for two years with prices of less than $40 a barrel . But it has $726 billion in foreign currency reserves and is betting that it will survive .
 80 percent of new U.S. shale oil production this year will be $50 to $69 a barrel, says Daniel Yergin of IHS Cambridge Energy Research Associates .
 The chicken-out point is the marginal cost of production, or the additional costs after the wells are drilled and the pipes are laid . Instead, the marginal costs are the cost of producing .
 Cash flow for an additional barrel falls to zero. It’s the price at which cash flow for a barrel fall to zero .
 Wood Mackenzie, an energy research organization, found that of 2,222 oil fields surveyed worldwide, only 1. percent would have negative cash flow at $40 a barrel .
 The marginal cost for efficient U.S. shale-oil producers is about $10 to $20 a barrel in the Permian Basin in Texas and about the same for oil produced in the Persian Gulf .
 They desperately need the revenue from oil exports to service foreign debts and fund imports . The oil industry is struggling to cope with foreign debts .
 The more oil they produce and export to earn the same number of dollars as the currency used to price and trade oil . The lower the price, the more oil is produced and exported to earn more dollars .
With new discoveries, stability in parts of the Middle East and increasing drilling efficiency, global oil output will no doubt rise in the next several years, adding to pressure on prices .
 U.S. crude oil production forecast to rise by 300,000 barrels a day during the next year from 9. million now . The United States is expected to produce more than 1 million barrels per day .
 The drilling rig count is falling, but it's the inefficient rigs that are being idled, not the horizontal rigs . The fracking industry is the backbone of the fracking industry .
 Iraq's recent deal with the Kurds means another 550,000 barrels a day will enter the market . Consider also Iraq’s recent deals with Kurds, meaning that another 550k barrels per day.
 OPEC forecasts demand for its oil at a 14-year low of 28. million barrels a day in 2017 . That's 600,000 less than its forecast a year ago and down from 30. million barrel output .
 It cut its 2015 demand forecast to a 12-year low of 29.12 million barrels . It also cut its 2016 demand forecast for the same amount of barrels .
 The International Energy Agency reduced its 2015 global demand forecast for the fourth time in 12 months by 230,000 barrels a day to 93. million . The agency sees supply exceeding demand this year by 400,000 barrel a day .
 The 40 percent decline in U.S. gasoline prices since April 2014 has led consumers to buy more SUVs and pick-up trucks . Consumers during the past few years have bought the most efficient blend of cars and trucks ever .
 slowing growth in China and shift away from energy-intensive manufactured exports and infrastructure to consumer services is depressing oil demand .
 China accounted for two-thirds of the growth in demand for oil in the past decade . China accounts for two thirds of the growing demand in the last decade .
 France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine to sign a deal to end a year-long war fuelled by Russia and fought by its proxies . The pens were on the table in Minsk, Belarus’s capital.
 Russia looks sure to be able to keep open its border with Ukraine and sustain the flow of arms and people . But Russia has been accused of trying to keep it open with Ukraine .
 The siege of Debaltseve, a strategic transport hub held by Ukrainian forces, continues . Ukrainian forces have been holding the city for more than a year .
 IMF has said it will lend Ukraine $17. billion to prop up its economy . Meanwhile the IMF said it would lend $17 billion to Ukraine .
 Mr Putin seems to be relying on a familiar Russian tactic of exhausting his negotiating counterparts . But Mr Putin appears to be taking two steps forward, one step back .
 He is counting on time and endurance to bring the collapse and division of Ukraine and a revision of the post-cold war world order . He is counting on time to bring Ukraine to the end .
 The West faces a greater threat from the East than at any point during the cold war . Nearly a quarter-century after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the West faces an even greater threat .
 Even during the Cuban missile crisis of 1962, Soviet leaders were constrained by the Politburo and memories of the second world war .
 Russian elite's perception of the West as a threat to the very existence of the Russian state. Bluff or not, this reflects the Russian elite’s perception of West as threat to Russian state .
 Russia did not start the war in Ukraine, but responded to Western aggression . In this view, Russia didn't start the Ukraine war, but reacted to West aggression .
 The Maidan uprising and ousting of Viktor Yanukovych as Ukraine's president were engineered by American special services to move NATO closer to Russia's borders .
 U.S. envoys offered Ukraine’s interim government $25 billion to place missile defences on the Russian border .
 America would have found some other excuse to contain Russia, Mr Putin has said .
 Ukraine was not the cause of Russia’s conflict with the West, but its consequence. Ukraine, therefore, was not a cause of the conflict with West, says the author .
 Putin's purpose is not to rebuild the Soviet empire, but to protect Russia’s sovereignty, he says .
By this he means its values, the most important of which is a monopoly on state power . By this, he means state power. By this he mean its values.
 On one side are human rights, an accountable bureaucracy and democratic elections . On the other side are an unconstrained state that can sacrifice its citizens’ interests to further its destiny or satisfy its rulers’ greed .
 Both under communism and before it, the Russian state acquired religious attributes . Both under communist and before, the state acquiredreligious attributes .
 His former KGB colleagues–the Committee of State Security–are its guardians, servants and priests, and entitled to its riches . He is now a former KGB colleague .
 Expropriating a private firm’s assets to benefit a state firm is not an act of corruption . Expropropriate a private company's assets is therefore not an acts of corruption.
 Thousands of Ukrainians took to the streets demanding a Western-European way of life . The Kremlin saw this as a threat to its model of governance .
 Alexander Prokhanov is a nationalist writer who backs Russia's war in Ukraine . He compares European civilisation to a magnet attracting Ukraine and Russia .
 Russia feels threatened not by any individual European state, but by the European Union and NATO, which it regards as expansionist . Russia says it feels threatened by the EU and NATO .
 America seeks to exploit Western values to gain influence over the rest of the world . It sees them as “occupied’ by America, which seeks to exploited Western values .
 Russia has taken to arguing that it is not fighting Ukraine, but America in Ukraine . Russia has said it is fighting Ukraine.
 The Ukrainian army is just a foreign legion of NATO, and U.S. soldiers are killing Russian proxies in the Donbas .
Anti-Americanism is not only the reason for war and the main pillar of state power, but also an ideology that Russia is trying to export to Europe . Russia once exported communism to Europe.
 The Donbas rebels are fighting against a corrupt Western way of life in order to defend Russia’s distinct world . They are fighting not only the Ukrainian army, but against a corrupted Western way.
 Many in the West equate the end of communism with end of the cold war . Many in West equate end of Communism to end of Cold War .
 By the time the Soviet Union fell apart, Marxism-Leninism was long dead . In fact, by the time that time, it had been dead .
 Stalin replaced ideals of internationalism, equality and social justice that the Bolsheviks had proclaimed in 1917 with imperialism and state dominance over all spheres of life .
 Mikhail Gorbachev’s revolution consisted not in damping down Marxism, but in proclaiming the supremacy of universal human values over the state .
 Nationalists, Stalinists, communists, communists and monarchists united against Mr Gorbachev . Nationalist, Stalinist, Communists, and monarchs united against him .
 When communism collapsed they united against Boris Yeltsin and his attempts to make Russia “normal, by which he meant a Western-style free-market democracy’s.
Members of this coalition were ejected by pro-Yeltsin forces from the parliament building they had occupied in Moscow . By 1993, they seemed defeated.
 Those who fought Yeltsin and his ideas were active in the annexation of Crimea . They were involved in the war in south-east Ukraine .
 Alexander Borodai is the first ‘prime minister’ of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic . He fought with anti-Yeltsin forces in the Donetsk People's Republic .
In his first two presidential terms, rising living standards helped buy acceptance of his monopoly on state power . Now that the economy is shrinking, the threat of war is needed to legitimise his rule, he says .
 He forged his alliance with Orthodox nationalists only during mass street protests by Westernised liberals in 2012 . He returned to the Kremlin in 2012 when he returned to Russia .
 Instead of tear gas, he has used nationalist, imperialist ideas, culminating in annexation of Crimea and the slow subjugation of south-east Ukraine .
 hybrid warfare is ambiguous in both source and intent, making it hard for NATO and the EU to craft a response . A combination of instruments, some military and some non-military, choreographed to surprise, confuse and wear down an opponent .
 The first was that Russia could deploy hard power in countries that had been in the Soviet Union and were outside NATO with little risk of the West responding with force . The first is that Russia can deploy hardPower in countries like Russia in the USSR .
 The second, after a slapdash campaign, was that Russia’s armed forces needed to be reformed . Russia's armed forces had been under fire after a series of scandals .
 Military modernisation became a personal mission to redress ‘humiliations’ visited by an “overweening’ West on Russia since the cold war ended .
 Russia’s defence spending will have tripled in nominal terms since 2007 . It will be halfway through a ten-year, 20 trillion rouble programme to modernise its weapons .
New types of missiles, bombers and submarines are being readied for deployment over the next few years . New types of missile, bombers, and submarines will be deployed in the coming years .
 Spending on defence and security is expected to climb by 30% this year and swallow more than a third of the federal budget .
Money for combat aircraft, helicopters, armoured vehicles and air-defence systems . About a third of the budget has been earmarked to overhaul Russia's nuclear forces .
 A revised military doctrine signed by Mr Putin in December identified “reinforcement of NATO’s offensive capacities directly on Russia’'s borders . Measures taken to deploy a global anti-missile defence system.
 Nearly all large-scale military exercises in the past decade have featured simulations of limited nuclear strikes . One on Warsaw, Warsaw, was one on Warsaw .
 Mr Putin has also been streamlining his armed forces, with the army recruiting 60,000 contract soldiers each year .
 Putin wants to be able to win, but for the kind of complex, limited wars he wants to win .
Ordinary contract soldiers are still catching up with special forces . GRU Spetsnaz and the elite airborne VDV troops are catching up .
 Spetsnaz units first trained the Kremlin-backed separatist rebels in tactics and the handling of sophisticated Russian weapons .
 Russia had regular forces near the border to provide a calibrated response . But when the Ukrainian government began to make headway in early summer, Russia had special forces close the border .
 It is hard to tell how many Russian troops have seen action in Ukraine, as their vehicles and uniforms carry no identifiers .
Around 4,000 troops sent to relieve Luhansk and Donetsk while threatening Mariupol . But the troops were enough to convince Mr Poroshenko to draw his troops back .
 Putin’s claim last year that he could “take Kiev in two weeks’ if he wanted, a full-scale invasion and subsequent occupation is beyond Russia .
 A Russian-controlled mini-state, Novorossiya, similar to Abkhazia and Transdniestria, could be more or less economically sustainable . But a Russian- controlled mini- state could be less economically viable .
 Not a bad outcome for Mr Putin, and within reach with the hard power he controls, says Mr Putin . Not a good outcome for the Russian president .
 The big fear for NATO is that Mr Putin turns his hybrid warfare against a member country . The biggest fear is that he turns his hybrids against the member country.
 NATO's previous secretary-general said there was a ‘high probability’ that Putin would test NATO’s Article 5 . But “he will be defeated’ if he does so, Rasmussen said in January .
 A pattern of provocation has been established that includes a big increase in the number of close encounters involving Russian aircraft and naval vessels . Russian forces close to NATO’s northern and eastern borders have been involved .
 68 “hot” identifications and interdictions occurred along the Lithuanian border alone . In the first nine months of the year, 68 ‘hot’ identifications were made .
 There have also been at least two near-misses between Russian military aircraft and Swedish airliners .
Transponders switched off, which makes them invisible to civil radar . They fly with transponder switched off . They are invisible to Civil radar .
 Two Russian strategic bombers flew down the English Channel on January 28th . The incident caused havoc to commercial aviation .
 Such behaviour is intended to test Western air defences, and was last seen in the cold war . Such behaviour was meant to test West's air defences .
 Most of what Russia might attempt will be below the radar of traditional collective defence . A huge problem for NATO is that most of what the Russia might try will be under the radar .
 Mr Stoltenberg says both recognising what is going on and knowing who is behind it . He says deciding whether an Article 5 attack has taken place means both recognises what is happening and who's behind it.
 The Soviet Union and America had been allies and winners in the second world war . For all the rhetoric of the cold war, the Soviet Union, the United States felt a certain respect for each other .
 Mr Putin and his KGB men came out of the cold war as losers . In contrast, Mr Putin's KGB men were not as losers, according to reports .
 Russia is harder to deal with than the old Soviet Union, Mr Stoltenberg says .
 Wielding power or gaining influence abroad has become part of the Kremlin’s hybrid-war strategy . The Kremlin has used antiestablishment political parties, disgruntled minority groups, media outlets, environmental activists, and others .
 Moscow is seen by Moscow as a vital complement to military engagement . This perversion of “soft power’s” is seen as a key part of Russia's military strategy .
 The U.S. government's aid agency, USAID, has planted tweets in Cuba and Middle East to foster dissent .
 Putin has hinted that Russia needs to fight this way through “pseudo-NGOs’, CNN and human-rights groups .
 At home Russian media, which are mostly state-controlled, churn out lies and conspiracy theories . At home, Russian media are mostlyState-controlled.
 The main conduit for the Kremlin’s world view is RT, a TV channel set up in 2005 to promote a positive view of Russia . The channel now focuses on making the West look bad .
 It broadcasts in English, Arabic and Spanish and is planning Germanand French-language channels . It is planning to broadcast in German and French.
 One speculating that America was behind Ebola epidemic in west Africa . It is not a complete farce, it has broadcast a string of false stories .
 The Kremlin is also a sophisticated user of the internet and social media . The Kremlin also is a sophisticated social media user .
 The West employs hundreds of “trolls’ to garrison the comment sections and Twitter feeds of the West . It employs thousands of people to garrison comment sections.
 The point is not so much to promote the Kremlin's views, but to denigrate opposition figures, and foreign governments and institutions, and to sow fear and confusion .
 Russian business can rely on some of its corporate partners to lobby against policies that would hurt Russian business .
 The West’s willingness to shelter Russian money, some of it gained corruptly, demoralises the Russian opposition . It makes the West more dependent on the Kremlin, making it more dependent.
 Russia wields soft power in the Baltics partly through its “compatriots policy’s ‘compatriot’ policy, which entails financial support for Russian-speaking minorities abroad . Russia wieldes soft power.
 Far-right groups seduced by the idea of Moscow as a counterweight to the EU, and by its law-and-order policies .
 Its stance on homosexuality and promotion of “traditional’s moral values appeal to religious conservatives . It is not the first time the country has taken a position on homosexuality .
 Russia's most surprising allies, however, are probably Europe’s Greens, according to CNN .
 Moscow is opposed to shale-gas fracking and nuclear power . Both promise to lessen Europe’s dependence on Russian fossil fuels .
 Mr Rasmussen has accused Russia of “sophisticated’s manipulation of information to hobble fracking in Europe . Mr Rasmussen says Russia has not produced concrete evidence .
 There is circumstantial evidence in Bulgaria, which in 2012 cancelled a permit for Chevron to explore for shale gas after anti-fracking protests .
 Bulgaria had been expected to transport Russian oil through its planned South Stream pipeline . Previously, Bulgaria had expected the project to be exempt from awkward EU rules .
 Much of it had been written by Gazprom, and the construction contract was to go to a firm owned by Gennady Timchenko, an oligarch now under Western sanctions .
 Gazprom offered to finance the pipeline and to sponsor a Bulgarian football team . Gazprom also offered to support a Bulgarian team .
 The energy minister at the time claimed he was offered bribes by a Russian envoy to smooth the project’s passage .
 The episode shows the methods Moscow uses to protect its economic interests . European opposition means it has now been scrapped, but the episode has been scrapped .
 Mr Putin is evidently acting not only for Russia’s sake, but for his own, says Mr Putin .
 Russian volunteers who are fighting in Donbas will tomorrow defend their president on the streets of Moscow . Mr Borodai, the rebel ideologue in Donetsk, says that if necessary the Russian volunteers will defend the president .
 Mr Putin may believe he is using nationalists, but nationalists believe they are using him to consolidate their power .
 Russians rally behind the nationalist state and their leader to take on Western liberalism . What they aspire to, with or without Mr Putin, is that they rally behind their leader .
 Prices broke below several technical support levels, including $3.046 and then $3, says Schork . Prices may be headed toward $2.80 or lower, he says .
 February $2.50 puts were the most active options in electronic trading . February $1.50 was most active option for electronic trading in the United States .
 Above-normal temperatures in the East this week will give way to mostly seasonal readings from Maine to Florida through Jan .
 The central states will see below-normal readings on Dec. through the first week of January . The central state will be affected by below- normal readings .
 An estimated 49 percent of U.S. households use gas for heating, led by the Midwest and Northeast, Energy Information Administration says .
 BNP Paribas lowered its estimate for average 2015 gas prices to $3.60 per million Btu from $2.75 per million .
 Gas stockpiles fell by 49 billion cubic feet to 3.246 trillion cubic feet in the seven days ended Dec. It is below the five-year average withdrawal for the fourth straight week .
 Production of the heating and power plant fuel expanded in 2014 to an all-time high for the fourth consecutive year, EIA data show . The production of the fuel rose 5. percent to 74.26 billion cubic feet a day .
 Daily output will rise another 3. percent next year to 76.58 billion, marking a decade of gains as technologies such as hydraulic fracturing or fracking made it more economic to extract fuel from shale rock .
 The relative strength index, a technical momentum indicator, declined to 28. at 2:36m., falling below 30 . Some traders considered it to be a buy signal for the first time since July .
 The RSI had risen to more than 74 in October before the recent selloff . RSI has now sold out more than 80 per cent of its shares .