 The aggressive actions of the Kremlin are unprecedented in the modern era . The aggressive action is unprecedented in a modern era.
 All these offensive incidents are accompanied by a massive, persistent, ongoing, brutally aggressive disinformation campaign . All these incidents are followed by a huge, persistent and ongoing, brutal campaign of disinformation .
 It has been building a wide range of communication structures in most of the EU Member States . platforms that have already been functioning for a long time can't be erased without significant counter-effort .
 The thought that Trump might cede Crimea for piffle in debts or other trade was a joke .
 Russia's transformation into an ultra-national neo-imperial state is a look back at the Cold War . I could wag the finger all day in the direction of Putin and his inner circle .
 It really underestimates how well the U.S. professional political community sees Moscow as Putin has rebuilt it and sustained so much Soviet Era baggage . But it may please those less engaged in politics.
 This morning, I glanced at a Foreign Policy headline on how democracies fall apart . I looked at how democracies fell apart .
 The official state remains quite robust. I should get to that article, but the official state is quite robust . I should be able to get to the state's official state.
 Trump may do the right great American things despite himself, to lay in Churchill’s observation .
 Putin with Khamenei and through Assad has shown a depth in callousness, cruelty, dishonesty, and madness in Syria . This is a dangerous period for everyone as Putin and Khamenei, through Assad, have shown a dangerous time for everyone .
 For five years or so, the image of a child’s hand gripping a mother's forearm has been repeated in untold visual analogs . No bodies have been found in relation to the indiscriminate bombing of noncombatants in Syria .
 Russia's economy withers while Assad burns Syria into an unsustainable nothing . Neither Moscow nor Tehran get anywhere with horrifying the world .
 It has in it the prayer that the state prove stronger than its leading statesman, and I think the odds fair that it will do that if a President — any at any time — embarks on a dictator's mission .
 Several small extremist groups are active in Hungary, but MNA is unique in that it has extensive ties with Russian military intelligence .
 Hungary was secretly supplying tanks to the Ukrainian army . The story was in connection with a lesser-known right-wing portal .
 For some time it has served as a vehicle of Russian disinformation, a growing concern in Europe and elsewhere .
 Hídfő is entirely under Russian direction, either directly or indirectly, according to security officials . In fact, by now, at least according to national security officials, Hífő has been under Russian Direction .
 The best summary of the history of MNA and its activities can be found in an investigative piece written by András Dezső and Veronika Munk of Index . MNA's history can be seen in an article written by dezs ő and M
 Stephen Györkös, 76, opened fire at his home earlier this week . The National Bureau of Investigation was Supposed to search his house . The officers Showa up at the home the 76-year-old man opened fire .
 This started well before the eruption of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict . This started before the outbreak of the Syrian conflict .
Russian military formations and their surrogates continue to pour into the Donbas region, in eastern Ukraine . Russian military formations, including advanced weapons systems, are pouring in .
 Ukrainian defense forces and the civilian population are subjected to incessant shelling . Over 10,000 have died, thousands more wounded and over 1. million have been driven from their homes .
We appeal to President Obama and to the international community to force Putin to stop the killing . We appeal to Obama to stop Putin's killing .
 NATO appears so far reactive as regards the Russian investment in low-level fighting with artillery in Crimea .
 Ukrainian forces are mounting resistance to Russian aggression . It has met the Russian presence with its own presence, but has left to Ukrainian forces .
 What follows is simply the morning’s compilation of background source material in reverse chronological order .
 They use propaganda and espionage, money and servants who help them destroy democracy and freedom . They are creeping across all of Europe; for the time being, they wear suits and, instead of sinking of boats, they use propaganda .
 It is not possible to overlook the dangers and ignore the crimes committed by Putin . Putin's crimes are committed by the Russian president .
 It is not possible to forget the thousands of dead Chechnyans and Georgians, the theft of Crimea and thousands of Ukrainians . It is also not Possible to ignore the war crimes committed in Syria, says CNN .
 It isn’t possible to ignore the despotism exercised against the political prisoners in Russia, be they committed against Russian citizens or against abducted foreigners . Nadezhda Savchenko and Oleg Sentscov were among those abducted .
 Hundreds of thousands of dead, including Putin, Kadyrov and al-Assad, are documented on photographs . Some are known as Nemtsov or Litvinenko, but others just grey dead faces .
 Putin, take your little green men back, stop waging wars and occupying territories, supporting other dictators and oppressing your own nation . Putin, stop waged wars and occupy territories, support other dictators, support your own country. Putin.
 Czech intelligence alarmed by Russian ‘threat’, EUObserver, says .
 Crimean Tatars had just ended their Friday prayers and were rounded up en masse .
 The raid, by men with machine guns, can only be called an overt attempt to terrorize Crimean Muslims . With no suggestion that anybody was suspected of an offence, the raid was not an offence .
 This is not the first such act of primitive intimidation, with at least one of the previous occasions making it quite clear that the Russian occupation regime is targeting Crimean Tatars in general .
 Russia steps up terror offensive with armed raid on mosque in Occupied Crimea . The raid was reported on May 7, 2016 .
 The new caliphate would unify the Muslim community in a unitary "superstate" of unified Muslim-majority countries . The caliphate would include Morocco in West Africa to the southern Philippines in East Asia .
 Russia and the Tatars will have to overcome bitter legacy of 1944 deportations, but also centuries of conflict . If Russia and Tatars are to get along, they will have a bitter legacy.
 Russian Tsar Catherine the Great’s conquest of the Crimean Khanate in 1774 led to a mass emigration of Tatars to the Ottoman Empire .
 Tatars used vast lands for grazing to Russian, Ukrainian, German, and foreign nobles and farming communities . Catherine then proceeded to distribute vast lands that had been used by Tatars for grazing .
 Crimean war of 1853-56 spurred another mass emigration of Crimean Tatars . The Crimean war was the first Crimean war between 1853 and56 .
 The Crimean Tatar Khanate was part of the Ottoman Empire . One of its primary activities was seizing captives from Russia, Ukraine, and the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth .
 Putin's Era, labeling Russia’s overt investigation of the Crimean Tatar community and brushing away of the Islamist taint linked to Hizb ut-Tahrir, perhaps signals that disingenuous writing would promote chaos, at least .
 Hizb ut-Tahrir may rightly call any number of authorities, Ukrainian no less than Russian, to alert and to action .
 The Bear’s hamfisted and often suspect methods may excuse them in the interest of further explicating political drifts and their strength within so many conflicted and conflict-creating communities within Russia and within the Russian ‘sphere of challenge’ The
 Halya Coynash’s writing makes the rounds, with which this post was started and titled . One may wish to keep in mind post-Soviet Russia's deeply feudal revanch.
 Russia’s state game appears to involve creating the problem that its own ‘heroic self’ self might solve . If it has worked so far, and for Russia, so well, in Syria, may God let it not take off in Crimea .
 If the symbolic attributes of Mejlis are banned, uncertainty will prevail concerning the use of the flag of Crimean Tatars . The flag is the symbol of the Crimean peninsula .