 This article goes beyond RT's branding to explore the broadcaster’s nation branding of Russia .
 The article explores RT's branding of Russia and the online audience’s engagement with this within the contemporary transnational, convergent media environment .
 This article forms part of the Theorizing Media in Nation Branding special issue . This article is part of a special issue for the National Branding magazine .
 Crimea is a country as a brand, a ‘product’ to an external audience through forms of strategic communication . Crimea is Crimea, Crimea, Russia's Crimea, and Crimea is the Crimea region .
 Media convergence adds a new twist to this relatively new phenomenon . It relies on a set of ‘shared’ values and experiences .
 This article strives to re-orient the discussion more towards Russia’s nation branding strategies . This article is a look at Russia's nation branding strategy .
 It is generally understood as aiming to coopt or ‘shape preferences of others’ by projecting an attractive image of a country .
 A country’s favourable image is pragmatically believed to enhance its diplomatic efforts, economic advantages, cultural and symbolic capital .
 Grix and Lee’s definition of soft power as ‘a discursive mechanism for increased agency in global affairs through the performative politics of attraction’ brings soft power and nation branding closer together .
 A nation’s brand is created via discursive mechanisms, via the re-circulation of images, symbols and meanings . A nation's brand is also created via Discursive mechanisms .
 The article is an exploration of the different components of nation branding . However, it is beyond the scope of this article .
 What is more important here is the dynamic, processual nature of branding, which implies incompleteness and fluidity .
 The more horizontal architecture of participatory digital media means that audiences engage in ‘hollowing out’ a nation’s image through their diverse and multiple readings of the brand .
 This article explores RT’s branding of its founding nation, questioning the dimensions of the nation brand it promotes and the strategies it uses in the post-broadcast era .
 RT provides an examplary case study because it represents a straightforward case of nation branding with clearly identified actors and branding strategy .
 Its remit, discussed below, aligns with a specific, recent and evolving nation branding strategy .
 RT was launched in English first, and then in other foreign languages . It was created for an external, international, multilingual and media-savvy audience .
 The post-broadcast era is characterised by the re-shaped media landscape . It transcends national boundaries, media channels, communication platforms and authorship .
 broadcasters need to ensure that they strike a chord with the audience . In this context, to appeal to a wide audience diverging in demographics, interests, locations and modes of access, they need to appeal .
 The marketing and production side of RT’s broadcasts is beyond the scope of this article .
 Instead, I focus on RT’s nation branding strategies as identified in its content. Instead, it focuses on RT's nation branding strategy as identified by its content .
 The article starts with an overview of RT’s broadcasting philosophy, and then outlines the methodology and data analysis used in my research .
 Framing analysis (Entman, 1993) and Gitlin’s interpretation of ideological hegemony help deconstruct RT's media coverage . Russia conflict with Russia's re-unification with/annexation of Crimea2 in March 2014.
 RT’s evolution and its broadcasting ‘philosophy’ This section traces the key moments that established RT – an international multi-language broadcaster . RT was founded with the direct support of the Russian government in 2005 .
 RT first began broadcasting in English and then launched channels in Arabic in 2007 and Spanish in 2009 . RT first started broadcasting inEnglish and first launched in Arabic and Spanish .
 The station's original approach proved rather rigid and lacked broader appeal . However, the station’s original approach proves rather rigid .
 RT interwove global news with Russian-based ones to draw attention to the country’s affairs and its regional influence .
 As a result, the audience viewed it as a direct mouthpiece of Russian propaganda .
 RT's new tagline reflects its positioning, aiming to appeal to audiences who have a natural anti-establishment, anti-corporation and anti-western predisposition . RT’s new tag line reflects its new positioning.
This ‘counter-hegemonic struggle’ presupposes the absence of any ‘objectivity’ and sanctions an eclectic and opportunistic approach . This ‘Counter- hegemonic Struggle’ is a ‘ counter-heGemonic struggle
 ‘all means are acceptable’ and there is an ‘excuse’ for RT’s inconsistent and, at times, unreliable reporting .
 It also enables RT to refute any criticism of its output, since it can be framed within the suppression of a ‘free speech’ argument .
 Some Russian media no longer produce straightforward propaganda but diverse, and occasionally contradictory, accounts which cannot easily be verified, to create confusion and doubt . This tactic is similar to the ‘information war’ or what journalist Petr Pomerantsev calls the 'weaponization of information�
 This notion of RT’s information counter-flow is very broad and encompasses anti-western views, conspiracy theories and a particular type of journalistic practice .
 Reports focus on issues such as racial unrest or growing social inequality in the U.S. and problems with multiculturalism in Western Europe .
 Russia's global ambitions alludes to Russia’s global ambitions, it says .
i.e. Its remit is to challenge the framework within which it operates . CNN and BBC are among well-established western news organisations .
 This ‘cool-ness’ might be appealing to more rebellious audience that wants to be trendy .
 RT's framing of Russia’s brand and audience's related prosumption practices will be expanded on in the analysis section below .
 The study reviewed 1 year's coverage of developments asociated with Crimea’s ‘re-unification’ with Russia .
 Crimea's new status has only partially been accepted by the world community . It is important for Russia to maintain the post-Sochi Olympic Games’ momentum in broadcasting a positive image .
 The author monitored key concepts and themes in relevant media reports . He ran a number of word searches for ‘Ukraine’, ‘Crimea’ and ‘crisis’
 The overall framework used to trace RT’s nation branding strategies includes examining direct statements and assertions, inferential assumptions and critical omissions or absences .
 Study looks at most commonly used frames, shifts in emphasis, tone and voices present . The study looks at the most common used frames.
 I then cross-referenced these with other relevant reports and previous studies to inform my analysis . The analysis was based on previous studies and other studies .
 The online searches were conducted using the English language version of RT available in the United Kingdom .
 The number of articles in each set shows that politico-economic issues are the priority, followed by legal and security issues and then socio-cultural matters .
 RT's techniques and tactics for promoting Russia’s brand (direct and indirect strategies) become more sophisticated and consider the post-broadcast media environment .
 Events to mark the second anniversary of Crimea's ‘re-unification’ provided an obvious occasion to boost Russia’s profile via direct positive branding .
 The 'perverted' western media coverage, such as the ‘perverted’ western media, diverts attention from those considerations . However, foregrounding other aspects of the 'pervert’ west media coverage.
 A miscellaneous report about Russia providing gas supplies to a freezing Ukrainian border town is a clear case of explicit positive branding .
 A more indirect strategy includes mainstreaming a theme across time, use of imagery and shifts of emphasis . A more direct strategy includes using imagery and shifting of emphasis.
 Russia is abiding by the Minsk agreements, according to set II . Even the reports about EU's sanctions are used to reinforce this idea .
 Eleven of 21 stories assert that Russia is fulfilling the agreements, so sanctions should be lifted . France, like France, are challenging the need to prolong the sanctions, they say .
 Set I includes a large number of reports accompanied by picturesque and tranquil scenes of Crimea .
 Set II shifts the emphasis from a negative perception to a more nuanced delineation of attitudes towards Russia .
 Merkel says Russia is key to European security but defends NATO build up . Merkel: Russia key to Europe's security, but NATO needs to build up.
 The report indirectly asserts Russia’s stance as an important and equal global player .
 There are two Crimea-centric articles on the economy and three on human rights . One on human human rights violations in Ukraine and one on public support for Russia .
 Russia’s agency is clear in five reports about security (NATO; terrorist threat from Ukraine) and three stories about celebrating the second anniversary of re-unification .
 'Crimea' is generally ‘spoken about on behalf of’ Russia, reports say .
 The stories directly concerning Russia have the most urgency, importance and weight . Russia has the most importance, according to CNN.com .
Indirect branding occurs by mixing news with entertainment and involving social media . Indirect branding is often used by social media users to promote social media.
 The story of a Crimean-born chess player winning an international competition to remind the audience about Crimea and boost Russia’s international reputation .
 Crimea does not lend itself to extensive use in entertainment and tabloidisation . However, a sensitive issue like Crimea doesn't lend themselves to extensive uses in entertainment .
 The logic of incorporating social media in the reports largely follows the idea of direct or indirect support of the framing . The idea of using social media is often supported by the media .
 The Deterrence and Dialogue report in set II uses RT’s own tweet about a survey of German attitudes to NATO alongside previous RT footage of Kosovo and a report on the Tatars .
 Set III criticises ‘so-called’ experts on Ukraine, citing Twitter correspondence between two users . Set III criticised ‘ so-called experts’ on Ukraine .
 The popularity of online resources is not the main factor for their selection . They seem to have been chosen at random, says author .
 The framing here is mostly clustered around Russia as a global player advancing a multipolar world . Russia is seen as a powerful protector of its region and Putin as the embodiment of Russia . Russia’s involvement in Crimea, Syria, challenging EU sanctions and NATO.
 RT's reporting within this stream echoes the Russian saying that defence is the best form of attack . RT’s reporting within the stream echoes that the Russian say defence is best form.
 Kremlin will press for Washington to pressure Ukraine to fully implement the Minsk Agreement, which was supposed to resolve the Donbas conflict . RT frequently uses a mirroring technique.
 Set II reports portray Ukraine in a negative light, according to set II reports . Set II: radicals commemorating the anniversary of Euromaidan, or attacking Russian banks in Kiev .
 These kinds of direct attack are supplemented with other techniques, such as discrediting an opponent . The techniques are also used to attack an opponent.
 Ukraine has a positive branding of Russia, often alongside a negative branding of Ukraine .
 All these paint Ukraine in an adverse light, for instance, its destabilising relationships (preannexation) and repression of its citizens . The country is accused of 'looting' resources after the fall of the USSR and masterminding an energy blocade .
 Russia's actions are consistently framed positively as pro-democratic and legitimate . In this way, Russia’s actions are often framed positively.
 The final strategy involves other indirect ways of framing, for instance, omitting certain issues or facts . The final strategies involve other indirect methods of framing .
 RT’s overall trend for silence involves either downplaying or omitting stories that are unfavourable for the country . There are no reports of the economic impact of the sanctions on Russia, for example .
 RT chose to factually report the issue (Stalin’s deportation of Tatars) instead of ignoring it . The Crimean Tatars example reveals that RT chose not to ignore the issue .
 This aimed to demonstrate a certain objectivity and unbiased coverage and show RT/Russia was not afraid of controversial issues . This is aimed to show that RT/ Russia was not worried about controversial issues.
In doing so, RT uses an incoherent, ambivalent and contradictory framing . In doing so,. RT uses a contradictory framing.
 Decades after Tatar deportation, the situation is far from black and white’ in set III mentions the Tatars’ deportation in 1944 . It constructs a historical narrative which highlights certain aspects, such as Stalinism and the deportation of other ethnic groups .
 Crimean Tatars report less than a month apart from the Mejlis, which accused their top legislative body of extremism and banned it . This article depicts Crimean Tatar positively .
 RT’s ‘counter-hegemonic’ remit means that it has no obligation to develop the topic further or follow it up . This kind of inconsistency and ambiguity remains unchallenged .
 RT reporting also uses meta-discursivity and performativity informed by the post-broadcast multi-platformativity .
 Liz Wahl and Sara Firth resigned in wake of Russia-Ukraine conflict amplified by annexation of Crimea .
 RT released a statement that ‘when someone makes a big public show of a personal decision, it is nothing more than a self-promotional stunt. In turn, RT said it was a 'self-promotion stunt'
 Simonyan’s LiveJournal blog alleged that Firth had received another job offer a fortnight before her ‘spontaneous' resignation .
 Martin’s ‘performative authentication’ strengthens the frame that Russia supports freedom of speech . This inference of RT's high standards of journalistic practice via Martin's ‘Performative authentication’
 It strengthens the frame of ‘raising the standards of reporting, ‘uncovering truth’ and challenging the western establishment, as well as reasserting Russia's confidence .
 RT’s coverage of Crimea within global information flows will be analysed .
 Russia subtly attempts to shape perceptions of its sphere of influence in both the ‘near’ and more distant abroad .
 Minsk agreements are used as a tool to reiterate Russia’s position as a powerful, modern state, criticising sanctions and highlighting western bias towards Russia . This is especially evident in set II, where the Minsk agreement is used as an tool to remind Russia of
Postannexed Crimea is generally ignored by mainstream broadcasters, who are preoccupied with world affairs like Trump’s election and post-Brexit Europe .
 This narrative remains in the margins of the global media environment, says CNN.com .
 Russia’s framing and online audience. This section examines how participants in networked cross-media practices engage with RT's framing .
 One comment which included Russian swearwords and asserted the irreversible nature of re-unifying Crimea remained . One comment called into question the level of scrutiny the posts are subjected to .
 Some of the comments are anonymous, so the findings should be treated with caution . Some of them are probably online trolls .
 The social media figures were checked on 1 February 2017, and there was no obvious correlation between the number of tweets and comments under an article .
 Some articles were re-tweeted more than 2000 times, but hardly any comments were posted . Others did not trend on social media at all .
 Minsk agreements with a more formulaic themes and dominant experts’ voices were less suited to extensive online discussions .
 The most popular reports in set III were on Eurovision and the ‘secret’ Ukrainian terror plot . The two least popular were about Crimean Tatars, the two most popular stories .
 Patterns of tweets and comments largely overlap, reflecting more genuine public support of this topic . The Eurovision media event saw a rapid increase in interest after the event .
 ‘Americans are surprised that in Russia people have their own children’ ‘USA are crazy about Crimea.’
 The users often stated where they were from, for instance, ‘I’m in Australia and believe Crimea is part of Russia’
 ‘supporters’ of the Russian brand can interpret the broadcaster’s framing in their own ways .
 There are multiple readings of anti-westernism, as users conflate various groups and post xenophobic outpourings on RT .
 The report from set I contains claims such as ‘Crimea is Russia and Russia is Crimea.’
 'Crimea is part of Russia. Nothing the U.S. and West can do about that is going to change the reality!’
 RT’s framing of Russia undergoes certain permutations once exposed to an even more diverse online audience . RT's framing of the Russian government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 RT’s framing of Russia as ‘not afraid of criticism’ reduces the weight of opposing comments .
 RT’s reliance on the logic and shared practices of digital participatory media cultures is problematic, says author .
 New mediascape lacks clarity on self-governance, mutual governance and regulation . This is especially true at a time when the new mediascapes lacks clarity .
 Users’ motivations for participating in social media are also varied, ranging from affirmations of national identity to others who depend on a technologically conditioned and mediated selfhood .
 Some of the groups are attracted to RT by its remit, others are driven by a ‘consumer culture’ Others are attracted by a 'consumer culture'
 Some individuals strive to achieve some sort of narrative closure from RT’s deliberately contradictory coverage . Others are attracted by the ‘gamification’ principle, in which they compete to score the highest number of re-tweets, followers, popularity based on ironic observations on RT
 RT's favouring of conspiracy theories adds another stimulus to encourage audiences to engage in this ‘game’ and assemble various pieces of the puzzle into a different, coherent narrative .
 The broadcasters’ reputation and reporting are contributing elements of a nation’s brand .
 BBC contributes to the nation branding by broadcasting in line with its ethos of neutrality, objectivity and balance as reflected in the Charter .
 As an emerging broadcaster with a less established status, RT is unable to capitalise on its reputation in a similar vein . RT is an emerging broadcasters with a more established status .
 It strives to enhance the country's image in a less subtle and consistent way as part of its ‘counter-hegemonic’ agenda .
 RT's strategies in promoting Russia's image have become more complex and sophisticated . RT’s strategies in promote Russia’'s image are now more sophisticated and complex .
 The research showed that RT’s nation branding efforts involve both positive and negative direct and indirect strategies, as well as omissions, ‘partial’ reporting and performativity .
 Russia is depicted as both an assertive global player and a victim of western bullying . These strategies result in incongruencies and contradictions in framing, such as Russia being depicted as a victim.
 Despite a percieved lack of coherent framing, RT’s counter-hegemonic agenda ensures sustainability of the key narratives. Despite a percieved lack of coherentframing, RT's counter- hegemonic agendas ensures sustainability.
 It also forms part of the strategic principle driving its nation branding communication . It is also part of a national branding strategy .
 RT implies the existence of an alternative power centre – Russia – ‘holding it to account’ and acting as a guardian of conservative values .
 The politics of attraction are based on a counterintuitive principle, with nation branding being predominantly based on counter-hegemonic position .
 RT's nation branding strategies tread a fine line between freedom of expression and subversive manipulation of information . This analysis also revealed that RT’s nation branding strategy treads a line between free speech and subversive manipulations .
 It reflects Russia’s instrumental approach to its reputation management . Russia's reputation management is a key part of its reputation .
 There is a certain level of support for RT’s strategies, while audience comments display a low level of internalisation, with users crudely repeating key messages and frames .
 A further longitudinal inquiry into digital re-imagination of Russia’s nation brand from ‘below’ via, for instance, users’ news-driven digital storytelling on other social platforms is needed .
 Issues around controlling the message and the logic of co-producing a shared narrative remain open to negotiation .
 Audiences’ virtual engagement via social media platforms entails an integral tension between consuming, subverting and appropriating broadcasters’ narratives for their own ends .
 RT's move to repackage its content for contemporary networked cross-media practices will play out . It remains to be seen how RT’s move to re-brand its content will play.
 The author received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article . Funding was not provided .
 Minsk agreements involved two summits in Minsk between the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France . Minsk is also known as Minsk II . The summit was held in September 2014 and January 2015 .
 Halliday J BBC World Service fears losing information war as Russia Today ramps up pressure . Russia Today is facing increasing pressure from the Kremlin .
 Ofcom sanctioned by Ofcom over series of misleading and biased articles . Jackson J RT sanctioned by ofcom. Ofcom.
 RT English surpasses 2bn views on YouTube, entire network reaches 4.5bn mark, 22 May . RT English has more than 2bn YouTube views .
 Sitdikov R. R.   ‘ИМИ   цититiрейтинг х, 13 April. ‘НИ ‘
 Stahlberg P and Bolin G Nation branding, identity and cosmopolitan imagination . Stahlburg P. G Nation is based in the city of Bolin .
Suslov M and Bassin M Eurasia 2.0: Russian Geopolitics in the Age of New Media . Suslov M. and Bassi M Eurasian 2.1: RussianGeopolitics. 2.2: Russian geopolitics .
 Galina has extensively published in peer-reviewed journals and co-authored several monographs on media representations of Islam and multiculturalism . Galina also has written monographs about gender, media and emergent forms of post-Soviet identity .
 Galina is a co-convenor of a BASEES Media and Cultures group, as well as a recipient of a number of national and international research grants . Galina has also been recipient of several national and International research grants.