 The study probes into the causes and effects of Ukrainian crisis and merger of Crimea into Russia . The study was published in the journal of the International Journal .
 External forces' competition of power combined with internal political conflicts have triggered the Ukrainian crisis . It is pointed out that external forces' Competition of power and internal conflicts have resulted into the fragmentation of Ukraine .
 The entrenched causes of hostility between Russia and Ukraine are studied in the context of Eurasianism . Here, the reasons of the hostility between the two countries are studied .
 Moscow seeks the support of the post-Soviet republics in the wake of the Ukraine crisis . An effort is made in addition to highlight Russia's foreign policy towards post- Soviet republics .
 Moscow’s grand strategy to exert influence on the ex-Soviet Union states and protect the Russian-speaking population in and around Russia was a prima facie case to merge Crimea . Moscow's grand strategy was a first step in the process of merging Crimea .
 Responsibility to Protect approach serves as a good pretext to cover Russia’s action in Ukraine . The logic of Responsibility to protect approach is good pretext for Russia's action .
 The former Soviet states have come to adopt wary approach towards Russia . Subsequently, the former Soviet countries have adopted wary approach to Russia .
 The paper will offer a futuristic outlook of Russian relations with the post-Soviet states . Finally, the paper will be published in the future .
 Merger, Eurasianism, Russia, R2P, Post-Soviet States, Crimea, Ukraine, Russia and Ukraine are all listed .
 Eurasian conception is still popular within Russia where its new worldview is justified in Russia but criticized in the West . Yet Eurasian conceptions are still popular in Russia where it is justified by Russia .
 Ukraine crisis has appeared as a showground between Eurasianists and anti-Eurasianists . In this backdrop, Ukraine has appeared to be a show ground between the two sides .
 The paper aims to investigate the causes and effects of the merger of Crimea with Russia . The paper is based in Crimea .
 It delves into emanating challenges and prospects of Russia's annexation of Crimea are under review . Also delves in to emanating challenges.
 The effects of the crisis are strong in the post-Soviet states and the region . The effects are also strong in post- Soviet states.
East-West rivalry is changing the contour of the foreign policies of these states . East-West rivals are changing thecontour of these countries' foreign policies .
 Realpolitik is an important part of Kremlin’s policy in pursuit of the great power status .
 Russia's interventions in Georgia and later in Ukraine were rationalized as acts of protecting minority groups in these states . Russia's intervention in Georgia, Ukraine and Russia's involvement in Ukraine are rationalized by Russia's actions .
 Both intrusions were internationally construed as driven by strategic impulses than humanitarian considerations . However, both intrusions are not necessarily driven by humanitarian considerations.
 The Russian intervention in Ukraine has not only undermined the territorial integrity of adjacent states but also signalled imperialist approach for reviving influence in these states .
 The development has elicited strong reaction in the post-Soviet region . Nevertheless, this development has prompted a strong reaction .
 Some states have strongly leaned towards the West for guarding their territorial integrity and containing Russian influence . Other states have also strongly leaned to the West.
 Moscow’s stance over the merger of Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia had led to a division between Russia and the West . A friction has appeared between Russia, China and other members of Shanghai Cooperation Organization too .
 United Russia secured the highest turnout in Duma's elections . Despite some countries and opposition party of Russia to propagate a negative image, it was observed that United Russia got more cohesion .
 Moscow internationally conveyed its stance that it has a right to defend Russian nationals beyond its own territory . Moscow says use of force was legitimate and needed to protect ethnic Russians .
 Ukraine crisis has exposed resurgence of imperial Russia and sensitizes post-Soviet states as they have sizeable Russian population . On the other hand, the Western perspective of Ukraine crisis is that it has exposed Russian resurgence .
 West is trying to make Russia economically and politically weak. This paradox is ominous of a new rivalry in which West is making Russia economically weak .
 Post Soviet States such as Central Asian Republics dependent on Russia with their economies are directly affected due to its imposed economic embargoes .
 CARs loyalty to Russia is due to the economic interests, yet the use of force has made them apprehensive . Other post-Soviet republics, as other post- Soviet Republics, are apprehensive.
 Some scholars pronounce Russia will make another move to further redraw the map of post-Soviet republics by incorporating other Russianspeaking regions .
 Others believe that Russia's mission has more or less ended with the annexation of Crimea and its ambitions will be limited . Others believe Russia's goal is to take Crimea out of Crimea .
 Putin's actions find new worldview in the post-imperial complex of Russia, first . rebuilding of Russia by binding together the lost territories .
 This paper endeavours to analyse Russia's changing political dynamics and its effects on the post-Soviet region . The paper also looks at the impact of Russia's change on the region .
 Theoretical Framework in the words of J Mankoff, Russia wanted to establish itself as a powerful state of the world . Russia wanted the world to establish its own power, says Mank off .
 Russia faces a lot of problems in pursuit of a coveted great power status . Despite contested politics of Eurasia, Russia faces many problems due to contested politics .
 As the central state of the Eurasian region, it considers itself a responsible security guarantor to many regional weak states . The Eurasian state is a key member of the European Union .
 This selfpositioning of Russia in the heart of Eurasia provides some degree of logic to Russia's Eurasianist ideology . This self-positioning is part of Russia's "Eurasianist" ideology .
 The Eurasianists rely on a powerful Russia to bring about the multipolar world they want . The Eurasians rely on the powerful Russia.
 Eurasianism is mean to thwart Atlanticism4 which signifies another type of union of European and American nations. Eurasianistism is meant to thwartAtlanticism4 .
 The movement was based on a historical Eurasian movement of Russian émigré community . It opposed forces of modernity and stood for Eurasian traditionalism .
 Russia always prefers to be a hegemon. In order to maintain its centrality, Russia always wants to be an hegomon .
 The Eurasianists envision Russia’s re-emergence as a world power, by influencing the post-Soviet region . They are in opposition to liberal views of West .
 Russia acted according to the assumptions in its self-defined philosophye. Russia acted in accordance with the assumptions of its own philosophye .
 Eurasianism and moved to rebuild the former Soviet area is headed by the Crimea's merger with Russia7.7. The Crimea's merge with Russia 7.7 is the biggest merger in the region .
 This hypothesis is widely discussed by Aleksandr Dugin in his work The Fourth Political Theory . This hypothesis has been widely discussed in the work of Dugin .
 Eventually, his ideas galvanized politics of Russia and termed West its main opponent . Eventually, he called West's main opponent the West's biggest opponent .
 Russian Political figures, incumbent head of state and ruling Duma party United Russia, are all inspired by Eurasianists .
 Ostensibly, Eurasianism motivated Russia to pursue its objectives through the use of force . Russia's actions were motivated by Eurasianistism .
 Russia calls the military action of 2013 a legal move to protect the Russian speaking minority in Ukraine . Russia remained politically dormant in post-Soviet space from independence until 2000 due to internal problems .
 NATO’s enlargement and later coloured revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine persuaded Kremlin to reassert itself in the traditional area of interest . NATO's enlargement.
 Russia eventually started to warm its relations with its old republics to dislodge the U.S. influence in the post-Soviet area . Russia eventually began to warm relations with the former republics .
 Moscow confronted opposition groups in many parts of the post-Soviet states such as Russia . The Post Soviet States expand its influence .
 Ukraine sought to hinder the Russian influence by using its diplomatic power . The troubled region eventually became part of Russia .
 Russia wants to acquire sphere of influence in its neighbourhood for security reasons . Several factors had been involved in the merger of Crimea into Russia .
Economic, ideological and political confrontation triggered the Ukrainian crisis and manifest causes of the Crimean merger . Economic, ideological, political confrontation sparked the merger .
 Geopolitical Importance of Ukraine and Crimea is its geography . Ukraine is situated in the southwest of Russia and strongly linked geographically as well as historically with Russia .
 Apart from ethnic identity linkages, their interdependence helped forge strong ties .
 Ukraine provided energy transit routes to Russia for the supply of oil and gas to Europe and its territory had been used for creating nuclear weapons . Ukraine provided transit routes for energy supply to Russia .
 Crimea was largely due to Crimea where two-thirds of the population called themselves Russians . The region was largely based on Crimea, which is home to Crimea .
 The Crimean Peninsula is located on the north-eastern coast of the Black Sea . It has the maximum number of Russian speakers in Ukraine .
 Crimea is regarded as an integral part of Russia . Crimea is a homeland of Russians, and is considered a part of the country .
 Russian as a lingua franca and ethnic commonalities could not separate the two republics . As a consequence of century's long history, Russian could not be separated from Russia .
 The territory was given the name of ‘New Russia’ because it was never part of old Kiev Rus . The territory is now known as New Russia .
 Catherine II had conquered the area in the late 1700s Sarwat Rauf 36 Crimea had been part of Russia, geographically linked with Ukraine . All land transportation to Crimea was through Ukraine .
 After World War-II, Crimea was declared as an Oblast within the Soviet Union . Crimea is now a part of the Russian Union .
 In 1954 Crimea was transferred to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic by Nikita Khrushchev . Crimea was considered as a natural extension of Ukraine which left its inhabitants baffled .
 Even Khrushchev had suggested to Stalin as early as 1944 that transferring Crimea to Ukraine would help Moscow in securing the support of Ukrainian elites .
 The two sides approved the division of the fleet's assets and to lease port to the Russian Navy in Sevastopol .
 Crimea was transferred to Ukraine in 1954, but after 60 years, new justifications were marshalled to get over Crimea . Not a single protest was made over the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine .
 The overwhelming influence of Russia on Ukraine and cultural ties of the people persuaded leaders of Russia and Ukraine to normalize ties .
 Putin and Leonid Kuchma in 2000 successfully transformed a decade-long bitterness to amiable mutual relations . Putin and Kuchman in 2000 succeeded in transforming the bitter relationship .
 The period of 2005 to 2009 was irritable as Ukraine attempted to integrate itself into the Western institution . Ukraine had sown the seeds of anti-Russian movements and facilitated foreign involvement .
 Ukraine has started to make efforts to improve its relations with Russia . The Russian Empire held it until 1917-1920 .
 The territory of Novorossiya encompasses some other areas, such as Rostov, Stavropol, and Krasnodar .
 West supported anti-Russian campaigns in Georgia, Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan and the Russo-Georgian war of 2008 . In all incidents, the West backed anti-Russia campaigns .
 There was an emphasis on non-intervention of Russia in these states and a severe Western response was observed during Russia's war against Georgia in 2008 .
 H Gardner maintained that Moscow’s decision to seize Crimea in February-March, 2014 was an act of reactive or preclusive imperialism . However, Kremlin rejected this narrative .
 Legally, Russia legitimizes its use of force refereeing R2P to control the post-Soviet republics . Legally. Russia legitimized its use. of force referees to control post- Soviet republics.
 At the time of the merger of Crimea into Russia, President Putin termed intervention in Ukraine a humanitarian project .
 President Putin says the use of force was a humanitarian mission and in the interest of Russia's national interest . The question of force is the question of the use.
 The geo-economic and geopolitical positioning of Ukraine has enticed both East and West . The strategic partnership of Russia with Ukraine with Ukraine is crucial for European security .
 Russia's competition with European Union to exert influence over Eastern Europe provides a basic understanding of the Ukrainian crisis . Russia's cooperation with the EU provides abasic understanding of Ukraine's crisis .
 The formation of single economic space has been President Putin's priority since his entry into Kremlin . Putin's focus has been the formation of economic space .
 Russia was then struggling to make Ukraine and other old republics of Soviet Union to join Customs Union . Russia was also struggling to get Ukraine and others to join the Union .
 The organization was formed to build a Russian-led community of the postSoviet states to create economic benefits and get a better bargaining position vis-a-vis continental neighbours .
 The formation of Eurasian Economic Union in 2015 was the 20 Hall Gardner, Crimea, Global Rivalry, and the Vengeance of History .
 Sarwat Rauf 38 continuation of Russian efforts to diffuse tension between Russia and EU relations . SarwatRauf is the latest in a series of attempts to diffuse tensions between the two countries .
 subtle divergences gradually morphed dichotomies and clamour against Russia got louder in the western part of Ukraine and lead to a referendum in Crimea . The Crimea referendum is expected to be held in Crimea next month .
 A long-term East-West tense relation was a prominent factor in precipitating the Ukraine crisis . The Ukraine crisis was a major factor in the crisis .
 At the time of disintegration of Soviet Union, it was expected that the ex-Soviet space would remain under the influence of Russia due to geographical, ideological and historical linkages .
 The anti-Russian huddles occurred because of involvement of the West, according to the Russian government .
 The 9/11 event was a turning point in West-Russia's relations . Russia and the West tried to establish cordial relations in face of the common threat of terrorism .
 NATO's expansion had always been a threat to Russia in extending military cooperation . Russia gave consent for setting up the NATO-Russia Council,24 to reduce tension .
 All presidents of the Russian Federation had tried to set better relations with the US and Europe . But these expectations did not materialize as Moscow continued to be a target of frantic criticism by the West .
 President Putin denounced the inequities of the post-Cold War settlement . He promised that he would pristine Western injustices during the Cold War and restores the glory of Russia .
 The West propagated that Russia was violating human rights in Chechnya . The West, on its part, said Russia had used force against Georgia and unlawfully annexed Crimea .
 The Group of industrialized states cancelled the membership of Russia, NATO and terminated cooperative links with Moscow . The EU cut off its ties with Moscow, and the EU also terminated its ties to Moscow .
 Russia was trying to get close with Ukraine while EU wanted to bring it in its orbit of influence . Russia was also trying to bring Ukraine into its orbit.
 NATO expansion, NATO enlargement and EU expansion all added fuel to fire,25 and caused tense relations of Ukraine with Russia .
 The strategic dissonance between Russia and the West intensified over the Ukrainian issue . Russia and West have been at odds over the Ukraine issue .
 As the new Cold War between East and West re-appeared, secessionist movements also got strengthened due to internal instability and external involvement in Crimea .
 Malaysian Airline Flight MH-17 was targeted while flying over the conflict zone . The blame game started between Ukraine and Russia after the incident .
 The crises seemed to be a turning point in ending the brief honeymoon of friendship between Russia and the West .
 The Russian Language Former Soviet republics are home to significant ethnic Russians . They have close affiliation with the Russian populace in terms of language, culture and ideology .
 Large numbers of ethnic Russians are residing in Ukraine, particularly in southern and eastern areas .
 Many ethnic Russians living in Ukraine were pressurized to quit using the language . As a Slavic state, it has close ties with Russia .
 The Ukrainization or the separate identity of Ukrainians appeared as a popular nationalist campaign . The Ukrainians appeared to have been trying to separate their identities .
 Efforts were made to close schools where the Russian language was used as a medium of instruction .
 Many schools closed down because they were teaching in the Russian language . Survey from 1989 to 2001.
 The Ukrainian language was made compulsory and was seen by Kremlin as a violation of minority rights . The language was also seen by the Kremlin as violating minority rights.
 In 2012, Verkhovna Rada announced a new state language policy, allowing government offices to use any other language in case of 10% local population speaks that language . This would get status of the second official language .
 Dmitri Trenin, director of Carnegie Endowment Moscow Centre, expounded on September 9, 2014 . He is also the director of the Carnegie Center in Moscow .
Language Policy and National Integration is a joint project by WashingtonLanguage Policy .
 The rallies of Russian speakers, residing in eastern and southern Ukraine, raised the demand of autonomy of region and Russian language .
 The rallies were followed by revolutionary groups, grabbing government buildings . After these rallies, these groups grabbed government buildings, grabbing buildings .
 Kremlin took Ukraine as a subdivision of the Russian people or 'Little Russians' During Ukraine crisis, pro-Russian protests were held and resentment gradually converted to a demand of referendum .
 Crimean authorities set a referendum to get people's response on the issue of joining Russia or Ukraine . The authorities in Crimea set a vote on whether to join Ukraine or Russia .
Almost 96% of Crimean voters approved a union with Russia as they spoke in favour of Russia . Surprisingly, the majority of population cast their votes for joining of Russia.
 Western Ukraine along with the mainstream West criticized the referendum as an illegal enactment and questioned the fair voting . Western Ukraine, along with mainstream West, also criticized the vote as illegal .
 Crimea formally merged into Russia on March 18, 2014, and signed a treaty which was presented in Duma for approval . Crimea formally merging into Russia in March 2014 .
 A bill related to Crimea and Sevastopol’s addition as federal units of Russia was also presented . A bill, related to the Crimea and Crimea, also was presented .
 The Crimea referendum proved to be the immediate cause of the merger of Crimea into Ukraine .
 Wider Europe is divided ideologically, politically, linguistically and linguistically . It is largely affecting its economy .
 There are three existing arrangements in Europe; first, the established Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe emphasizes political links to integrate states . Third, European 30 Dmitri Trenin, “The Ukraine Crisis and the Resumption of Great Power Rivalry’s”
 The Post Soviet States Union in which states courteously accept each other’s differences and yet cooperate .
 The three blocks, EU, NATO and OSCE try to cope with security threats and create models to manage challenges . These three blocks are part of the European Union, European Union and NATO .
 Russia wants to establish a different platform for the post-Soviet states to resolve their matters . Russia wants a different way to resolve its issues with the West .
 Russia views NATO and EU as a threat to its interests because it is a Western bloc . In theory and practice, Russia views the EU and NATO as the threat.
 Both West and Russia consider their stance justified and mutual tension appears as the natural occurrence . Both countries consider the stance justified .
 geopolitical interests are guiding foreign policies of the two rivals of the Cold War era .
 Despite strong opposition, Russia and the West are not yet in a full-fledged defiance mode . The prospects of Russia’s limited compromises exist with the West .
 geopolitical differences over Ukraine are intensifying and posing challenges to mutual relations . The West tends to reinforce Article 5 of NATO (promises that each member of NATO defends fellow member states)
 The Baltic States did not respond in favour of Russia over the military actions in Ukraine .
 Baltic states, particularly Estonia and Latvia, are home to significant Russian-speaking people and ethnic Russians . Baltic states are not satisfied with the lack of citizenship in the Baltic States .
 Russia fears another aggressive reaction of Russia may cause regional friction . They fear that such situation may invite another aggressive response .
 The Ukraine crisis did not affect much change in the Baltic States' policies towards Russia . The Baltic States have started to seek Western support to counter Russia .
 Ukraine's decision to annex Crimea was limited to a small circle, says the author . Ukraine's internal support to Russia for its action towards Ukraine was strong, he says .
 Ukraine has neither accepted Crimea as part of Russia, nor it is taking necessary steps to tide over the situation . In addition, Ukraine has not accepted Crimea from Russia .
Toward Russia, Ukraine, and Eurasia, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, .1. The Task Force on United States Policy Toward Russia and Ukraine .
 Ukraine is publicizing Russia's intervention illegal and deliberating its violation of international law . Ukraine is also deliberating on whether Russia's actions should be illegal .
 Ukraine has to pick out its association with EU-NATO and improve its economy . Yet Ukraine must pick out the association with the European Union .
 Russia-Ukrainian ties have been fluctuating since 2013 with serious effects for Moscow . Impact on Russia Russian-Ukraine ties has been fluctuated since 2013 .
 Among the consequences are Western-led economic sanctions and the cost of Russia's perceived support to separatists in Eastern Ukraine .
 The rapid decline in rouble's exchange rate and intense opposition has occurred between Russia and the West . Russia's economy has suffered a sharp decline in exchange rate since 2008 .
 Russia has acquired a status of somewhat ‘unpredictable’ state in world politics . Russia has also acquired a Status of somewhat 'unp predictable' state in World politics .
 Kremlin seeking cooperation with former territories, including Ukraine, but facing problems in establishing good links with old territories . Kremlin is seeking cooperation.
 Moscow nowadays is the target of allegations too, such as transgressor of the international law, a violator of Budapest conference, 1994, and breach of Ukraine constitution .
 The Syrian crisis has further deteriorated the situation and transpired in the form of declining oil prices in international market, an economic shock to Russia . The UN non-binding resolution proclaimed merger of Crimea into Russia and subsequent referendum as 'illegal actions'
 Russia’s heavy dependence on hydrocarbons and current cuts in export is leading to challenging situationg. The country's dependence on Hydrocarbons has led to challenges in Russia .
 Europe has reduced its demand for natural gas which is an economic setback for Russia . Russia has been hit by an economic downturn in recent years .
 Crimea Annexation Important Milestone: Implications for the Post Soviet States amplify nationalist, separatist and military adventurism, within Russia .
 Russia still wields leverage over post-Soviet states due to their energy demands and dependence . There are emerging signs of forthcoming economic blow in terms of liquidity and economic recession .
 Ukraine's entry into EU and Western-led bloc would be difficult at least for now. It appears that Ukraine’s entry into the EU and West will be difficult .
Despite prevailing economic stress in Russia, overall national cohesion is palpable . Despite prevailing economic stresses, overall economic stress is palpable in Russia .
 Historical records are a witness that Russia has always been resilient and strengthened itself after waging war against other states . Russian history is a witness to Russia's resilience and strength .
 It can be safely inferred that Kremlin's forceful strategy might buttress Russia's internal position . But, it might be dangerous for the global economy to maintain long-term economic sanctions against Russia . It may be crucial for the world economy to keep sanctions on Russia .
 The chances of further dissonance are imminent and potential ramifications are suggestive of likely future civil wars in Europe and Russia . The chances are likely to be similar to those in Russia .
 The Ukrainian crisis has proved a turning point for Russia, says Russian media . It gave birth to domestic and regional tensions which were simmering before the Ukraine crisis .
 The domestic unrest, led by the opposition including Alexei Navalny, was earlier extant in moderate form . However, the decreased oil prices and uncertainty has made the opposition more vocal .
 Moscow is sending overtures of support to ethnic Russians in its old territories . In this manner, Moscow is also sending overture of support.
 The present nationalist leadership of Russia is focusing more on the post-Soviet reintegration in Central Asia and Eastern Europe . The formation of Eurasian Economic Union is a validation of Russia's efforts .
 Russia has taken a big step toward restoring its dominance in the Black Sea region . Meanwhile, Russia has also taken a step to restore its dominance.
 Its geopolitical position has become stronger by attaching Crimea and Sevastopol as now it uses its naval fleet without much inhibition . The Crimean naval fleet is now being used without much inhibited .
 Turkey has been projecting power in the Black Sea since the Soviet Union collapse . This also affects Turkey which, since the collapse, has been projected power .
 The Turkish fleet can be challenged after the control of Sevastopol base . Now the Turkish fleet will be challenged by the government .
 Caucasus Region The Caucasus connects Europe with Asia . It is attached to the European and Asian political dynamics .
 Ukraine crisis has created ripple effects on the Caucasian region . National security has become a top priority of Caucasus states .
 Georgia is a signatory of EU Association Agreement . It pushes Moscow to get close to Georgia's neighbours to curb Western influence .
 Georgia has been staunchly supporting Ukraine and fighting a common battle against Russian hegemony in the post-Soviet region .
 Russia condemned Russia’s action in Crimea as it had also passed through the same experience in 2008 .
 Armenia proved to be pro-Russian. Despite the significant presence of Armenians in Ukraine and strong relations with each other, Armenia proves to be a pro- Russian .
 Azerbaijan stayed away from harsh criticism of Russian actions . Azerbaijan opted to remain impartial in the escalating tug-of-war between West and Russia .
 Moscow has promised to find some solutions to the tense NagornoKarabakh issue . Moscow is trying to restore customary relations with Baku in the energy sector .
 Many analysts are concerned that Kremlin's takeover of Crimea could set a similar model of intervention against the post-Soviet states particularly CARs .
 The CARs are distant from the direct range of the EU, but geographical voids cannot fully isolate the region . The tussle between Moscow and the EU backed by NATO is upsetting the regional states .
 The Soviet-style governments of the CARs are different from the EU and geographically proximate to Asia . The CARs have a different style of government than the EU .
 Kremlin has found fertile political grounds in Central Asia for the resurgence . So, Kremlin has been looking for a resurgence .
 Russia is aware that if it uses identical means as employed in Ukraine, anti-Russian sentiments could rise as revulsion against Moscow . But Russia is also aware that it could also use identical means in Ukraine .
 destabilization in Russia and economic dislocation could affect the CARs which are still beholden to Russia .
 Implications for the Post Soviet States states could hit bottom with it .
 Any outright condemnation of Russia has been rare in Central Asia due to the country's dependency on Russia . The country has a strong relationship with Russia .
 CARs are not only close to Russia but are also interacting with China and the Western domain of economy and security is also present .
 geographical location of Russia is a prime factor for CARs dependence on the former country . However, geographical location is a key factor forCARs dependence.
 The CARs are concerned due to the strain on Russia's economy caused by sanctions . They are concerned about the strain.
 Tajik and Kyrgyz workers in Russia are directly affected as they make the substantial contribution to the GDPs of their states .
 Russia’s Federal Migration Service highlights 2% to 4% decline of Kyrgyz, Tajik, and Uzbek workers in Russia .
 Moscow maintains a major military presence in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan . It acts as its influence and determines domination in the region .
 The Sevastopol naval base of Russia is analogous to the CARs military bases . The naval base is similar to that of Russia's.
 Kyrgyzstan initially hesitated in supporting Russia's action to merge Crimea into its territory . No wonder, KyrgyZstan initially hesitation in supporting the move .
 Bishkek opposed Russian advocacy for Viktor Yanukovych . Despite heavy dependence on Moscow, BishKEk opposed Russia's advocacy for Yanukovych .
 EEU and Russian actions in Ukraine were substantiated as Russia provides Kyrgyzstan assistance in the field of migration . Yet it became the member of E EU and Russian action in Ukraine.
 Economic crisis leads Russia to cut its goods and services, particularly, in 2015 . Russia started to curtail its gas imports from CARs due to economic strains .
 separatist movement within Karakalpakstan could be a triggering factor of Russia’s intervention in Uzbekistan in future . But it is hinted that separatist movement in the country may be a trigger .
 Sarwat Rauf 46 Collective Security Treaty Organization which it joined and later left . The organization is based in the U.S.
 With strong linkage to Russia due to strategic interests, it cannot afford tense relations with Moscow . With strong links to Russia, Russia cannot afford tension with Moscow.
 Astana has refrained from recognizing Crimea as a part of Russia . Astana hopes Moscow will not be capitalizing on ethnic affinities and linguistic nexus as a tool for any future intervention .
 Astana desired in de-escalating of the conflict but might not have the control . In addition, Astana wanted in de -escalating the conflict, but may not have control .
 Russia's political bonds are however intact even after the crisis and any economic sanctions on Russia cannot rupture their close relations . Russia's economic bonds are still intact, despite the crisis .
 CARs can't detach themselves completely from Moscow for there is no replacement of a traditional partner .
 The merger of Crimea into Russia has led to some punitive policies of the West . The Westg. purposeful indirect economic sanctions are causing adverse effects to the Russian economy .
 The Cold war enmity between the East and the West has appeared once again . It is not just short-term bad weather but an essential change in Russia-West relations .
 Mearsheimer claimed that Putin worked to destabilize Ukraine until it abandoned its efforts to join the West . Mearsheim said that Putin was trying to destabilise Ukraine until the West abandoned its attempts.
 The United States had challenged the legality of the referendum held in Crimea . The U.S. became anxious due to the control of Russia over the naval base in Sevastopol .
Western tactics are operating steadfastly, resulting in depreciation of rouble, capital flight and decreased investment . With the aim to isolate Russia, Western tactics are working steadfastly , resulting in a decrease in investment .
 Post Soviet States Energy diversification is taking place in Europe to lessen dependency of Europe on Russian goods and resources .
 The boycott of Russian companies, particularly of Rosneft, is a serious economic blow for Russia .
 explicit warnings are coming in with the emerging US-EU energy relationship . It reflects further isolation of Russia.
 Several Western delegates declined to attend the conference on security in Russia same year . Also, following the referendum in Crimea in 2014, several Western delegates refused to attend .
 Moscow is inclined to now back non-Western nations and non-US allies . Sensing diplomatic decline in relations and discerning that Washington is preparing its allies for sanctions .
 NATO's basing rights for prolonged stay is seen as validating the East-West divide more clear and stark. Further, NATO's Basing rights are seen asvalidating the West's divide .
 The Crimean case can be taken as testing waters for Russia, says David Frum . Russia and the West found an opportunity to accelerate assistance to neighbouring states of Russia to get their support .
 The Russian economy is a relative decline of the Russian economy . However, it should not be considered an absolute economic decline, rather it is an absolute decline .
 The Crimean merger into Russia has introduced new fixtures for the post-Soviet region where old fault lines of the Cold War era are reactivated . Western-led anti-Russian campaign has started .
 The Western interpretation on Russia’s military action in Ukraine is based on allegations such as violation of international law for which it must be punished . Russia's military action has been accused of violating international law .
 Russia declared its action in Ukraine on the principle of “responsibility to protect’s Slavic people residing in Ukraine and vented crisis were an incitement engineered by West .
 The economic system disturbed internally and NATO-EU alliance got the fresh impetus to check Russia’s return to great power status .
 Moscow’s aggressive actions have been causative to the economic instability in the post-Soviet republics .
 NATO-EU’s involvement in the post-Soviet states as a part of encirclement policy .
Kremlin started focusing on forging alliances on its periphery as geography has always been an asset for Russia .
 In order to develop politico-economic ties, the EEU is designed to accomplish Russia’s interests . The EEU was created to develop relations with Russia in order to create ties .
 Some non-traditional partners are also in Russia’s spotlight .
 vagaries of global politics are bringing regional changes and forming unexpected alliances . Interestingly, vagaries are also bringing regional change .
 The wave of terrorism is infecting the periphery of Russia and the emergence of the so-called Islamic State in the Middle-East is becoming a headache for Russia .
 Economic sanctions and falling oil prices are causing internal and external ramifications for Russia . The opposition is becoming more vocal by leaning on the Western propaganda of democracy, human rights and accountability .
 Russia's Eurasianist identity is being focused most by the Putin administration . Russia has a greater role in the post-Soviet space, according to CNN.
 Under Eurasianism, Russia tries to forge ties with its neighbours that would in effect expand Russia’s influence .
 Russia is gravitating towards the post-Soviet states for fresh alliances . Russia is looking to avoid global isolation .
 Russia has succeeded in its goals by incorporating Crimea . It seems problematic for Russia to annex other post-Soviet states as circumstances are quite different there .
Military success may have been achieved yet seeds of parochial conflicts are germinating . Albeit conventional military success may be achieved.
 The Ukrainian parliament considers this a temporary phase and has professed/predicted that Crimea would revert to it soon . The Ukrainian Parliament considers this temporary phase .
 Ukraine needs strong leaders and strong leaders to handle the issue alone . Ukraine is a vulnerable state yet it seems that it needs farsighted and strong leadership .
 It is likely that this might lead to increased military spending in Europe .
 Russia, on its part, is already spending heavily on military and Ukraine has also recently ramped up its military budget . Russia is already Spending heavily on its military, and Ukraine is also spending heavily .
 As a consequence, it could imperil the security architecture of the Eurasian region . It could be a consequence of it.
 The Moscow Times, September 19, 2016 Bugajski, Janusz and Margarita Assenova, Eurasian Disunion: Russia’s Vulnerable Flanks .
 The Jamestown Foundation, 2016 Cancelled Language Law in Ukraine Sparks Concern among Russian and EU diplomats” RT News.
 An Introduction to Neo-Eurasianism Arktos Media, 2014 Dugin, Alexander Dugin . The book is a book about the world's most popular religion .
 Movement without Change, Change without Movement (Amsterdam Overseas Publishers Associations, 2000 Gardner, Hall.
 Crimea, Global Rivalry and the Vengeance of History (Palgrave Macmillan, 2015 Goble, Paul.
 Hill, Fiona and Steven Pifer, “Dealing with a simmering Ukraine-Russia conflict’s conflict” Brookings.
brookings.edu.edu/research/dealing-with-a-simmering-ukraine-russiaconflict.
 The liberals. Delusions that Provoked Putin. The liberals Delusions That Provoked Vladimir Putin .
Task Force on U.S. Policy toward Russia, Ukraine, and Eurasia, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, March 13.