 The aim of the current article is to provide analysis of information operations of the Russian Federation performed against the Ukrainian state and defence forces from 1 April until 31 December 2014 . The aim is to give analysis of Russian Federation's operations against Ukrainian state.
 Russia uses ideological, historical, political symbols and narratives for justifying and supporting their military, economic and political campaigns in Donbass . Russia uses ideology, historical and political symbols to justify and support its political campaigns .
 The article concentrates on the various means of meaning-making carried out by Russian information operations regarding the Ukrainian state and military structures .
 Pabriks & Kudors 2015 is a look at the procedures of modern hybrid war in Ukraine1 . This is the first time we have been able to look into the Ukraine crisis .
 Russia uses information as a tool to destabilise the Donbass region, but in Ukraine as a whole . Russia uses it as a weapon to destabilising the situation in Ukraine .
 Denis McQuail explains that increasing power and internationalisation of media institutions, the idea of access of reporters to war can be seen as part of raising the importance of media in war situations .
Andrew Hoskins and Ben O’Loughlin see that war is transformed and reconstructed so that all aspects of war need consideration of media . Andrew Hoskins says that war should be considered as part of media.
 This also means that war, critical exploration of war and conflict coverage has gained the attention of media scholars . This also mean that war has also gained attention from media scholars in the past .
 The process of mediatisation of war has several directions – on the one hand, media can be considered an important player in depicting war . At the same time, fighting war means deploying media as an informational and psychological weapon .
 The paper looks at how Russia uses its media outlets, linguistically available to most Ukrainians, to support military operations . This paper focuses on the second part of the paper, which focuses on Russia's media outlets .
 Many recent studies focused on different topics related to Russian politics, hybrid warfare in Ukraine or Russian information warfare against the Ukrainian state .
 The aim of the given article is to contribute to filling the gap regarding the representation of the Ukrainian state and military structures in the Russian media . The aim is to help fill the gap.
 This paper analyses information operations of the Russian Federation performed against Ukraine from April until December 2014 . The paper analyses the information operations.
 It examines and systematises the representation of Ukraine, its authorities and armed forces during their anti-terrorist operation in Eastern Ukraine . It aims to provide empirical evidence about the varied nature of Russian propaganda .
 The media analysis presented is based on content analysis, which examines three Russian news outlets . Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum and TV Zvezda are among the outlets examined .
 Ukraine in Russia’s geopolitical and informational sphere of influence . Before defining the aspects of modern information warfare, it is essential to understand the underlying reasons for the outbreak of the Ukrainian crisis .
 Ukraine's independence in 1991 was a shock too hard to swallow for the patriotically-minded Russian political groups . It meant a major defeat for Moscow’s historical strategy, which attempts to exercise control over the geopolitical space around Russia's borders .
 The return of geopolitics has always been an important factor for Russia in performing its international politics after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Brzezinski says losing Ukraine decreases Russia’s possibilities to rule over the Black Sea region . Crimea and Odessa have historically been important strategic clues to Black Sea and even to Mediterranean .
 Ukraine has always been an essential part of narratives related to Russian nation-building . Throughout history, Ukraine has been a part of Russia's history .
 Ukraine does not only play a pivotal role in Russian strategic thinking but also holds a symbolic value hard to underestimate as the homeland of the Russian civilization .
 The Kyiv government set on a more determined path towards integration with the West after the fall of pro-Russian President Yanukovich .
 In Moscow, the possibility of losing Ukraine from its geopolitical sphere of influence was seen as a catastrophic defeat . In 1991, the collapse of the Soviet imperial system was thought to be even more than the collapse .
 Russia has not taken any initiative favouring international or regional crisis management . It would have had good tools for mediating between Ukrainian government and unrecognised People's Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 During the Ukraine crisis in 2014, the role of actual military interventions has remained low in comparison to different tools of asymmetric warfare .
 The regular military force is used mainly as a deterrent and not as a tool of open aggression, according to Andras Rácz .
 hybrid war is not a new phenomenon, as its principles were also characteristic to Soviet military thinking . However, hybrid war as such is not new phenomenon.
 The current empirical research focuses on one part of the hybrid war – information warfare . The research is based on empirical research on one of the most recent conflicts in the world .
 Information warfare is about achieving goals, according to Ulrik Franke . It is about replacing military force and bloodshed with cleverly crafted messages .
 For Russia, information warfare is not simply an accidental choice of instruments in a diverse toolbox of weapons . But for Russia, it is not just an accidental selection of instruments .
 The new Russian military doctrine from December 2014 explicitly states that in the modern war, information superiority is essential to achieve victory on the physical battlefield .
 Russian scholars Chekinov and Bogdanov use the term strategic information warfare . Strategic information warfare forms a vital part of supporting different military and non-military measures .
Successful information war can result in decisions favouring the initiating party, says Semenov .
 Russian information operations in Georgia were not so successful . Compared with the 2008 war in Georgia, Russia's information operations were less successful .
 In 2008, Russia misjudged the importance of information warfare and lost the war of narratives to the West .
 The use of special operation forces that produce public discontent in the crisis area and manipulate public opinion can be clearly identified during the Ukrainian crisis . The extensive use ofspecial operation forces.
 Russia stimulates a proxy war in Eastern Ukraine, where the local pro-Russian separatists have been used as military tools of Russia's political goals . Russia has been using the separatists as political tools of its political goals.
 Russia offers them its extensive support, but this support is thoroughly calculated and tied to Russia's national interests . Russia offers it its support, and it offers them extensive support .
 The Russian information operations against Ukraine are not of new origin, it is important to note . Nevertheless, the Russian information operation against Ukraine is not new origin .
 Russian propagandists started to create the idea of dividing Ukraine into two or three parts in 2003-2004 .
 Moroz associates it with the events in Russia at the same time – oppression of the NTV news channel and the appearance of political technologists in the Russian media space . Moroz: NTV's oppression of NTV has been linked to the rise of political technology .
 Russian information activities started to creep in during the presidency of Leonid Kuchma . The impact of the “first Maidan’s – the Orange Revolution of 2004 – made the Russian rulers uneasy to maintain their influence .
 Russian information operations were not as massive, aggressive, influential and visible as they are now . Back then, the Russian information operation was not as aggressive, aggressive and visible .
 Ukrainian Foreign Ministry considers a more aggressive wave of Russian information campaigns to have started approximately one year before Crimea's annexation .
 The overtake-process indicates that this was a well-prepared action . Russia was militarily ready to conduct the operation in Crimea .
 The Russian information operations in 2014 were carried out at all levels starting with the political level up to the military level . The Russian military level was the highest level of information operations .
 The image of the Ukrainian army as put forward by Russian information operations, portrays them as murderers, criminals and Nazi perpetrators .
 Methodology to find answers to questions on how Russia uses the media as part of information warfare . integrated content analysis was used .
 Qualitative benefits of content analysis allowed for systematising the meaningmaking regarding the different target groups – the Ukrainian government, army and its leadership .
 The quantitative aspect of the analysis provided statistical output to depict various trends in using different keywords and narratives .
 The empirical material was gathered from three news outlets – Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum, TV Zvezda – during the research period from 1 April to 31 December 2014 .
 The period after the annexation of Crimea by Russia was chosen because it includes the intensification of Russian-backed military activities in the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics .
 The three outlets were of interest to us due to various aspects of Russia's media landscape . Russia is not representative of the entire media landscape of Russia .
 Komsomolskaya Pravda is one of the most widely circulated newspapers in Russia . It is targeted at the Russian audience but also has many readers in Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, and other countries with large Russian diasporas .
 The coding manual was developed based on qualitative analysis and expert discussions . It was designed to investigate the variety of themes and tools of information warfare .
 Russia often tries to undermine the historical nation-building process with re-utilising important narratives as part of the propaganda. We focused on historical narratives and the use of them in the modern context .
 The Ukrainian army leadership and the Kyiv government are seen as the most important military forces in the country . The army leadership is the most powerful government in Ukraine .
 We intended to investigate how negative propaganda is used as a tool in information warfare .
 The texts could also be conveying a positive image of Ukraine, either by the author himself or referring to someone doing that . For example, the texts may also be referring to something supportive towards Ukraine .
 The articles could have taken a justifying stance not being directly supportive of the Ukrainian army or the government but nevertheless giving an explanation or excuse .
 An important category was that of neutrally presented articles which simply stated events or facts . But without explicit judgements, these articles were presented without a judgement .
 The analysis did not include and aim at examining the share of true and fake stories . The analysis was not intended to focus on true and false stories .
 From each day two relevant news stories – the first and the last – were analysed by using the coding manual . The first and last news stories were analysed from each day by the coding Manual .
 The final coding was done by three people, using GoogleForms in a survey mode . Each of the three coders filled out a “coding survey’s” for each article in the sample .
 Formal intra-coder validation was not used, with several seminars and discussions including joint coding sessions being used instead .
 Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum and TV Zvezda are under investigation . Analysis of three online news channels under investigation brought out a range of approaches how Russian information campaigns construct a predominantly negative image of Ukraine .
 The antiUkrainian approach can take different forms and relies on various nuances . The three channels under scrutiny are not representative of the entire spectrum of Russian media .
 Ukrainian soldiers, army leadership and the government received the most judgemental treatment by Komsomolskaya Pravda . Ukrainian soldiers and army leadership received the worst treatment .
 86% of articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda conveyed a negative attitude towards the Ukrainian army . The same figures for Regnum and TV Zvezda were 23% and 43% respectively .
 The Ukrainian government was approached in a critical way in 62% of the articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda, 43% in Regnum and 31% in TV Zvezda .
 The Ukrainian army leadership got significantly less attention than the army as a whole or the government . The army's leadership got less attention.
 44% of articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda criticised the command authorities of the army . Only 14% and 6% of the articles did the same in Regnum and TV Zvezda respectively .
 The focus was mostly on the army as a whole and from the leadership point of view it was the government not the military command authorities that received most attention .
 On average, almost two-thirds of articles in Regnum and more than one-third in TV Zvezda did not include explicit judgements . The same figure was only 12% for Komsomolskaya Pravda .
 TV Zvezda was percentage-wise more similar to Komsomolskaya Pravda . But this is explained by the overall significantly lower level of importance of this topic in TV.
 It was only 10% of articles in TV Zvezda that referred to the command authorities of the Ukrainian army . The same figure was 54% for Komsomolskaya Pravda and 55% for Regnum .
 The share of positive or justifying references to any of the three target groups was marginal and therefore negligible . The share was marginal, therefore negligible, according to the study .
 The latter mostly took the form of quoting statements, speeches etc. of different politicians, officials and institutions . The latter tried to gain additional credibility by relying on external authority .
 The share of opinion pieces in Regnum was less than 5% and non-existent in TV Zvezda .
 Komsomolskaya Pravda, on the other hand, used the greatest variety of different journalistic genres . The Russian city is known for its great journalistic genres.
 About 40% of the articles were news stories and 23% were statements . The rest of the article was divided between opinion pieces, interviews and reportages .
 differences in stylistic means folded out when conveying, for example, critical attitudes . The present analysis did not go in-depth with textual and discourse analysis .
 Komsomolskaya Pravda relied more on emotional and even aggressive rhetoric when describing the crisis and its counterparts . It was KomsomsomololskayaPravda that relied on emotional, evenaggressive rhetoric .
 TV Zvezda has adopted to convey its anti-Ukrainian approach . However, when it comes to portraying different groups of adversaries, attention must be paid to the subtler ways .
 The stories that simply describe events but do not carry explicit judgements. 50% of the stories in TV Zvezda regarding the Ukrainian government are about the Ukrainian army . Almost 40% of those regarding the Ukraine army are regarding the army .
 The anti-Ukrainian stance becomes apparent as TV Zvezda does have its ways of “helping the reader to reach that viewpoint’s viewpoint .
 The article can easily succeed in giving a discrediting impression of Ukraine . It can also contribute to the overall negative tonality of Ukraine.
 In our research, we focused on different military aspects of the crisis . Main topics of the articles were the military aspects.
 In all cases, the list of main topics is dominated by different war-related events – combat activities, violence and terrorism .
In Komsomolskaya Pravda and TV Zvezda, the Ukrainian armed forces are still the third most frequent main topic . Nevertheless, in Komsomsomolkia, the country's armed forces remain the most frequent topic .
 Two outlets pay considerably less attention to the separatist armed forces . These two outlets pay less attention than the separatist forces .
 In Regnum, on the other hand, the armed forces, whether Ukrainian or separatist, figure to equally little extent .
 Regnum focuses the most on the political aspects of the conflict . It includes stories that deal with the Ukrainian government, the West’s interference in Ukraine, and Russia .
 These main topics are also present in TV Zvezda but to a lesser extent . The main topics also present on the show are also discussed .
 The so-called Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics are present to only a very small degree as main topics across all three outlets . Importantly, topics related to separatists – the so- called Donetsk andLuhansk people's Republics – are present.
 The main focus was rather on specific events than on broader questions regarding the separatist entities . This shows that while reporting the military aspects of the crisis, even if the articles deal with Eastern Ukraine, the main focus is on the military aspect .
 Komsomolskaya Pravda stands out with the narrowest range of main topics . The political level of the crisis is in the background .
 During phases II and III, the relative share of topics related to combat activities and terrorism is the highest across all outlets . The most acute phases of the military conflict coincide with the most acute periods of military conflict .
 In TV Zvezda, it was 70% for Phase II and 40% for phase III . Other main topics started to enter the scene, such as the Ukrainian government, Russia and the so-called humanitarian convoys .
 Russian information campaigns against Ukraine have become broader in their scope . This illustrates how the Russian information campaign against Ukraine has become broader . This shows how the campaign has become wider in its scope .
Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum and TV Zvezda have the lowest share of articles mentioning the Ukrainian armed forces . This is evident by the highest share of non-judgemental articles (60% and 55% of stories)
 After April, during phases II-IV, the share of articles critical towards the Ukrainian armed forces is always at least half of the data sample . During phases 2- IV, during periods 2-3, the shares of articlescritical towards the Ukraine armed forces are always
 There are virtually no articles presenting anyone’s positive or justifying viewpoints of the army . There are almost no articles presented anyone's positive and justifying viewpoints.
 The Russian information campaigns intensified only during phase II, together with the escalation of the actual military conflict .
Karateli is the most frequent association with the Nazis and their crimes . Karateli has a history of being involved in Nazi crimes .
 More explicit associations with the Nazis, such as parallels with the Kyiv junta and fascists, are always present to a lower level . More explicit association with Nazis is also present to the lower level.
 The share of articles arguing for Russophobia stays the lowest throughout all the four phases . The majority of articles argue forRussophobia stay the lowest during all four phases.
 Komsomolskaya Pravda offers the most colourful and explicitly negative approach to portraying Ukrainian armed forces .
 A great deal of articles concentrates on executions, killings, killings and torturing of civilians, including Russianspeaking people .
For example, an article describes how “One of the videos, published by militia, shows fresh burials. For example, a video shows how ‘one of the video’ was published by the militia .
 More than 10% of the data sample in Komsomolskaya Pravda portrayed the Ukrainian armed forces as fascists or Nazis .
About 40% of articles in Komsomolskaya Pravda show the Ukrainian soldiers as karateli who also kill and rape people, among them women and children .
 Authors of Komsomolskaya Pravda often portray the army and its volunteers as criminals, rapists, drug addicts, alcoholics, robbers and cowards .
 Ukrainian armed forces are shown as revolting due to miserable conditions in the army and not wanting to shoot civilians . Ukraine's army is shown as being in miserable conditions .
 Komsomolskaya Pravda claims that the “Moral condition of the Ukrainian army makes us worry more and more.’s ‘Moral Condition of the Ukraine army’
 Komsomolskaya Pravda has a more reserved approach to portray the Ukrainian army .
 The style used by Regnum and TV Zvezda was more restrained by putting emphasis on facts and not playing directly on emotions .
 siloviki (“persons of force’s) was probably most frequently used strongest negative label for indicating the Ukrainian fighters in the Eastern Ukraine .
 Regnum and TV Zvezda were largely missing in the Russian information campaigns . The associations were often used to draw parallels between Ukraine and Nazi Germany .
 The term karateli was sometimes used, but it remained rather low-profile in terms of frequency .
About 40% of the articles referred to the Ukrainian soldiers as karateli . The term was used only in 7% of articles in TV Zvezda and only in one article in Regnum .
 TV Zvezda also relies on subtler ways of constructing a negative image of the Ukrainian army .
 The article does not accuse anyone but it does require an effort of critical thinking on behalf of the readers not to associate these two separate statements with each other, which might not become the case .
 The share of articles that do not mention the army leadership is always the highest . All throughout the four phases, the share of article that does not mention army leaders is always highest .
 During phases I and II, the share of non-judgemental articles was slightly higher than those conveying a negative approach . Then during phases III and IV it is the other way round .
 The share of articles presenting positive or justifying opinions is similar to the armed forces, practically nonexistent .
 The Russian information operations tend to take a more lukewarm stance on the military leaders . The Prime Minister of the self-proclaimed People's Republic of Donetsk Alexander Zakharchenko is known for his anti-government policies .
 The share of various other unspecified negative attitudes is the highest . The highest share of negative attitudes was the highest in the world .
 The stance on the Ukrainian army leadership also depends on the outlet, according to reports .
 TV Zvezda mentions the Ukraine army leadership significantly less than Regnum and Komsomolskaya Pravda . TVZvezda presents a varied selection of narratives .
 There are hardly any positive or justifying references to the Ukrainian army and its leadership . Similarly to the Ukraine army and the leadership, there are no positive and justifying references .
 In absolute terms the government gets associated with violence the most all throughout the phases of the government .
 In relative terms its share decreases as the usage of other narratives increases . However, in relative terms, its share decrease as the use of other narrative increases .
 Different outlets also target the government differently, according to the government .
 This also becomes evident when comparing the first phase with the later ones . This is also evident when compared to the later phase .
 TV Zvezda remained relatively modest about the Ukrainian armed forces in April when compared to the other outlets . But in April, it associates the government the most with violence .
 TV Zvezda argues less for acts of violence during the later phases . Komsomolskaya Pravda, on the other hand, increases the usage of this narrative .
Ukrainian army leadership was quite visibly associated with following the Kyiv junta . However, the level of labelling the government itself as junta remains rather low-profile .
 The government gets associated with Russophobia more than the army and its leadership . The usage of this narrative also increases with time, says the author .
 The share of portraying the Ukrainian state and people as “false Russians remains the lowest all throughout the four phases. The share is the lowest of all four phases, according to the report .
 Russian information campaigns against the government take different forms in different outlets . Similar to other categories, the Russian information campaign takes different forms .
 The selection of narratives used by Komsomolskaya Pravda widens with time . Regnum and TV Zvezda display more fluctuation .
 Regnum turns to Ukrainian and Western analysts that have critical views against the Ukrainian authorities or experts from other CIS countries that may produce opinions favourable for Russia .
 Regnum usually avoids direct disparagement of opponents . However, in its opinion-building Regnum often avoids direct criticism of its opponents .
 Indirect belittling can be found, which makes the Ukrainian authorities responsible for the violence and human catastrophe in Eastern Ukraine . The Ukrainian authorities are the puppets of the West, where the Ukraine crisis is described as a battlefield between Western and Russian civilization .
 Regnum avoids calling Ukrainian authorities and armed forces fascists, criminals or using other extreme expressions to describe them . At the same time, Regnum avoided calling the Ukrainian authorities, armed forces and criminals .
 There are altogether 30 articles that refer to the Ukrainian government as fascists or junta . Regnum and TV Zvezda are only 7 and 3 articles, thus marginal .
 The analysis of Russian media confirms that media plays an important role in the management of conflict in Ukraine . The analysis shows that media play a key role in management of the conflict .
 Russia uses the influence and accessibility of Russian media outlets to undermine Ukrainian efforts with a variety of approaches that have intensified over time . Russia uses its influence and access to Russian media to undermine Ukraine efforts .
 Russian behaviour during the crisis has always been rational and calculated . There is no "mysterious Russia" which acts in an untold manner. Russian behaviour is rational, calculated and calculated.
 The Georgian campaign of 2008 focused principally on the demonstration of Russia's military power . The military activities often just support the main battles conducted through media channels .
 There is much evidence that Russia tests its new military strategy, in which different non-military actions are often used for achieving military goals .
 The current study focused on outlets that represent the Russian mainstream media . Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum and TV Zvezda are the main outlets .
 Komsomolskaya Pravda tends to be more aggressive against Ukraine as the majority of news, statements, reportages and interviews are given with a strong judgement .
 Regnum, contrariwise, usually puts emphasis on facts and avoids provoking emotions . Regnum is contrari wise .
 This can be explained by its specific role as an information agency, while newspapers are more oriented to opinion pieces . This is explained by the specific role of the information agency .
 The majority of news is given without judgement, but at the same time it does not provide any criticism towards the Russian government . The majority.
 TV Zvezda is rather restrained in terms of portraying the crisis and its counterparts . Similar to Regnum, TV Zuzda is more restrained in its portrayal of the crisis .
 In building negative images, TV Zvezda targets mostly Ukrainian armed forces and the government .
 The Russian information operations have as many faces as Russia has different media channels . Russia has a different media channel than any other country .
 These mass media channels are generally critical against the Ukrainian government and armed forces . They tend to support the political goals of Russian authorities .
 Komsomolskaya Pravda, Regnum and TV Zvezda often refer to soft propaganda mechanisms and methods . In their information building, Komsomsomolkovskaya Pavda and Regnum refer tosoft propaganda mechanisms .
Estonian National Defence College is leader of the project Vladimir Sazonov . The project is part of the NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence . It is based on the project.
Vene meisterspioon külma sõja järgses Ameerikas paljastab oma rääkimata saladused . Vene meisterpio on küLma s õja
 How It Works, and How It Doesn’t’s in Agnieszka PikulickaWilczewska and Richard Sakwa, eds.
 School of Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College .
 Russia’s Foreign Policy and Media Coverage of the Conflict in South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Russia”s foreign policy and media coverage of the conflict in South Caucasus .