 Flashpoint in Russia's escalating crisis. US and UK continue to supply Ukraine with heavy weaponry in the name of Ukraine's defence .
 The Donbas region of eastern Ukraine declared independence in 2014 following Russia's reintegration of Crimea . The region has been a flash point in Russia's escalating crisis with Ukraine .
Russian President Vladimir Putin recognised the independence of two Moscow-backed breakaway enclaves known as the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics . The region turned volatile on Monday, when Russian President Putin recognised independence of the two breakaway enclave .
 The Russian president issued decrees directing military forces to enter the region for "peacekeeping" purposes . Also issued decree directing military force to enter region for peacekeeping purposes .
 The formal recognition is a significant escalation that signals the end of the seven-year-old Minsk peace agreement . Tatiana, a resident of Lviv, a large Ukrainian city on the eastern border with Poland, says there's no reason to fight .
Russian journalist Dr Mujahid Mirza says Putin focused on Luhansk and Donetsk republics in his speech . Mirza is based in Moscow .
 Russia has provided a variety of humanitarian, financial, and covert military assistance to the Russian-speaking population . Since then, Russia has been providing a wide range of assistance .
 The United States and the UK continue to supply Ukraine with heavy weaponry in the name of Ukraine's defence . The U.S. and UK have been supplying Ukraine with weapons for years .
 He warned that if Russia invaded Ukraine, the repercussions would be "extremely serious" for Russia . He also warned that the repercussions for Russia would be 'extremely serious'
 Yanukovych fled to Russia and remained there throughout his presidency . He then fled to the West in order to improve the country's economic situation . He remained in Russia for years .
In the same year of 2014, Russia annexed the Crimea Peninsula on the Black Sea, where 75% of the population is Russian . He accepted a $15 billion aid package from Russia .
 Crimea is home to 12% of Tatar Muslims . Most Ukrainians living in Eastern Ukraine are of Russian ancestry . They oppose the central government of Ukraine .
 NATO later violated this understanding and expanded eastward into Europe . However, NATO later violating this understanding, expanding eastward .
 NATO has also installed modern artillery in Estonia capable of attacking Russia's St. St. Petersburg . Estonia also has modern artillery.
 The commission has been attempting to prepare Ukrainians for NATO membership . But NATO'S expansion to the eastward is contentious .
 NATO has stepped up its efforts to enlist Ukraine in the alliance once again in the aftermath of the Ukraine crisis . Russia has halted the supply of cheap gas to Ukraine; on the other hand, Russia has ignored Poland and Ukraine . Poland is adamantly opposed to this gas pipeline due to Germany
 relations between Europe and the U.S. have been strained on several occasions in recent years .
 Germany built the $10 billion Nord Stream 2 despite strong U.S. opposition . Under President Trump, relations between Germany and the United States deteriorated .
 The U.S. seeks to contain Europe's growing economic cooperation with Russia, as well as Ukraine's central government . The United States wants to contain European economic cooperation and Ukraine's government .
Eastern Ukraine is home to the majority of Russian speakers . While a majority of Ukrainians desire membership in the European Union, the country is divided over NATO membership .
 These Russian backers have instigated a revolt against Ukraine's central government .
Relations between Russia and China have a long-term strategy for cooperation with China . Russia wishes to include Odessa, a Russian-speaking city with a population of 75% Russian speakers .
 President Putin recently visited China and signed a number of agreements strengthening relations between the two countries .
 China issued a critical statement in response to Russia's recent incursion into eastern Ukraine's Donbas region . In the context of Ukraine, tensions between Russia and the United States have been increasing in Europe .