 My aim was to explore the relevance of the Cold War to the unfolding drama of Ukraine . The challenge of securing essential interests without triggering a wider war is the challenge .
 The consequences of the failure of crisis management lay not so much in expanding the area of conflict . Instead in a sharp deterioration in relations between Russia and the West, it is continuing and unsettling violence within Ukraine .
 The role of Russian forces within Ukraine became more direct and overt, as the more irregular separatist forces were unable to cope . The result was that, over subsequent months, the role of the Russian forces in Ukraine was more direct .
 The conflict became less of an externally sponsored insurgency in eastern Ukraine and more of a limited war between Ukraine and Russia . The conflict has become less of a externallysponsored insurgency in east Ukraine .
By 8 October 2014 the conflict had claimed 3,682 lives and wounded 8,871 in eastern Ukraine . According to the United Nations, by 8 October2014 the conflict has claimed 3.682 lives .
 Lawrence Freedman is Professor of War Studies at King’s College London . He is also Professor at King's College London.
 An earlier version of this article appeared on the web magazine War on the Rocks on 8 October 2014 . The article was published on October 8 .
 In this article I do not reprise the material on the origins of the crisis and the events up to May 2014 contained in the first article . Instead concentrate on the later intensification of the conflict and the aftermath of the ‘ceasefire’ of 5 September .
 The concept of limited war has even longer history than that of crisis management . On limited and hybrid warfare, the concept has a long history .
 It requires that belligerents choose not to fight at full capacity, in order that a conflict neither gains in intensity nor expands in space and time . It requires a conflict to be resolved in order to avoid further escalation .
 This is different from accepting those natural limits imposed by resources and geography, and also from circumstances in which a strong state employs only limited forces to deal with opponents with inferior capabilities . This is not the same as when a strong State employs onlylimited forces to dealing with opponents.
Against inferior opponents complete victories can still be achieved with limited effort . Against inferior opponents can still achieve with limited efforts .
 As a distinctive concept, limited war depended on a contrast with total war . The term was popularised as a result of the First World War .
 The Napoleonic period saw a departure from the inherently limited conflicts of the eighteenth century . The Napolonic period was the most significant period of the 18th century .
 If both sides could accept that whatever was at stake was not worth an all-out confrontation, then any effort to protect interests would have to be governed by some sense of how far they were prepared to go .
 The United States neither extended the war into China nor used nuclear weapons . In the end Ukraine and the Art of Limited War, 9 accepted an outcome that could be characterised as stalemate rather than victory .
 If the U.S. was prepared to fight only total war and lacked a capacity for limited war, it would face a dilemma with an incremental Soviet advance .
Once forces of great size and complexity began to clash, a conflict would become increasingly difficult to manage . Once forces of large size and complex conflict began, it would become more difficult to managed .
 Actions might be taken because of confusion, misapprehension, panic or passion, or passion .
Once fighting was under way, new issues would affect attitudes to the conflict . Once fighting was over, a new issue would affect the conflict.
As questions of reputation, credibility and pride came into play, the military effort might be ratcheted up to levels beyond those justified by the original dispute .
 This problem could be aggravated by the rhetoric necessary to mobilise public opinion behind any operation . This problem is aggravated by rhetoric necessary for mobilising public opinion.
 Should a threshold be reached or a deal agreed, then all this would have to be scaled down . If a threshold is reached, then a deal could be agreed .
 In the end, limited war implied compromise, which would always be difficult when the enemy had been described in the darkest terms . The stakes raised to existential levels in the war .
 The original metaphor derived from the moving staircase which took one to a place one might not want to go because one could not get off .
 The theorists of escalation, such as Herman Kahn, resisted the idea of a loss of control . The theory of escalation has been called "Estranged"
 They suggested that it might be possible to find a level at which a war might be fought which suited one side's capabilities . But not the other, they suggested that a war could be fought on a level which suited both sides .
 A problem with limited war is that, despite the natural assumption of some proportionality between limited ends and limited means, some military commitments would reflect the logic of combat .
 Forces would need to be sized with reference to those of the enemy, as well as the value of whatever was in dispute .
 There would need to be some means by which limits could be recognised, agreed and enforced . There would be some limits by which limit could be agreed, agreed or enforced .
With the end of the East-West confrontation, the issue of limited war became less pressing . The West’s lomatic activity would be necessary if a conflict was to be kept limited .
 The wars fought by Western countries were inherently limited, and only anxiety rarely with another state . The wars in Western countries are inherently limited .
 There were challenges related to keeping conflicts restricted in terms of time taken and resources expended . But their discretionary nature meant that if demands of a campaign exceeded the value of the objective, then an intervention could be drawn to a close .
 The confrontation morphed into an inter-state war with high stakes, and with one side a nuclear power, but vast armies did not move against each other . capabilities were held in reserve and diplomatic communications continued throughout .
 NATO was not directly engaged in the fighting, but it had to consider whether and how it might get involved .
 This involved assessing Russian objectives, advising Ukraine on how to respond, and examining the implications for any conflict between Russia and a NATO member .
 This term gained currency after Israel was said to have been surprised and discomfited during the 2006 Lebanon War by the combination Ukraine and the Art of Limited War .
 It is now discussed as an approach that draws upon a number of types of force from across the full spectrum, including terrorism, insurgency and regular combat .
 There are many examples in military history of the combination of regular and irregular forms of warfare .
Command authority can choreograph the various operations to achieve the greatest synergy in pursuit of specified goals . This suggests a command authority that is able to choreograph various operations .
 The Ukrainian case has also raised additional questions about hybrid war .
 The advantages of hybrid warfare have been less evident than often claimed, he says . He argues that the advantages of hybrids are less evident.
 The complex command arrangements reduced Russian control over the developing situation on the ground . The Russian role became progressively transparent, while efforts at deception were by and large ineffectual .
 The exception to this may have been a relative success in projecting a more menacing image than Russia’s actual strength was warranted .
 This supported a limited-war strategy based on boosting Russia’s position by warning of a readiness to continue escalation . This supported the Russia-Russia strategy, according to the Russian military .
 Ukraine's Lawrence Freedman says most effective forms of control involve regular armed forces . But physical control does not ensure a functioning economy and society, he says .
 Any analysis relies on inferences about Russian President Vladimir Putin’s objectives and calculations . Until more is revealed about Russian decision-making during the course of this crisis, any analysis is needed .
 The evidence supports a number of interpretations. This is not straightforward, because the evidence supports many interpretations . The evidence is not simple, because it supports many theories .
 Putin viewed the break-up of the Soviet Union as a retrograde step which created opportunities for Russia's adversaries that they did not hesitate to exploit .
 Moscow came to consider the overall political orientation of Ukraine, whether it looked to the East or the West, as a vital interest .
 Russia put pressure on Ukraine not to sign an association agreement with the European Union . This issue came to the fore during the course of 2013 . It became the latest stage in the West's expansion into the former Soviet space .
 At first, Kiev opted for the EU, only to turn instead to the Eurasian Union with the incentive of a large Russian loan .
 Former Polish Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski suggested that this was combined with a threat to seize Crimea and possibly personal blackmail . It has also been suggested by former Polish foreign minister that this is combined with an organised corruption of Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovich's government .
 Zaporozhye, Dnepropetrovsk and Odessa regions, rather than those parts of the Donbas area that came to be controlled by separatists . These were the Zaporzhye and Dnepshye regions .
 Yanukovich’s turn to Russia triggered the revolt in Kiev, the overthrow of the Yanukovich government and an apparently decisive Ukraine .
 If Moscow had formed a link between such a hostile turn in Kiev’s policy and the seizure of Crimea and other Ukrainian territory, then this might explain the speed with which agitation soon began .
 The effort to generate a counter-revolutionary movement failed, other than in Crimea . Russia had the benefit of the Sevastapol base as well as prior preparation, the Russian official says .
 The Russians may have hoped to retain annexation as a threat to encourage Kiev to reconsider its position . But given the revolutionary enthusiasm in Ukraine, concessions to Moscow were always unlikely .
 The evident support for annexation within Russia meant that it was not long delayed . The evident popular support for annexing within Russia means that it wasn't long delayed.
 This was a definitive move that would be very difficult for Moscow to reverse. This was the first time Moscow has made a decision to make a decision .
 It introduced a problem into all later attempts to achieve a political settlement . It introduced the problem into the later attempts.
 The focus had to be on preventing Russia from taking more slices of salami . A view quickly developed within the international community that it would be extremely difficult to force Russia to hand Crimea back .
 Initially, there were a number of areas of agitation, including Odessa, but they gained little traction . The agitation began in the city of Odessa .
 Russian efforts concentrated on the Donbas region and the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics . Eventually, Russian efforts focused on the region .
 Putin described these areas using the historic name of Novorossiya, expressing his astonishment that they had ever been allowed to become part of Ukraine in 1922 . The loss of these territorial slices directly challenged Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Lawrence Freedman of a special responsibility to protect the position of Russians unfortunate enough to live outside the borders of the Russian Federation potentially affected a number of countries .
 This was already the rationale behind the frozen conflicts in Moldova and Georgia . This was also the rationale for the Moldova-Georgia conflict .
 It could be used to challenge the position of the Baltic states, notably Estonia,12 and even Russia’s notional partners in the Eurasian Union, Belarus and Kazakhstan .
 Poland, Sweden and Finland could come into the frame if Russia moves into a full expansionist mode . If it was believed that Russia was capable of moving into full expansion mode, then Poland and Sweden could come in the frame .
 If any action triggers NATO's Article V commitments, Russian forces would be outnumbered and face superior air power from the U.S. and other allies .
 Poland's GDP is close to that of Italy and in per capita terms is less than Poland's . Its GDP is similar to Italy's, but its GDP is more than Poland’s .
 Britain is a great power by virtue of its nuclear arsenal and permanent membership of the Security Council . Britain also has a stronger economy and many more allies, including stronger economy .
 What marks Russia out is a regular need to assert its power, reflecting security problems around its periphery . Russia's power needs to assert power, reflects security problems in its periphery.
 Putin has not gone for broke in Ukraine. For all the talk about driving to Kiev, never mind Warsaw, nevermind Warsaw .
 It had implications for the wider European economy and energy networks . It was a major concern for the European economy .
 The shooting down of a civilian airliner in July affected many countries . The shooting was the first civilian airliner to have been shot down .
 The Russian effort remains limited to areas bordering Russia, including Crimea . The focus of the Russian effort is on Crimea .
Valery Gerasimov, newly appointed chief of Russia’s general staff, highlighted how appropriate they might be in contemporary conflict .
In Middle Eastern conflicts there had been a progressive erosion of the distinctions between war and peace, he said .
 It was evident in Crimea that preparations had been made for this contingency for some time . It is evident that preparations were made for the situation .
 Russian agents acted with indigenous separatists to seize administrative buildings and other facilities in the Donbas area . They were deployed again in numbers in April, as Russian agents were deployed in April .
 At first these operations were successful, in part because the local response by Ukrainian security forces was lame .
 There was evidence of intimidation by the separatists and substantial support from Russia . But the rebellion struggled to establish itself because of a lack of popular backing .
 Referendums held in support of separatism had little credibility and were not taken seriously internationally . Referentums held by separatist groups were not seriously taken seriously by international authorities .
 The Ukrainian military effort against the separatists was stepped up after the election of President Poroshenko at the end of May . The operation was under the heading of an anti-terrorist operation .
 The Chechnya and Georgia militants were combining local agitators, militants and Russian special forces . They lacked coherence, combining local Agitators and militants who had learnt their trade in Chechny and Georgia .
 Coordination was often poor, and political leadership was often eccentric . Political leadership at times eccentric .
Local people used sophisticated equipment with which they were provided recklessly . Their methods alienated local people, and they used the sophisticated equipment they were given .
 Ukrainian forces are becoming better organised, and prepared to deploy firepower more ruthlessly, they gave ground . Ukrainian forces became better organised and prepared.
 Donetsk airport was taken by government forces in a significant battle on 26 May . Government forces used aircraft and helicopters.
 Ill-prepared separatist fighters suffered many casualties, a number apparently as a result of friendly fire .
 Russia has sent more advanced equipment to separatists, including anti-aircraft weapons and GRAD rockets . This particular episode may be one reason why Russia began sending more advanced weapons to separatists .
 Surface-to-air missiles made the skies more dangerous for Ukrainian military aircraft . The missiles were used by Ukrainian military planes .
 The furore that followed added to Russia’s isolation, not helped by a refusal to accept any responsibility . Russia's isolation has been added to the country's isolation .
 These events may have distracted the separatists’ attention from the defence of their positions . These events also may also have distracted them from their positions.
 Ukrainians replaced the leadership of the rebellion with Ukrainians rather than the Russian citizens who had initially taken charge of the revolt .
 In late August, Russian armed forces became involved in a much more overt way .
 There were reports of 15,000 troops on the border, with at least 1,000 operating inside Ukraine .
 Ilovaisk, a town between Donetsk and the Russian border, was retaken from separatists on 19 August . Ukrainian troops were surrounded by Russian troops in the town .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk observed that it was easy to deal with ‘Russian-led guerrillas and the Russian-led terrorists’
 Some 65% of Ukraine's military equipment had been lost, while the armour left in storage was described by Poroshenko as being as good as 'tins cans'
 Russia seized the border town of Novoazovsk and threatened the port of Mariupol . It raised the possibility of a land corridor to Crimea which, with only sea links, was proving a challenge for Moscow .
 An agreement on a ceasefire was reached at Minsk, signed by representatives of Russia, Ukraine and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe . The leaders of the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics also signed .
 The agreement was largely based on a plan originally proposed by Poroshenko in June . It offered a degree of decentralisation of power and protection of Russian language . It also offered the liberation of hostages and amnesties .
 The September agreement gave the OSCE a substantial role in monitoring the provisions . The OSCE has been in charge of monitoring the September agreement .
 A further agreement of 19 September required that heavy weaponry be pulled back 15 kilometres from the line of contact . The agreement also called for the withdrawal of foreign mercenaries and an OSCE monitoring mission . It also banned offensive operations and flights by combat aircraft .
 NATO reported a ‘significant’ withdrawal of Russian troops from Ukraine on 24 September . On 24 September, NATO reported that the withdrawal was not complete .
 These troops were said to be not for fighting but specialist training . The troops were trained to help the separatist forces .
 There were reports that these forces were being reinforced with more weaponry at the time of the separatist elections in early November .
 Russian forces on the border were down from the 18 battalions of August to some seven, still enough to unnerve Kiev .
 In principle, by accepting Ukrainian sovereignty, this agreement favoured Kiev more than Moscow . In principle. By accepting Ukraine's sovereignty, it favoured Kiev.
 Russian caution added risks associated with further intervention, including getting bogged down in an occupation against a hostile population .
 It was one thing to shell Ukrainian positions, and another to move in numbers against those positions . One thing to occupy territory with superior force, but another to administer and reconstruct .
 There were also reports of significant Russian casualties, ranging from the hundreds to the thousands .
Russian authorities deny that the deaths had occurred in Ukraine or to insist that, if they did, this was because the casualties had temporarily left the army and volunteered to help the separatists . These were causing consternation in Russia, especially because of the lengths the authorities went to deny the deaths
 Western sanctions were steadily ratcheted up after the Minsk agreement . A second reason for caution might lie in Western economic sanctions, which were steadilyratcheted.
 These measures affected investment in future exploration for the oil and gas industry . The measures affect investment in the oil industry .
 The easing of sanctions was linked to the implementation of the agreement . The easing was linked explicitly to the Implementation of the deal .
 US Deputy National Security Adviser Tony Blinken said there was a need to make sure that ‘Russian personnel and equipment leave Ukraine’
 Some Russian responses, notably the banning of some agricultural products from the EU, added to the costs and reduced the choices for Russian consumers .
 Ukraine and the Art of Limited War. 19 faced a declining currency, along with recession and rising prices, especially for foodstuffs .
 Russia meets about a quarter of Europe's demand for gas,28 the pressure on revenues limited the country’s ability to cut supplies . There were even some moves to resolve the vexing issue of Russian supplies to Ukraine .
 The positions held by separatists undoubtedly created a serious problem for Ukraine . The positions hold by separatists have created serious problems for the country .
 The territory held at the time of the ceasefire could not ensure that Russia would achieve its main aims . But the territory held during the ceasefire was not enough to achieve its aims .
 Russia was already struggling with Crimea,30 and Sanctions none of its other frozen territories were exactly economic success stories . Russia was also struggling with Ukraine, Crimea, 30 and other frozen regions .
 It was unlikely that those aggravated a displaced by the conflict would return while fightdifficult situation continued .
 If these territories did secede, there would be continuing tension on their border with the rest of Ukraine . There is a need for high levels of military mobilisation, and a likely deterioration in economic and social conditions .
 Industrial production had collapsed, pensions were not being paid and provisions would be necessary for the winter . Industrial production has collapsed, pensioners were not paid, and provisions were needed for winter .
 Ukraine would be bound to work even more closely with Western Europe . Meanwhile, Ukraine would have to work with the West more closely .
 As was expected, the more pro-Russian parties faltered in the 27 October parliamentary elections .
 propaganda claim that neo-Nazis were at the heart of the new order in Ukraine was the weakness of the right-wing Svoboda party .
 Yatsenyuk's party did slightly better than that of more conciliatory President Poroshenko . The more hawkish Prime Minister was the party of the more hawish PM .
 Minsk deal made little sense to Russia's separatists . Minsk's role was reduced after Minsk was reduced .
 The fighting did not actually stop as they sought to extend their area of control, resulting in many more casualties . For this reason, the fighting didn't actually stop .
 At 20, Lawrence Freedman's best this was more de-escalation than ceasefire . At 20 he was better than any other man in the world .
 Mariupol appeared to give up quite quickly, except for occasional shelling, because of the entrenched position of Ukrainian forces .
 Although the actual airport was destroyed, it remained in Ukrainian hands . The actual airport is still in Ukraine .
 separatist failure left many casualties and undermined claims of separatist control over the region . This separatist failure leaves many casualties.
 Moscow’s interests were not necessarily the same as the separatists, although ultimately the separatists could not survive without Russian support . Moscow's interests were therefore not necessarily same.
 Russia did not endorse full independence for or annexation of Novorussyia . But only the compromise position that the region would stay part of Ukraine but with a significant amount of autonomy . This explains the tensions between the two, as Russia does not endorse independence .
 The separatists showed no interest in these issues or any compromise along these lines . The separatists are not interested in any compromise on these issues .
 One of his deputies explicitly rejected the agreement to return control of the border to Ukraine . One of the deputies explicitly rejects the agreement .
 There were demands that Ukraine cede more territory or else it would be taken by force . There were soon demands for more territory .
 Elections were conducted separately in Donetsk and Luhansk in contravention of the Minsk agreement . Results were unsurprising given the limited choice allowed .
 Poroshenko described the elections as a ‘farce at gunpoint’ and questioned whether there was much point continuing with the Minsk agreement .
 Putin dared not abandon the separatists, yet he was unable to get them to meet their obligations . The Russian leader was able to meet the separatists' obligations .
 Putin, Poroshenko and EU leaders met in Milan on 17 October . Putin and Poroshenko were not able to force them to do so, says Putin .
 Ukraine had a clear interest in a negotiated solution, but there were growing elements in the country pushing for tougher action . Ukraine was severely weakened by the events of 2014.
 The conflict encouraged nationalist sentiment in Ukraine as well as Russia, according to reports .
 Poroshenko accepted the need for compromise in terms of more autonomy for the troubled regions . But he could not abandon closer relations with the EU as a goal .
 The parties agreed to postpone the implementation of the EU's Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with Ukraine from November 2014 to the end of 2015 . Russia threatened tariffs for Ukrainian exports to Russia should implementation take place .
 The conciliatory stance adopted by Kiev led to the resignation of Ukraine’s deputy foreign minister . Ukraine's Deputy foreign minister resigns from his post .
 The Russian intervention was widely seen as successful, even though the conflict was still unresolved . Russia had yet to achieve its main objectives .
 Russian success was attributed to its skilful adoption of the techniques of hybrid war . Russian success is attributed to the use of hybrid warfare .
 Lawrence Freedman's use of a range of force types was reflected in 22 of his work . The use of force type is reflected in his work in the UK .
 Initially, the main requirement was sufficient force to take over administrative buildings and intimidate local police forces . Initially, it was necessary to intimidate police forces.
Local agitators had to be supplemented with Russian fighters with combat experience, apparently often Chechen . Over time the demands increased, to the point where local agitator's demands increased .
 Throughout there was a deceptive intent, recalling the old Soviet concept of maskirovka or even Potemkin villages .
 The aim was to sustain the pretence that the fighting force was wholly indigenous, supplemented by some friendly volunteers from over the border .
 Some have called the new approach ‘hybrid war,’ a conflict waged by commandos without insignia, armored columns slipping across the international border .
 A civilian airliner was shot down by surface-to-air missiles, but the triggerman or supplier of the missile was never identified . Russian military material and equipment appears suddenly in the villages and fields of eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine's hybrid war features an aggressor whose moves are shrouded in deception . While people are being killed, as in any war, this hybrid war is a hybrid war .
 Russian strategists said to judge information operations to be important as a means of challenging the claims made by their opponents and of shoring up support at home .
 Ukrainian and Western opponents of Russian action. A constant challenge was mounted to the claims made by Ukrainian and West opponents . A competing narrative was developed.
 Russia has a larger narrative about the greatness, exceptional quality and legitimate interests of Russia . This was combined with a bigger narrative about Russia's greatness, says CNN's John Sutter .
Trade with Western Europe to intensified links with Asia to intensified ties with Asia . Economic sacrifices and the risks being run in Ukraine were justified as enabling a shift away from dependence on Ukraine and the Art of Limited War .
 Enormous efforts were made to harass perceived opponents of Russia, including the deployment of an army of trolls with a mission to contradict and abuse anti-Russian positions .
 Moscow has been accused of being behind a series of Russian military operations . The Russian government has denied the claims, but it has now said it will continue to do so .
 The claims about a lack of direct Russian involvement in the fighting became progressively implausible and eventually incredible . The claims were eventually incredibly incredible .
 Russian positions taken in a series of awkward Security Council sessions were widely disregarded and derided . The country’s standing fell internationally .
Independent analysts used forensic skills to evaluate claims being made by both sides . As much of the campaign was conducted through social media, Russian efforts were hampered by the role played by analysts .
 This was particularly effective after the downing of the Malaysia Airlines plane . The plane was downed by Malaysia Airlines on Monday morning .
 Moscow denies that BUK surface-to-air missiles could have been in the area . Moscow attempted to suggest that the airliner had been attacked from behind by a Ukrainian Su-25 .
 The Su-25 theory of a BUK was debunked by the British government . The debris showed damage consistent with the BUK, the analysis of the debris .
 The information campaign was effective, reflected in a surge in Putin’s popularity . Here, the information campaign is reflected in Putin's popularity .
 The president rode a wave of nationalist sentiment, particularly with regard to the annexation of Crimea . The president is expected to make a speech on Thursday .
 Putin took advantage of the situation to do so, with those worried about the economy losing out to those seeking to strengthen the state .
 Government insists on fictional descriptions of situations can get caught out . Jeffrey Michaels has identified as a ‘discourse trap’ which must be upheld even when it pushes counterproductive policies .
 Nationalists were unnerved by possible betrayals of the separatists . Allegations sure to re-surface if the Propaganda separate territories were in any way re-integrated into Ukraine .
 When an interlocutor insists on an alternative reality of danger it becomes hard to engage or to trust, making diplomatic intercourse more difficult . There were diplomatic costs as well .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel and President Putin have poor relations . This was one reason for the poor relations between the two leaders .
 There was one important sense in which the Russian propaganda effort was successful . There was, however, one importantsense in which it was successful.
 The West may not have been supporting Ukraine as much as it might otherwise have done . This was in creating a sense of danger that probably had an effect, but it was hard to measure .
 This effort involved rhetorical threats, such as regular reminders of Russia’s nuclear strength . This effort involves rhetorical threats.
 There were suggestions of a new Russian doctrine that would ‘re-establish NATO as Russia’s primary threat’ There were also staged incidents, such as the kidnapping of an Estonian officer and regular violations of Western airspace .
 Western commentary often accepted the foundations of this self-promotion at face value instead of Ukraine and the Art of Limited War .
Russian boldness was often compared unfavourably with the feebleness of Western support . Russian boldness is often compared to that of the West .
 The doves accepted that the origins of the crisis lay in Western expansionism rather than Ukrainian self-determination . While the hawks exaggerated Russian power, the doves showed sympathy for its stance .
 The price Russia paid for the deterrence value of this additional menace was a restructuring of the European security debate . Russia paid the price for the deterrent value of the additional menace .
 More attention began to be paid by NATO to the Baltic states, while neutrals like Sweden and Finland got closer to the alliance .
 It committed financial and material support to Ukraine and promised to hold regular military exercises on its territory . It also committed financial support to the country and pledged to hold military exercises .
 NATO provided an answer to the question of what it needed to worry about as it left Afghanistan . If nothing else, NATO was provided with an answer.
 There were claims that Russia would reduce its dependence on Western markets by looking to Asia . There were also claims that, in response, Russia would look to Asia for the future .
 China was largely taking advantage of Russian weakness to achieve attractive deals on oil supplies . Japan had also imposed sanctions on Russia .
 The Russian foreign minister even floated the idea of a new ‘reset’ with the U.S.
 U.S. President Barack Obama’s proposition that there could not be a ‘military solution’ to the Ukraine crisis was adopted as something of a mantra . NATO's Wales summit took place at the same time as the ceasefire negotiations in Minsk .
 The effect was to signal to both domestic audiences and Ukraine that NATO members were not going to get militarily involved . The effect of the move was to send a message to both the Ukraine and the Ukraine .
 Poroshenko had made an urgent appeal for more military support when he spoke to the United States Congress in September . The limited $53m package he was offered, including radar, vehicles and body armour, stopped short of providing weapons or other lethal aid .
 Despite pressure from Congress and within government, the White House was anxious to avoid a proxy war with Moscow .
 Poroshenko has agreed to a ceasefire with Russia and the separatists . This may well have convinced him not to continue to push back militarily against Russia and separatists .
 Russia’s more forceful intervention meant that when areas of control were supposedly frozen under the Minsk agreement they were far more advantageous to the separatists than they would have been just a couple of weeks earlier .
 It did not ensure a political solution that met Russia’s objectives . It didn’t, however, meet Russia's objectives .
 Limited wars can only conclude if both sides accept a new reality as preferable to the risks involved in trying to achieve an even better reality .
 After Minsk, Western capitals began to take the view that the worst of the crisis was over . Western capitals took the view after Minsk .
 This limited war had not been transformed into a frozen conflict along the lines of those in Moldova and Georgia . The Moldova-Georgia conflict was not a frozen war .
 NATO and the EU had damaged, but not defeated, Russia . By sticking to economic rather than military sanctions, the EU and NATO had damaged.
 The crisis was not over, because the future of Ukraine remained uncertain . The future of the Ukraine is still uncertain .
 The separatists could not accept the political logic of the Minsk agreement, which meant they would have to agree that they could not actually stay separate . This was largely because the separatists couldn't accept thepolitical logic .
 Putin was left with the dilemma of accusations of betrayal if Donetsk and Luhansk were re-integrated into Ukraine and of loss of influence over Ukraine if they were effectively to become part of Russia .
 The logic of the situation was that the separatists would be sustained, and even push further into Ukraine, but without regular Russian units taking too prominent a role . The logic was that they would be sustaining, and pushing further into the Ukraine .
 Definitions that assume unified political control overlook the most challenging aspect of trying to bring together irregular forces, and regular forces, representing another .
 It can be challenging enough to meld together different units of the same army – for example, special forces and infantry battalions – but even more difficult where the forces coming together not only have different military tasks and methods, but also distinct command structures and diverging political interests .
 Even among militia groups in Donetsk and Luhansk there were differences. Even among the militia groups there were Differences .
 As conditions became harsher within those areas these differences were likely to grow .
 At the same time, Ukrainian forces had also seen awkward combinations of militias and regular forces .
 Russia sustained a weak position and boosted its bargaining position by conveying a readiness to escalate . Russia sustained its weak position. Russia's bargaining position was boosted by its willingness to escalate.
 This was a constant of Russian rhetoric, including reference, on occasion, to nuclear capabilities . This was the constant of Russia's rhetoric, with reference to nuclear capability .
 Putin offered no. While the Russian threats were not quite Potemkin villages, they were still exaggerated .
 Russians decried sanctions as being against international rules, but of little consequence . Similarly, rather than complain about sanctions, they decried them as being in violation of rules .
 Russia could be challenged on the basis of the underlying economic realities of its position. This dismissal of sanctions, as with claims that Russia could march with ease to Kiev, or turn off gas supplies without a thought for the consequences, could be challenging .
 The gloomy prognostications by many Western commentators about how Putin was determined to take on all neighbouring states in some ways boosted this aspect of Russian strategy, making the country appear more powerful than was actually the case .
 Putin's power play in Ukraine was impulsive and improvised, without any clear sense of the desired end state . Putin’s power play is impulsive, improvised and improvised .
 Putin offered no long-term vision for Ukraine. In a wide-ranging speech in October at Sochi, he said the United States had been engaged in a foolish quest to dominate the world .
 separatists had denounced the Minsk agreements. Yet by the time of this speech the separatists had denounced the agreements .
 Putin was stuck with boosting them both militarily and politically, perhaps hoping that Kiev would eventually accept that it must negotiate on their terms .
 Donetsk and Luhansk fell into disrepair and disarray, adrift in some separatist limbo . It is not clear that either had the capacity to provide a viable future . It would serve neither Ukraine nor Russia if Donetsk andLuhansk fall into disarray .
 The separatists would not allow these territories to be re-integrated into Ukraine, while Russia could not afford to annex them . Russia would not be able to annex these territories .
 Militarily, Russia could help the separatists expand their area of control and use this to coerce and unsettle Ukraine . Russia could use this as a means of coercing and unsettingtle Ukraine.
 The border between the separatist areas and Russia was left open and unmonitored . Those with Ukraine lacked any particular geographical or political logic that might allow them to be frozen .
 The economic situation might push Moscow to look for a deal, but the sense of continuing crisis and the nationalism it engendered played to Putin’s domestic political agenda .
 If the conflict was not resolved, economic sanctions would become embedded . There was a chance that Washington would have to reconsider its refusal to supply Ukraine with lethal equipment .
 Ukraine was left struggling with a dire economic situation, aggravated by the costs of war, and stuck with a demanding and unresolved military conflict . A disaffected minority still looking more to the east than the west. For its part, Ukraine is still struggling with an economic situation .
 Not much of a start had been made on dealing with problems of chronic corruption and incompetence left over from old regime .
 If Ukraine could not be strengthened economically, politically and militarily, the situation could return to the one before 2014 . It was hard to imagine the country ever being in a fit state to join the EU .
 Russia would struggle to transform seized territory into a viable political entity . However, without popular support, Russia would be unable to transform into a political entity.
 Russia had achieved limited gains, but at high cost, after many months of effort . After many months, Russia had reached limited gains.
 It was therefore about on reports from official sources and the progressive exclusion of oppomedical establishments and are nents .
Another tended to refer to civilian deaths to sive but incremental victories . Another tended to use progresreport attributes civilian death to sives but incremental wins .
 There is a continuity between pro-Russian and Ukrainian forces in the Ukraine crisis . The U.N. has used the 'fascist' label to deleSee all other parties .
 Poland-Romania-and-the-BalticThirty-two people died as a result. states.
 The incident aggravated already tense 14. This was a speech of late January 2013 relations in southeastern Ukraine .
 The New Statute about the General includes Odessa . It included the Organization of the Defense of what had been Ottoman territory the Country in Correspondence .
 The referendums were held on 11 Aid Convoy Committed Wide-scale May 2014 . See Reuben Johnson, ‘Russian 15’
 IHS Jane’s Putin had asked that they be postDefence Weekly, 27 August 2014, poned . They took place after Looting, Says Ukraine’, says Ukraine .
Ukrainian Troops have been fighting in Ukraine for three years . The Ukrainian army has been fighting against pro-Russian rebels .
 There are, for obviArseniy Yatsenyuk on Ukraine's ous reasons, no authoritative Russian Challenges’, Council on Foreign figures .
 Most likely, we between Russia and Ukraine at the will stay unrecognized . Most likely.
 'Russia–Ukraine Gas Deal – other hand, it is very good for the Another Last-Minute Special, Center economy,' says Chow .
Being unrecognized means for Strategic and International Studies, more money . Being unrecognized is a good way to make money, says the study's director .
 Under the aegis of someeurope/21623767-after-war-was-notthing mischievously described as 34 . Lawrence Freedman the Association of Security and release_statements-14-276_en.htm .
 'Putin Demands extremist politicians (from right and Reopening of EU Trade Pact) validated the election,' says Peter Spiegel . ‘Putin Demanded extremist politicians,’ says Spiegel .
 Ukrainians remained evenly divided, 43 Timothy Snyder, ‘To Understand on whether a military or a negoPutin, Read Orwell’, said Snyder .
Ott Ummelas and Bryan Bradley, challenge-11113. See also org/feature/putins-public-opinionOtt U mmelas.
 Ukraine and concern about economic bloomberg.com.com/news/2014-09-19/ prospects .
 McFaul 54 one issue was whether the new and Stephen Sestanovich in the doctrine would discuss pre-emptive November–December issue (Faulty nuclear strikes)
 Germany 'will certainly not lower gas price, accepting $350 per deliver weapons, as this would be a thousand cubic metres'