Russian troops blocked the entrance of a Ukrainian air base outside Sevastopol in 2014 .
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month . Denis Sinyakov/Redux send any friend a story .
Dr. Evelyn N FarkasDr. Dr. Farka is a doctor in the U.S. and the world's most famous doctor .
 Farkas was a deputy assistant secretary of defense for Russia, Ukraine and Eurasia in the Obama administration . The White House on Friday came out with its starkest warning yet.
 The national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, stressed there was no way to predict what President Vladimir Putin of Russia might do . History shows we should not underestimate Mr Putin's willingness to violate another country’s sovereignty .
There was nothing the Ukrainian military could do — years of corrupt management had left it ill equipped and unprepared . There was nothing they could do.
Senior Pentagon official in charge of Russia and Ukraine was stunned by the invasion . Attempts to retake Ukrainian bases and rescue their personnel would inevitably have led to a blood bath .
 I remember going to bed praying that the besieged Ukrainian naval, air and marine forces in Crimea would still be alive when I woke up . I remember praying that they would be alive.
 My colleagues in the White House Situation Room were equally horrified. My colleagues were also horrified .
At the time, we debated how forcefully to confront Mr Putin . Even if we had seen troop movements weeks or months in advance, we never would have imagined Mr Putin would take such a risky and blatantly illegal action .
 We, along with the administration that followed, ultimately appear to have emboldened Mr Putin .
 Mr Putin amassing some 100,000 troops at the Ukrainian border, threatening to invade and redraw the global chessboard . That brought us to where we are today.
 To stop him, we must learn the lessons of Crimea and stand up to Russian aggression, says CNN's John Sutter . "We must stop him," Sutter says .
 The cost of failing to bring Ukraine into the European Union would be catastrophic, says David Frum .
 Mr Yanukovych fled to Russia as the protests swelled and the government lost control of the situation .
This was the first time since World War II that one European country annexed part of another . Mr Putin made his brazen move on Crimea days later .
Russian soldiers outside Ukrainian naval headquarters in Sevastopol in 2014. And we did — at first.
 U.N. condemned the Russian annexation and the General Assembly declared the move illegal .
 The United States imposed sanctions on individuals and entities supporting the annexation of Crimea . But Mr Putin kept going.
 By spring of 2014, pro-Russian separatists had kicked off a bloody war in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine .
 Russian-led forces took more Ukrainian territory, Obama administration says . Obama administration has organized another set of sanctions on Moscow and military assistance to Ukraine .
 Russia may have stopped Russia from taking more ground in 2015, according to Russian media reports . Russia is expected to take more ground this year than in 2015 .
 The U.S. and international community effectively set aside the Crimea situation and set the stage for the crisis today . At the same time, the administration was also struggling to wrap up the conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq .
 Crimea would get only intermittent official U.S. attention . We took the international pressure off Mr Putin’s revanchist violations in Ukraine .
 Each time the United States did just enough to respond through sanctions and diplomacy aimed at containing the immediate transgression . Each time, the U.S. did justEnough to respond to the transgression.
This pattern continued in the Trump administration, and was even intensified by the president's unseemly deference to Mr Putin . But we failed to keep global pressure on the source of each crisis — Mr Putin's aggressive, illegal foreign policy .
 Donald Trump downplayed Russia’s meddling in our elections and was willing to break U.S. law to withhold assistance to Ukraine . The action led to his first impeachment by the House of Representatives .
Donald Trump questioned the value of NATO, the alliance protecting eastern European states from Russian violations of their sovereignty . He also questioned thevalue of NATO.
 The Biden administration must immediately treat Russia as a rogue state and aggressively isolate Moscow . I'm not suggesting the U.S. and its allies send troops to push Russia out of Ukraine .
What is at stake is more than Mr Putin's expansion of his sphere of influence. Yes, Russia is a nuclear power and Europe depends on its energy supplies .
 It’s about upholding the principles of the post-World War II order, and specifically a country's right to its territorial integrity . It's about upholding the principles.
 Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield’s address at the United Nations last month called out Russia's aggressive actions . It must be the beginning of a sustained strategy against Mr Putin.
 The U.S. should work with European allies to put sanctions on Russian banks, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The United States should also work with EU allies, even if it comes at a cost to our economic interests .
 Washington must continue reducing Europe’s dependence on Russian energy by facilitating increased liquefied natural gas deliveries from the United States, Japan and elsewhere . It could also cut Russia off from the SWIFT interbank messaging system .
 Washington has been much more aggressive in exposing Russia’s various misinformation campaigns with this crisis . Washington cited intelligence about a Russian plan to create a pretext to justify invading Ukraine .
Mr Putin desires to be respected on the world stage. But the Biden administration can and should do more .
 Russia's support to authoritarian regimes in Eastern Europe, Latin America and Africa will put Russia on the defensive . Further exposing Russia’s global meddling, including its support for authoritarian regimes, will put it on the defense .
 The strategy won’t fully pay off overnight. It could prompt leaders to accept Russian support to pull back, fearful of public backlash .
Evelyn N Farkas was deputy assistant secretary of defense for Russia, Ukraine and Eurasia in the Obama administration .
 The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor . She is also president of Farkas Global Strategies, an international business development firm .
"We Underestimated Putin Once. We Can’t Make That Mistake Again. We can't make that Mistake again"