 The West today is dealing with an imperial Russia and not a Cold War Russia . It is not a cold War Russia. The West is not dealing with the imperial Russia .
 Putin is more interested in expanding Russian military, economic, and political influence than spreading an ideology . Putin’s vision for Russia is closer to that of the czars than the rulers of the Soviet Union .
 Putin is willing to use military force to protect ‘compatriots’ Those loosely defined as ethnic Russians, Russian speakers, and other groups sharing cultural, religious, or historical ties to Russia .
 Given current geopolitical circumstances, it is unlikely Putin will risk a total war with the United States by invading a NATO member .
 Non-NATO options for intervention are available across Eastern Europe and Eurasia . Options would allow Putin to reveal the West as ineffectual and disunited without automatically triggering a full-scale war with the alliance .
 Some involve direct threats to U.S. national interests; others raise only indirect threats . Some involve indirect threats to the United States .
Russia exerts influence beyond its present borders but still inside its old imperial frontiers . Russia exerts its influence beyond the present borders .
 Though ethnically Turkic, Gagauzs are Orthodox Christian and Russian speaking . They are also Orthodox Christian, Russian speaking.
 Gagauzs blame the westward orientation of the central government for many of their problems . Today, it is the poorest region of Moldova, and it is also the poorest in the country .
 Moldova is targeted by Russian economic sanctions . Gagauzia enjoys an exemption from the sanctions .
 98. percent of the voters in Gagauzia expressed a preference for closer relations with the Russian-backed Eurasian Customs Union over the European Union .
 Bringing Gagauzia under Russian influence would help to complete Putin's control along Ukraine’s western border .
 Ukraine's Odesa Oblast would be under further threat from Russian aggression . It would also place Ukraine’s OdesA Oblast under further threats from Russia .
 The Odessan region of Budjak, along with Moldova forms the historical region of Bessarabia, once part of the Russian Empire .
 The scenario aligns with Putin’s imperial vision of the region and his designs on Ukraine . The scenario fits with Putin's imperial vision and his plans for Ukraine .
 Putin views the Republic of Georgia as part of Russia’s natural sphere of influence . He stands ready to “influence’ the country by force if necessary.
 In August 2008, Russia invaded Georgia, coming within 15 miles of the capital, Tbilisi . Russia invaded the country in August 2008 .
 An estimated 11,000 Russian troops occupy the regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia in violation of the 2008 cease-fire agreement .
 Russia appears to be exploiting ethnic tensions in the Armenian-populated Georgian province of Samtskhe-Javakheti . Russia also appears to have exploited ethnic tensions.
 The goal may be to create a sphere of influence linking Russia with Armenia through South Ossetia and Samtskhe-Javakheti . The goal is to create an influence between Armenia and Russia .
 Armenian separatists in Samtskhe-Javakheti are not as vocal as they were a few years ago . The separatists are now more vocal than they were in years ago.
 Tbilisi has placed new citizenship and immigration restrictions on Javakheti Armenians . But Moscow might easily re-energize separatist movements in the region .
 Many Javakheti Armenians work in Russia and have Russian sympathies, so these policies breed animosity . Moscow whips into a separatist frenzy .
 An unstable Samtskhe-Javakheti would advance Russian strategy for Georgia and the broader South Caucasus region .
 Russia could supply its growing military presence in Armenia one step closer to being realized . Bringing the region under Moscow’s influence would make a land corridor for Russia .
 At a time when Europe is trying to move away from Russian-supplied energy, the stability and operation of these pipelines is vital .
 Modern-day Turkmenistan was one of the last regions in Central Asia to succumb fully to Russian control during imperial times .
 It regained its independence in 1991 after the collapse of the Soviet Union . It remains one of the world’s most closed societies .
 Turkmenistan leans toward isolationism and self-described ‘permanent neutrality’ in foreign relations . Turkmenstan leans toward self-proclaimed “permanent neutrality’s’
 Ashgabat has refrained from joining Russian-backed alliances such as the Eurasian Economic Union and the Collective Security Treaty Organization .
Security situation across the border in northern Afghanistan is challenging this . However, the security situation in the region is challenging .
 As Taliban and other Central Asian militants were pushed from the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region, many found their way to northern Afghanistan .
 Since early 2015, an increasing number of security incidents involving Taliban militants and Turkmen border guards has resulted in the deaths of dozens of Turkmen conscripts . The deaths have occurred since early 2015 .
 Today, a myriad nefarious actors operate in Afghan provinces bordering Turkmenistan’s Lebap and Mary provinces .
 Pakistani Taliban, local Turkmen Taliban, Turkmen militia units, remnants of the militant Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, and organized criminal groups . They include Pakistani Taliban.
 Turkmen authorities have responded by trying to seal the border with Afghanistan using fences, ditches, and various means of surveillance . Turkmen have responded to the situation using fences and ditches .
 Moscow increasingly concerned about the deteriorating security situation in northern Afghanistan . Turkmenistan’s seeming inability to contain the threat.
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov visited Ashgabat in January . He offered Russian weaponry and training to help Turkmenistan secure the border .
 Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu also visited Ashgabat to reiterate this offer . In June, Russian Defense minister Sergei Shoigsu visited AshGabat .
 Some experts believe the next offer will be “help’ in the form of Russian troops to patrol the border .
Until 2005, Russian troops patrolled Tajikistan’s border with Afghanistan . Until 2005, Russians patrolled the border with the country .
 Turkmenistan’s border with Afghanistan in the early 1990s, after independence . They patrolled the border with the country in the 1990s .
 Once Russian troops deploy to Turkmenistan, they likely would remain for the foreseeable future . Moscow could gain another strategic foothold in the region .
 Kazakhstan has developed its own regional policy that tries to be distinct from Russia . Since regaining its independence in 1991, Kazakhstan has been trying to separate its regional policy .
 Astana retains close ties with Moscow through membership in the Russian-backed Eurasian Economic Union and Collective Security Treaty Organization .
 Many ethnic Russians from Kazakhstan are said to sympathetic with their counterparts in eastern Ukraine . Some have fought alongside the separatists in the Donbas region .
 Kazakhstan’s government has placed restrictions on Russian language teaching and advertising . It also cracked down on pro-Russia social media postings .
 There is uncertainty about who will succeed President Nursultan Nazarbayev, now 76 .
 Many Russian have to Kazakhstan for reasons of nostalgia. Added to this is an emotional attachment many have to the country .
Kazakhstan was instrumental in providing weapons to the front lines during World War II . It was the most crucial time for the Soviet Union during the war .
 Kazakhstan was also home to the Baikonur launch site used for space exploration and the Semipalatinsk nuclear testing site .
 It played a key role in Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev’s Virgin Lands Campaign in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Russian intervention in northern Kazakhstan would prove once again that Russia is willing to use its military strength to protect ethnic Russians . Russia is sending a message to others in the region.
 Armenia and Azerbaijan clashed in 1988 when Armenia made territorial claims on Azerbaijan’s Karabakh Autonomous Oblast . Armenia made claims in 1988.
 The war left 30,000 dead and hundreds of thousands internally displaced . Hundreds of thousands were displaced .
 The conflict has been "frozen" since 1994, when the warring parties signed a cease-fire agreement . The conflict was "f frozen" when the conflict began in 1994 .
 Armenian forces and Armenian-backed militias continue to occupy almost 20 percent of the territory that world leaders recognize as part of Azerbaijan .
 Violence has increased noticeably along the Line of Contact between Armenian and Azerbaijani forces since August 2014 .
 The Minsk Group, tasked with bringing a lasting end to the war, remains the recognized mediating body . It is de facto inoperative due to the breakdown in Western relations with Moscow over the issue of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine .
 The Ukraine conflict already gives Putin a useful excuse for keeping thousands of troops in Armenia .
There have been suggestions that Russia wants to deploy “peacekeepers’ to the Nagorno-Karabakh region against the will of Azerbaijan .
 Basing Russian troops in Azerbaijan under the guise of peacekeeping would provide Moscow another strategic foothold in the South Caucasus .
 Nagorno-Karabakh likely would never be returned to Azerbaijan . It would be in Russia’s interests to keep a military presence there for as long as possible .
 A large Russian military presence in Azerbaijan would block Baku's closer relations with the West . Also, if Russia’s military presence is anything to go by, a large Russian presence in Armenia would block the relationship .
 In 2013, Viktor Yanukovych refused to sign an association agreement with the European Union . In 2014, he was ousted by the Kremlin-backed Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych .
 The subsequent Russian military intervention has left the Crimean Peninsula under occupation and parts of Luhansk and Donetsk oblasts under the control of Russian-backed separatists .
 The most recent cease-fire between the warring parties exists in name only . The most recently cease-fires between the two sides are in name .
 Russia’s primary short-term goal is to keep the conflict in eastern Ukraine ‘frozen’ The goal is that the major fighting stops without the conflict being brought to a conclusive end .
 Moscow helps separatists consolidate gains in Donetsk and Luhansk to create a political entity that functions more like a viable state .
 This would include capture of important communication and transit nodes, such as the city of Mariupol and its port, and the Luhansk power plant . All of which are under Ukrainian government control .
 The most aggressive scenario might see Moscow attempt to re-establish control of the Novorossiya region in southern Ukraine . The mostaggressive scenario might be the most aggressive.
 Mariupol and Odesa, Ukraine’s 10thand third-largest cities, respectively. But taking control would be no easy undertaking, requiring capture of heavily defended cities .
 Considering Russia's recent track record, any of these scenarios are possible. Considering Russia’s recent track records, there are many scenarios possible .
 The Russian government has always been to push forward its encroachments as fast and as far as the apathy or want of firmness of other governments would allow it to go, but always to stop and retire .
 Palmerston's description of 19th-century Russia fits Putin's Russia to a tee . Palmerston’s description of the 19th century Russia fits the Russian leader's Russia.
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine over the past couple of years have been deliberate and calculated . Russia's actions are part of Putin's Grand Strategy, according to the Russian President .
 The events in Crimea are rooted in the failure of the Obama administration’s Russian “reset,’ the unilateral disarming of Europe, and the U.S. disengagement from Europe .
 Russia has exploited the situation nimbly, calculating that the West will not respond in any significant way . Russia has used the situation to exploit the West's lack of response to Russia .
 Russia will do what it knows it can get away with, no more and no less, Lord Palmerston knew . As Lord Palmerson knew, he knew, Russia would do what he knew .
 The West should see the problem and develop its own strategy, the West says . It is through this lens the West should be able to find the problem.