 UC Berkeley scholars present diverse viewpoints on the conflict between Russia and Ukraine . The conflict has been ongoing for years .
 Ukrainian leader Viktor Yanukovych backed out under pressure from Russian President Vladimir Putin . Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych then backed out .
 Ukrainians fed up with corruption of their government and seeking closer ties with Europe . For Ukrainians, it was a breaking point.
 The U.S. and the EU imposed sanctions on Russia in response to the invasion . The first forcible change to European borders since the end of World War II .
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization moved troops into Baltic countries on Russia’s border . In the ensuing months, Russian-backed separatists have continued to fight for autonomy in Eastern Ukraine .
 The U.S. policy of NATO expansion has been perceived in Russia as especially provocative, Walker says . He says it has become destabilizing to the entire region .
 There is also an internal political logic to Putin’s actions, writes Berkeley political scientist M Steven Fish .
 Times, and VoxUkraine blogger Yuriy Gorodnichenko have engaged in public forums and lectures on topics from the wider Eurasian context to the role of the European Union .
There is “always a good amount of interest in events in Russia on this campus,’ says Jeffery Pennington . The Ukraine situation has increased interest significantly .
 ISEEES has “been able to do more activities, more events that are focused on the region’s region. As a result, ISEEes has been able toDo more activities.
 Berkeley’s interdisciplinary scholars will turn away from Russia and the Ukraine anytime soon .
 Violence between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian army continues to erupt in Ukraine’s Donbas region .
 The pressure of international sanctions and falling oil prices has caused the ruble’s value to tumble .
 What this means for internal Russian politics and foreign policy is not yet clear . It is not clear what this means.
Western sanctions would have been high “even if oil was at $100 a barrel,’ says Walker . Walker notes that the impact of the western sanctions would be high ‘even ifOil was $ 100 a barrel’ as they cut Russia off from Western technology .
 The stakes of ongoing tensions are high in Ukraine and between NATO and Russia . Putin’s Russia funds far right parties from France to Hungary .
With the economic situation in Europe far worse than in the US, he's concerned that these political movements will find more participants .
 The new status quo does not bode well for the European Union’s goals of extending its political and economic influence toward the East .
 The Shared Sacred Sites initiative uses digital humanities methods to present information about sacred sites . Karen Barkey, a sociologist joining UC Berkeley in Fall 2016, directs the initiative . The initiative is part of the Shared Sacred sites initiative .