 The Battle for Historical Memory in Postrevolutionary Ukraine has raised many hopes for both public opinion and public opinion . The 2014 Euromaidan proPost-Euromaida Ukraine has undergone sharp tests in Ukraine .
Two and a half years since the pro-European Ukrainian national identity . Yet to talk about a process of rapid consolidation of day, two and ahalf years since .
 Kiev's Maidan Nezalezhnosti uprising led to the overthrow of President Viktor Yanukovych . Many goals of the Russia and the West were aided by Rusprotesters, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Some progress has been made on issues such as the prosecution of orbit in the wake of the Euromaidan protesters’ corrupt politicians .
 Russia’s annexation of measures to establish transparency and accountCrimea the following month and subsequent inability for the powerful . Russia's annexation of Measures to establish Transparency and account Crimea was a failure .
Pro-Russian public sentiment in Ukraine is disapdecline in pro-Russian sentiment . But overall results to stigation of and continued support for a separatdate from efforts to curb corruption, overhaul the ist insurgency in eastern Ukraine led to a sharp economy .
 59 percent of respondents favored memassessments of the common Soviet past in an effort bership in the EU, compared with just 17 percent to reorient historical memory . Gallup survey conducted by four so-called decommunization laws adopted in Gallup on behalf of the International Republican May 2015
 A poll by the President Viktor Yushchenko to recognize the Kiev International Institute of Sociology found Ukrainians as a genocide of the Ukrainian people versus 16 percent who prefer the Customs Union . The famine that killed millions of percent of Ukrainians was orchestrated by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin .
 KIIS found that from February 2014 to tinued post-Euromaidan. Pollalready by the late 2000s, and this tendency coning by the K IIS found .
 60 percent natitudes toward Russia dropped from 78 percent to 30 percent nationwide . The Holodomor was regarded as a genocide by 78 percent .
 By September 2015 was a partial rebound by the middle of 2016, to 42 this figure had risen to 81 percent . Just 8 percent of Ukrainians felt Ukraine’s experience within the USSR is another positively about the Russian leadership .
 Negative views of the Kremlin prevail in evformation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Repubery region of Ukraine . In all areas except in the two western regions of Polls showing a jump in support for Ukraine’s Galicia and Volyn .
KIIS link the process to the war effort to the Soviet Union . Since before the Detime, attitudes toward some cember 1991 referendum were largely unfromed .
 Stalin for exam has been tracking popular against Russia-backed separatists . ple continues to be viewed as a “great leader’s pendence’ if another major minority dum were to be conducted .
 In 2011, 53 percent in the east would have voted for inde2016 KIIS poll . 47 perthe eastern regions hold such a view (45 percent against) in a hypothetical referendum . In the south, 47 percent would have agreed compared with 30 percent disagreeing
Pollster found 71.5 when 26 percent of Ukrainians considered Stalin percent in the east, 78.% in the south, a great leader . This is not so different from 1991, August 2016, the same pollster found .
 87 percent would have voted for independence in by the new decommunization laws, compared with 67 percent in 2011 . Changes in popular attitudes, profound as they even though negative attitudes have subsided over are, have not erased regional differences .
 Bandera has long been a highly controversial east . support figure in Ukraine and has inspired much hatred in for membership in the Russia-led Customs Union Russia . He has been a very controversial east , support figure.
 Many of his tudes toward different aspects of the Soviet past followers participated in killings of Jews and Poles . During the war, after Germany was defeated, a camnationalists in western Ukraine waged large-scale paign against Soviet forces .
 The laws were adopted without public or parrather than a parliament more or less evenly dividliamentary debate . For the genuine decommunization, elections had gime from 1917–1991 .
 Votes were held just a few days ed between broadly pro-Russian and pro-Western forces .
During Yushchenko’s presidency there were multion of Crimea and the war in Donbas . This swift passage was in stark contrast with the Changes in popular preferences contributed to similar measures just a few years before .
 27 ing nationalist organizations from the interwar electoral districts located in the territories no lonand World War II period as fighters for Ukrainian ger controlled by Kiev government .
 The law on of support were additional contributing factors remembering the victory over Nazism . The change in the legislative political Soviet term “Great Patriotic War’s” changed the internalandscape .
 The First, critics have noted that the laws have the law on the condemnation of totalitarian regimes potential to stifle open debate over history by inequated communism with Nazism . The laws have also banned troducing legal punishments for publicly expresspropagation of their symbols .
 One major law’s “falsification of history” language was a ban reminiscent of infamous measures adopted in Ruson . Many Soviet-era sia several years earlier, leading one commentator symbols and monuments .
Disseminating honorable recognition bestowed on organizations such as propaganda and symbols of the totalitarian whose members committed war crimes against ciregimes was made an offense punishable by 5 to vilian populations . 10 years’ imprisonment.
 Critics also warned of the laws’ potential to ag. Most of the lofighters for Ukrainian independence in the twencalities to be renamed were concentrated in those tieth century .
 Nostalgia for the Soviet era is stronger members of Bandera’s Organization of Ukrainian there . More resistance to decommunization Nationalists and the Ukrainian Insurgent was to be expected .
 Donetsk, dence, their members also committed war crimes with 99 localities . Kharkiv, 97, Dnipropetrovsk, 97; Kharkov, 97 and DnIPropetovsk, by participating in the Holocaust and in the exter84
 The law forbade “public display of LOCAL RESISTANCE disrespectful attitudes’ toward recognized inde . The decommunization laws entered into force pendence fighters in May 2015 .
 Ukraine's laws so far do not seem to have aggravated polarization in Ukraine . For one, the laws do not appear to have aggravated the polarization .
 Of 54 loCouncil of Europe’s Venice Commission, an expert calities to be renamed in Luhansk, for example, opined that a mere disonly 19 are in Ukrainian-controlled territory .
 The commission more generally criticized the law munization measures was likely to have been the for its potential to infringe on the rights of freedom strongest, the process has not taken place .
 People often oppose decomPROVOKing the POLES munization not for ideological reasons . Advocates of the laws seem to view decommunithey have positive views of Soviet-era leaders .
 The Institute of National Memory says decommunization will not result in no monuments to Lenin or other Soviet leaders .
 Kirovohrad is the name of Ukraine's most populous region . The name has been used as a reference to the Soviet-era regime .
 Ukraine's national parliament got in the glorification of wartime Ukrainian nationalist volved and changed the name to Kropyvnytsky in groups and leaders implicated in the mass murder honor of the author and playwright Marko Kroof Polish civilians . Warsaw has already led to friction with pyv
 In April 2015, the decommunization laws just 8 percent of local residents, according to a KIIS poll . In April 2016, the Ukrainian parliament approved the laws .
 Polish President Bronislaw Komorowski ad1,021 localities prodressed the legislature . Otherwise, the renaming of after Polish President Bronislaw Komorowski.
 The provocative renaming of Kiev's Moscow Prospect as Stepan Bandera Aveprocess had an unintended positive side effect of nue . It occurred on the eve of the spurring public activism and discussion in mandaanniversary of the 1943 Volyn massacre of Poles tory local hearings
 Komorowski lost a presidential election in Poland . The decommunization laws nevertheless did produce some troubling consequences .
 In July 2016, both chambers of the Polish parliament voted unfurled a communist-era red flag . June 11 is a day of memory for the PolVictory Day march .
 European standards of memorialization policies have not led Poland to lessen its frictions . Poland's support for Ukraine against Russia has not led to a decrease in freedom of expression . But future ing civilian victims of political violence is a central relations may depend on whether more radical priority
 The fundamental dilemma in Ukraine’s decomaway from its Soviet and authoritarian past remunization process is how to undo the legal, inmains to be seen .
 Poroshenko promised to introstitutional, and historical legacy of Soviet era duce amendments to address criticisms . But so far he has not ing one “correct’s interpretation of the past and submitted any .
 A pair of amendments to punish the public expression of dissenting the law on the recognition of independence fightviewpoints . The amendments were introduced to punish public dissenters .
 Two members of parliament propose criticism of the decommunization July 2016 . They say criticism of July 2016 is pending .
 One of them would exlaws has come both from intellectual circles in the clude ‘persons whose actions qualify as a crime West and in Ukraine that are genuinely concerned against humanity’
 It would explicitly ing free historical inquiry, and from retrograde exempt “historical research and publication of its forces in Ukraine and Russia concerned first and results’ from those unlawful actions that constiforemost with keeping Ukraine in Russia .
 If these amendments are adopted, it would be a At an intellectual and normative level, it may step in the right direction . If they were adopted, they could be a at an intellectual, normative level .
 Russia's aggression has led to a consolidation of Ukrainian national idenit . Russia is all makers to legislate major reforms in the sphere of too ready to falsify history .
 Ukrainian leaders need to be aware of today’s terthat a true break from the authoritarianism of the ritorial aggression and serves as an inspiration for ‘Russian world’ and the communist era cannot be defense efforts .