 thinking of it recreates the fear of wood. How wild, harsh and impenetrable that wood was, so that thinking of them recreats the fear .
 I had been living in a rented apartment in Kiev while a revolution unfolded on the streets . I had written a diary for Radio Liberty and other publications about the extraordinary events .
Despite the fascination of events in Ukraine, I was anxious to bring the Russian bureaucratic process to an end . Despite the fascination, I wasn't worried about the Russian bureaucracy .
 The author had been waiting three weeks for approval and wanted to return to Moscow . He hoped to settle for at least a few years .
 The Russian consulate has approved an application for a trip to the U.S. to visit Russia . The application was approved by the Russian consulate .
On Christmas Eve, I went to the consulate and was buzzed in by staff members . On Christmas Eve.
 consul greeted me cordially and asked me to wait while he retrieved the approval letter . The consul asked him to wait until he retrieved his approval letter. He then told me he would wait until the letter was returned .
After an hour and a half, he returned and said that he had found my number in the consular log . He returned and returned and he said that there was no letter . After an hour, he said he found his number, but that no letter was found .
 The Foreign Ministry in Moscow called the Foreign Ministry to explain the situation to a diplomat in the press department .
 A half hour later, he told me to call the embassy the following day and ask for Alexei Gruby, a first secretary . He told her to call him the next day, and he asked for a secretary .
 Something had gone wrong, he said, but Gruby would make sure he received his visa . He said he would makesure he received my visa .
 Age of Delirium was shown in the Maidan Nezalezhnosti (Independence Square), the epicenter of Kiev’s antiregime revolt .
About a hundred people stood for an hour and forty minutes in subzero cold in an improvised outdoor cinema . The story of the fate of ordinary people in the Soviet collapse.
 The next morning, I was interviewed by Kiev’s Espreso TV, an internet television network that covers the Maidan .
 Ukraine celebrates the Orthodox Christmas. All offices, including the Russian embassy, were open on December 25 .
 The new editor of the Radio Liberty Russian Service has been in Moscow for three months . He has been able to open a bank account and organize an apartment in Moscow .
 The only significant article I had written concerned Yeltsin’s destruction of the Russian parliament twenty years before, in 1993 .
 Russia is an alternate universe that could be understood only through the details of individual Russians’ lives .
 It was this book that became the film shown on Christmas Eve in the Maidan .
 During the 1980s, I was refused visas to the Soviet Union and was able to enter the country on reporting trips . The United States State Department threatened retaliation against Soviet correspondents if I was barred .
 Reader’s Digest threatened to cancel plans for a Russian-language edition of the magazine . The magazine was writing pieces about Russia .
 The Soviet authorities were encouraging Western institutions to set up in Moscow . The Digest ultimatum was given by the Soviet authorities .
For the next two decades, I traveled freely to Russia, writing two books and hundreds of articles . For the next 20 years, I went to Russia for the next 2 decades, writing and writing about Russia .
 In 1999, four apartment buildings in Russia were blown up, killing hundreds of residents in their sleep . The bombings were carried out by the FSB, not by Chechen rebels, he says . He says they were the pretext for starting the second Chechen war .
 Russian authorities have been tolerant of free expression in recent years . The regime has been known to be tolerant of freedom of expression .
 The tolerance was based on the authorities’ confidence in their ability to manipulate Western opinion . In fact, this tolerance is based on their confidence in the authorities' confidence .
 The picture of contemporary Russia sent back by Western journalists and academics was far from favorable, but it hardly conveyed how morally damaged Russia really was .
 Valdai Discussion Club organized as a means of influencing the world’s leading experts on Russia . An example of Russian success in manipulating Western observers was the Valdai discussion club .
 One of the great attractions of the meetings was the opportunity to question Putin and other Russian officials in an informal setting .
 Russian officials were unfailingly generous with their time and hospitality . But they tightly controlled the proceedings, providing detailed answers to prepared questions .
 The participants were anxious not to offend their hosts for fear of not being invited back . They engaged in self-censorship as Russian authorities knew they would .
 The story described Putin’s criticism of the West for losing touch with its Christian roots . The story was published in his opening speech .
 Valdai participants “felt the evolution, the self-confidence of this country, its consolidation,’ he said . Instead, he said, the Valdai Participants ‘felt the Evolution, theself- confidence of this nation,” he said.
 Russia’s ability to manipulate foreign opinion is limited by external circumstances, according to the Russian media . Russia has been accused of manipulating foreign opinion in the past .
 In December 2013, as I was waiting for my Russian visa to be renewed, the crisis in Ukraine was changing the calculus . The crisis has changed the calculus in Ukraine .
 The mask of liberalism had effectively misled the world about the true nature of the regime . If the regime began to be directly threatened, as it was by events in Ukraine, it would have to take steps that would make the illusion harder.
 I owed my continued presence in Moscow to the regime’s desire to protect the masquerade. I owed his continued presence to the regimes. I owe my continued Presence in Moscow.
 Russian officials liked to point out that no American journalist had been expelled since the end of the Cold War . No American journalist has been expelled from Russia since the war ended .
 Authorities apparently decided that the Ukraine crisis was over, but the show was over .
 Understanding Russia is actually very easy, but one must teach oneself to do something that is very hard to believe .
 Westerners become confused because they approach Russia with a Western frame of reference, not realizing that Russia is a universe based on a completely different set of values .
 If a Westerner takes it for granted that the individual has inherent worth and is not just raw material for the deluded schemes of corrupt political leaders, he may not realize that in Russia this outlook is not widely shared .
 To grasp the reality of Russia, it is necessary to accept that Russian leaders really are capable of blowing up hundreds of their own people to preserve their hold on power .
 They really are capable of ordering an attack with flamethrowers on a gymnasium full of defenseless parents and children . They really can order an attack.
 Once one accepts that the impossible is really possible, the degradation of the Yeltsin years and Vladimir Putin’s rise to power make perfect sense .
 Acknowledgment: In his effort to describe what went wrong in Russia after the fall of the Soviet Union, I was supported by many institutions .
 I would like to express my deep appreciation to the Sarah Scaife Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the William H Donner Foundation . The Earhart Foundation is also a foundation for the Earhart and Smith Richardson foundations .
Daniel McMichael died September 23, 2013 . McMichael was a longtime benefactor and friend of Daniel McMichael, who died in 2013 .
Raphael and Mark read early versions of the manuscript and provided helpful suggestions and comments . His sons, Raphael and Mark, read early version of the book and provided suggestions .
 The Henry Jackson Society sponsored me for a British residency permit after I was expelled from Russia in December 2013 . My thanks also to the Henry Jackson society, which sponsored me.
 An oblast is a territorial subdivision of the Russian Federation . Often similar in size to an American state, it is often similar to a state .
 Since 2004, governors of oblasts have been appointed by the president .
 In the summer of 1999, those at the pinnacle of power in Russia feared for their freedom and even their lives . The 1999 Apartment Bombings were one of the most recent attacks in Russia .
 Most citizens were still living in poverty and waiting months to be paid . There were signs of an economic recovery, but most were waiting months for pay .
The Yeltsin entourage was increasingly isolated and widely hated for its role in pillaging the country . The Yeltsins were often blamed for their role in Pillaging the nation .
 Tatyana Dyachenko, the president’s daughter, Boris Berezovsky, her close adviser and the country's richest man. Valentin Yumashev, a member of the Security Council, lived in fear of a cruel reckoning . The future husband of the
 In the twelve days from September 4 to the 16th, everything changed . In the 12 days from Sept 4 to September 16, everything was changed .
 Four apartment buildings were blown up in Moscow, Buinaksk, and Volgodonsk . The controversies that wracked the country over corruption and privatization were suddenly forgotten .
 Eight years of postSoviet Russian history was telescoped into shocking images of bodies being carried out of the rubble of bombed buildings .
 Newly appointed prime minister Vladimir Putin expressed perfectly the country’s desire for revenge . Putin expressed the country's desire to revenge .
 Russian forces are already fighting Chechen rebels in Dagestan . The country is looking desperately for someone to blame .
 Russians had been opposed to further involvement in Chechnya, but in the wake of the apartment bombings, sentiment shifted .
 The mystery of who bombed the apartment houses in 1999 has never been solved .
 The Russian Federation was the most important reason for his role in the investigation of the 1999 apartment bombings . He was told on Christmas Day 2013 that the “competent organs” had determined that his presence in the territory of the Russia was “undesirable
 The Rise of the Russian Criminal State, in which I accused the FSB of responsibility for the explosions, was published on Monday . I accused them of responsibility.
 The expulsion would have drawn attention to an episode the rest of the world seemed to have forgotten, he says . "They did this, I believe, because they did this. They did this," he adds .
 Putin’s hold on power was weakening by the time he worked in Moscow in late 2013, he says .
Mass protests had taken place in Moscow and a popular revolution had broken out in Ukraine . Mass protests had been held in Moscow .
 The question of the apartment bombings had never quite gone away in Russia . Now the whispers are becoming louder .
In the new conditions, raising the topic freely was not going to be allowed . In the new condition, raising a topic freely would not be allowed in the new rules .
 Yeltsin's Russia in the spring of 1999 was a nation traumatized by impoverishment and criminalization . It was far from certain that the presidential elections set for June 2000 would take place .
 The popular approval ratings of both Yeltsin and Putin were at 2 percent . The new prime minister and heir apparent, Vladimir Putin, was appointed as the prime minister .
 There was a widespread fear that Yeltsin would find a pretext for declaring a state of emergency so that the elections would not take place . But there was also fear that the election would be a pretext.
 The plan was referred to as Storm in Moscow . It was to include attacks on the FSB, the Interior Ministry and the Federation Council .
 Russia began a steady military buildup on the Chechen border in June . Also in June, Russia started a steadyMilitary buildup.
 Significant numbers of artillery and aircraft were transferred to the region in early July . The arrival of multiple-rocket launchers capable of destroying entire areas .
 The slow increase of forces continued until the equivalent of a Russian division, about 7,000 men, was on the border . About seven thousand men were on the Russian border .
 Russian authorities surprised local law enforcement by withdrawing internal troops stationed on the border . But in late spring, they cleared a route for would-be invaders .
 An Islamic force of twelve hundred armed men, commanded by the Chechen leader Shamil Basaev and an Arab extremist named Khattab, entered Dagestan without meeting resistance .
 The invaders occupied territory in the Botlikh region and were fought mostly by local self-defense units . The invaders were mostly fought by self- defense units .
 On August 23, the invaders withdrew, again without encountering resistance . On August 24, the invasion was again without facing resistance .
 Russian commander told Time magazine that he had Basaev in his sights but was ordered to hold his fire .
 Chechen president Aslan Maskhadov tried to reach Yeltsin on a hotline installed after the first Chechen war . No one answered .
 Russia bombed the Botlikh region for several days and then began a punitive operation against KaramakhiChabanmakhi . A year earlier, with official permission, had proclaimed Islamic law .
 Russian forces surrounded villages and bombed them, killing up to one thousand civilians . Russian forces surround villages and kill up to 1,000 civilians .
 There was no obvious connection between the Botlikh events and Karamakhi-Chabanmakhi, which is in different part of Dagestan .
 Basaev's forces reinvaded Dagestan, leading to fighting that continued for almost three weeks . In response to the bombing of Karamakhi-Chabanmakhi, on September 4.
 The timing of the bombings coincided with the fighting in Dagestan, creating the impression that the bombings were revenge for the attacks by the Russian military on Islamic insurgents in the city .
 The invasion of Dagestan was treated by the Russian government as a sign that the Chechens wanted to take over the entire North Caucasus . The invasion was treated as an attempt to take control of the North Caucasus.
 In August, Versiya published a report indicating that Basaev’s invasion of Dagestan had been organized with Russian complicity . The report was published by the investigative weekly Versiya .
 Alexander Voloshin had met with Basaev on July 4 in the town of Beaulieu, between Nice and Monaco . The two met at a villa belonging to the international arms merchant Adnan Khashoggi .
 This information was said to come from a source in French intelligence . It is said to have come from an unnamed source .
Moskovsky Komsomolets published parts of the transcript of a friendly conversation between a man with a voice similar to that of Boris Berezovsky . The man is the unofficial spokesman for the radical Chechen opposition .
 The Yeltsin government is in danger of losing power, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Moscow would be the scene of a huge provocation .
 He said the issue was the security of Yeltsin and his family in the case of a handover of power . He said that the issue is the security for Yeltsins and his wife and family .
I sensed the uneasiness but did not know how to assess my friend’s prediction . I sensed the anxiety but didn’t know what to do with it .
 I had no illusions about Yeltsin and his cronies, but it was hard to imagine that a man who came to power through a peaceful anticommunist revolution would murder his own people to hold on to power .
 At 9:40 Pm on September 4, a truck bomb exploded in Buinaksk, Dagestan's second-largest city .
 A five-story apartment building that housed soldiers from the 136th Motor Rifle Brigade was destroyed .
 The explosion occurred while many residents were at home watching a televised soccer match between France and Ukraine . Dozens of persons were buried under the rubble .
 The eventual death toll was sixty-four, with nearly one hundred people injured . Nearly one hundred were injured .
 Second bomb discovered in ZIL-130 truck near military hospital in Buinaksk . Second bomb found in truck near the hospital .
 Sappers stopped a watch mechanism twelve minutes before the bomb was set to explode .
 There was almost six thousand pounds of explosives in the truck, enough to have leveled the central part of the city .
 The events in Buinaksk did not stun the nation because the victims were Dagestani, not Russian, and Dagestan was a war zone . The events were not major, but major, because Dagestans were not Russian .
 On September 9, however, the terrorists struck again, this time in Moscow . This time, they struck again.
 A bomb exploded in the basement of a building at 19 Guryanova Street, in a working-class area in the southeast part of city .
 The central section of the building was obliterated, leaving the left and right stairwells standing on each side of a gaping hole .
 Items removed from scene showed traces of TNT and hexogen, a powerful military explosive . The Moscow FSB announced that items removed from the scene show traces of the explosive .
 An explosion at 6 Kashirskoye Highway in Moscow flattened a nine-story brick apartment building on September 13 . Four days later, an explosion at the same road flattened the building, turning it into rubble .
 The explosion took place at 5 AM, when almost all of the residents were asleep . To add to the horror, the explosion happened at 5am .
 Muscovites awoke to graphic television footage showing emergency workers feverishly going through debris .
 There were thousands of calls to the police reporting suspicious activity . Police were called to reports of suspicious activity.
 Gennady Seleznev announced at a meeting of the Duma Council that on the previous night, an apartment house had been blown up in Volgodonsk .
 The significance of this announcement would not become clear until later . The significance would not be clear until after later .
 A truck bomb exploded in Volgodonsk, Russia, in the early hours of the morning . The blast happened in the city of Volgodonk, near Moscow's capital Moscow .
 The dead bodies of 18 people, including two children, were pulled from the rubble . The bodies of two children were pulled out of the rubble.
 This explosion, like the one on Kashirskoye Highway, took place at 5 am.
Hundreds of people were unwilling to sleep in their homes and insisted on spending the night outdoors . The psychological shock was so great that afterward hundreds of people refused to sleep .
 A white Lada parked in front of the building at 14/16 Novoselov Street with a male passenger in the back seat . The male passenger was in a back seat of the Lada .
 The last two numbers on the car’s license plates were covered with pieces of paper that had “62,’ the code for Ryazan .
 Yulia, a twenty-three-year-old medical intern, went out onto the balcony and watched as a man emerged from the basement . He checked his watch, and got into the car, where two people were waiting .
 Another resident, Vladimir Vasiliev, returned and also noticed the car . In the meantime, another resident returned and returned to his home .
 The number on the rear license plate had now fallen off so that the number was different from the front plate .
 The basement had been used as a toilet by local derelicts, so they did not want to go down there .
 People took babies out of bathtubs, grabbed documents, and threw on overcoats . People also took babies and threw them out of baths .
 The police entered the basement as residents watched on the street . Yuri Tkachenko, the head of the local bomb squad, was among the officers .
 Tkachenko disconnected a detonator and timing device and then tested three sacks of a white crystalline substance with a portable gas analyzer . The substance was found in three sacks.
 The contents of the sacks tested positive for hexogen, the same substance used in the previous apartment bombings . The sacks were filled with the same material as the bombs .
 There now is no question that someone had tried to blow up the building .
 FSB agents forgot to take away the highly professional military detonator, which was left in the hands of the bomb squad . The bomb squad has been called out to take it away .
 Police prepared identikit portraits of suspects on basis of descriptions by Kartofelnikov, his daughter, and Vasiliev .
 The railroad Stations and airport were cordoned off, and roads leading out of the city were blocked . The railway Stations were closed and the airport was closed .
 A short time later, a call to Moscow was made from a public telephone in Ryazan . The operator who connected the call caught a fragment of the conversation .
 The terrorists were soon arrested, and to the stupefaction of the police, they produced FSB identification .
 FSB director Nikolai Patrushev came out of a Kremlin meeting and announced that the evacuation of the building had been part of a training exercise .
 Patrushev’s statement contradicted what the authorities had been saying for two days . The authorities had said they would not comment on the situation for days .
 Alexander Sergeev, the head of the Ryazan FSB, had appeared on television and congratulated residents on being saved from a terrorist attack .
 interior minister Vladimir Rushailo announced on national television that an attempted terrorist act had been foiled . The interior minister said on national TV that the attempt was foiled.
 The reading that indicated hexogen was a mistake. The sacks found by the bomb squad contained sugar .
 There were similar exercises in other cities, Patrushev said, but only in Ryazan did the people react promptly .
 These events provoked anger in Ryazan, where people had spent the night of September 23 sleeping outdoors .
 The day after the bomb was discovered, Russian aircraft began bombing the Grozny airport, in Chechnya . On October 1, Russian troops moved across the border, launching the second Chechen war .
 Hitler's “treacherous attack on the Soviet Union’s Soviet Union helped mobilize the Soviet people in the first days of World War II . The attack has been a touchstone in the Russian popular consciousness .
 The Chechens had carried the war to the Russian people and now had to pay a price . For the vast majority of Russians, the war had been carried out to the Russians .
 The Ryazan episode, though disturbing, was forgotten in the rush of fast-moving events . The Ryzan episode was also disturbing .
 Five years earlier, the first Chechen war had begun with the slaughter of Russian troops trapped in their tanks in the narrow streets of Grozny .
This time, Chechnya was carried out methodically and seemingly with success . This time, the invasion of Chechnyya was carrying out methodally and seems to be successful .
 Only 2 percent of the population had favored him for the presidency in August . In September, just 4 percent favored him .
 It was now clear that there would be no need to introduce emergency rule and postpone the elections . It is now clear there would not be a need for emergency rule.
Russian forces easily advanced over the Chechen lowlands to the Terek River . Russian forces easily advance over the lowlands.
 In December, Grozny began a massive bombardment that left the city looking like Stalingrad .
 In early October, I met again with the operative who had warned me of a Massive provocation coming in Moscow . He said the apartment bombings were that provocation. In earlyOctober, he said the bombings were provocation .
 Many Russian newspapers were making the same charge, especially the mass circulation Moskovsky Komsomolets, the newspaper Novaya Vremya .
 The idea that the authorities had organized a terrorist act against their own people seemed not only plausible but likely . It was characteristic of Moscow’s mood under Yeltsin that after eight years in which the country had been run for the benefit of gangsters and oligarchs .
 If the perpetrators were Chechens and the purpose was to make a political point, blowing up ordinary people was senseless, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Moscow River is the only way out is Ryazansky Prospekt . On three sides is the Moscow River and the onlyway out is the Russian River .
 Second blast was on the Kashirskoye Highway, also among the cheapest, flimsiest houses in Moscow .
 This is the reactive agent for a new generation of artillery shells in Russia . The shells are used to make artillery shells .
 The bombings had created terror in Russia and then provided a justification for a new war in Chechnya, they abruptly stopped .
 The sites were cleared of debris within three or four days, effectively destroying the crime scenes . At the same time, the sites were clear of debris, including body parts .
I was almost certain that my friend’s information was coming from disaffected members of the security services . I was almost sure that his information was from a disaffected member .
 I asked him to arrange for me to talk to his informants, and he promised to arrange a meeting . He promised to meet with his informants . He said he would meet with them, and they would talk to him .
 We went to a nearby department store, got into an elevator, and got off at an upper floor . We got off in an elevator and went to another store .
 It was already dark, the columns of the Bolshoi were illuminated . Streetlamps were burning in the square .
 There was indeed something strange about the apartment bombings. They said there was actually something strange .
 Nonetheless, I glanced around continuously for the appearance of an interested onlooker .
 They said that the idea that the bombings were carried out by Chechen terrorists did not make sense . They said the idea of the bombings was not made sense .
 All four bombings had the same “handwriting,” attested by the nature of the destruction, the way the concrete panels collapsed, and the volume of the blasts .
 The explosive in each case was said to be hexogen . All four bombs were timed to go off at night to assure the maximum number of casualties .
 To have carried out such a campaign, Chechen terrorists would have needed a major logistical operation .
 Russian authorities claimed to have prevented nine explosions in two weeks . Russian authorities would have had to prepare nine explosions .
 Chechen Islamists, the preferred suspects, were engaging Russian forces in Dagestan . The official Chechen government was bracing for a Russian invasion .
 The bombers had to have been highly trained specialists, according to a friend's friend . The two men elaborated on a friend’s statement that the bombers had been highlytrained specialists .
In Moscow, the first bomb caused the entire central section of the building to collapse . In Moscow, they told me, they said the firstBomb caused the whole central section to collapse.
 On Kashirskoye Highway, an eight-story brick building was reduced to rubble . The building was built on a highway in Kashirkoye.
 To produce this kind of result, it was necessary to identify and destroy the critical structural elements, says the author . To produce the result, the author says .
 The bombings were explained as a response to the Russian attacks in Dagestan after the Chechen-led Islamist invasion in August .
 A careful model of events showed that it would have taken four to four and a half months to organize the bombings . But a careful model showed that the bombings would have been more than four months long .
 The bombers had to select and visit the targets, make corrections, determine the optimum mix of explosives, order their preparation, and make final calculations based on the makeup of the explosives, rent space in the targeted buildings .
 Planning would have had to begin in the spring, well before the Chechen invasion of Dagestan .
 The attacks might have been part of a bigger plan that included the Chechen invasion of Dagestan, the Russian bombing of Islamist villages in “retaliation,” and the bombings in Buinaksk, Moscow, and Volgodonsk .
 It was hard to see how the explosions could serve their purposes . Chechen terrorists would have faced obstacles in carrying out the bombings .
 The only real result would have been to justify a new invasion of Chechnya, says the author of the book .
 The bombings served the interests of the Yeltsin entourage, which was hoping to control the presidential succession . But the bombings clearly served the interest of Yeltsina entourage .
 General Alexander Lebed, who had run for president in 1996, said he was Virtually certain the Yeltsin family was behind the apartment bombings . Lebed said in an interview with the French newspaper Le Figaro that he was certain the family was responsible .
 He would have struck at the buildings of the Ministry of Internal Affairs or the FSB or at weapons storage areas or at atomic electric power stations .
 I had lost contact with U.S. editorial pages after the fall of the Soviet Union . Those relations had only been partially restored .
 I was uncertain who would be willing to publish an article suggesting that the leading candidate for the Russian presidency was a terrorist . I was also uncertain who was willing to published an article saying that the top candidate for Russia's presidency was an terrorist .
 The Washington Times was widely read in Washington for its oppositionist coverage . But I had recently established contact with the Washington Times .
 I was also leaving for the city of Krasnoyarsk, the scene in the 1990s of the bloody battles for control of the aluminum industry . Dozens of people were murdered.
 A journey of five hours from Krasnoyarsk to Sayansk went through miles of snow-covered taiga . Cars were easily stopped and people sometimes disappeared without a trace .
 The October 22, 1999, issue of Moskovsky Komsomolets had entire pages filled with pictures of the bombings’ victims .
 At the top of one page was a photo of the building on Guryanov Street with lights burning in all the windows .
 Mikhailin family, Sergei and Tatyana and their two children, Zhanna, 20-four, and Alexander, 16, are pictured .
 In the photo, Zhanna is leaning with her head on the head of her brother .
 The next page showed victims of the explosion of the building on Kashirskoye Highway . The next pages showed victims.
 Felix Misharin, fifty-eight, of apartment 74, had been snapped in a celebratory mood .
 He stood with his right arm extended and his left arm around his wife, Vera, fifty . He stood in front of his wife with his arm extended.
 The Misharins were buried when the bomb that had been hidden in the basement went off . On the same page was a photo of the debris in which the debris was buried .
 I wrote an email to the editorial page of the Washington Times, attached my article, and pressed send . I sent it to the paper's editorial page .
 Russian press reports about the strange events in Ryazan soon all but disappeared .
For the next fifteen years, the policies of the Western powers were based on the assumption that questions about the Putin regime’s legitimacy did not exist .
 Putin said that security services were certain of the participation of Osama Bin Laden in the first Moscow bombing .
 The Yeltsin regime would murder hundreds of its own citizens and terrify the nation to hold on to power . The West was critical to the credence given in the West to Russian explanations .
 It crippled Western policy toward Russia, rendering it naive and ineffectual . It crippled the West's approach to Russia . It also crippled the Western policy towards Russia .
 The West maintained an image of Russia that bore no relation to reality. From the moment Putin took power, the West maintained a picture of Russia .
 The groundswell of support for Putin and the new war in Chechnya transformed the political landscape . The new war was the first war in the country's history .
Pro-Putin forces achieved a strong parliamentary majority, leaving the opposition without a political base in the national government . Yeltsin, as president, had confronted an oppositional parliament, but the opposition had a strong majority .
 Putin was named acting president, giving him the advantages of incumbency . Yeltsin resigned on New Year’s Eve .
 elections were moved up from June to April, according to the Constitution . The presidential campaign was launched in April .
 Russian journalists began to reexamine the incident in Ryazan .
 Pavel Voloshin, a reporter for Novaya Gazeta, met with Yuri Tkachenko, the sapper who had tested the bomb . TKachenko had tested a bomb.
 Tkachenko would later be barred from contact with journalists . On this occasion he gave a detailed interview in which he insisted that the bomb found in the basement at 14/16 Novoselov Street was real .
 The state-of-the-art gas analyzer used by the Ryazan police clearly indicated the presence of hexogen . He said it had a genuine military detonator, and said it was genuine .
 Voloshin also talked to the police officers who answered the original call from Kartofelnikov .
 They too insisted that the incident was not an exercise, and that the substance in the bags did not look anything like sugar .
 Voloshin suggested that the FSB publish the order for the exercise and give journalists access to the agents who had placed the bomb in the basement and to the material evidence . Tkachenko and others have also suggested the order.
 A teacher said that one of her female students had a girlfriend who met a soldier who bragged about guarding sacks of hexogen . Voloshin received a call at the office of Novaya Gazeta from a teacher who said that she had a girl with a soldier .
 The soldier, Alexei Pinyaev, was based in NaroFominsk, outside of Moscow . The soldier was a soldier from Narofominsk .
Voloshin drove to the base, entered secretly, and succeeded in meeting with the soldier . Voloshin entered secretly and met the soldier at the base . The soldier was wounded in the attack .
 Pinyaev said he was sent from a Moscow base in the autumn of 1999 to the base of the 137th Ryazan paratroop regiment .
After a period of shooting and parachute jumping, he was assigned to guard a warehouse that supposedly contained arms and ammunition . The warehouse was supposed to contain weapons and ammunition.
 Pinyaev and another soldier decided to look inside . The two soldiers were on guard duty .
 Pinyaev said they were puzzled as to why it was necessary to stand guard over bags of sugar . They stuck a bayonet into one of the bags and poured out some of the sugar into a plastic packet .
 Pinyaev said the taste was revolting and they feared they had poisoned themselves . They said they feared the taste had revolted themselves .
 The substance in the bag was hexogen . A bomb expert tested it and told the commander that the substance washexogen . He called a bomb expert who tested it .
 Pinyaev and the other soldier were relieved of their normal duties and began to be called regularly for interrogations . Almost immediately, they were called to interrogations.
Soldiers advised them to prepare for long prison sentences . Their fellow soldiers advised them.
 Pinyaev's story was published in the March 13 issue of Novaya Gazeta under the headline “Hexogen’s”
 The Duma demand that the general prosecutor check the facts published in Novaya Gazeta about the storing of hexogen in the guise of sugar in an arms warehouse at a training camp for paratroopers . The deputies also suggested that the Duma demanded that the prosecutor check.
 The misgivings raised by the Novaya Gazeta articles led the FSB to agree to participate in a televised meeting between its top officials and residents of the building in Ryazan .
 Nikolai Nikolaev asked Alexander Zdanovich, the host of the FSB, how it was possible that Sergeev had mistaken a dummy for a bomb .
 Sergeev was only communicating what had been told him by Tkachenko .
 Zdanovich suggested that the bomb squad was incompetent . He was also suggesting that the squad was incompetence .
 Nikolaev asked Raphael Gilmanov, an independent explosives expert in the hall, whether it was possible to mistake sugar for hexogen . He asked him if he could have mistaken sugar forhexogen .
Lawyer: Law on investigative activities covering military exercises did not give the FSB the right to mine a residential building . Lawyer Pavel Astakhov says the law does not give FSB right tomine a building .
 Article 5 of the law explicitly mentions the necessity of observing civil rights while carrying out exercises . Also mentions the need to observe civil rights during exercises .
 A military man in the audience called the circumstances extremely suspicious . The circumstances were 'extremely suspicious'
 The organization of military exercises is always accompanied by the preparation of ambulances, medicine, bandages, and warm clothing .
 Nikolaev asked why the investigation into the incident was continuing six months later . Nikolaev said the investigation was continuing after the incident .
 Ryazan residents and FSB officials filed out of the hall, but it was clear that the FSB had suffered a major setback .
 The incident in Ryazan resembled not a military exercise but a failed provocation . People everywhere were struck by the ineptitude of the FSB representatives’ attempts to defend the organization’s actions .
 The authorities seem to feel that they need no longer be concerned about the apartment bombings . With Putin's election, the authorities seemed to feel no longer worried about the bombings .
 The bombings would become the last in the long list of unsolved crimes that defined the history of the twentieth-century Russia .
In April, a week after Putin's election, I decided to go to Ryazan. Although I feared it was an exercise in futility, in April, I chose to go there .
 The residents of 14/16 Novoselov Street suffered from heart problems and depression as a result of what happened . Their children were afraid to go to sleep at night .
 Those walking in and out of the building on the rainy night were completely convinced that the previous September’s events were not a training exercise .
 The residents of 14/16 Novosyelov Street resemble the working-class residents of any Russian city .
 The building was built in 1987 by the Ryazan radio factory and still houses many of its employees . The building is still being used by many of the company's employees .
 The “exercise’ and the events that followed it left them plagued by questions that would not go away . But the “Exercise” and the ‘exercise and the event that followed’s events left it plagued with questions that wouldn’t
 The bomb was successfully neutralized, and the bomb was not found for two days . They wanted to know why, if the incident was a test, they were not allowed to return to their apartments .
 The FSB wanted to know what right the FSB had to make them guinea pigs in an exercise . The exercise was not an exercise, but it was a fun exercise .
 The victims of the bombings in Buinaksk, Moscow, and Volgodonsk also probably could not have imagined that they would be killed in their sleep .
Residents considered suing the FSB but gave up in the face of the daunting paperwork . Vasiliev said that the residents considered suing FSB .
 The building on Novoselov Street was an odd choice for a test of vigilance . Residents could have assumed someone unloading sacks of sugar was doing so for the store .
 The test would have been minimal because the building was at the edge of the city . At the same time, the impact of the test would be minimal .
 The goal was the maximum number of victims, but it was very well suited to be the target for a terrorist attack . It was also well suited for the attack, especially if the goal was a maximum number.
14/16 Novosyelov Street was a brick building of standard construction . Like the building on Kashirskoye Highway in Moscow, it was built in the same style .
 In an explosion there would have been little chance for anyone to survive in an explosion .
 The building was also on an elevation . An explosion would have caused it to hit the adjacent building with the force of an avalanche .
 In February 2002, a motion to investigate the Ryazan events failed in the State Duma for the third time . The motion failed in February 2002 .
 Duma deputies and human rights activists organized an independent commission to seek answers . No official body was going to demand the truth about the bombings .
 The chairman was Sergei Kovalyev, a Duma deputy and former Soviet dissident . He had once been Yeltsin's human rights chief .
 The commission had no official standing, but it included prominent people . Duma deputies could direct questions to the government in their individual capacity .
 Commission members were fighting a rising tide of indifference. But the commission members are fighting a rise of indifference .
 Putin gave the impression of prosecuting the second Chechen war successfully, and an economic boom that started before he took office was gaining momentum .
Independent commission began its work after apartment bombings in Russia .
 On September 16, the building in Volgodonsk really was blown up, and on the 17th, Zhirinovsky demanded an explanation .
 Seleznev avoided responding, and when Zhirinovsky persisted, his microphone was turned off . He avoided responding .
 The newspaper succeeded in getting the transcript of what Seleznev had said on the 13th . Now the newspaper has been able to get the transcript from SelezNEv .
 The newspaper asked Seleznev who had told him about the Volgodonsk bombing three days before it happened .
 He answered, “Believe me, not Berezovsky,’s. He answered that he was well aware who had given him the information .
 The explosion was confirmed by the local Volgodonsk press . Seleznev’s explanation raised more questions than it answered .
 It was hard to understand why, at a time when apartment buildings were being blown up with hundreds of casualties, it was necessary to inform the speaker of the Duma about such an insignificant incident .
 Seleznev did not mention the “routine’s explosion in September 1999, when questions about his knowledge of the bombing were first raised .
 He was still reporting on September 13 about an event on the 15th . Even if he read concerned a genuine criminal conflict in Volgodonsk.
 Alexander Litvinenko, a former FSB officer who fled to London, offered a more plausible explanation . He was raising questions about the apartment bombings .
 The note to Seleznev was the result of “the usual ‘Kontora’ mess-up,’s opinion, says Litvinenko .
 Boris Berezovsky was instrumental in facilitating Putin’s rise to power but then went into exile after being deprived of influence . He accused the FSB of carrying out the bombings in order to justify the second Chechen war .
Nikita Chekulin was recruited by the FSB as a secret agent . He was a former acting director of the Russian Explosives Conversion Center, a scientific research institute under the Ministry of Education .
 In 1999-2000, a large quantity of hexogen was purchased by the institute from various military units and then shipped all over the country to unknown destinations .
Two French producers had originally worked with NTV to expand the program . Nikolai Nikolaev questioned the FSB spokesman Alexander Zdanovich .
 The planning for such a complex operation would have had to have begun much earlier, before Putin became prime minister . Berezovsky was one of the most powerful members of the leadership .
 Berezovsky played a critical role in advocating Putin’s ascent and was also instrumental in promoting the new Chechen war, which made it possible for Putin to win the presidency .
 The new Chechen war could not have happened without the apartment bombings .
 It is therefore hard to imagine that Berezovsky was not involved in them. It is also hard to believe that he was not in any part of them .
 Berezovsky’s attitude toward Putin changed only when Putin acted to remove him from power . Putin acted only when he was removed from power.
 Berezovsky started to hint and then in December 2001, to state openly that the bombings were carried out by the FSB with Putin’s complicity .
 This level of cynicism, though shocking by Western standards, is perfectly plausible for Russian leaders . It's not surprising that Russian leaders are cynical, but it's perfectly plausible .
 Putin was not in a position to respond to the accusations by saying that Berezovsky was the real initiator and that he was merely a passive participant . Putin did not respond by saying he was not the real initiate .
Berezovsky would later accuse Berezovsky of responsibility for every major political murder and terrorist act that took place in Russia . But on the apartment bombings he had to remain silent .
 Authorities avoid discussing the issue because of his odious reputation . Instead, his reputation made it easier for authorities to avoid discussing it .
 FSB officials said they did not intend to enter into polemics with Berezovsky . FSB said that they didn't intend to engage in a polemic .
Independent commission began its work in February 2002 but could not get answers to its questions . The independent commission has been working since February 2002 .
 Russian officials simply refused to respond to deputies' inquiries . responding was a legal obligation .
 Mikhail Trepashkin was a former FSB agent and orthodox communist . He was also an investigator for the FSB . He had all but ceased to function as a result of his activities .
 Most commission members’ distrust of Berezovsky, Yushenkov and Yuli Rybakov . Despite most commission members' distrust, they are still in touch with each other .
 Petersburg, flew to London to attend the March 5 press conference and watch the film . Petersburg, Russia, is home to the world's most famous film, The Great Britain .
 Trepashkin had been fired by the FSB after investigating the links between FSB officers and Chechen organized crime figures .
 Trepashkin began cooperating with the public commission after this meeting .
 In April, Yushenkov traveled to the United States and met Alena and Tanya Morozov, whose mother was killed in the explosion on Guryanov Street . Yushenov traveled to U.S. in April .
 This means that they could gain access to the investigation and participate in court proceedings . This meant that they were able to participate in the investigation . This means they could be able to access the investigation.
 The person who rented the basement storage area where the bomb was placed had presented the passport of Mukhid Laipanov, a resident of the Karachaevo-Cherkesiya republic in the North Caucasus .
 The real Laipanov had been killed in an auto accident in February 1999 . It turned out, however, that he had died in a car accident in 1999 .
 The person using his passport was Achemez Gochiyaev, an ethnic Karachai and the director of a Moscow construction firm whose warehouses were used as a transfer point for shipments of hexogen disguised as bags of sugar .
 He owned a home in Moscow, lived not far from where the bombing took place, and had many relatives in the city . He lived in Moscow.
 If he had committed an act of terror against innocent civilians, he would have been putting his relatives at risk . He would have put his family at risk, he said .
 Mark Blumenfeld gave a description of the person who had rented the basement .
 The FSB released a composite photo of the suspect based on that description . The suspect has been identified as a suspect in the case .
 It was briefly allowed to circulate, but then quickly replaced with one of Gochiyaev, who looked completely different . It was then replaced by one of the same.
 Gochiyaev saw that he was being accused of blowing up a building . He immediately went into hiding .
 The two authors handed a courier a list of questions for the person claiming to be Gochiyaev . At the end of April, a courier handed the two authors a list.
 A videotape and several photographs were turned over by an intermediary in another European country . Several days later, an intermediary turned over a videotape of Gochiyaev's identity .
 Gochiyaev insisted that he had been set up and had fled only because he knew that the FSB was getting ready to kill him . In the statement, he said that he was set up.
 Trepashkin found Gochiyaev’s testimony convincing and decided to concentrate on locating the original composite photo . The original composite picture was taken in the same place .
 He was working closely with the independent public commission . By this time, he had been working closely.
 Sergei Yushenkov had been shot dead in front of the entrance to his apartment building in 2003 .
My book Darkness at Dawn was due out in the United States in May . I argued that the FSB was responsible for the apartment bombings .
 Sergei, who held the same view and was trying to prove it, had been murdered . Now Sergei is accused of being murdered by a man who had tried to prove that .
 He was one of the most active members of the public commission on the bombings . He had been full of enthusiasm when he saw him in a hallway of the State Duma .
 French documentary will circulate the documentary and make people aware of the real story behind the bombings .
 I went to the window and looked at the surrounding buildings, the streetlamps, and the nearly empty street . I went into the window to look at the outside of the building .
 For the first time in twenty-seven years of writing about Russia, I felt afraid to leave my apartment . For the second time in 20-seven year of writing, she felt afraid of leaving her apartment .
 Yuri Shchekochikhin, another member of the public commission, died three months later . He died of a mysterious illness that caused his skin to peel off and his internal organs to collapse .
 Shchekochikhin was tentatively diagnosed as having died from thallium poisoning . Russian authorities refused to allow an autopsy, but his relatives managed to send tissue samples to London .
 Thallium is also believed to have been used in the poisoning of Roman Tsepov, Putin’s former bodyguard .
 Trepashkin was the only person still actively investigating the apartment bombings . Yushenkov and Shchekochikhin were killed in the bombings .
 The FSB pulled the picture from circulation in the hope that a picture had been published somewhere before it was pulled from circulation . A man went through old newspaper archives to find the picture .
 Vladimir Romanovich, an FSB agent, had been responsible for ties with Chechen criminal organizations in the 1990s .
 Trepashkin worked for the department of the FSB that protected officers, their sources, and their families .
 Chechen extremists were being sheltered by Russian law enforcement . This gave him indirect knowledge of the operations of Chechen extremist groups .
 A Chechen criminal band was engaged in shaking down banks in Moscow, including the Soldi Bank . In 1995, he learned that a Chechencriminal band was involved in shaking up banks .
 Romanovich specialized in banks and had helped the Chechens rent a number of premises in Moscow for extortion and money laundering . He had been a member of a group that had been involved in the extortion of Moscow .
 Trepashkin set up an ambush at the Soldi Bank, but the Chechens did not appear . The Chechens didn't appear .
 A special vehicle ordered by Romanovich was monitoring the bank . He later learned that on the day of the failed ambush, a special vehicle was ordered to monitor the bank.
 Trepashkin wanted to interrogate Romanovich, but the investigation was halted . Nikolai Patrushev, head of his unit, blocked further work on the case .
 Patrushev later became the head of the FSB and held that post at the time of the apartment bombings . He was also head of FSB.
 Blumenfeld said that on the moming of the bombing, he described the man who had rented the basement space to local police . He said the man rented the space to police .
 FSB officers pressured him to change his story and “recognize another photo, that of Gochiyaev. Two days later, he was brought to the Lefortovo, where he was taken to a police station .
 Under his leadership were two demolition instructors, the Arabs Abu Umar and Abu Zharaf .
 Gochiyaev received $500,000 from Khattab, he said . He added that according to their information, he had received $ 500,000 .
 The original sketch of the person who reserved the basement storage area was not of Gochiyaev . It was hard to see on what basis he was a suspect .
 Yusuf Krymshamkhalov and Adam Dekkushev are accused of transporting explosives to Volgodonsk . They were accused of being the “band of Gochiyaev” who had allegedly transported explosives .
 Trepashkin was preparing to present this new evidence in court . He first shared Blumenfeld’s name and telephone number with Igor Korolkov, an investigative reporter .
 In a taped statement in the editorial office, Blumenfeld describes what happened .
 Gochiyaev and the person who came to him resembled each other . Korolkov asked Blumenfeld whether Gochiyev and a person who come to him resemble each other.
 Blumenfeld: "On the photo there was depicted a man with a simple face" But the person who had rented the premises looked like an intellectual .
 He was charged with possession of an unlicensed gun, but a judge dismissed that charge . The judge dismissed the charge.
 He was sentenced to four years in a labor camp in the Ural Mountains . He was then accused of improper use of classified material and was jailed .
 Trepashkin was able to transmit to Moskovskiye Novosti after his arrest . He was arrested for allegedly mishandling a secret document he allegedly improperly handled .
 The transcript of an eavesdropped conversation among members of the Golyanovsky criminal organization. It was said that past and present FSB agents were members and took part in killings .
Trepashkin said the documents he was charged with publicizing could not bear the stamp “secret” because the law on state secrets prohibits classifying information about illegal acts committed by officials .
 With Trepashkin's arrest, the investigation of the apartment bombings entered a lull . The investigation into the bombings into a lull.
 Those who wanted to raise the issue lacked investigative tools such as subpoena power and knew that too active an interest could cost them their lives . Those who want to raise issue didn't have investigative tools like subpoena power .
 Putin regime's main accusers have been accused of Russia's Putin regime . The Russian president has been accused by some of the country's most senior officials .
 Darkness at Dawn was published in May 2003, and presented in Washington at the Hudson Institute .
 Alexander Goldfarb, an émigré from Soviet dissident circles in Moscow in the 1970s, was now working as an aide to Berezovsky . He was a member of the dissident circle in Moscow, but now works as a aide to the Russian president .
 He asked whether he had any objection to the presence of a ‘German film crew’ at his talk . He asked if he had no objection to a German film crew at the talk .
 Goldfarb arrived with husband-and-wife filmmaking team, Andrei Nekrasov and Olga Konskaya, and Alena Morozova, whose mother had died in the bombing on Guryanova Street . The sister had given Trepashkin power of attorney to
In his presentation, I explained why I believed the apartment bombings were a provocation intended to assure Putin’s access to power .
 My remarks became part of a film, entitled Disbelief, which premiered in 2004 at the Sundance Film Festival . The film was released in 2004 .
 A Russian-language version was put on YouTube and circulated on DVDs in Russia . A Russian version of the Russian version was posted on YouTube .
 Darkness at Dawn was also translated into Russian, with long excerpts published in the press .
 People capable of helping to make the bombings a serious political issue were disappearing . Unfortunately, the people capable of help to make it a political issue are disappearing .
 Anna Politkovskaya, Russia’s leading investigative journalist, called on Russian presidential candidates to answer the outstanding questions surrounding the apartment bombings . In 2004, she called on the Russian presidential candidate to answer questions.
 Alexander Litvinenko continued to update his book and speak out on the case in London .
 Politkovskaya was shot dead in the elevator of her apartment block on October 7, 2006 .
 Litvinenko died of radiation poisoning on November 23 after ingesting radioactive polonium . It was put into his tea in a London sushi restaurant .
 The deaths of so many persons who had investigated the apartment bombings, all of them with the exception of Litvinenko my personal friends, left me as one of the few people still arguing that this monumental provocation could not be ignored .
 On May 17, 2007, testifying before the House Foreign Relations Committee on Russia’s foreign policy, I explained the role played by the apartment bombings .
 A plan was put into motion to put in place a successor who would guarantee Yeltsin and his family would be safe from prosecution . The criminal division of property in the country would not be subject to reexamination .
 "Operation Successor" was a massive provocation to succeed . It was necessary to have a huge provocation, but it was necessary for it to succeed.
 In his view, this provocation was the bombing in September 1999 of the apartment buildings in Moscow, Buinaksk and Volgodonsk . In my view, the bombing was a provocation .
 In the aftermath of these attacks, a new war was launched against Chechnya . Three hundred lives were killed in the attacks, which claimed three hundred lives .
 Putin, the newly appointed prime minister who was put in charge of that war, achieved overnight popularity . Putin's new prime minister has been in charge since the end of the war .
 Putin was elected president and his first act was to guarantee Yeltsin immunity from prosecution . He was elected President of Russia in 2008 .
 All talk of re-examining the results of privatization was forgotten . In the meantime, all talk of reinvocation of privatization is forgotten .
 Russia's First Channel screened a "documentary" alleging the September 11 attacks in the United States were orchestrated by the U.S. government . The station invited me to comment on the film .
 The apartment bombings have been linked to an apartment bombing in Russia . Radio Liberty has no immediate plans to raise the issue of the bombings .
 The apartment bombings are impossible for a conscientious observer to ignore . In fact, they are impossible to ignore, says the author .
 The circumstantial evidence that the bombings were carried out by the FSB is overwhelming . The evidence is overwhelming, according to the evidence .
 The only reason there is no direct evidence is that the Putin regime has concealed it . The Putin regime is believed to have concealed it, according to reports .
 The rubble from the bombings was cleared almost immediately . The Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Emergency Situations had objected .
 The U.S. embassies were bombed in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998 . Suspects were identified and arrested as a result of the careful sifting of the rubble from the explosion .
Authorities sequestered the people who put the bomb in the basement of Ryazan . Records of the exercise and the “dummy’s bomb itself were also sequestered .
 By any standard, murdering hundreds of randomly chosen civilians in order to hold on to power shows a cynicism that cannot be comprehended in a normal human context .
 Russia is fully consistent with the kind of country that Russia, in the wake of communism, has become . But it is not just a country that has become, but it is consistent with what it is .
 During the anti-Putin protests in 2011 and 2012, demonstrators carried signs referring to the attacks . The attacks were carried out during the protests.
 The evidence that the bombings were a provocation means that Russia is carrying a burden that will weigh on it for years to come. The evidence is that Russia will carry a burden for years.
Until the truth about the bombings is known, the true nature of Russia’s postcommunist history cannot be established . Until the truth is known.
 At the same time, failing to react to the evidence that the bombings were a governmentplanned mass crime leaves such provocation as a standing temptation for government leaders .
 If those responsible are not identified and punished, it will be assumed by those fighting for power in Russia that provocations are a legitimate way to win elections .
 Russia has failed to demand answers to the mystery of how Putin came to power . Russia has a history of violence and violence against Russia .
Many things changed after the fall of the Soviet Union . Many things changed.
 There had been no moral revolution in Russia. But as society was rapidly transformed, it became obvious that there was no revolution .
 Communist society had taken it for granted that the individual was expendable . Postcommunist Russia did as well, often to a even greater degree .
 Yeltsin was a hero to many Russians after he successfully led the resistance to the August 1991 pro-communist coup . He was also a hero for many Russians .
 Neither Yeltsin nor the ‘young reformers’ who he put in charge of Russia’s transformation showed any understanding of the need to establish the rule of law .
 For Yeltsin and the reformers, the goal was to reach a “point of no return,” beyond which it would be impossible to restore socialism regardless of the will of the people .
 Property had to be put into private hands as quickly as possible . This was done with little regard for who received the property or on what basis .
 The largest peaceful transfer of property in history without the benefit of law . The reformers created the conditions for the criminalization of the whole country .
 Russia has become a regime of aggression and terror in recent years . Their interaction set the stage for Russia’s drift into an aggressive regime of terror and aggression .
 If one were to choose a date for the beginning of the reforms, it would be January 2, 1992 .
 Mikhail Gorbachev's resignation marked the end of the Soviet Union . The government of the newly emerged Russian Federation abruptly freed prices .
 Gaidar predicted that prices would increase by a factor of three to five and then begin to fall . Prices would then start to fall by afactor of five to five, according to the economist .
 By April, almost all the money in people’s savings accounts had disappeared .
 One night in Moscow in March 1993, there was a knock at the door of my apartment . The door was opened at the time of the night .
I opened the door to a haggard old woman I had occasionally seen in the elevator . I opened the doors to a woman who had been seen by the elevator.
 Surprised by the request, I reached for my wallet for money to help bury this unfortunate, unknown woman .
 The wiping out of citizens’ savings was followed by numerous pyramid schemes that promised to help Russians survive the spiraling inflation .
 Russians were subjected to deceptive advertising campaigns that explained how their investments would grow . With no experience of the capitalist world, Russians were subject to deceptive ads .
 At first, as share prices rose steadily, the firms allowed investors to cash out their earnings, the better to attract new gamblers . The firms were able to attract a new generation of gamblers to the market .
 Long lines formed as people fought to take advantage of the new opportunities . Long lines form as people fight to takeadvantage of new opportunities.
 Sometimes in as little as three months, pyramid schemes stopped honoring their commitments .
 With the first decline in the volume of share purchases, the organizers took the investors’ money and disappeared . The organizers' money disappeared .
 hyperinflation drove millions into poverty, but the well connected found numerous ways to amass vast unearned wealth .
 Inflation created a shortage of turnover capital, which paralyzed production . Inflation also paralyzed production, creating a shortage.
 credits were issued to industry at rates of 10 to 25 percent . Inflation rate was 2,500 percent .
 The intent was to help factories pay salaries and purchase supplies . Instead of being used for this purpose, the credits were deposited in banks at commercial rates of interest .
 A second path to wealth was to obtain permission to export raw materials . The third path was to get permission to Export raw materials.
 At first, energy prices were less than 1 percent of world market prices . Most prices had been freed, but prices continued to be regulated .
 The government abandoned the Soviet-era monopoly on foreign trade . The government allowed anyone to export who could get a license .
 export licenses were a license to print money . raw materials were bought at the internal price, for rubles, and sold abroad at the world price .
 The Ministry of Foreign Economic Ties granted them in return for bribes . The ministry of Foreign economic Ties gave them the money in return.
 The fee for the license was insignificant next to the size of the bribe . The fee was insignificant. The bribe was the largest in the world .
 In 1991, fearing a famine, the government sold permits for the importation of food products at 1 percent of their real value . The difference was subsidized with the help of Western commodity credits .
 The attempt to relieve the country’s food crisis led to the enrichment of a small group of traders . The products were sold at normal market prices .
 The value of import subsidies in 1992 came to 15 percent of the gross domestic product . In 1992, the value of imported subsidies in the country was 15 percent .
 After hyperinflation, the second factor that facilitated the rise of Russia’s criminal oligarchy was the process of privatization . The second factor was the second cause of the rise.
 The placing of State assets in private hands actually began during perestroika, as officials took over government agencies and reorganized them as private businesses .
 In place of the state distribution system, they created commodity exchanges, and in place of state banks, they create commercial banks . The state created commercial banks.
Privatization started in October 1992 with the widespread distribution of vouchers .
 Beginning that month, any Russian citizen could receive a State privatization check denominated at ten thousand rubles .
 Each voucher supposedly represented a citizen’s share of the national wealth . The voucher supposedly represents a citizen's share of national wealth.
 Factories were converted into joint stock companies, and citizens were invited to exchange their vouchers for shares in any enterprise .
 Others invested in supposed voucher funds that advertised widely and promised dividends . Others invested them in supposed vouchers funds that promised to pay out dividends .
 Many vouchers were sold on the street, often for as little as ten dollars or a bottle of vodka . Many vouchers are sold for up to ten dollars .
 Their deliberately shabby appearance was meant to create the impression that the vouchers had no real value . The vouchers were intended to create an impression that they were not worth value .
Watching this spectacle in 1993 and 1994, I also formed the impression that the vouchers were worthless . Watching this spectacle, he also formed an impression of the vouchers.
 The first private property in Russia was created legally in Russia . But corrupt business and organized crime groups were behind the vagrants .
 When auctions were held for shares in industrial enterprises, members of these groups arrived with vouchers .
 In one of the first major investment auctions in 1993, a 4.88 percent ownership stake in the Sayansk Aluminum Factory was obtained by the firm Aluminproduct .
 Oleg Deripaska would become one of Russia's richest men . It was run by the richest man in Russia .
 He presented 130,000 vouchers ten minutes before bidding was closed, obtaining 18 percent of the shares . He presented the vouchers 10 minutes before the bidding was shut down .
 As for the rest of the population, in most cases their investments produced nothing . In most cases, their investments produce nothing .
 Many of the newly rich set up banks, and these banks began to be “empowered’ to handle government accounts . Many banks are now "empowered"
 The official rate of return on the government’s money was not high, but what mattered was that empowered banks treated budgetary funds as free capital that was available for investment .
Nonpayment of salaries became the reality of millions of Russians’ lives. Meanwhile, nonpayment of wages became thereality of millions’s lives .
 The new group of millionaires and billionaires were able to buy up Russia’s mines and factories for a fraction of their value .
 During cash privatization, enterprises were officially sold at auction, but the auctions frequently took place only on paper .
 State Property Committee officials often eliminated bidders or provided information about competing offers to the predetermined winner .
 Only rarely was there true competitive bidding, and if a powerful group was outbid by an insistent competitor, the winner could easily pay for his tenacity .
 The Russian government ceased printing money in late 1994 . In late 1994, in response to pressure from the World Bank to reduce inflation, the government stopped printing money .
 Russia launched the “loans for shares’ program in order to meet its obligations . It made possible the creation in Russia of companies comparable in size to the largest American corporations .
 Under the program, the government mortgaged shares in the most desirable nonprivatized enterprises in return for loans .
 In practice, the shares went to powerful banks with the best “informal connections to the government’s government . The shares go to powerful bank with best connections to government .
 The banks organized auctions in which they participated and which they inevitably won . Banks organized auctions which they always won .
 Once an enterprise had been mortgaged, the proprietary bank was free to exploit it . When the government failed to repay the bank loans, the enterprise became the lending bank’s property .
 Once the auction began, a previously unknown firm would offer a bid that was almost identical to the starting price . The bank that was named to organize the bidding had set the price .
 It effectively set the price at which it would buy the enterprise. It thereby effectively sets the price of the enterprise . It effectively sets a price for the company .
 Norilsk Nickel, the giant metals combine, was offered at a starting price of $170 million .
 The scheme provided little in badly needed revenue to the government . The scheme, however, provided very little in need of revenue .
 A letter signed by 13 oligarchs and published in leading Russian newspapers issued a veiled threat . It appeared to be directed against the communists, who were gaining in the public opinion polls .
 Russia became a classic third world country, selling raw materials to import consumer goods . Russia became the first country in the world to sell raw materials.
 Millions spent weekends in the countryside growing their own food in order to survive . Millions were forced to spend weekends growing their food in the country . Millions of people spent weekends growing food in rural areas .
 By mid1998, the government was spending $1 billion a week simply to meet its obligations . By mid 1998, the federal government was Spending $1billion a week to meet obligations .
 People returned from summer vacations to find that cash machines of their banks were locked .
 Currency exchange points posted new ruble-dollar exchange rates every hour . Currency exchange rates posted new exchange rates each hour .
People began to scoop up everything in the stores, including salt, sugar, matches, and flour . People began to pick up everything from flour to flour .
 Many small businesses collapsed, and there was a rash of contract killings of borrowers who could not repay their debts . There was a spate of contract deaths of borrowers.
 Many had hoped that the economy was getting better, but it now seemed to have irrevocably collapsed . The economy is now in a state of crisis .
Russian oligarchs made fortunes during the 1990s, and brought on succession crisis that led to bombing of Russian apartment buildings in 1999 . This, in turn, created extreme uneasiness among the oligarchs and others who made fortunes .
 The modern era of criminalization in Russia began during perestroika . Like privatization, Russia's criminalization began in the early 1990s .
 The Gorbachev era reforms started with the legalization of “cooperatives,’ which became the only privately run businesses in the Soviet Union . The GorBachev era began with the legalize of ‘cooperative’
 The cooperatives quickly prospered, but because the police protected only state enterprises and it was illegal to hire private guards, gangs sprang up all over the country to extort money .
By 1992, nearly every kiosk and store owner and every trader in the markets was making payoffs to gangsters . By 1992, almost all kiosks and store owners and traders had made payoffs.
 In addition to protection from themselves, the gangs also provided other services .
 Most gangs were organized on the basis of an ethnic group or a region . The most important ones developed highly sophisticated structures .
 The KGB and police were responsible for planning murders and setting up wiretapping . They had their own analytical departments, staffed with veterans of the KGB and the police .
 Armed forces supplied with latest weapons and equipment from the armed forces . They were supplied with the latest weapons.
 Initially, the gangs’ most lucrative targets were markets where transactions were carried out in cash . In addition to gas stations and casinos, casinos were the most lucrative target .
 Many of these had a turnover of billions of dollars in unregistered revenues . Many of the unregistered revenue was in the form of millions of dollars .
 Moscow's Cherkizovskaya market is the largest in Russia . The market is estimated to be worth $8 billion a year .
 "Businessmen" use their connections to acquire vast unearned wealth to take over new enterprises . The gangs began to use terror to take control of the new enterprises.
 In the early 1990s, hundreds of bankers, businessmen, and government personnel became the victims of contract murders .
 The gangsters, businessmen, and corrupt officials began to work together . Soon the gangsters and businessmen began working together .
 The gangsters needed the businessmen because they required places to invest their capital but lacked the expertise to run large enterprises . The gangster needed the businessman because they needed places to investment their capital .
 The businessmen needed the gangsters to enforce contracts and collect debts . The gangsters needed the businessmen to enforce Contracts and collect debt .
 Both needed crooked officials to provide licenses and permissions on a noncompetitive basis and to shield them from the law . Both needed licenses and permission from crooked officials .
 The criminals' behavior was typically brutal and aggressive at first, but it improved over time . The criminals’ behavior was usually brutal andaggressive at first .
 Many gangsters, wishing to be seen as “businessmen,’s learned to negotiate and to keep their word . The gangsters are known as "businessmen"
 Moscow hair stylists are patronizing the best Moscow stylists . They began buying suits from leading European tailors and patronizing best hair stylist .
 Their identity was betrayed only by their weakness for gold chains and a tendency to lose control and revert to threats when encountering resistance .
Russian businessmen learned which companies were most closely connected to gangsters or were fronts for organized crime . For their own safety, Russian businessmen learned how to protect themselves from gangsters .
 The situation was more complicated for a foreigner doing business in Russia . The situation is more complicated than any other country in Russia.
 He frequently found that his dealings with a commercial partner led directly to contact with criminals demanding money for protection or for permission to do business . He also found that he often found that the dealings with commercial partners led him to contact criminals .
 If he turned to the authorities to defend him, he often found that the criminals seeking to “protect him had connections going to the very top .
 The new society developed an authoritarian political system, including a criminalized economy, the new society .
 Yeltsin was lionized for his role in the overthrow of communism . He quickly demonstrated that he had no understanding of genuine democracy or separation of powers .
 The system he sought to create in Russia was designed to serve only his own drive for power . The system was designed for his own purposes .
 In October 1993, the two most important branches of government in Russia, the executive branch and the parliament, went to war . The Russian parliament is the most important branch of government .
 In November 1991, it voted Yeltsin special powers, and after the Soviet Union’s collapse, it approved his radical reform program . In November1991, it vote Yelts in special powers .
 Yeltsin wanted full control over the economic reform process and was not ready to share power with anyone . Yeltsins was not willing to share control with anyone, but wanted full power .
 The first twenty-one months of Yeltsin's postcommunist rule was marked by rising tension between the two branches of government .
 In January 1992, the sudden removal of price controls unleashed hyperinflation . The price controls were removed in January 1992 .
Yeltsin had forecast lower prices within half a year and economic recovery by the fall . Yeltsin's economic recovery was expected to be better than the fall.
 By the end of December, prices were rising at a rate of 2,318 percent . But prices were still rising at an average rate of 3,000 percent .
Deputies expressed opposition to aspects of the reforms. In this situation, the deputies expressed opposition.
 He did not lobby the deputies, and he paid no attention to their debates . He didn't talk to them, he did not Lobby the deputies .
 On March 15, 1992, Ruslan Khasbulatov, the speaker of the parliament, demanded the resignation of Yegor Gaidar and his team . His team's predictions regarding inflation had proved completely unrealistic .
 Khasbulatov and Alexander Rutskoi, the vice president, intensified their attacks on the government in June . In June, Khas Bulatov, Alexander Rutkoi and KhasBulatov were the two vice president .
Yeltsin found himself opposed by two-thirds of the parliament in November 1991 . Yeltsin had been supported by two thirds of parliament in 1991 .
As the cold weather approaches, the conflict between the two sides intensified . About half the population living below the poverty line, with about half living under the poverty lines .
 On March 20, 1993, Yeltsin announced that he was signing a decree banning any activities by the parliament that limited the powers of the president .
 A new referendum is set for April 25 on the subjects of trust in the president and his economic policies . A short time later, a new referendum was set to be held on April 25 .
George Soros funded a massive advertising campaign that overwhelmed the opposition . It was achieved in part with the help of George Soros, the American financier whose secret contributions to offshore accounts controlled by Anatoly Chubais .
Yeltsin continued to rule by decree even though his November 1991 grant of special powers had run out .
 The parliament sent Yeltsin’s decrees to the Constitutional Court, freezing their implementation . The court also sent the decree to the court .
In 1993, the Supreme Soviet recalculated the budget submitted by Yeltsin, raising pensions and increasing salaries of teachers, doctors, and others paid out of state funds . The confrontation reached its apogee in the summer of 1993 .
 At the same time, he made preparations to break the parliament’s resistance .
 He visited bases of army units in the Moscow oblast to shore up support . He visited the bases of military units and doubled or tripled the salaries of officers .
 The original proposal called not only for the dissolution of the parliament but for the banning of the Constitutional Court and the subordination of the general prosecutor to the president .
 In September, Yeltsin and Khasbulatov each invited the other to resign . In September the two men invited each to resign.
 Khasbulatov raised the subject of Yeltsin’s alcoholism before a meeting of deputies on September 18 .
 The gesture and Khasbulatov’s remarks were promptly reported to Yeltsin . The time had come to finish with the parliament once and for all. The gesture was promptly reported.
 Rutskoi took the oath of office, declared decree 1400 invalid . He said he was taking responsibility for the security of the state .
 Russia now has two heads of state and the beginnings of two separate governments . Russia now had two heads.
 In August 1991, Yeltsin had defied the leaders of the pro-communist coup from the same White House where the deputies were now preparing to resist the abolition of the parliament .
 In 1991, the coup leaders did not shut off the telephones and electricity to Yeltsin and the other members of the Russian government .
 Yeltsin, however, apparently had no intention of repeating that mistake . Yeltsins had no intentions of repeating the mistake .
 Moscow authorities cut off the building’s heat and hot water, and sent large numbers of police to the approaches to the White House .
 The leaders of the parliament were fearful that the building would be easily cleared if it were left undefended .
 The defenders included members of the Union of Officers, a communist group, and veterans of ethnic conflicts in Abkhazia and Trans-Dniester .
Once armed, they formed units that ceased to be under the control of the deputies . Once armed, the deputies were no longer in control of deputies .
 communist demonstrators rallied on the street in support of the parliament and were beaten by the police . Meanwhile, communist demonstrators rally on the streets of the capital .
 As preparations for a possible armed confrontation grew, there was increasing support for the parliament in the provinces . There was also an increase in support for parliament.
Twenty-three regional soviets had voted to support the Supreme Soviet and to treat decree 1400 as invalid on their territory .
Valery Zorkin suggested new elections of both the president and parliament as a way of resolving the crisis . The head of the Constitutional Court suggested the election as a solution .
 The proposal, which became known as the “zero option,’ gained popularity but was rejected by Yeltsin and his supporters . acceptance would mean recognizing the existence of the parliament that Yeltsins had just abolished .
 Yeltsin promised that he would not use force against the White House . He also said he wouldn't use force. Yeltsins said he would never use force at the White house .
 At 10:03 Pm on September 23, the electricity in the White House was cut off . The already unheated building was plunged into darkness .
Deputies lit candles and continued to meet, but there was a change in the psychological atmosphere . The deputies lit candles.
 They set up posts on all landings and staircases and began to check IDs and shine lights in faces . They also began to look at lights in people's faces .
 It was now obvious that they intended to answer only to their own commanders . It's now obvious they meant to answer to themselves themselves .
False rumors of military and worker support for deputies led many to expect a popular revolt . At the same time, false rumors of support for the deputies led to continuous radicalization .
 On September 28, up to ten thousand demonstrators gathered in front of police roadblocks to support the White House . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The police attacked in force, beating people of all ages indiscriminately . The police beat people all ages.
 Steps were taken to seal off the White House completely . Shortly afterward, steps were taken.
 Thousands of heavily armed troops cut off access to the part of the city center where it was located . It was surrounded with barbed wire, and thousands of armed troops were on the streets .
 The next day, Alexei I, the Russian Orthodox patriarch, called for talks . Talks began a day later in the Danilovsky Monastery under Alexei’s sponsorship .
 The presidential side could not refuse to take part in talks called by the patriarch . The talks were not to Yeltsin's advantage .
 They implicitly recognized parliament as an equal branch of government . As they progressed, the pressure on Yeltsin increased .
 Representatives of regional soviets in Moscow called for an end to the blockade of the White House .
 representatives of 14 Siberian oblasts and republics threatened to stop paying taxes, cut the trans-Siberian railroad, and announce the creation of an independent Siberian republic . Yeltsin's representatives threatened to cut the railroad and announce an independent republic .
In this situation, attention is focused on armed defenders of the White House and the communist demonstrators on the street .
 Yeltsin's promise not to use force against the White House seemed to commit him to a standoff . His support in the armed forces could weaken while support for the deputies in the regional soviets grew .
 On October 3, thousands of communist demonstrators gathered in front of the police lines on the Krymsky Bridge .
 The police cordon had been set up not in front of the bridge but in the middle, depriving the police of strategic depth .
 There were only two lines of police, which meant that they were vastly outnumbered . There were just two lines.
 For nearly a week, protestors had been beaten by the police . Many of those victims were now in the front line of demonstrators, armed with bricks and clubs .
 The marchers threw themselves on the police lines. Suddenly there was a hail of rocks and the marchers throw themselves on police lines .
 Police were manning a barricade of fire engines and trucks in their path . But as the crowd approached, they also withdrew .
 The crowd took over nearly 20 trucks, many with the keys in the ignition . The crowd also took over almost 20 trucks .
 Demonstrators drove the seized trucks to the square behind the White House .
When they arrived, Rutskoi, Khasbulatov, and the rest of the parliamentary leadership emerged on the balcony facing the square .
 Rutskoi told demonstrators to take over the Mayoralty, which was next to the White House, and then the Ostankino Television Tower . The demonstrators were told to take control of the mayoralty and the TV tower .
 The crowd and armed defenders of the White House stormed the Mayoralty and seized it .
 In the parking lot, they found more buses and trucks, also with keys in the ignitions .
 Thousands of vehicles left for the Ostankino Tower, with thousands more heading to the tower on foot .
Nearly four thousand in the square. Those who had walked arrived later, but by 7 pm, there was a crowd of nearly four thousand .
 General Albert Makashov, the leader of the White House defense, arrived at Ostankino with a group of armed fighters . He demanded that the guards open the doors .
 A young man began preparing the grenade launcher while troops inside the building positioned themselves behind concrete parapets on the first floor .
 Two trucks of the pro-parliament forces crashed into the entrance to the television tower and the plate glass windows next to it .
Explosion at the entrance of the building was followed by a powerful explosion at the door . The grenade launcher was fired at the doors and another explosion inside the building .
 Nikolai Sitnikov, a member of the Interior Forces Vytyas unit, was killed in the explosion . It was the second explosion that killed Sitnikov .
 A solid sheet of fire from inside the building raked the demonstrators in the square .
 Most of the armed fascists were shielded by a roof over the entryway . But the unarmed protestors, onlookers, and journalists were hit by a torrent of orange-yellow tracer bullets .
 The square was quickly littered with the bodies of the wounded and dead . The square had been filled with bodies of injured and dead.
 As the wounded called out, “Don’t shoot’ and “Please, help us,” their bodies were repeatedly riddled with automatic weapons fire .
 Civilians dived for cover as troops fired at anyone who lifted his head . The troops fired on anyone who lifts his head.
 Yuri Mikhailov, a thirty-five-year-old Moscow resident, called to the soldiers and asked if he could rescue Duncan . One of them, Yuri Mikhailova, a 30-year old Moscow man, asked for help .
 Russian television announced that Ostankino had been seized by an armed mob . Nonetheless, Russian TV announced that the mob had seized the man .
 Gaidar appeared on television and called on Muscovites to take to the streets to show support for the president .
 commanders of the military districts announced their support for Yeltsin . The military districts are Yeltsins' military districts .
Deputies returned from Ostankino in shock as they returned from the White House in shock .
 Internal troops shot defenders of the White House, including teenagers who were outside the building .
 At 8 AM they opened fire on the building itself, shattering rows of windows .
 The attackers directed large-caliber machine guns and tank artillery at the twelfth and thirteenth floors . The White House was quickly consumed in flames .
 Tanks on the Novy Arbat Bridge blew out sections of the deserted upper floors .
Members of the Alpha antiterrorist unit entered the building and accepted the deputies' surrender .
Yeltsin's victory was a provocation, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he became convinced that Yeltsin owed his victory to a provocation . He says the death toll is not the true death toll .
 The center of Moscow was sealed off by thousands of riot troops and police on October 3-4 . For days before the events of October 3, 4, Moscow was closed off by riot troops.
 On October 3, after demonstrators broke through the police lines on the Krymsky Bridge, the police had all but disappeared .
 Police abandoned one checkpoint after another, leaving behind trucks and buses with keys in the ignition .
Demonstrators were able to take over the Mayoralty and proceed to the Ostankino Television Tower without hindrance . The demonstrators took over the mayor's office and took control of the TV tower .
 When they arrived at Ostankino, Makashov and his twenty or so fighters organized a meeting and began issuing ultimatums . They had no chance of taking the building, but they had no chances of taking it .
Internal troops opened fire not on armed attackers but on the unarmed crowd in the square . A grenade exploded in the entrance to Ostankino .
 The conflict at Ostankino was used to persuade the army to attack the White House .
 It is possible that a high death toll could be blamed on the demonstrators, which may have helped make the case for intervention .
 An investigation into the October events by a team from the office of the general prosecutor rapidly uncovered inconsistencies in the story presented by the presidential side .
 The deaths of Sitnikov and Sergei Krasilnikov were used by the presidential side to justify the order to attack demonstrators .
 The investigation showed that neither of these killings was the responsibility of the proparliamentary forces . The investigation was conducted by the French government .
 Sitnikov died not from grenade fire by the proparliament forces but from the explosion of a device inside the building .
 The shot that killed Krasilnikov was fired in a corridor full of Interior Ministry troops .
 The investigation of Yeltsin’s own actions came to a halt . They were released from prison, and the investigation was halted .
Yeltsin presented the country with a new draft constitution that gave the president near-dictatorial powers . Yeltsin's victory in the October confrontation led to a new constitution .
 The State Duma would have virtually no control over the executive branch . Under the proposed constitution, the Supreme Soviet would be replaced with a smaller body, the state Duma .
 The president would have the power to appoint without interference all ministers except the prime minister . The Duma would have to be confirmed by the president .
 If the Duma rejected three of his candidates for prime minister, the president would be able to dissolve Duma . If the president rejected three candidates, he could dissolve the government .
 The president would have control over the budget and appoint the director of the Central Bank and the justices of the Constitutional Court . He would also have control of the bank's budget .
Removing the president would require a two-thirds majority of the parliament as well as approval by the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court . Removing the President would require two- thirds majority of parliament and approval by Supreme Court .
 Laws would be passed by the Duma, but they could be vetoed by the president . The veto could be overridden only by a two-thirds vote of the parliament, a near impossibility in parliament .
 The draft constitution was put to a vote simultaneously with elections to the new parliament on December 12, 1993 . It was published a month after the publication of the text .
 In the referendum, 54. percent of eligible voters were said to have participated, with 58. percent voting for and 41. percent against the new constitution .
 Only 25 percent of eligible voters had to vote yes for the constitution to become law . Yeltsin had established a rule whereby only 25 percent had to voted yes to the constitution .
 The presidential team never explained the origin of the extra ballots . They ignored all demands for an investigation .
 The 1993 Constitution was never approved by the population . It is highly likely that the 1993 Constitution wasn't approved .
 Yeltsin needed a war because since the events of October 1993, he could no longer blame the parliament for his failures . The war began in October 1993 .
 Oleg Lobov, the secretary of Yeltsin's Security Council, told Sergei Yushenkov that a war in Chechnya was coming .
On November 26, 1994, Chechen troops loyal to Djofar Dudayev, the Chechen leader, were routed by Chechen volunteers . The volunteers were routed in November 1994 .
 The Russian military began air strikes on December 2, and on the 11th, three columns of Russian army units moved into Chechnya .
 Democrats, including Gaidar, who had supported Yeltsin’s suppression of the parliament, now found that giving unchecked power to Yeltsins came at a price .
 He had unilaterally committed the army to a war against Russian citizens on Russia’s own territory . He had agreed to war against Russia's own citizens.
 The destruction of the Supreme Soviet also assured Yeltsin an apparently undeserved second term in office . The destruction also assures Yelts in an apparently unappointed second term.
After the parliament was disbanded by force, the communists were apparently too intimidated to seriously contest an election . The communists were reportedly too intimidated.
 Yeltsin was believed to have won the 1996 presidential election, albeit with the help of massive violations of the campaign financing rules . Yelts in 1996 was the only candidate to win the presidential election .
 President Dmitri Medvedev said in February 2012 that this was not the case . In February 2012, at a meeting with four members of the opposition, he said that it was not a case .
 Viktor Ilyukhin, a communist who in 1996 was the head of the Duma Security Committee, said in an interview with the site Gazeta.ru that Zyuganov did not protest the theft of the election . In light of the events in October 1993, he was afraid
 There were fifty thousand armed guards in Moscow, many of them Afghan veterans who were on Yeltsin's side . ‘This force could have been used and that was more terrible than an open confrontation,’ says one of the guards .
 When tanks move, they are visible but this could be used to attack from behind . The tanks are visible when they move, but they are not visible .
 His health began to fail, making him unable to wield the power he had taken such pains to accumulate . It was then that his health started to fail.
 He surrendered authority to his daughter, Tatyana Dyachenko, and Valentin Yumashev . The journalist in the 1980s had helped him write his first volume of memoirs .
 Yeltsin's drive to monopolize power made it necessary to ensure that he was succeeded by someone who would not hold him and his family accountable for their abuse of power .
 The result was “Operation Successor,” which led directly to the apartment bombings and Russia’s final transition from a failing democracy to a full-fledged dictatorship . The result is “ Operation Successor’, which led to the bombings and the
 In 1998, Yeltsin nominated Yevgeny Primakov, the former head of the Foreign Intelligence Service, to be prime minister . He was nominated in the wake of the Russian financial crisis .
 The crisis had destroyed much of Yeltsin’s remaining support, and the appointment of Primakov was a compromise with the political opposition .
Once appointed, Berezovsky authorized an investigation of the Yeltsin family and some of the oligarchs . Once appointed, he authorized a probe of the family and oligarchs.
 Russian organized crime controlled more than three hundred firms in Switzerland, police reports show . Behgjet Pacolli, a Swiss businessman of Albanian origin, was providing unexplained funds to Yeltsin.
 The documents were forwarded to Yuri Skuratov, the Russian general prosecutor, in 1998 .
 A raid on the Mabetex office in Lugano turned up payments of $600,000 on the credit cards of Yeltsin’s daughters .
 Pacolli also seemed to have paid kickbacks to Pavel Borodin, the director of the presidential administration, for contracts to work on the Kremlin .
Skuratov intensified his investigation into Berezovsky's activities . Skuratov, meanwhile, intensified his probe into the Russian businessman .
 On February 2 and 4, heavily armed FSB agents raided Aeroflot and the private security firm Atoll . The security firm was also associated with Berezovsky .
 It came at a time when Yeltsin was reportedly suffering blackouts and periods of disorientation . Many important decisions were reportedly being made by Dyachenko .
 The Yeltsin entourage was not slow to react to the efforts of Skuratov . Primakov’s blessing was that he was seriously investigating them .
 Vladimir Putin secretly filmed Skuratov in a sauna having sex with two prostitutes . The FSB, under its director at the time, was under Putin's control .
 The film was shown on the state television channel, RTR, and Skuratov was forced to resign . The film has been shown on RTR .
 Skuratov could not eliminate the long-term threat to the Yeltsin family in the event of a future loss of power . But it could not be eliminated, however, in the future .
 He took no role in either the daily political struggle or the running of the economy . He was not involved in any of the political struggles he faced .
 His aides decided that he was more suited to the role of guarantor of the Constitution . His aides said he was better suited to a role as guarantor.
Yeltsin handled even this role poorly, avoiding decisions and limiting himself to generalities . But Yeltsin did not make the right decisions .
 Sensing Yeltsin’s weakness, the opposition in the State Duma scheduled an impeachment vote .
 Yeltsin fired Primakov and installed the interior minister, Sergei Stepashin, as acting premier . On May 12, the day before the opening of the hearings, Primakov was fired . The interior minister was installed as acting PM .
 Yeltsin’s readiness to fire Primakov was taken as a signal to the deputies that in the event of impeachment, he was ready to suppress the parliament by force .
 Of the five charges, only the one concerning the war in Chechnya had a good chance of gaining the two-thirds vote necessary for impeachment . Only the one regarding the war had a chance of getting the two thirds vote needed for impeachment.
 Kremlin agents circulated through the State Duma, bribing deputies not to vote for impeachment on this count .
Deputies who voted for impeachment on other counts if they would refrain from supporting it on this count . They even offered to pay deputies who voted to impeach if they wouldn't support it on another count .
 Luzhkov began to organize the opposition to Yeltsin in anticipation of the 2000 elections . With the failure of the impeachment motion, the opposition began organizing for the 2000 election .
 If Primakov chose to run for president, he would stand aside and support him . Primakov recruited Primakov for his Fatherland-All Russia movement .
 At first, Yeltsin’s allies hoped that Stepashin would be able to defeat Primakov in an election .
 Stepashin was unenthusiastic about attacking Primakov and Luzhkov . There were reports that he rejected schemes for introducing a state of emergency and canceling the presidential elections .
 One of the schemes discussed among insiders, known as “Storm in Moscow, called for acts of terror in Moscow .
 On August 9, Stepashin was dismissed and Putin was named prime minister . Between September 4 and 16, Russia was wracked by the apartment bombings that completely changed the course of politics .
 The shock of the bombings allowed Putin, with the help of state television, to project the image of a tough leader avenging an attack on innocent civilians .
 At noon on December 31, 1999, Yeltsin announced in a televised address that he was resigning three months early .
 In the early afternoon, Vladimir Putin was appointed acting president at a Kremlin ceremony .
 His first act was to issue a decree granting Yeltsin immunity from prosecution . His first acts were to issue the decree granting immunity from prosecuted .
 The decree shielded Yeltsin from searches, arrest, and interrogation and protected his cars, telephone calls, documents, luggage, and correspondence .
 Putin eschewed serious campaigning and avoided even explaining where he stood on the issues facing the country . Putin eschews serious campaigning.
 The Russian people had elected someone about whom they knew nothing except that he was avenging the apartment bombings . The Russians knew nothing about him, but he had been elected to avenging their bombings .
 The rise of a criminal oligarchy and the reliance on violent and illegal methods to create an authoritarian political system inevitably affected the public consciousness . The use of violent methods and violence to create authoritarian political systems will affect the public, says David Cameron .
 A blurring of moral distinctions, a growth of irrationality, and a disregard for the value of human life. They led to a blurred of moral distinction, a growing irrationality and a lack of value of life .
 The blurring of moral distinctions was a natural consequence of a transition process that rewarded criminality, says John Sutter . Sutter says the blurring was a result of the transition process.
 success in Russia was so closely associated with crime that it surprised no one when gangsters became civic leaders . Success in Russia is so closely linked to crime that no one was surprised by it .
 Otari Kvantrishvili began his criminal career in the 1980s, when he organized his own gang to engage in currency speculation, gambling, and extortion of prostitutes working in Moscow's leading hotels .
 Kvantrishvili founded a holding company, Association Twenty-first Century, which then sought to engage in the export of oil, timber, and nonferrous metals .
 Iosif Kobson is a singer with ties to political leaders . He developed these with the help of Ios if Kobson, a singer who has ties to the political leaders.
 He was the unofficial emissary of organized crime to society and society’s representative to the criminal world . He also arbitrated criminal disputes and soon became the unofficial e-s rep representative to society .
 Criminals turned to Kvantrishvili for help with the authorities, and businessmen turned to him for help . He has been helping with the gangs for years .
 Kvantrishvili organized the Yashin Fund for the Social Defense of Sportsmen . To bolster his respectability, he organized a fund for sportsmen .
 He was invited on television to discuss the living conditions of athletes . He became a frequent guest at beauty pageants, sporting events, and celebrity parties .
 At the end of 1993 he decided to enter politics and created his own political party, Sportsmen of Russia . He was a member of the Russian National Football League .
 On April 5, 1994, he was shot by a sniper as he left a bathhouse surrounded by bodyguards .
 The crowd at his funeral consisted equally of members of the political and cultural elite and organized crime leaders . The funeral was held in his honor .
 Among those attending were Luzhkov, Gusinsky, Shamil Tarpishchev, Yeltsin’s tennis coach, and Alexander Rosenbaum, a popular singer .
 Bykov was implicated in the killings of Krasnoyarsk’s criminal leaders and of businessmen who had paid protection money to the recently deceased criminal authorities and did not want to pay him as well .
 In late July and early August 1994, five leading Krasnoyarsk businessmen were killed in ten days . In late June and early July 1994, the five leading business leaders were killed .
 Also killed were assassins sent to kill Bykov and four businessmen whom Bykov mistook for hired killers . Also killed are assassins sent by Bykov.
 Bykov’s gunmen not only mowed down their victims in full public view, they also shot anyone who got in the way .
 Krasnoyarsk Krai Legislative Assembly candidate says he broke the law only to establish order and rid the region of criminals . Bykov acknowledged that he had taken “some illegal chances’s illegal chances, but said he had broken the law .
 Solonik became the boyfriend of one of Russia's most glamorous women, Svetlana Kotova, a former Miss Russia .
 Kotova traveled to Greece on January 25 at his invitation . They met in a Moscow nightclub on New Year’s Eve, 1997, and Kotova went to Greece .
 She was met at the plane with armloads of flowers and taken to Solonik's villa in a chauffeur-driven Mercedes .
 She told her mother by phone that what she was living was not life but a miracle . She said her mother had told her by phone she was a miracle.
 The miracle ended on January 30, when gangsters from the Kurgan criminal organization arrived at the villa .
 While they were talking to Solonik, someone threw a thin cord around his neck and strangled him .
 Members of the group then found Svetlana on the second floor, where they strangled her to eliminate a possible witness .
 People turned to witches, sorcerers, and fortune-tellers. Without the discredited communist ideology to make sense of what was happening around them, people turned to sorcerers .
 Anatoly Kashpirovsky was Russia's most popular public personality in the early 1990s . He treated everything from high blood pressure and hip injuries to emotional distress .
 Crowds writhed and sobbed at his command, thinking they were experiencing the casting out of devils .
 Also popular was Allan Chumak, a former journalist with flowing white hair, who moved his hands across the television screen .
 Wives appealed to witches to help return their husbands or cast the evil eye on their rivals . Wives appeal to witches for help returning their husbands.
 Sometimes a client asked a witch to change the behavior of her partner . Sometimes a witch asked a client to change her partner's behavior .
 The witch used a photograph to make a wax figure of a person whose behavior was to be changed . She inserted a needle into the figure’s sexual parts, and then removed it .
 Businessmen consulted sorcerers before making decisions, to identify enemies, and to select targets for contract killings . Businessmen consult sorcerers to predict the results of upcoming cases, and choose targets for contracts .
 The Russian Orthodox Church itself became a kind of cult, with priests blessing businesses, banks, homes, cars, and even a tank .
 Aum Shinrikyo’s leaders established contact with high Russian officials, including Oleg Lobov, the secretary of the Security Council .
Members of the sect trained at Russian military bases and shopped for advanced weapons . With his help, members trained at military bases.
 At that time, Aum Shinrikyo had eight times more followers in Russia than in Japan .
 In the 1990s, the number of murders reached forty thousand a year, three times as many as in 1990s . In the 90s, murders reached 40,000 a year .
 A Russian was five times as likely to die in a traffic accident, twenty-five times more likely to accidentally poison himself . Compared to an Englishman, a Russian was 5 times as often as likely as a British man .
 One night in October, I left my apartment in the Kolomensky district in Moscow to go for a walk .
Georgians displaced by the war in Abkhazia were cooking khachapuris . The kiosks where the owners sold cigarettes, vodka, and Snickers bars through a small window located well below eye level .
 Russia had never had many automobiles, but now there was traffic on Andropov Prospect and a lot of foreign cars .
 I turned down Sudostroitelnaya Street, walked past rows of concrete panel apartment blocks, and stopped at a metal notice board full of notes .
 It proposed lifetime care for single persons in difficulty in return for legal ownership of their apartment . The proposal was proposed for single people in difficulty to get their apartment back .
 The note did not include the name or address of an organization, only a phone number . The note does not include a name, address or address .
 It included a promise to handle legal formalities and said that many people in the area were already being helped . It said many people are already being help.
With the fall of communism, state apartments could now be privatized and become the property of their occupant .
 This was the first time I was exposed to the apartment racket, but I felt intuitively that anyone who agreed to this arrangement was signing his death warrant . This was a first time he was exposed.
 The bodies of those who agreed were discovered by hundreds, perhaps thousands, in forests and garbage dumps all over Russia .
 Russian citizens during the Yeltsin years experienced the trauma of losing an entire worldview that had given meaning to their lives .
 In response, the government removed all restrictions on the sale of alcohol . The government removed the restrictions on alcohol sales .
 The average Russian's salary in relation to the cost of vodka increased threefold . At a time when the purchasing power of the average Russian was cut in half, his salary was cut .
 The era of cheap vodka and the resulting tranquilization of the population lowered resistance to the pillaging of the country, but at a severe cost to the nation’s health .
 For the first time, Russians had to pay for many medical services, from necessary medicines to lifesaving operations . Many Russians gave up on their own lives after being unable to pay .
 By various estimates, five to six million people died prematurely during the Yeltsin period .
 The change was unaccompanied by an effort to provide a reason for which this change should be undertaken . The change is unaccompanied by the effort to give an explanation for which it should be done .
 He was Russia's overwhelmingly popular head of state at a pivotal moment in the country's history after the fall of the Soviet Union . He could have helped Russia to break once and for all with its totalitarian past .
 He understood communism as an economic phenomenon and assumed that to produce democracy it was necessary only to change economic structures . Unfortunately, he understood Communism as a economic phenomenon .
 communism was always a moral phenomenon whose failings could be addressed only through restoration of the universal values that the communist system denied . In fact, communism, which promoted “class values,’ was always an moral phenomenon .
 Yeltsin assured Russia would be taken over by criminals and that Russian oppression would not end but only enter a new phase .
 The country, exhausted and demoralized, had no sympathy for the departing Yeltsin . The country was exhausted and depressed .
 Putin in the hope that his elections marked the start of something new . But it welcomed Putin's victory in Russia's first election .
 Russians saw in Putin what they wanted him to be, rather than what he was . Russians saw him as a man who they wanted to be .
 He also took power at the moment when the Russian economy started to expand . He also takes power at a moment when Russia's economy is expanding .
 Putin declined to debate in the presidential election campaign . His vow to destroy the terrorists who carried out the apartment bombings resonated with the public .
 At the same time, a public relations campaign on state-run television helped turn him into a popular hero .
 He was shown dressed as a fighter pilot, swimming in a river, shooting a Siberian tiger with a sedation dart, and shooting a polar bear . A suspicious explosion on August 8 in Moscow’s Pushkin Square killed 13 people .
 Putin's intention was to create a system in which the regime exercised total power . Putin’s intention, however, was to creating a system of total power, he said .
 The president did not answer for everything, even under the 1993 Constitution, according to the Constitution .
 Parliament was responsible for making laws, and the courts for the administration of justice . Parliament is responsible for creating laws and making laws .
 Russia is ostensibly a democracy in which the government answers to the people . This too was a departure, because Russia is supposed to be a democracy .
 The promise to be guided only by the interests of the state was implicitly a claim to one-man rule . The promise was implicit a claim of one- man rule .
 Russia was still too weak to contemplate foreign aggression, but they were a claim for the future . These words were little noticed at the time, and Russia was not too weak.
 Putin did not refer in his speech to individual rights, but his attitude on the subject became clear three months later . Putin's stance on individual rights became clear after his speech .
 On August 12, two massive explosions occurred on board the nuclear submarine Kursk during a training exercise . It sank to the bottom of the Barents Sea .
 The entire world was transfixed by the drama of the trapped Russian sailors . The government, unwilling to admit weakness, refused offers of foreign help .
 Putin said only “It sank,” giving an eerie smile . Later, when asked by Larry King on CNN what happened to the Kursk, Putin said "It sank"
 It was an ominous sign of the indifference to suffering that would be a hallmark of the years ahead . But it was an indication of the future of the world's future .
 In the system created under Putin, power was exercised through a bureaucracy that answered only to the country's leader .
 The regime viewed the Russian people with suspicion, rightly regarding their desire for rights as its most dangerous potential threat . Lies and manipulation helped reconcile the population to this state of affairs, but the regime still viewed them with suspicion .
 The criminality of the Yeltsin period engendered a hunger for order, which, in the absence of moral content, led to banditry in the guise of a state .
 The facade of rational government was preserved, but all normal values were displaced . A facade ofrational government was preservation, but the facade was preserved .
 Under optimal conditions, such a structure could rule successfully for a long time . Such a structure can rule successfully under optimal conditions .
 It was based on the proposition that the good luck would never run out . But it was based upon the proposition of good luck .
 The creation and consolidation of the Putin-era system involved installing a vertical chain of command and eliminating alternative centers of power . The creation of a new system of power was the creation of Putin's regime .
 An autocratic system was created almost before the population understood what had taken place .
 Putin filled the highest posts with those who had worked with him in the St. George's House .
 Other posts were filled with veterans of the KGB-FSB and the Interior Ministry . Other posts are filled with former KGB veterans .
 By 2004, the top ministers, half of the Security Council, and 70 percent of the senior regional officials in Russia came from the security services . By 2014, the security service had been in charge of half of Russia's top ministers .
 Many of Russia's leaders grew up in poverty, living in communal apartments with shared kitchens and baths . Like most Soviet citizens, many of Russia’s leaders lived in poverty .
 Putin’s patronage, they acquired wealth beyond the dreams of avarice, and repaid the favor with total conformity . With no reason for success except Putin's patronage, it was not the only reason .
 Boris Gryzlov once said that if Putin told him to jump out of a window, he would do it . The former speaker of the Duma said he would jump out if he was told to .
 Andrei Illarionov was Putin’s economic adviser for his first five years in office . He said in testimony before the United States Congress that the leadership operates on the basis of mutual support and omerta .
 Its members show a high degree of obedience to the current leadership, strong loyalty to each other, rather strict discipline . The group is based in London, England, and is based on a large number of members .
 Russian national income fell by almost half during the 1990s, but sharp rises in world energy prices, coupled with the first benefits of the capitalist economic transformation under Yeltsin, led to an unprecedented economic boom .
 In 2000, Russia’s GDP rose 7. percent and industrial production by 9. percent . Russia's GDP rose by 7.1 percent .
 Russians who inherited their Soviet era apartments suddenly found that they had disposable cash . There was a boom in consumption, and there was a surge in consumption .
 The oil and gas revenue made it possible to organize, equip, and staff government agencies that had been barely functioning, according to a report .
Under Putin, enforcement was organized and taxes began to be collected . Under Putin, taxes were collected .
Other government agencies also began to perform their required functions . Other government agencies are also beginning to perform the required functions.
 The strengthening of state institutions did not lead to greater legality, however, according to the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Instead of stamping out criminality, the government apparatus took it over .
 Anarchy and lack of governance were replaced by meddling and ubiquitous bribe taking . Anarchy was replaced by meddling and ubiquitous bribery taking .
 Between 2001 and 2005, bribes extorted by the authorities increased nearly tenfold, according to the INDEM think tank . The bribes were over $316 billion .
 Russia ranked 79th in the global Corruption Perceptions Index compiled by ‘Transparency International’ In 2001, Russia was in the 79th place on the index .
 Putin acted to eliminate independent centers of power, Putin says . Putin also acted to create a system of top-down control .
 One by one, institutions capable of providing an alternative to unitary power were subordinated, starting with the media, followed by business, and ending with parliament and the courts . One by two, institutions providing alternative to units were subordinate to business and courts .
 The result was a society in which the regime was the only center of power . The regime was drastically limiting the freedom of the population, drastically limiting freedom .
 Everywhere there is the need for political protection and the necessity of being subject to control, says the author . "There is a need forpolitical protection," he says .
 Putin had seen the role of television in sabotaging Primakov’s presidential candidacy . He wanted to make sure that the national television stations in particular were always under his control .
 The first target was NTV, which had angered the FSB with its investigation into the apartment bombings . NTV was the first target of the investigation .
 Media Most, the holding company that owned NTV, was raided by masked men who identified themselves as the tax police .
 Media Most’s chairman, Vladimir Gusinsky, was called to the prosecutor for questioning . Gusinsky was supposedly about the origin of several bullets for a decorative pistol that were confiscated in the May 11 raid .
 He was arrested in connection with the privatization of a St. French-based company .
 Petersburg television company, Russian Video, and taken to the Byutyrsky Prison .
 On July 16, Gusinsky was charged with fraud and released on the condition that he not leave Moscow . Gusinsky has been released from jail on condition he not leaves Moscow .
 He was offered $300 million and forgiveness of a debt of $473 million to Gazprom . Media-Most and NTV, his entire empire, was also offered $400 million .
With Gusinsky's removal, the type of critical reports that had distinguished NTV in the 1990s disappeared . With Gusinsky’s removal, NTV's critical reports have disappeared .
 NTV concentrated on entertainment, including foreign soap operas and such programs as Fear Factor . Instead, NTV rewarded contestants for climbing high buildings, sitting in cells underwater or eating worms or cockroaches .
 The neutralization of NTV was followed by the takeover of ORT . The most important television station was run by Boris Berezovsky .
 ORT had supported Putin during the presidential campaign, but once Putin was elected, Berezovsky began to oppose some of his policies . He was opposed to the creation of presidential envoys.
 The station showed scenes of Putin jet skiing in Sochi and contrasted his behavior with the despair of the doomed sailors’ mothers and widows .
 ORT’s coverage of the Kursk disaster is apparently what led Putin to decide to take the station away from Berezovsky .
 Putin’s chief of staff told Berezovsky to give up ORT in two weeks or share the fate of Gusinsky .
 Berezovsky argued that ORT attacks by ORT actually helped Putin because it showed that he tolerated criticism .
In December, Berezovsky’s friend and collaborator Nikolai Glushkov was arrested . In December, he was arrested by his friend and collaborators .
 Berezovsky told a Moscow radio station that the arrest was blackmail . He said it made no sense for him to struggle further and expose his friends and family to risk .
 That left TV-6 as Russia’s last remaining independent television station . It is Russia's last remainingIndependent TV station .
 Lukoil-Garant, the pension fund of the Russian oil company Lukoil, filed a bankruptcy suit . Lukoil owned 15 percent of the station and was itself minority owned by the state .
 The Supreme Arbitration Court ordered the station liquidated, and on January 14, 2002, the station was pulled off the air . Nonetheless, the court said the station should be liquidated .
 NTV, ORT, and TV-6, national television, the most important information source for 90 percent of the population, came entirely under the regime's control .
 The takeover of television was accompanied by the subjugation of business . The takeover was accompanied with the subjugating of business.
 If under Yeltsin, corrupt businessmen and gangsters had privatized the state, under Putin, they became serfs of the regime . If under the regime, they would become serfs.
 The number of bureaucrats grew by nearly two-thirds, and this army of officials acted in their own predatory interests .
 70 to 90 percent of Russia’s enterprises and banks in major cities were forced to pay criminal gangs 10 to 20 percent of their revenues .
 The only thing that changed under Putin was the identity of those collecting the tribute . The only change was the name of those who collected the tribute.
Businesses generally do not show their real revenues, a fact that is overlooked in exchange for bribes . As a result, businesses generally do NOT show theirreal revenues, according to experts .
 Businessmen pay bribes to get goods through customs, to avoid fines after inspections . Businessmen also pay bribes, to get permits, to acquire permits, and just to be left alone .
 The system involves nearly everyone, which means that almost every citizen is vulnerable to facing criminal charges . Almost every citizen in the U.S. faces criminal charges.
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky is the head of the Yukos oil company and Russia's wealthiest man . He is Russia's richest man .
 Khodorkovsky acquired his holdings through the corrupt privatization schemes, but he proved to be a very effective manager .
19 Khodorkovsky provoked a confrontation because he realized that the best way to increase profits was to break with the Putin system . He imported Western advisers and techniques and doubled the flow rate in his Western Siberian oil fields between 1997 and 2002 .
 He declared his income and introduced Wester standards of accounting and corporate governance . He also introduced new rules for corporate governance and accounting .
 At the same time, Khodorkovsky began to accuse the government of corruption . At the time, the government was accused of corruption.
 Khodorkovsky was arrested on October 25, 2003, and accused of fraud and tax evasion . The authorities’ response was to arrest him in 2003 .
 The charges allege that he avoided taxes by setting up intermediary firms in closed cities that offered tax advantages . The charges also allege he stole shares in a fertilizer plant during privatization .
 Khodorkovsky alone was prosecuted . Similar charges could have been made against every Yeltsin-era oligarch .
 He was sentenced to eight years in a labor camp, and Yukos was dismembered . The pieces of Yukos were sold off cheaply to Putin's cronies .
 Khodorkovsky was charged again with stealing the entire production of Yukos’s subsidiaries . He had already been tried and sentenced for avoiding taxes on the sale of that production .
After Khodorkovsky's arrest, there were no more attempts by Russian oligarchs to confront the Kremlin or finance the political opposition .
 The oligarchs tried to show total loyalty so as not to share Khodorkovsky’s fate . On the contrary, the oligarchs, in their public statements and private gifts, tried to be loyal .
 The authorities made sure that private wealth could be used politically only in the service of the regime .
 The arrest of Khodorkovsky and dismemberment of Yukos set a precedent that local officials were quick to follow . Local officials werequick to follow in the case.
 In a Russian raid, an owner is typically charged with a crime by investigators in the pay of his economic competitors . The owner is often state officials or their close friends and relatives .
 The owner is put in pretrial detention and given a below-market offer for his property . He is then put in Pretrial detention .
 A judge in the pay of raiders can issue an order allowing the raiders to take it over . If this is not enough to persuade him to give up his business, a judge can issue a order allowing them to take over .
An entire industry has grown up dedicated to taking companies away from their original owners . An entire industry is dedicated to removing companies from their owners .
 Sergei Kanyev, a crime reporter for Novaya Gazeta, described the situation of a typical Moscow businessman .
Local police chief treats his "curator" from the FSB to daily dinners in a restaurant . He gives the local police chief an expensive foreign car and treats his “curator’s” from the police chief .
 Once a month, fire and trade inspectors visit his stores and they expect money or presents .
 The businessman makes payments to another pair of spongers, the head of the local branch of United Russia, and a representative from Just Russia, the other main pro-Kremlin party .
 Street extortion, formerly the province of criminal gangs, now carried out by the police .
 The warehouses are controlled by the commanders; shops and small restaurants by the criminal investigation unit . bootleggers and sellers of pirated DVDs by the anti-economic crimes unit .
High-ranking officials were able to enrich themselves by stealing from the state . Private businesses were being bled by bureaucrats at every level .
 Dimitri Medvedev was the first deputy premier of Gazprom . He was made the chairman of the company when he was first Deputy PM .
 Igor Sechin, the deputy head of the Kremlin administration, became the chairman of the Rosneft oil company . Sechin was the chairman.
 Igor Shuvalov, an assistant to the president, was put on the board of Russian Railways . He is a former assistant to Russian president .
 In 2007, the capitalization of Gazprom was $236 billion, Rosneft $94 billion, and Russian Railways $50 billion .
 Access to cash flows of huge state enterprises made it possible for Russian officials to channel business and stolen state resources to offshore companies that they secretly controlled .
 Leonid Reiman, the minister of telecommunications, was found by a Zurich arbitration tribunal in 2007 to have used his position as chairman of the board of the state-run telecommunications holding company to acquire assets valued at $6 billion .
 Evidence suggests that he also pillages the state, on an even grander scale . Evidence suggests he may also pillage the state .
 Gennady Timchenko, the head of the Gunvor oil trading company, is believed to be worth $15. billion . Yuri Kovalchuk, an owner of the Rossiya Bank ; and the Rotenberg brothers, Arkady and Boris, whose combined wealth is estimated at $
 Gazfund, Gazprombank, Russia’s second-most important bank, and Gazprom-media were all removed from state-run Gazprom . The Rossiya Bank was put under the control of the Gazprom Bank .
 Putin is the beneficial owner of 75 percent of Gunvor, 37 percent of Surgutneftegaz, and 4. percent of Gazprom . Belkovsky says senior figures in the president’s own administration as his sources .
 The ownership structure was concealed behind a “non-transparent network of offshore companies’s offshore companies,” with the final points in Zug, Switzerland, and Lichtenstein .
 Belkovsky said that Putin's wealth is no secret among the elites . When asked whether he could prove his claims, he said he could .
With national television and business under the regime’s control, all that remained was to neutralize the parliament and the courts . With national television, business was under control .
 This process, well advanced in the early years of Yeltsin’s rule, reached its final expression under Putin . This process was well-advanced in early years.
 Under Yeltsin, the State Duma was weak but not completely powerless, and there were possibilities for oppositionists to achieve representation .
 The dramatic rise in Russian living standards under Putin was of immense benefit to United Russia, which began actively recruiting new members and opening offices all over the country .
 The shift of power to the government bureaucracy and concentration of decision making in the hands of the president created a situation in which nearly everyone in a Management position felt that he needed the protection of a good relationship with the authorities . United Russia was best guaranteed by donations and activism on
 They now supported the regime's policies while occasionally arguing about their implementation . They now support the regime’s policies while sometimes arguing about them .
 Yabloko and the Union of Right Forces are the only potential opposition voices in the Duma . This left the members of the two liberal parties as the only possible opposition voices .
 Both parties were starved of funds after Khodorkovsky’s arrest, but both parties were still struggling .
 At the same time, a law was passed raising the threshold for representation in the Duma to 7 percent . A party had to poll strongly all over the country to be represented in the party .
 After 2007, neither Yabloko nor SPS was able to surmount this barrier . The failure to gain places in the Duma all but eliminated liberals from the country’s official political life .
 In 2007, People for Democracy and Justice, led by former prime minister Mikhail Kasyanov, was denied registration because of 37 mistakes in a list of 56,000 party members .
 In the 2012 presidential race, each of these parties fielded a candidate .
 Mikhail Prokhorov collected enough signatures to be placed on the ballot and ran with the tacit approval of the authorities . A fifth candidate, Mikhail Prokorov, collected enough votes to be on the ballots .
 Serious criticism of the regime or its policies played no role in the presidential race . The regime and its policies did not play a role in a presidential race.
 The regime tried to produce the highest possible vote totals for its candidates . Medvedev and Putin in the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections were among the candidates .
 Officials, managers, law enforcement officers, and businessmen were all expected to work for United Russia . United Russia is the largest country in Russia .
 In twenty of the eighty-three Russian regions, there was virtually no opposition and election returns were easily falsified . In 20 of the 80-three regions, including the North Caucasus, the South Urals, Tuva, and Kalmykia, there were virtually no local opposition
 State employees were instructed to vote for the regime’s candidates . Workers were frequently forced to vote under the watchful eyes of their bosses .
 In rural areas, people not supporting the authorities could have their water turned off or their houses burned down .
 The electoral results were reinforced by ballot-box stuffing, multiple voting, and the falsification of protocols . The election results were confirmed by ballot box stuffing, and multiple voting .
 Control over the electoral process was complemented by the subjugation of the judiciary . The judiciary had little ability to maintain its independence within an otherwise unitary government .
 In every region, it is the court chairmen who organize the work of the court, including the assignment of cases . The court chairman in every region is responsible for the work.
 Putin's first chairmen began to be appointed by the president in December 2001 . Many chairmen fulfilled their responsibilities in a neutral manner .
 The chairman is in direct contact with the political authorities . He has many ways of controlling the judges in his or her district .
 He or she arranges housing for the judges and sets their vacation schedules . The judge or the judge is a judge or a judge who arranges the housing .
 The chairman collects material that can be used as grounds for a judge’s dismissal . The chairman also collects material for the dismissal of a judge .
 He or she can also influence the qualification commission, a supervisory organ elected by the judges themselves, to make sure that a judge suspected of corruption is or not investigated .
 If a matter between individuals is before the court, it often is decided on its merits . The case is often decided on the merits of individuals .
 Judge Olga Kudeshkina was removed in May 2004 after stating publicly that Yegorova had ordered her to make a decision in the case of the Three Whales and Grand furniture chains . The chains were founded by the father of a high-ranking FSB official and
 Zaitsev is accused of conducting a search without authorization . The case was closed on orders from the prosecutor’s office .
 Zaitsev said that he had to conduct an immediate search in order to prevent the destruction of records . He said he would not have to search for records .
 The case was assigned to Kudeshkina, who was newly arrived in Moscow from Siberia .
 Dmitri Shokhin, the prosecutor in the case, hinted to journalists that a guilty verdict was expected . Kudeshkina told journalists that before the trial started, Dmitri shokhin hinted to her that the guilty verdict would be expected .
 The trial began in May 2003, and after a week, Shokhin began protesting against Kudeshkina’s line of questioning . She accused her of favoring the accused .
 Russian court monitors asked lay jurors to replace her . He turned to lay jurors, members of the public who served in Russian courts as monitors .
 Yegorova phoned Yuri Biryukov, deputy general prosecutor, and discussed the case in Kudeshkina’s presence .
 In written statements, they said that Shokhin’s efforts to put pressure on them were damaging their health . They said that they were "disgusting" in their statements .
 Zaitsev was found guilty and given a two-year suspended sentence. Five months later, another judge found him guilty and gave him a two year suspended sentence .
 Kudeshkina took a leave from the bench to run for the Duma in November . In November, he ran for the club's first team .
 Moscow qualification commission began disciplinary proceedings against her for defaming the judiciary . She withdrew from the race days before the election after receiving threats .
 In May 2004, the commission fired her from her judgeship . It accused her of seeking to denigrate the authority of the judges and undermine the prestige of the judicial profession .
 Russians do not expect and cannot obtain justice in any case where the regime’s interests are involved, including those who exploit their political ties to amass wealth .
 The European Court is overwhelmed with complaints from Russia . The corruption of the judiciary in Russia is the reason the court is overwhelmed.
 In 2013, there were 24,102 complaints to the European Court from Russia . More than from any of the other forty-six countries that make up the Council of Europe .
 Russia has come full circle in recent years. Russia has seen a rise in wealth in recent decades .
 It had once again become a state that deprived its citizens of a voice or the means to defend their rights . It had been a state once again becoming a state of a state.
 The resulting system, however, is not prepared to withstand external political and economic shocks . It is not ready to withstand the shocks of the system .
 It can be protected only through concealment or aggressive militarism if it is to stave off internal conflict and eventual collapse . It can only be protected by concealment and aggressive militaryism .
 The Putin system divided Russian society into two groups, a handful of people who benefit from corruption and the vast majority who cannot . The vast majority of Russian society cannot.
 Such a division invites a violent crisis, as a result of events in Ukraine, this is exactly what Russia got, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's actions in Ukraine have led to a crisis, he says .
 Bureaucrats sucked money out of Russia at a phenomenal rate, but energy prices boomed . There were signs of the new prosperity everywhere .
 Bentley and Maserati dealerships and an Ermenegildo Zegna clothing store opened near the Supreme Court building .
 Many Russians quickly became connoisseurs. Deprived for decades of Western consumer goods, many became con noisseurs .
 Government officials bought apartments for their mistresses, helping to aggravate the housing shortage . There was a boom in private planes and cosmetology .
 The economic boom and a centralized system, however, could not by themselves ensure the regime’s durability .
 The terror served to remind everyone that behind the fagade of a normal society, the regime had the ability to eliminate its enemies . If threatened, if threatened, would not hesitate to do so .
 For many Russians, defeat in the first Chechen war was a symbol of the country’s humiliation under Yeltsin .
 The invasion of Chechnya in September 1999 made it possible to depict Putin as the person who was restoring the nation’s honor and helped him win the presidency .
 To preserve Putin’s image as a successful warrior, it was important that the Chechen resistance be destroyed . It was important to preserve Putin's image, however, to preserve his image .
 The second Chechen war was pursued even more ruthlessly than the first . The second war was followed by the second war in the Russian capital .
 The Russians used ground-to-ground missiles and fuel air “vacuum’s” explosives, which have been compared to low-level tactical nuclear weapons, against populated areas .
 Thousands of Chechen males disappeared in security sweeps . At the same time, thousands of men disappeared.
 The barbarity of Russian tactics prompted international pressure to end the war . Russia's barbarity led to the end of the war in Russia .
 The Dubrovka and Beslan hostage takings changed Russia in ways that were not fully appreciated at the time . Russia's relationship with Russia has been strained by the two governments .
 The KGB-FSB view of the supremacy of the state’s interests and the negligible value of human life was affirmed and legitimized . But the KGB- FSB view was affirmed.
 In each case, a thousand or more hostages were seized by Chechen terrorists .
 In both instances, Russian authorities refused to negotiate and acted instead to kill the terrorists . Hundreds of hostages were killed by Russian authorities .
 In both cases, there was evidence that the government had a role in instigating the original attacks .
 The seizure of the Theater on Dubrovka took place during a performance of Nord-Ost, the most popular musical in Russia .
 Forty heavily armed male and female terrorists entered the theater and moved rapidly down the aisles in the semidarkness .
 The men wore camouflage gear, had Kalashnikov assault rifles slung over their shoulders, and carried grenade launchers . The men were also wearing camouflage gear .
 The terrorists moved large canvas bags into the middle of the stage and began taking out packets of explosives that the women attached to belts around their waists .
 The men laid booby traps and taped explosive devices to the walls of their homes . The men meanwhile laid boob traps and tape explosive devices on the walls .
 The bombs were placed so that if they went off at once, the entire audience would be caught in a hail of shrapnel . The force would cause the building to collapse .
 They warned that if any one of them were killed, they would kill ten hostages in response . They said they would also kill 10 hostages if they were killed .
 relatives told relatives to beg the authorities to negotiate with the terrorists and not to attack the theater . They were told to beg them to negotiate.
Politicians Grigory Yavlinsky, Irina Khakamada, and Ruslan Aushev attempted to negotiate with terrorists . At first the terrorists had trouble formulating their demands .
 If Putin announced an end to the war and pulled troops out of one Chechen region within twenty-four hours, the hostages would go free .
 The Russian response was to offer the terrorists safe passage if they left the building . Under the circumstances, the response resembled a nonoffer .
 The hostages lived in a state of extreme tension, whiplashed between dull apprehension and crippling fear . The hostages were unable to leave their seats except to relieve themselves in the orchestra pit .
 The authorities suddenly agreed to negotiate on the evening of October 25 .
Victor Kazantsev, Putin's envoy in the Southern Federal District, will arrive at the theater at 10 the next morning to begin talks .
 Baraev got up on the stage and said, “Everything is going according to plan.’
Members of the FSB's Alfa and Wympel units equipped with flak jackets, gas masks, and assault weapons entered the building in a two-pronged assault from the front and rear and began executing the terrorists .
 The first group killed a large number of terrorists who had been forced backward onto the stage . The second group killed the first group of terrorists .
 The other group ran up the stairs and along the corridors to the storeroom that had served as the terrorists’ headquarters, killing as they went . The terrorists were killed as they encountered ineffectual resistance .
 Many terrorists, including almost all of the female suicide bombers, were overcome by the gas . Many of the terrorists were killed by gas, including the female bombers .
 The hall was being filled with gas but did not open fire on the hostages or kill them with grenades . They had had time to realize that the hall was full of gas .
 None of the explosives with which they had threatened to blow up the building were detonated . The explosives were not detonated .
 It was later discovered that the bombs were dummies, as were many women's suicide belts .
 More than eight hundred unconscious hostages were slumped in their seats or lying in the aisles . In the theater, they were finding it difficult to breathe .
 In the absence of medical personnel, police and soldiers draped the bodies of hostages over their shoulders or carried them out by the arms and legs .
 Bodies were piled one on top of another outside the theater entrance . No attempt to separate the living from the dead .
 hostages were taken to hospitals in buses, microbuses, and cars . Medical authorities had had days to prepare for the siege, but there was a shortage of ambulances .
 Alexander Karpov, a wellknown songwriter, died after spending seven hours alive in a bus packed with corpses . He was a well known songwriter .
 The gas was not identified for the rescuers, who were forced to spend several hours testing antidotes . They found naloxone, which is used to treat heroin overdoses, was effective .
Hundreds of hostages suffering exposure to an unknown gas suddenly appeared . The confusion continued at the hospitals, where the gas appeared .
 The FSB, apparently aware that the death toll was going to be shocking, initially deliberately understated the fatalities . The death toll is believed to be the first time the FSB has reported a death .
 The first report was that 10 people had died, leading Russians to feel a sense of relief . Russian media reported 10 people died, but the first report said 10 had died .
 In the weeks following the storm, there began to be serious doubts about the regime’s actions . But in the weeks after the incident, there were fears that once again, the entire episode might have been a provocation .
 Preparations for the attack had begun in April 2002, when a terrorist linked to Shamil Basaev bought a house in the village of Chernoe, in the Moscow oblast .
 Neither police nor the FSB reacted to this highly unusual activity . Neither the police nor FSB reaction to the unusual activity.
 The FSB also did not react to warnings from sources in the criminal world that a large group of armed Chechen extremists had gathered in the central and southwest districts of Moscow .
 Mikhail Trepashkin was no longer in the FSB but had stayed in touch with his criminal contacts . He had been in contact with a number of criminal contacts, but had not been arrested .
 Abubakar had been living in Moscow and was running protection for two firms that were providing money to the Chechen rebels . He informed the FSB, among other things.
 Trepashkin learned of Abubakar’s role after the attack . He offered to share information with the FSB . After the attack, he again contacted the agency .
 The security services may have done more than fail to stop the preparations for the attack .
There were signs that the FSB and the terrorists were closely connected . There were signs of a link between the two groups .
 Arman Menkeevy is a retired major in Russian military intelligence and a specialist in the making of explosives . One of the visitors to the house in Chernoe was a retired Major in the military intelligence .
 He reportedly prepared the suicide bombers’ explosives belts and other devices used by the hostage takers . He reportedly also prepared the explosives belts.
 Menkeev did not take part in the actual hostage taking, but his role is hard to understand if the authorities were not facilitating the attack .
 A fourth was supposedly serving a long sentence in a Russian labor camp . The fourth was supposed to have been in a labor camp in Russia .
 The hostage takers identified themselves as Islamists . The authorities blamed the attack on Aslan Maskhadov, Chechnya’s president and the leader of the non-Islamist separatists .
 This suggested that the authorities actually wanted a bloody denouement . This suggests that they actually wanted the authorities to kill someone .
 Maskhadov was Chechnya’s last elected leader . He was probably the only person capable of negotiating a peaceful resolution .
 Maskhadov, who was in hiding in the mountains of Chechnya, condemned the attack and called for a peaceful end to the crisis .
 The Russian media, however, said that the attack was ordered by Maskhadov . The Russian press said that Mask had ordered the attack .
 The tape was made not on the eve of the theater siege but at least two months earlier, at the end of the summer .
 Zakaev was referring to an impending military operation against federal forces . This supported his statement that Maskhadov was referring not to the seizure of hostages but to an upcoming military operation .
 In months after Nord-Ost attack, family members and survivors began to demand answers from authorities .
Authorities would say only that the gas had been a calmative opiate, a derivative of fenatyl delivered in aerosol form . The authorities would only say that it had been an opiate .
 Many survivors were seriously ill, and without knowing the identity of the poison, doctors did not know how to treat them . Many of the survivors were severely ill .
 In April 2003, a lawyer representing some of the former hostages said that approximately forty more had died since October 26, 2002 .
 They had died from long periods of immobility, he said, and from chronic diseases . They had been suffering from long-term immobilities .
 One of the surviving hostages became concemed about the possible ties between the terrorists and the authorities . Vesselin Nedkov noticed a man appeared in the theater wearing a suit instead of camouflage gear .
 A large group of terrorists carrying bombs and grenade launchers could take over a theater in the center of Moscow . The ability of one of the terrorists to enter the building even after it was surrounded by police astonished Nedkov .
I was in Moscow at the time of the Nord-Ost siege, and like nearly everyone in the city, I prayed for the hostages’ safety . I was in the capital when the siege took place .
Journalist went to the scene but could get no closer than the police lines . "I went to a scene but, like other journalists, could getno closer than police lines"
 The authorities facilitated the takeover of the theater, according to the theater's owner . The theater was taken over after the storm .
 All of the terrorists were executed, including many who were shot while unconscious . Many of them were shot in the head while unconscious.
 Russian authorities hoped to learn about the organization of the attack and any plans for future attacks . This made no sense if the Russian authorities wanted to learn from the attack .
 Authorities wanted to make sure that there could be no public trial at which inconvenient details could be revealed . It was logical, however, if the authorities wanted to ensure that there was no trial .
Relatives of victims and survivors who filed suit against Moscow government faced bureaucratic harassment from the authorities .
 A request by human rights groups to the prosecutor to open an investigation into the use of the gas was denied .
 A motion to open a parliamentary inquiry into the siege was voted down by a majority of MPs . A motion was also voted down .
 Sergei Yushchenkov, head of a commission investigating the Nord-Ost attack, was assassinated on April 17, 2003 .
 Russian authorities were under mounting pressure to reach a settlement over Chechnya . Before the seizure of the theater, the Russian authorities had been under pressure.
 The Russian population was growing tired of the war, which had been going on for three years . The war had gone on for 3 years .
 56 percent of respondents favored peace negotiations to end the Chechen conflict . Only 34 percent supported continued military action .
Under a plan proposed by Brzezinski, Chechens would acknowledge Russian territorial integrity . A referendum would be held under which the Chechens could approve the constitutional basis of extensive self-government .
 The regime was given nearly complete freedom to act inside Chechnya as long as it professed loyalty to Moscow . With pressure for a settlement removed, the regime was free to carry out its preferred strategy .
 The security organs were staffed by ethnic Chechens, who were as cruel as their Russian predecessors but more selective .
 The fighting declined after nearly a decade of war split the ranks of the resistance, and the fighting declined .
 Reduced violence in Chechnya, however, came alongside an increase in fighting in neighboring republics, particularly Ingushetiya .
 Murat Zyazikov was elected president of Ingushetiya in a rigged election . He responded to attacks with hundreds of summary executions, which led to a massive influx of young men into the insurgents' ranks .
 On June 21, 2004, Chechen and Ingush militants carried out a large-scale attack on government buildings in Nazran, the Ingush capital .
 The Russians were taken completely by surprise, and scores of police and security personnel were killed .
 The Chechen resistance and the Russian authorities were considering ways to reassert their positions . By the summer of 2004, both the Chechen Resistance and Russian authorities had been considering ways.
 The radical Islamist wing of the resistance knew it would take something spectacular to force the Russians to negotiate over Chechnya . resistance leaders wanted to show that the war was continuing .
 The Russians wanted to deliver a decisive blow to the resistance and confirm the success of their policies . The Russian government wanted to confirm their policies.
 The result was the seizure by Chechen terrorists of a school in Beslan in North Ossetia on September 1, 2004 .
 Music was playing over loudspeakers and many of the children were carrying balloons .
 terrorists in military clothes invaded the schoolyard, firing machine guns in the air .
 Many parents did not spot the terrorists at first and did not realize the significance of the shots . Many parents didn't spot the terrorist at first .
 The gymnasium was twenty-five yards long by ten yards wide . But the firing continued, with the terrorists shouting, ‘Allahu Akbar’ and ‘Get into the school’
 A male hostage approached one of the terrorists and was immediately shot in the head . The hostage was shot by a male hostage who approached the terrorist and was then shot .
 Other male hostages were forced to drag his corpse by the arms through the gym . The crowd suddenly became quiet .
Terrorists hung bombs packed with ball bearings and shards of glass from a wire strung across the gym . The terrorists hung bombs with ball bearing and glass shards from the wire .
 Khuchbarov’s second in command was Vladimir Khodov, a half-Ukrainian, half-Ossetian convert to Islam . He committed rapes in 1998 and 2004 and was involved in a car bombing in Vladikavkaz in March and a
 Alexander Dzasokhov, Aslambek Aslakhanov and Leonid Roshal are among those believed to have worked with the FSB during the Nord-Ost siege . The FSB's president was also an adviser to Putin on North Caucasus .
 The note also contained a cell phone number for contacting the terrorists . It also contains a phone number.
 Second hostage sent out with video of the situation inside the school as well as a second note demanding a halt to the war in Chechnya . Twenty-seven rebels captured after the June raid in Ingushetiya .
 The authorities showed no interest in negotiating. Despite the notes, however, they did not want to negotiate .
 State television reported that the hostages were making no demands . Mamitova insisted to the authorities that more than a thousand were held captive . The lies enraged the terrorists .
 hostages told their lives had already been written off and forbade them to drink water or go to the toilet . They told the hostages that their lives were already written off .
 The men were forced to sit facing the wall with their arms over their heads . They then separated out the younger men and led them to a small room, where they were separated .
 The male terrorists then withdrew, and the female terrorists in the room detonated their bomb belts, causing an enormous explosion, killing most of the men instantly . The men were killed instantly .
 The male terrorists returned after the explosion and forced the survivors to carry the dead and injured to a room on an upper floor . The injured were reportedly beaten to death .
 North Ossetian parliamentary commission says murder of young adult male hostages was a direct response to the authorities' refusal to acknowledge the terrorists’ demands .
 Two deputy directors of the FSB, Vladimir Pronichev and Vladimir Anisimov, arrived from Moscow . They set up a parallel operational headquarters that had little contact with the crisis committee .
 Dzasokhov announced that he was ready to enter the school . He was warned by the operational headquarters that he would be stopped if he tried .
 North Ossetian FSB negotiator Vitaly Zangionov was appointed to talk to the terrorists . But his offers, an escape route, money, and a human shield were irrelevant to terrorists’ demands .
 If authorities had agreed at least to free the twenty-seven imprisoned terrorists, they might have bought lives of many hostages .
 FSB was almost certainly responsible for eliminating one more potential negotiator, Anna Politkovskaya . In the meantime, the FSB also eliminated a potential negotiator.
 Politkovskaya boarded a 9 pm flight for Rostov, hoping to proceed to Beslan by car . After hearing about the hostage taking, PolitkovSkaya boarded the flight .
 She was respected by Chechens for her reporting and had more success in the Nord-Ost crisis than other negotiators . She was also respected for her work in the region .
 After boarding the plane for Rostov, she took a sip of tea and lost consciousness .
 When the plane landed, she was rushed to a hospital and put in intensive care . She was taken into intensive care.
 On the second day of the siege, state-run television announced that it had the exact number of hostages in the school . State-run TV:354 hostages have been taken by the gunman in the siege .
 The terrorists who had access to radio and television and the hostages who were close enough to hear were stunned as reporters repeatedly gave out this absurdly understated estimate .
 It was a hot day and the heat in the gym became unbearable, making it difficult to breathe .
 Many hostages, prevented from drinking, were dehydrated and beginning to slip in and out of consciousness . Many of the hostages were preventing from drinking .
 The terrorists brought in buckets for the hostages to relieve themselves into. The hostages were being held hostage by terrorists .
 At the same time, hostages began to drink their own urine . The hostages were ravaged by thirst .
 Despite worsening humanitarian crisis, the authorities did not speak to the terrorists .
 tanks and armored personnel carriers were brought up to Beslan from Vladikavkaz . Instead, tanks and armoured personnel carriers are brought up. Instead, Tanks and armored Personnel carriers are being brought up in Beslan .
 The only real negotiation was with Ruslan Aushev, the former president of Ingushetiya, on September 2 .
 Aushev called the terrorists on his own initiative, and they agreed to let him enter the school . They agreed to allow him in .
 Colonel told him the terrorists were acting on the orders of Shamil Basaev . He was led inside at 3:30 pm by masked terrorists .
 Aushev was able to secure the release of eleven women and fifteen nursing infants and toddlers .
 If Chechnya were given independence, Basaev wrote, it would not conclude any military or political agreements directed against Russia . It would remain in the ruble zone, he wrote .
 Russian officials gave interviews in which they said they had no intention of storming the school . Several times on September 2, Russian officials said they did not intend to storm the school.
 Putin said the chief task was saving the lives of the hostages . He said everything would be subordinated to that goal .
 The sight of armed men seizing the school created panic among residents . Residents thought the building was being taken over by terrorists .
 The terrorists were Special Forces, according to local police .
 The hostages' relatives became convinced that the authorities fully intended to storm the school . They were convinced that, regardless of their public statements, they would be stormed .
Parents of hostages gathered in front of the school and formed a human chain to prevent an attack . From September 1 on, parents of the hostages gathered.
 Aushev was arranging to enter the school, he and Dzasokhov were also on the phone to Zakaev in London . They asked him to contact Maskhadov .
 Zakaev called the Chechen Service of Radio Liberty and told them of his talks with Aushev and Dzasokhov . But Zakaeva called the service of radio Liberty and said he was in talks with the two Chechen leaders .
 Radio Liberty broadcast the news and, at his secret headquarters in the mountains, Maskhadov heard the broadcast and immediately called Zakaev . The news was broadcast by Radio Liberty at the secret headquarters of the mountains .
 Zakaev said he was ready to come to Beslan without preconditions if he was given safe passage . Maskhadov said he is ready to go to the city.
 During the second night of the siege, the hostages were becoming increasingly desperate and depressed . The hostages were also becoming increasingly depressed and desperate .
 Others, particularly among the youngest children, were suffering from paralysis and were in danger of losing consciousness . Others, especially among the younger children, had paralysis .
 On the moming of September 3, Aushev and Dzasokhov called Zakaev, who told them of Maskhadov’s reaction .
 Dzasokhov emerged from his headquarters and went to a nearby club where many of his relatives were waiting for him . He went to the club where he was waiting for his relatives .
 Dzasokhov had spoken to Maskhadov, they had left their posts in front of the school, where they were prepared to use their bodies to prevent Russian forces from storming the school .
 Dzasokhov said the situation was grim but that Maskhadov’s intervention gave cause for hope .
 steps are being taken to assure Maskhadov’s safe arrival in Beslan, he said . He said steps were being taken.
 The first explosion was the result of a thermobaric grenade that was shot by either a flamethrower or a grenade launcher from a five-story building at 37 School Lane at 1:03 pm .
 The explosions were the signal to begin a storm of the school by Russian Special Forces . State television attributed the explosions to terrorists .
 Others were taken by the terrorists to the cafeteria, assembly hall, and southern wing .
 Hundreds trapped in gymnasium where ceiling rafters were burning and beginning to fall on them .
 At 1:30, Russian forces began to bombard the school with tanks, grenade launchers, and flamethrowers . The school was attacked by Russian forces with tanks and grenades .
 In the cafeteria, the terrorists placed women and children in the window openings . Russian forces fired at the windows, killing them .
 hostage accounts say hostage accounts. They then began sweeping the cafeteria area with automatic-weapons fire . They then, according to hostage accounts, began sweeping with automatic weapons fire .
 Three mushroom-like clouds rose over the school, two white and one black . Two white and a black cloud appeared over the building .
 A videotape showed that at 3:08 pm, the school was still under massive fire from grenade launchers and flamethrowers .
 General Alexander Tikhonov gave an order to begin putting out the fire at 3:10 pm .
 Tikhonov had forbidden anyone from extinguishing it for more than two hours . Until that time, he had banned anyone from doing so .
 Ten soldiers from the Russian Special Forces were killed by the terrorists . Two rescuers were also killed, as were two rescuers .
 He went directly to the district hospital and spent thirty minutes visiting victims in their rooms . He spent 30 minutes in the rooms of victims .
 He met with officials and made a televised statement . He then went to the FSB operational headquarters, where he made a statement .
 He then returned to Moscow without meeting with relatives of victims or visiting the burned school . He then went back to Moscow, without meeting relatives of the victims .
 One was the abolition of the popular election of governors, a direct violation of the Russian Constitution .
 The Beslan school crisis riveted the world’s attention. While it was going on, the Beslan crisis rivets the world's attention .
 The debris from the school was scooped up by an excavator, loaded onto trucks, and taken to a garbage dump outside of town .
 This destruction of evidence made it impossible to establish fully the sequence of events . The evidence was destroyed by the loss of evidence .
 Russian authorities blamed the terrorists, exonerated officials of any wrongdoing . They refused to listen to the survivors’ accounts of what they had seen and experienced . The survivors wanted justice, and they were plunged into emotional turmoil .
 In their despair, some parents turned to a cult leader to help resurrect their children .
 Marina Litvinovich, editor of the site Pravdabeslana.ru, and Elena Milashina, a reporter for Novaya Gazeta, were joined by two journalists .
 The North Ossetian parliament organized an investigative commission . Yuri Saveliev, a member of the commission, also began his own investigation .
 The Beslan terrorist attack was also the result of a Russian provocation, according to the evidence . The evidence suggests the terrorists enjoyed the support of the West .
 In August 2004, warnings to authorities about an impending terrorist attack in North Ossetia began arriving with chilling regularity . Police documents obtained by Novaya Gazeta.
 The Chechen police said there were plans by terrorists to seize a school in Beslan . The Russian internal affairs ministry was informed by the police that a man named Arsamikov was under arrest .
 All roadblocks on the route to the school were mysteriously removed, giving terrorists unhindered access .
 Khodov lived openly in Elkhotovo through the spring and summer, praying daily in the local mosque . He was the subject of a federal search after his participation in the two terrorist attacks in 2004 .
 His presence was reported to the North Ossetia FSB and the police organized crime division, but he was not arrested .
 Shamil Basaev is the author of the Beslan tragedy . He says the tragedy was caused by the death of a family member .
 Chechen rebels tried to seize the North Ossetian Parliament and government buildings . The school was seized by Russian security services .
 The terrorist acts Khodov committed in 2004 were carried out with the help of the FSB to win Basaev’s trust .
Khodov proposed a plan for seizing the North Ossetian government buildings . Once he had done so, Khodov planned to seize the government buildings.
 Basaev persuaded him to become a double agent after he confessed to him that he was working for the FSB . But after he admitted he was in charge, he became an agent for the club .
 Russians believe the plot was operational and scheduled for September 6, Chechen independence anniversary . In that capacity, he led the Russians to believe it was operational .
 The FSB, Basaev wrote, “intended to meet the group as they entered Vladikavkaz and destroy them. The group’s goal was to destroy them, they wrote .
 The Maskhadov-led non-Islamic opposition conducted its own investigation and concluded that Basaev’s explanation was accurate . Also concluded that the Mask had been wrong .
 The foiled takeover of government buildings in North Ossetia was meant to justify the abolition of the direct election of governors . The measure had long been planned in order to reinforce Putin's hold on power .
 There was no greater outrage over the authorities’ role in the Beslan crisis than in Beslan itself . There wasno greater outrage.
 Relatives of the victims organized themselves into a group called “Mothers of Beslan’s’ to investigate why the authorities had attacked a gymnasium packed with helpless hostages . Agreement had been reached on negotiations that might have ended the crisis without further loss
 The authorities insisted that it was necessary for the Special Forces to storm the building after the terrorists set off bombs .
 survivors of the siege said there was no explosion inside the school . But survivors said the storming began after the school was attacked with flamethrowers and grenade launchers from the outside .
 relatives recovered used tubes from flamethrowers near the school and presented them to reporters . Officials denied that the Russian forces used flameters, the relatives said .
 In May 2005, relatives of victims wrote to Putin, saying they had detailed information about the crisis . They were ready to come to Moscow, on foot if necessary, to present it to Putin .
 Putin proposed a meeting with relatives on September 2, in the middle of the ceremonies marking the tragedy . In response, Putin proposed meeting with the relatives .
 Three mothers left ceremonies and went to Moscow, where they met with Putin for three hours . In the end, three mothers left the ceremonies and returned to Moscow .
 He said the meeting had been delayed to allow time to gather information .
 The investigation, whose results were announced in December, absolved the police and other security forces of any blame for the tragedy .
 The seizure of the school by Chechen Islamist rebels firmly identified all Chechens with terrorists . The seizure is the first time the school has been taken over by Islamist rebels .
Hundreds of hostages had become prisoners as a direct result of the authorities’ incompetence and adventurism . The bloody denouement of the crisis was also the responsibility of the Russian authorities .
 The Russians blamed Maskhadov for the school seizure and announced that there was a bounty on his head .
 Maskhadov was killed in a shoot-out in the Chechen town of TolstoyYurt in March 2005 .
 Russian law says bodies of "terrorists" are not returned to their families . In keeping with a Russian law, the bodies of “terrorists’s” are not given back to their family .
 The victims' relatives in Beslan, Russia, are among the few people who are interested in what actually had happened . It's unclear what happened to the victims.
 The Nord-Ost and Beslan hostage takings were immensely helpful to Putin’s efforts to depict himself as a foe of terrorism and to legitimize the war in Chechnya to Russia and the West .
 Kadyrov ruled with the help of torture and disappearances, but Chechnya had faded from the world’s consciousness .
 The notion that Putin was restoring order there became widely accepted . The notion of Putin's restoration of order was widely accepted.
 Russians could speak freely, and there was wide discussion in the independent press . Russians could talk freely, according to the Russian media .
The average citizen did not fear death at the hands of the authorities for political reasons . The average citizen was not afraid of death for political purposes .
 selective killings made it clear that opposition in Russia was tolerated only within certain limits . But selective killings make it clear opposition was tolerated in Russia only within limited limits .
If someone crossed an invisible line, which was subject to change, he did so at the risk of his life . If someone crossed a line, it would be the first person to do so at a risk .
 Two types of people who were vulnerable to assassination were the regime’s opponents and its inconvenient friends . The regime's opponents were its enemies and its friends .
 When the victims were friends who had become a problem, the reasons were often more difficult to surmise .
 Alexander Litvinenko was a fugitive FSB agent who wrote books about the apartment bombings and the FSB’s links to organized crime .
 Litvinenko also contributed articles to Chechen rebel sites . He ridiculed the FSB and Putin personally .
 The world's first clear case of nuclear poisoning, November 23, 2006, was the world’s first case . There were diverse theories about the motive .
 It is more likely that the problem was not what he wrote but who he was . It is likely that he wrote what he was, but who was .
 Litvinenko, by his example, showed that even FSB agents could think and act on themselves .
 In an FSB-dominated regime, this was a challenge that could not be ignored, says the writer . "In an F SB-dominated regimes, this is a challenge," he says .
 Litvinenko became ill on November 1 after drinking tea with Andrei Lugovoi in London . He became ill in the Pine Bar of the Millennium Hotel in London, London .
 His hair began falling out, and there was a sharp drop in his white blood cell count . His hair started falling out and his blood cells dropped .
 Litvinenko’s doctors suspected radiation poisoning, but only gamma and beta particles can penetrate the skin . There was no gamma or beta radiation in his blood, according to doctors .
 A photographer slipped into the ward and took a picture of him, wasted and bald, staring at the camera . On November 20, he was moved to intensive care .
 Alexander Goldfarb read a statement from Litvinenko in which he accused Putin of his murder . The statement was read by Litvinko's friend Alexander GoldFarb .
 Litvinenko died without knowing exactly what killed him, but samples of his urine were sent to the Atomic Weapons Establishment .
 gamma and beta particles cannot pass through the body but are deadly when taken internally . There it was tested for alpha-emitting elements, which unlike gamma andbeta particles can be deadly .
 If Litvinenko had died sooner, the cause of death might never have been detected . The cause of his death may never be detected .
 British police began an exhaustive effort to trace Litvinenko’s movements after the discovery of polonium .
 Traces of polonium were found at the Pine Bar, at a sushi restaurant where Litvinenko dined with Lugovoi and Kovtun on October 16 . On a British Airways flight from Moscow to London on October 25, on the seat occupied by Lug
 Sergei Ivanov, a deputy prime minister, said Litvinenko had a “low intellect’s” and was inclined to provocation .
 Kremlin asked to question a hundred people in London, including Boris Berezovsky . In response, the Kremlin said it was conducting its own investigation .
 Six months after Litvinenko's death, the British prosecutor officially requested Lugovoi’s extradition . The British prosecutor has requested the extradition .
 Putin refused, saying the Russian Constitution barred sending citizens abroad for trial . Russia had signed the Council of Europe Extradition Convention in 2001 .
 The British should present their evidence to Moscow prosecutors and allow the Russian judicial system to decide the case, he said .
 On October 7, 2006, she was shot four times in her apartment building after stepping out of the elevator on her floor .
 He said the killers were Chechen criminals but that the crime had been masterminded by people outside Russia to discredit the Russian leaders . He said they were masterminded to discredit Russian leaders.
 A fourth person, Pavel Ryaguzov, a former FSB lieutenant colonel, was suspected of a leading role in the plot . He was not charged due to a lack of evidence .
 A third brother, Rustam Makhmudov, escaped abroad . The suspected triggerman is believed to have fled abroad .
 The trial lasted for three months and ended February 19, 2009 . All three defendants were acquitted of all three defendants .
 It had leaked information about the identity of the suspects, making it possible for the triggerman to flee . It prevented investigators from seizing Ryaguzov’s office computer .
 According to Novaya Gazeta, it had started following Politkovskaya in the summer of 2006 . It refused to say what was found .
 There was evidence that besides the defendants, a shadowy “second team’s’ had also placed Politkovskaya under surveillance .
 On the afternoon of her death, she was shopping at the Ramstor supermarket on Moscow’s Frunze embankment .
 A hidden video camera captured a man in jeans and a sweater and a woman in black following her down the aisle .
 Investigators failed to identify the couple or explain how they fit into the murder .
 The ties between the assassination team, the FSB and the police were also found to be far more extensive than was first revealed .
 Sergei Sokolov, deputy editor of Novaya Gazeta, testified that Dzhabrail Makhmudov was an FSB agent . He and his brothers were recruited by their uncle, Lomi-Ali Gaitukayev, who reported to Ryaguzov and
 A new trial was not immediately scheduled, but Novaya Gazeta found evidence that Dmitri Pavlyuchenkov had been hired by Gaitukayev to place Politkovskaya under surveillance . The head of surveillance of Moscow police and a witness in the first
 He had given the assassins her address and the weapons and bullets they used to kill her . He had also given them the address and weapons they used in the killing .
 He never testified about the supposed mastermind or who paid for the crime . But he didn't testify about the alleged mastermind.
 Pavlyuchenkov’s deal with the prosecution made it possible to cover the trail leading to the mastermind . Pavlyukhenkov's deal with prosecution makes it possible for him to cover his trail .
 There is no evidence to support the official story that Berezovsky was behind the crime .
 Gaitukayev, who recruited the gang, and his nephew Rustam Makhmudov, the gunman, received life in prison . The gunman's nephew, Rustam, was sentenced to life in jail .
 Ibrahim and Dzhabrail Makhmudov were sentenced to 12 and 14 years for following Politkovskaya the day she was killed .
 Besides Litvinenko and Politkovskaya, other prominent political opponents of Putin were also killed .
 Sergei Yushenkov investigated the apartment bombings and was ready to investigate the Nord-Ost hostage siege . He was also a cochairman of Liberal Russia, a new political party that appeared to have a chance to become the main democratic opposition party to Putin .
 He was shot in front of his apartment building on April 17, 2003, just hours after obtaining the registrations needed for the party to participate in that December’s State Duma elections .
 Mikhail Kodanev, the other leader of Liberal Russia, was tried and sentenced to 20 years in prison for ordering Yushenkov’s murder .
 Alexander Vinnik was convicted solely on the basis of the testimony of another convicted suspect . He protested his innocence and was convicted of a series of contradictory claims .
 The tape was never included in the case filed against Kodanev . The police collected the tape, but it was not included in a case filed by the court .
 Novaya Gazeta also investigated the case of the Grand and Three Whales furniture stores . The furniture stores were founded by the father of a high-ranking FSB official .
 The illness progressed catastrophically, from peeling skin to “edemas of the respiratory system and brain,’ and finally death . The illness was so bad that it killed the patient .
 His relatives were denied an official medical report about the cause of his illness . They were forbidden to take tissue specimens .
 Journalists for Novaya Gazeta managed to obtain a tissue sample and send it abroad for testing . But the sample was too small and the results were inconclusive .
Natalia Estemirova was virtually the sole surviving source of information on torture and murders carried out by the security services under Kadyrov in Chechnya . Another victim was Natalia E stemirova, who worked’ with Politkovskaya .
 She was abducted on the street in Grozny on July 15, 2009 . She was driven to a wooded area in Ingushetiya and shot and shot .
 In one of her last meetings with Kadyrov, he virtually foretold her death . He virtually foretells her death.
 Estemirova criticized the policy of compelling young girls in Chechnya to wear head scarves . Kadyrov replied, “I’m up to my elbows in blood.’s up to his elbows inBlood.”
 Klebnikov wrote a critical biography of Berezovsky using information supplied by FSB general Alexander Korzhakov .
 At the time of his death, he was believed to be investigating the distribution of property in Moscow by the family of Luzhkov and the redivision of property.
 Russian authorities charged a group of Chechens with the crime . The trial took place in 2006 in a Moscow court .
 The prosecutor said the killing was ordered by Khozh-Akhmed Nukhaev, a high-ranking Chechen official . He did not like the way he was portrayed in a book by Klebnikov .
 Sergei Sokolov investigated the Politkovskaya murder . As the case progressed, he added an unexpected twist .
 Dukuzov and Vakhayev were acquitted, but the Russian Supreme Court overturned the verdict and ordered a new trial . The Russian Supreme court ordered the new trial of the pair .
 Petersburg, Anatoly Sobchak, and Putin’s reputed liaison with organized crime, Roman Tsepov, are all known to have been involved .
 Sobchak was the best-known Putin colleague to die under mysterious circumstances . He was known for his work with Putin .
 Putin had been Sobchak’s deputy, and was familiar with the extent of his corruption in the early years of Yeltsin's rule .
 On February 17, he traveled with two male assistants to the Kaliningrad oblast to campaign .
 On February 19, after drinking moderately at a reception, he retumed to his hotel room and died . He had died on February 19 .
 In the wake of this finding, a second autopsy was carried out in a military hospital in St. Louis . A second autopsy is carried out this time in the military hospital .
 Arkady Vaksberg, an investigative journalist who knew Sobchak, met with him during the latter's two-year exile in Paris, began his own investigation . He learned that the two assistants who accompanied SobChak had been treated for mild poisoning following Sobchack's death
 Vaksberg concluded Sobchak had also been poisoned . He concluded from the apparent poisoning of the bodyguards.
 A poison placed on the bulb of his bedside lamp vaporized after the lamp was turned on . Sobchak suggested that a poison was put on the lamp's bulb and killed him .
 Such poisons were developed in special laboratories in the Soviet Union in the 1930s . Such poisons had been developed in the USSR .
 A few months after Vaksberg’s book was published, his car was blown up in Moscow . The car blew up in the city a few months later .
 Tsepov regulated relations between the mayor’s office and the St. Petersburg mayor's office . The city's mayor and the mayor's offices regulated relations.
 He fell ill on September 11, 2004, after drinking tea in the headquarters of the St. Louis-based St. Paul's office .
 He first experienced severe vomiting and diarrhea and a sharp drop in his white blood cell count . Then began to lose the skin from his tongue and lips .
 When he died, his body had a level of radiation a million times higher than normal . He died on September 24 .
 Only close friends and relatives went to the cemetery, Barsukov-Kumarin among them . Only close friend and relatives were there .
 Many Russians saw it as a minor compromise more than compensated for by the improvement in their material circumstances . It demanded participation in or tolerance for corruption, but this was seen by many Russians as a small compromise .
 Dmitri Medvedev, Putin’s longtime protégé, was elected president in 2008 . He was Putin's longtime protéegé .
 Putin ostensibly respected the Constitution, which limited the president to two consecutive terms in office . In this way, Putin ostensiblyrespected the Constitution .
 Medvedev immediately made Putin his prime minister, and power in Russia never really changed hands . Medvedeva immediately became Putin's prime minister .
 Putin loyalists occupied 95 percent of the positions in Medvedev’s government . Putin continued to be the real source of power, according to the Kremlin .
 Mikhail Delyagin, the director of the Institute of Globalization, said Medvedev “is not capable of running anything, even his own secretariat.’
 Medvedev: "It is wrong for us to orient ourselves only to calm and measured growth" He said it was wrong for him to orient himself to calm himself only to grow .
 His statements were intended to sound presidential, but their only effect was to give false encouragement to liberals who hoped for a positive evolution .
 The longer the regime held on to power, the more corrupt it became, it became and the more contemptuous it became . The longer it held power, it put it increasingly at odds with the population .
In 2008, the growth rate declined sharply as a result of the world economic crisis . In 2008, growth rate dropped sharply as the world economy suffered .
 Lev Gudkov: A poor society was ready to turn a blind eye to administrative caprice and the war in Chechnya . The Levada Center director of the Levada center says the country was tired of upheavals .
 Suddenly there were doubts about the future and a loss of faith in the authorities’ ability to lead .
 The process that led to the political awakening of the population began not with the economic situation, but when Russians realized that Putin intended to remain in power for life, it began .
 Putin started to give unmistakable signs that he intended to take back the presidency in 2011 . In 2011, Putin began to give signs he wanted to take over the presidency .
 Vladislav Surkov confessed in July 2011 that he believed Putin was sent to Russia by God . Surkov is the first deputy head of the presidential administration .
 The realization that Putin was returning to power had a demoralizing effect on Russia's urban middle class . An estimated 40 percent of the population in Moscow and 20 to 30 percent in the other major cities .
 The future under Putin promised little besides professional futility and national stagnation . For most, the future promised little else. For most.
 On December 4, elections were held to the State Duma, and United Russia got a majority . There were clear indications that the elections were falsified, but the majority was in favor .
Photos show ballot-box stuffing and multiple voting in the headquarters of vote monitors from all over the country . The photos were taken in an age of cell phones, photos show .
 Voters in closed institutions such as the military, asylums, and prisons were the easiest to coerce . United Russia gave United Russia overwhelming support .
 The vote counts were sent from the polling stations to the Central Election Commission . The results for United Russia were sometimes inflated two to three times .
 An analysis showed that the vote for United Russia tracked in almost linear fashion with the turnout . The vote was in favor of the party, according to the analysis .
 The results for United Russia also spiked at round values. The results suggest that local officials were trying to reach preestablished targets .
 Opposition rallies during the 2000s had generally attracted only a few hundred people . The clear vote fraud in 2012 drew 10,000 to a spontaneous rally on December 5 in central Moscow .
 On December 24, a rally on Prospect Sakharova brought out more than 100,000, protesting in subzero cold .
 The appearance of mass protests in a previously quiescent country did not pass unnoticed in the Kremlin .
 Putin regime had built a system of bureaucratic control that, as long as the ruling group remained united, could not be challenged by mass protests .
 Lilia Shevtsova, one of Russia’s most astute analysts, wrote that the new social activism led to panic among the leadership . The leadership feared that the loss of political control meant a loss of freedom or even life .
 Leading businessmen and bureaucrats began seeking safe havens, laundering their money, and shipping their assets abroad .
 The flight of wealth in the wake of the 2011 protests was three to four times as great. This had happened in 2008, when there was uncertainty over whether Putin would run for a third term .
 Medvedev announced a number of reforms that were intended to defuse the protests . The president is expected to win the March 4 presidential election .
 The reintroduction of the direct election of governors and an easing of the requirements for the registration of political parties . These included the reintroduction. of direct elections of governors .
 The election of governors, however, was counteracted by the government’s control over nominations . The liberalized registration was neutralized by a ban on coalitions .
 The audience consisted of many state employees, who were paid bonuses to attend . migrant workers were bused in from the provinces to swell the crowd .
 The presidential election, on March 4, 2012, was marred by the same falsification as the previous December’s parliamentary elections .
 Other experts estimated Putin’s share at 45 to 50 percent, including all the state employees paid or compelled to vote for him . Putin's share is 45-50 percent, according to experts .
 In an open contest, the votes would have gone to a liberal, anti-Putin candidate . Prokhorov would have been a liberal candidate .
 Putin gave a tearful speech in Manezh Square, next to the Kremlin, on March 4 . He thanked his supporters for their support .
 A demonstration in Bolotnaya Square took place on May 6 to protest Putin’s inauguration .
 Between 50,000 and 100,000 people marched through the streets . But as they approached the Square, they were met by heavily armed police . They allowed only a very narrow corridor to enter .
 Demonstrators were pushed up against the police line by the pressure from behind .
Demonstrations continued for the rest of the year. Despite this and other measures, demonstrations continued to continue .
 Navalny ran for mayor of Moscow in September . In September, he gained almost 30 percent of the vote .
 The opposition had lost energy, not least because its various factions lost energy . Putin's support among the population was still strong, but his support in Russia is still strong .
 By 2013 the protest wave had largely dissipated, just as much more massive opposition was building against a regime that closely resembled Putin’s in neighboring Ukraine .
 Privatization in Ukraine was dishonest everywhere, but in the Donetsk oblast, it was carried out at the point of a gun .
 Yanukovych owed his political career to Rinat Akhmetov, the country’s richest oligarch . Akhat Bragin was an enforcer for Akhat, a leading Ukrainian gangster, who started out as a gangster .
 Many Ukrainian deputies went into politics in the first place . Since protecting their financial interests was the reason many Ukrainian deputies go into politics .
 Once Yanukovych had secured a parliamentary majority, he used it to remake the Constitutional Court . He fired six of the eighteen judges .
 The Constitutional Court then stripped the Supreme Court of its ability to review appeals . The Supreme Court was then stripped of the ability toreview appeals .
 At the same time, the judicial congress, which regulates the judiciary, shifted power to the judges of the administrative and economic courts, which were the most corrupt .
 Businessmen were offered below-market prices for their businesses . If they did not accept, criminal cases were opened against them in court .
 Those who tried to resist the seizure often learned they were ex-owners of their enterprises . They were handed a court decision in a case of which they had no previous knowledge .
 Raiding at the highest level led to raiding at the local level, creating a pervasive atmosphere of lawlessness . Raids at the high level led for the first time to raid at the lowest level, according to a report .
 Yanukovych was responsible for Ukraine's new gangland atmosphere . But unlike Russia, there was a widespread belief that Putin is fighting corruption instead of directing it .
 Yanukovych consolidated power in his hands, Ukrainians also witnessed the rise of his son, Oleksandr, a forty-year-old dentist who became a multibillionaire .
 Yanukovych used his son as a counterweight to Akhmetov and another powerful oligarch, Dmytro Firtash . Yanukovych's son was also used as acounterweight to the Russian leader .
 The open promotion of Oleksandr inspired a visceral reaction against the government . But the open promotion was not enough for the government's reaction .
 The seizure of property by the Yanukovych family and the appointment of loyal but incompetent managers to run it had a visibly damaging effect on the Ukrainian economy . The economy had been hit by the world economic crisis and never really recovered .
 The system that allowed Yanukovych and his cronies to engage in massive theft also led to the degradation of the Ukrainian police and prosecutors . Ukrainians felt vulnerable to arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, according to the report .
 Anger over this situation came to a head in the town of Vradievka, in the Nikolaev oblast .
 Irina Krashkova, a divorced bookkeeper, was abducted by two police officers and a cab driver . She was gang-raped and beaten with a metal rod, and left for dead .
 After the attack, her assailants went to get a shovel to bury her, but while they were gone she managed to crawl to safety . The attackers were gone, but she crawled to safety.
 Yevgeny Dryzhak, a police captain, Dmitri Polishchuk, a senior lieutenant, and the driver, Sergei Rabenenko . The driver is a police officer .
 Dryzhak, whose relatives were high-ranking local officials, was not charged . Head of Vradievka police and five fellow officers provided him with an alibi .
 As news of what had happened to Krashkova spread, people started to gather in the city center .
 In the previous three years, the police in Vradievka had raped and killed five women . They tortured men to force them to confess to the crimes .
 Three of the men had hanged themselves, and one died at home from the torture . The men had been tortured by a group of men who tortured them .
 Thousands stormed the police headquarters and were dispersed with tear gas . Soon there were a thousand people in the square .
 The riot in Vradievka inspired protests against the police in cities all over the country .
 Dozens of residents of Vradievka left for Kiev on foot to demand the punishment of those guilty of rapes and murders . Interior minister Vitaly Zacharchenko, the interior minister, resigned on July 7 .
 The protestors went to the Maidan Nezalezhnosti where they set up a tent camp that was broken up by the police .
 On July 27 there was another protest in the Maidan against police terror, and ten people were arrested . On July 26 there was a protest in Maidan.
 The protests eventually came to an end, but not before the entire country was aware of what had happened in Vradievka . In the eyes of many Ukrainians, what could happen to them.
 Despite anger over Yanukovych’s conduct, there was a belief that he could not be challenged because he had successfully centralized power in his own hands .
 A series of chance events, however, turned simmering discontent into a revolution . The revolution was sparked by a series of chances events .
In November, plans to sign an association agreement with the European Union were unexpectedly dropped . In November, however, plans for the EU to sign the agreement were dropped .
 This created the impression that the path to Europe was permanently closed. This created a false impression of a closed path to the continent .
 At 4 AM, they were attacked without warning by Berkut riot police and savagely beaten . At 4am, the riot police attacked them without warning .
 Many fled to the nearby Mikhailovsky Zlattoverkhy Cathedral, the same monastery where, centuries ago, Kievans had hidden from the Mongols .
 The mass beating of the students was unprecedented in post-Soviet Ukraine . The mass beatings of students were unprecedented.
 Three opposition parties announced that they were forming a Committee of National Resistance . In response, three opposition parties said they would form a committee .
 Half a million people gathered in the Maidan in support of Ukraine in Europe and to protest the actions of the Berkut .
 radicals who may have been provocateurs attacked Berkut forces guarding the presidential administration .
 At least 40 journalists were injured in the “counterattack,’s ‘counterattack’ Hundreds of protestors and dozens of protestors were injured .
 Activists from the Svoboda and Batkivshchyna parties broke down the doors of the trade unions building on the Maidan and claimed it as the protest headquarters .
 The demonstrators started building barricades and putting up tents in the square . The demonstrators have been protesting against the use of violence .
 As many as a thousand demonstrators a night began sleeping in the columned hall . They also took over a city administration building just off the Maidan .
 A stage was set up in the square for speeches and performances . Crowd scenes were flashed on a huge screen on the trade unions building wall .
 Medical, security, and food services began operating, with the help of hundreds of volunteers . Hundreds of volunteers were involved in the operation .
 When I arrived in Kiev on December 4, the fifth day of the protest, I asked the cab driver who picked me up at the station what was going on .
People in the square gave their reasons for the uprising against Yanukovych . They were waiting for the processing of their visa .
Pyotr, a teacher from Kiev, said of Yanukovych, “This is a zek, a bandit who came to power. Pyotr. ‘This is the zek. This is aZek .’
 A pensioner from Kiev said, “We hate this power because it is based on complete thievery.’
 Alexander Reshetnyak, a welder from Lugansk, said, “I live in a village where there is no gas, no water, no medicines in the clinic, no heat.
 Many people in the square emphasized that if the movement was repressed and people were killed, the whole country would rise up and there would be civil war . Many people emphasized that the movement would be repressed .
There were always thousands of protestors in the Maidan, but their numbers rose and fell . There were always hundreds of protestors.
 The UNA-UNSO flag eventually all but disappeared amid suspicion that the members of this organization were provocateurs . The flag was eventually removed.
 The protestors demanded that the government resign and that Ukraine sign the association agreement with the European Union .
 At first, Yanukovych demanded that he step down, but this was only because they did not see a reasonable way of removing him . They did not, at first, demand that Yanukovych step down .
 With the first snow, the encampment in the Maidan took on an air of permanence . The Maidan is the capital of the city.
 The barricades were reinforced with heavy pipes and wooden platforms . The entrances were narrowed to make it easier to control the flow of people .
 They included an ecumenical “prayer tent,’s tent, as well as a medical station and outdoor movie theater . The tent also included an Ecumenical "prayer" tent .
Men sat on makeshift benches around rusted metal barrels where flames from burning logs gave off showers of crackling sparks .
 food services and self-defense brigades became institutionalized . Instead, food services, self- defense brigades were institutionalized.
 The elite hated him because they were the first victims of his seizure of property, he says . They felt they were living under the heel of a criminal organization .
 He offered amnesty and a moratorium on the use of force if the demonstrators would end the protests . He also offered amnesty for the protesters to end their protests .
 protestors feared that their identities were being registered and that if the protest ended without achieving its goals, Yanukovych would launch mass repression . But the protestors feared they would not be registered .
 Yanukovych refused to address the protestors’ concrete demands . The protesters’ biggest enemies became exhaustion, the need to report to work, and the onset of cold weather .
 Yanukovych secured a $15 billion financial rescue package from Russia . The crowds started to dwindle as the Christmas holidays approached .
 Opposition leaders said that it might be best to focus on the next presidential election .
 For the first time since the protests began, the demonstrators’ determination seems to be waning . The protests began in June 2013 .
 Yanukovych's allies in the parliament passed a set of laws providing for harsh fines and long prison terms for participation in protests . On January 16, Yanukovych’s allies passed a law providing for harsher fines and jail terms .
 The new laws would have allowed the government to put every participant in Maidan in prison . The threat of repression galvanized the demonstrators .
On the night of January 19, there were bloody clashes between demonstrators and the police . Maidan returned to the front pages of the world's newspapers .
 Dmitri Bulatov, one of the Maidan activists, was abducted on January 22 . He was abducted in Maidan.
 He was held prisoner for eight days, during which he was tortured, including having his hands nailed to a door . He was also held prisoner in a prison cell for seven days .
 Yuri Verbytsky, a seismologist from Lvov, abducted from a hospital where he was being treated for an eye injury . He was later found dead in a forest .
 At the same time, Yanukovych and the ruling party lost control in the western and central regions of the country .
 protestors in Lvov occupied the regional administration building on January 23 . On January 23, protestors occupied the building .
Demonstrators in Rivne demanded that riot police deployed to Kiev return home . Demonstrators said riot police should be sent home .
 In Cherkasy, thousands of protestors clashed with police protecting the municipal administration building .
 On January 28, the parliament revoked the laws on protests it had passed only twelve days earlier . Azarov and the cabinet resigned and Azarov resigned .
 Clashes between demonstrators and police in Kiev declined, press reported . Multiple nationalist factions that were independent of any political party had splintered .
 He forced parliament to vote for his version of an amnesty bill that made the freeing of dozens of detained protestors conditional on an end to the occupation of administrative buildings . He forced the parliament to votes for the bill.
 They now demand Yanukovych’s resignation and early parliamentary and presidential elections . They now want him to step down .
 The rapidly deteriorating political situation has caused previously loyal deputies to desert the president .
 protestors marched on the Verkhovna Rada, demanding changes to the Constitution that would limit the president’s power .
 The situation became violent after the speaker of parliament cut off discussion on the subject . The Speaker of Parliament cut off talk on the topic of the issue .
 The police sent in titushki, paid pro-government thugs, to attack the demonstrators .
Almost eight thousand demonstrators retreated into the square and set fire to tents, mattresses, and tires to create a barricade of flames .
 By morning there were twenty-five dead, including nine police officers . By morning, there had been 20 dead, with nine officers .
 The police said that their officers were shot in the head and neck over bulletproof vests with sniper bullets . The shooters were never identified .
 Third force armed with sniper rifles, separate from the police and known leadership of the Maidan, was also taking part in killing .
 Some protestors were killed by firearms, others were beaten to death with truncheons by the police .
 With the mass killing on the 18th, the attitude of the protestors underwent a change . The attitude of protestors has now changed .
 There was almost military discipline and, everywhere, faces hidden under black balaclavas . Instead, there was almostMilitary discipline and everywhere, face faces hidden in black balas .
 In Uzhgorod, Lutsk, Khmelnitsky, and Poltava, protestors seized police stations and administrative buildings . In Lvov they reoccupied the regional administration building .
 The Yanukovych government declared a truce with the leaders of the opposition . The government declares a truce. The opposition leader's party leader is the prime minister .
15 hundred weapons and 100,000 rounds of ammunition seized in raids on five district police stations in Lvov .
 In light of sniper attacks in Maidan on the 18th, no one was sure in whose hands the guns would end up .
 radicals smashed through the police lines established two days earlier . On the morning of February 20, shooting broke out, police say .
 The protestors surged out of the square up Institutsky Street to the government district . The police gave way, firing as they pulled back .
 The protestors then began to be picked off by snipers firing from the roofs and windows of surrounding buildings . The protestors were then picked off.
 The police also came under fire, and evidence uncovered later seemed to show that some snipers were firing at both protestors and the police .
 When the firing ceased, corpses littered the streets and the city center was firmly in the hands of the opposition .
 Ukrainian Interior Ministry: 16 police officers were also killed in February 20 fighting .
 Residents of Kiev brought food and drink to the protestors and began reinforcing the barricades . The barricades created huge choke points around Kiev .
 Yanukovych agreed to talks with three leaders of the opposition, mediated by the foreign ministers of Germany, Poland, and France . Yanukovych also agreed to a deal with the opposition's leaders .
 Twelve members of Yanukovych’s party and the mayor of Kiev resigned. To protest the violence, twelve members of the Yanukovych's party resigned .
 Yanukovych and the opposition leaders agreed on a peace deal that provided for a return to the 2004 Constitution . The deal also included the creation of a new coalition government and amnesty for all involved in violent rioting .
 Yanukovych agreed to refrain from imposing a state of emergency and to give protestors three days to surrender all illegal weapons . Yanukovych also agreed to stop imposing a State of emergency .
 The security forces on which Yanukovych depended for his power were preparing to abandon him . Yanukovych's security forces were preparing for his departure from power .
 Ukrainian parliament orders all Interior Ministry troops and police officers to return to their barracks after the Maidan killings .
 This was viewed by police as the first step toward blaming them for the violence . This was seen as a first step to blame the violence.
 Middle-level officers tried to contact their superiors but were unsuccessful . The officers were unsuccessful.
 In response, police began “laying down their shields’ and leaving Kiev, police say . Police say they are leaving Kiev .
 The peace agreement was announced in Maidan by the leaders of the opposition . In light of the killings, many protestors felt it was unthinkable to compromise with him or leave him .
 The Right Sector and other activists demanded that Yanukovych resign by 10 Am . They warned that if he did not, they would remove him by force .
 Yanukovych now feared for his life and decided to flee, flying to Kharkov . With the presidential administration and Yanukovych’s home both left unguarded, Yanukovych decided to leave .
 The violence that had convulsed Kiev came to a complete halt after he left. The violence was stopped when he left .
 On Saturday, February 22, the streets were empty of police, and protestors took control of the presidential administration and Yanukovych’s residence simply by walking through the front gate .
 The events in Ukraine were seen as a textbook example of the popular overthrow of a kleptocratic ruler that could be duplicated in Russia . In Moscow, the events were seen by some as an example of a popular overthrow.
 The regime in Ukraine was almost identical to what had been created in Russia . Ukraine, with a nationalist west and center and a pro-Russian east, was more pluralistic .
 Under these circumstances, it was essential to the Russian leadership that the Ukrainian revolution be discredited . The Ukrainian revolution was discredited, says the Russian leader .
 The regime chose the method traditionally used to distract the Russian population from their rulers’ abuses . The method is traditionally used by the regime to distract them from their abuses .
 Russia began planning a special operation to seize the Crimean peninsula on February 22 . The peninsula had been transferred to Ukraine in 1954 by Nikita Khrushchev .
 Putin said he made the decision after an all-night emergency meeting with his security chiefs on the crisis in Ukraine . Homeward Bound is produced by state-run Channel One television to mark the first anniversary of the annexation .
 There was no resistance because the Ukrainian leadership feared an armed conflict could serve as a pretext for an invasion of Crimea . The Ukraine leadership feared that the invasion would be a pretext.
 On February 28, troops in camouflage but without identification seized the airport in Simferopol . A number of Ukrainian military units, and the road between the two cities, blocked the airport .
 civilian volunteers wore orange-and-black St. John's. They were backed by civilian volunteers wearing the orange and black St.
 George’s ribbon, a symbol of Russian military prowess, had been adopted by pro-Russian activists in Crimea . The ribbon was adopted by the pro-Russians in Crimea.
 A Russian warship blocked the bay at Balaklava, where the Ukrainian Coast Guard was based .
 On March 1, a rocket unit in Yevpatoria was seized, and in Fedosiya, the unidentified troops cut off a battalion of Ukrainian marines . The unidentified troops also cut off an unidentified battalion of marines .
 The “polite, green men,’ as the anonymous troops were called, began to seize strategic locations everywhere . The ‘polite and green men’ were called .
 It would have been a different matter if they had been resisted with heavy weapons. It would be different if they were resisted with heavier weapons .
 Crimea's independence was announced on March 6 . The date of the referendum was moved up from May 25 to March 30, then to March 16 .
 The vote was preceded by a propaganda campaign on radio and TV, with calls to participate in the referendum . Crimea 24, a newly created newspaper, with a circulation of half a million, was published .
 Russia justified its invasion of Crimea by saying that it needed to protect the Russian-speaking population from neo-Nazi extremists . Russia said that it needs to protect its population from the extremists .
 Video was made during street battles on February 20 . It was later confirmed that the video was made not in Crimea, but in Kiev .
We could not leave this plea unheeded; we could not abandon Crimea and its residents in distress . Naturally, we can't abandon Crimea, and we can not abandon its residents .
 Oleksandr Turchinov bowed before superior force and issued a decree calling for the withdrawal of Ukrainian units from Crimea . On March 28, the acting president of Ukraine.
 The takeover of Crimea led to a surge of chauvinistic euphoria in Russia . The takeover was carefully cultivated by the Russian state-controlled media .
 In late March, Russia began to mass troops on the border with Ukraine, deploying 40,000 to 50,000 in twenty-four hours .
 In early April, pro-Russian groups stormed government buildings in various oblasts in Ukraine .
 armed men in masks seized the headquarters of the oblast administration in Kharkov . Under the cover of a crowd of demonstrators, armed men seized the HQ .
 Donetsk was declared the Donetsk People’s Republic . The SBU and the city administration were seized in Donetsk .
 masked men with automatic weapons seized the city headquarters of the SBU in Lugansk . They announced that the building had been mined .
 On April 7, there was an attempt to seize the administration building in Nikolaev .
 The April 6 actions were followed by a larger wave of attacks on April 12 . The April 12 attacks were also followed by the April 6 attacks .
 Groups of well-armed men in camouflage attacked strategic buildings in Donetsk, Gorlovaka, Druzhkovka, Kramatorsk, Konstantinovka, Slavyansk, Krasny Liman, Artyemovsk .
 The attempt to storm police headquarters in Gorlovka also failed . The building was taken after demonstrators formed a human shield around the attackers .
 Oleksandr Turchinov, Ukraine’s transitional president, launched a full-scale military operation to retake the buildings and reestablish the authority of the state .
 Igor Girkin is a Russian citizen from Moscow who is believed to be a colonel in Russian military intelligence . Girkin was a key figure in igniting the fighting in the Donbas region .
 Girkin met with people from the Ukrainian mainland who wanted eastern Ukraine to follow Crimea’s example .
 He recruited fifty-two volunteers and went to Slavyansk, seventy miles north of Donetsk, where pro-Russian sentiment was deemed to be strongest . He recruited 50-two volunteer volunteers .
 The force seized all of the principal government buildings in the city . He was joined there by two hundred local men .
 "Donetsk Republic" held a referendum on "state sovereignty" for the oblast . The referendum was held on May 11, the “Donetsk republic’s’Sanskansk Republic.
 89 percent of participants voted for self-rule, and there was a 75 percent turnout . According to its representatives, 89 percent voted forSelf-rule .
 The separatists then announced that they planned to incorporate most of Ukraine’s southern and eastern regions into the new entity . The Kharkov, Kherson, Dnepropetrovsk, Zaporozhe, and Odessa oblasts were also announced .
 The strike groups were led by capable professionals from the former Ukrainian police or the Russian reserve military .
 The cities that were attacked were not chosen at random . They were important transportation nodes for railroads and highways .
 The rebels were able to cut off supplies to the Ukrainian Army in the northeast of the Donetsk oblast .
 Kramatorsk had an airport with a landing strip capable of receiving Russian military transport planes . Kramatork has an airport that can be used for military transport aircraft .
 Kramatorsk made it possible to move forces to the heart of the Donbas region by air . Controlling Kramatork made the move possible.
 By early June, the number of fighters holed up in the city had reached one thousand . 90 percent of the fighters were locals, 90 percent were locals .
 The Ukrainian police in the Lugansk and Donetsk oblasts, including former members of the disbanded Berkut, defected en masse to the separatists . Former members of Berkut defected to separatists in Ukraine .
 The state-controlled media depicted the fighting in eastern Ukraine as a crusade to protect ethnic Russians from persecution by Ukrainian Nazis . The flow of false information on Russian television was unremitting .
 The overthrow of Yanukovych was depicted not as a revolt against a kleptocratic ruler but as an uprising by Ukrainian fascists intent on suppressing Russian speakers .
 Thousands of Russian military veterans have volunteered to fight in Russia . This coverage helped to inspire thousands of Russian veterans to fight .
 Appeals to join the ‘People’s Guard of Donbas’ were published on the internet along with telephone numbers to call in Ukraine . Appeals to joined the “People” were published in the internet .
 Those wishing to volunteer for Donetsk and Lugansk Republics told to contact Moscow office by email or Skype .
 Volunteers were told to go to Shakhti, a city in Rostov oblast near the Ukrainian border, where they were met and given places to stay .
 Outside the transfer apartments in Shakhti there was an entire parking lot of cars from different regions . It was illustrative that outside the transfer apartment there was a parking lot.
 There was even a new jeep from the Khanty-Mansisk region . They were there from the Kursk region and from Moscow, of course .
 They were not successful in their work and family life and were leaving nothing special behind . They were leaving no special behind.
 At first done secretly, the recruitment operation became increasingly open . At first, the operation became more open .
 volunteers begin to leave from the railroad station accompanied by ovations from the crowd and the blessing of a priest . In Ekaterinburg, volunteers began to leave.
 Despite official denials, an increasing stream of active-duty Russian soldiers were sent to join the fighting .
 Contract soldiers told there could be orders that involved crossing the border. Contract soldiers were told there may be orders to cross the border .
Soldiers in the Murmansk oblast were told they had to love their motherland . They were told, ‘You have to love your motherland.’
 Ukrainian military representatives say soldiers died in fighting near Lugansk . They say identity papers of members of the Pskov 76th Airborne Division were recovered .
 The rebels also had man-portable air defense systems, or MANPADS, which they used to shoot down Ukrainian military helicopters . The rebels had also used man-Portable airdefense systems, which were also used in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian military Antonov An-26 transport plane with eight people on board was shot down over Lugansk region . On July 14, the plane was carrying eight people .
 The airliner was flying at 30-3,000 feet in one of the busiest air transit corridors in the world .
 Russian weapons, soldiers, and experienced volunteers. But it could not have been fought for months, let alone sustained for months .
 Putin's popularity rating reached 86 percent, which exceeded even the support for Russia's 2008 war with Georgia . Putin’s popularity rating was 86 percent .
 The first Chechen war distracted Russians from the hardships of Yeltsin’s economic reforms and the second war from the injustices of privatization . The war in Ukraine distracted the Russian population from the real meaning of the events there and prevented them from contemplating the possibility of a Maidan
 The distraction took a high toll, as both sides engaged in indiscriminate killing . The distraction, however, was a high death toll .
 The insurgents fired on Ukrainian forces from positions next to schools and hospitals and between apartment buildings . The insurgents, based mainly in the towns, fired on the Ukrainian forces .
 The Ukrainian forces returned the fire, using Grad multiple-rocket launchers and artillery . Even though they were shelling populated urban areas, the Ukrainian forces were still shelling .
 Residents turned against the Kiev government and joined the rebels . But the tactics of the Ukrainian Army were covered for propaganda purposes on Russian television .
 Vasily Budik, an adviser to Ukraine’s Defense Ministry, described the approach to Anna Nemtsova of the Daily Beast .
 By early 2015, approximately fifty-seven hundred people had been killed in the fighting . More than a million had fled their homes, according to reports .
 The Maidan revolution, however, shocked the Russian leaders and brought an end to the dissimulation of the Russian government .
 The West was suddenly faced not with a masquerade but with the Russia that had existed all along, that somehow had been overlooked by many Western policy makers and observers .
 After annexing Crimea, Russian leaders began threatening a nuclear attack on the West . Russian leaders have threatened to attack the West with a nuclear strike .
 Russia’s ambassador to Denmark, Mikhail Vanin, told the Danish daily JyllandsPosten on March 21, that if Denmark carried out plans to join the NATO antimissile defense shield, Danish ships might become targets for Russia's nuclear missiles . Danish ships may become targets
 At each end of the bridge, closed posts are manned twenty-four hours a day by officers who survey video information and a strike group that can act immediately to block any suspicious persons .
 The regime has used state-run television to rally the population in support of the war in Ukraine and against the West .
 Putin’s approval rating, 65 percent in January 2014, jumped to 88 percent after the annexation of Crimea . It has remained there ever since, sustained by an onslaught of false information about Ukrainian atrocities .
 The Putin regime’s recent actions cannot disguise his government's fundamental insecurity, says CNN.com .
 With the fall of communism, the Russian people received the freedom to earn money, obtain information, speak openly, and travel abroad . The fall of Communism allowed people to travel abroad and earn money .
 The political regime enshrined theft and was guaranteed with the help of repeated bloody provocations . The regime, however, enshrined thefts and was also guaranteed by repeated provocations.
 A superstructure was created, but it is held together by mendacity and greed . It may sustain itself for many years, but could also collapse, a victim of its own rejection of moral values .
 Taken together these factors are more than sufficient to undermine the system’s stability. Taken together, these factors more than enough to undermine system's stability .
 The steady rise in living standards during the 2000s led to an implicit deal between the authorities and the population . The rise of living standards led to a deal between authorities and population .
Authorities would be free to steal as long as average incomes and living standards continued to rise . The authorities would be able to steal if living standards and incomes continued to increase .
 The boom depended on high oil and gas prices while corruption crippled normal development . The boom, however, depended on the high prices .
 Russia had no other comparable source of revenue when the price of oil collapsed in June 2014 . Western sanctions in response to Crimea annexation prevented badly needed investment .
 Average household wealth has risen sevenfold since 2000, from $1,650 in 2000 to $11,900 in 2013 . median wealth among adults in 2013 was only $871 .
 In a more normal society, these developments might not be threatening, but in Russia, a weakening economy deprives the population of its most important reason for ignoring the elites’ corruption .
 This is a clear sign that the authorities intend to use vodka to tranquilize the population . This is the first time the authorities have used vodka to tranquise the population in a country .
 The Putin regime is threatened by the consequences of the war in Ukraine, which it initiated, but its trajectory cannot control . Besides a weakening economy, the Putin regime has also been threatened.
 Russians originally believed that the invasion of eastern Ukraine could be accomplished without casualties, like the seizure of Crimea .
Official attempts to conceal the extent of the casualties are often revealed as absurd or ineffectual . The number of regular troops and volunteers killed in Ukraine continues to grow .
 Russian journalists photographed graves with the letters “NM’s for Neopoznanyi Muzhshchina_ on the nameplate .
 Russia has fought from the beginning to discredit the revolution in Ukraine so that it cannot become an example for a similar revolution in Russia . Russia has been trying to discredit Ukraine's revolution so it cannot be an example in Russia.
 For this purpose, rebel control over parts of Donetsk and Lugansk oblasts, with millions of impoverished people and a dysfunctional economy, is insufficient . For this reason, rebels are trying to take control of parts of the Donetsk region .
 The regime is threatened by the moral collapse of which it itself is the principal author . The regime's moral collapse is the main author .
 The Russian “elite’s” behaves like occupiers, according to a report . The report says the Russian ‘elites’ behave as occupiers .
 Russian oligarchs and major businessmen establish a second life in the West, where they keep their bank accounts, property, and families . Insofar as corrupt wealth in Russia is a product of political patronage and the political constellation may always change .
 The resentment inspired by Russia's moneyed class is aggravated by the elite’s habit of conspicuous consumption .
 REN-TV showed an interview with wives of three Russian oligarchs . One of them said there was no need to seek a discount on a crocodile skin coat because £50,000 was a reasonable price .
 The interview was seen by 200,000 people on YouTube and evoked a wave of abusive comments . The interview revealed other details of women's shopping habits .
 One commenter wrote, ‘It’s necessary to organize them a beautiful life with the help of Molotov cocktails.’ One commenter said, “It's necessary to organized them abeautiful life. It's necessary for them to organize a beautiful
There should be terror for these bourgeois so that they go and work as slaves for the Uzbeks and Tajiks . There should be Terror for them. There should also be terror.
 The French Revolution, the October Revolution, nationalization and shootings, the Revolution of Dignity in Ukraine, 2014, are all part of the French Revolution . The revolution was the first in France to take part in the revolution .
 Putin's adventurism has led to Western sanctions that have struck directly at many of the regime’s wealthiest and most powerful figures .
 The condition for becoming wealthy in Russia is cooperation with the regime and involvement in its corruption . But it is unlikely that any revolt from within would lead to a qualitative improvement in the life of the country .
 Democratic change in Russia could take place as a result of self-organizing anticriminal revolution that took place in Ukraine .
 It has been argued that the Russian population is inert and Putin’s hold on power is secure . It is argued that Putin's hold onpower is secure.
 The number of people who are middle class is more than 50 percent . In any case, the fate of any democratic revolt in Russia would be decided not across Russia .
 The popular revolt in Ukraine occurred and was able to sustain itself because certain preconditions had been met . The revolt occurred because some precondition had been meeting .
 Yanukovych’s sudden refusal to sign an association agreement with the European Union caused widespread shock and dismay . Many saw as critical to the country's future, which many saw as crucial to its future .
 Berkut riot police attacked student demonstrators in the Maidan . Students had gathered to support a future for Ukraine in Europe .
 Putin sought to distract Russians from the Ukrainian example’s relevance to their own situation .
 Russians are well aware of the corruption and lawlessness that surrounds them . But they are far from convinced that Putin is not involved in it .
 Putin's willingness to absolve Putin and the regime of responsibility for abuses reflects a determination not to face reality .
Protesters' determination might disappear very quickly if protests gain momentum and people begin to believe that positive change is a real possibility . That determination might disappeared very quickly.
 One catalyst for a democratic revolt could be the 2018 presidential elections . Putin could win a fourth term as president through massive falsification .
 A political crisis could also erupt because of economic collapse or a military defeat in Ukraine . A military defeat could also be a political crisis in Ukraine.
 A democratic revolt could be ignited by a single event that reminds people of their helpless situation, says the author .
 In February 2010, two doctors, Vera Sidelnikova and Olga Aleksandrina, a mother and daughter, were killed in Moscow . Their car crashed head-on with that of Lukoil vice president Anatoly Barkov, which turned into the oncoming lane .
 The incident sparked an explosion of outrage over the internet but no demonstrations . No demonstrations were held .
 The prospect that the regime could face a systemic crisis makes it imperative that the democratic forces in Russia recognize the importance of a moral revolution . The prospect of a crisis in Russia is imperative that Russia recognizes the importance for the country's democratic forces .
 Frederick Douglass wrote that the essence of the slave mentality is the tendency to treat conditions that are abnormal as if they were natural . Douglass said that the attitude to treat abnormal conditions is a slave mentality .
 In any Russian city, corruption is so routine and well developed that the participants can easily convince themselves that they are doing nothing wrong . In any city, Corruption is so commonplace that it can be easy to convince yourself that it is wrong .
 corruption is a symptom of a deeper ill, says the author . Corruption is a sign of the state's disregard for the value of the individual .
 An attack on corruption that does not address this underlying subservience risks removing one group of corrupt leaders and replacing them with another group that is just as bad .
 The war in Ukraine, at the same time, has given renewed strength to extreme Russian nationalism . An economic downturn could increase the appeal of left-wing socialism .
 The most desirable scenario for Russia would be the removal of the Putin regime in a free and fair election . The most wanted scenario would be a free, fair election in Russia .
 The last honest presidential election in Russia was in 1990, before the Soviet Union fell . Yeltsin was elected president of the Russian Republic .
 The Putin regime is to be denied its goal of ruling forever, it will be not through an election . Popular discontent grows so massive that the police and army become unreliable and the ruling group splits . At least one faction goes over to the side of the people .
 Under these circumstances, it will be important under which banners a democratic revolt occurs, says the author .
 Nearly all opposition forces share theoretical opposition to corruption . Nearly all Opposition forces share a theoretical opposition.
 What Russia needs is the triumph of a consciousness capable of guiding a popular movement away from radicalism and toward a fully articulated commitment to universal values, says Putin . Russia needs to be more aware of its role as a nation, he says .
 The tendency to treat the individual as raw material for the realization of the State’s ambitions made possible the triumph in Russia of communism, which tried to create ‘heaven on earth’ at the cost of millions of lives .
 The same tendency led to the determination to introduce capitalism without the rule of law and Russia’s total criminalization .
 To restore respect for the individual, Russia must take an honest look at its past . Russia must restore respect as the foundation for a new beginning, Russia says .
 It did not purify the moral and political atmosphere after seventy-four years of communism . Because it has failed to face the truth about the crimes of the communist regime, it has not been purified .
Facing the truth about communism and commemorating its millions of victims remains a fundamental requirement for Russia to have a decent future . Facing thetruth about communism remains a key issue for Russia .
 The 1993 massacre at the Ostankino Television Tower, the shelling of the White House, the 1999 apartment bombings, the 2002 Moscow theater siege, the 2004 Beslan school siege. The 2004 Beslen school siege, Alexander Litvinenko in London, and the radiation poisoning of Alexander Lit
 The explosions in Moscow, Buinaksk, and Volgodonsk were the ultimate result of the country’s criminalization under Yeltsin . The explosions were the key to Putin's rise to power .
 If the Putin regime faces a democratic revolt, it will seek to defend itself by claiming it is under attack by foreign agents .
 The apartment bombings demonstrate that it is the Putin regime itself that is the enemy of the population . The regime will not hesitate to use any means at its disposal to stay in power .
 The apartment bombings demonstrate the inherent criminality of the Russian authorities' view that individuals exist for the benefit of the state .
 It may be argued that Putin's and Yeltsin's guilt is unproven in the case of the apartment bombings .
 Any criminal convicted in a court of law can be said to be ultimately unproven . This is true, but only in the sense that the guilt of any criminal convicted is unproven.
 The Putin regime never faced a court of law, but only because it controlled the judicial process . Putin regime was in a position to seize and then hide or destroy the evidence .
 The totality of circumstantial evidence, unlike direct evidence, is impossible to fake . The verdict would be obvious and incontrovertible, says author .
 The regime has blocked three attempts at independent inquiries of the apartment bombings . It is implicated in the murders of people who tried to investigate the bombings on their own .
 The evidence of its subsequent actions suggests that it is fully capable of these crimes . The evidence suggests that the crimes were carried out by the group .
Russian authorities have the option of releasing vital evidence for independent examination . The bomb that was planted in the basement of the building in Ryazan was sequestered by the FSB in direct violation of Russian law .
In the wake of the murder of Boris Nemtsov, the conditions have been created for mass internal repression . The war in Ukraine shows no signs of ending, according to the Ukrainian media .
 Russia has threatened to use nuclear weapons against countries that are not Russia’s enemies . The leadership has also increased the chance that they might actually be used .
 The Russian people have the capacity to overthrow the new tyranny that took communism’s place . Against this, however, is the resiliency and talent of the Russian people, who succeeded .
 Russia's most pressing need is a truth commission, like South Africa’s Commission on ‘Truth and Reconciliation, that is able to examine the crimes of postcommunist regimes and make them known to the Russian people .
 Many of these crimes were terrible, but awareness of their true nature can be critical in building a new, democratic Russian society .
 Russia is able to follow the example of Ukraine in overthrowing a criminal government . It will be necessary to convene a new Constituent Assembly capable of producing a Constitution .
 Russia has never recovered from the suppression of the elected Constituent Assembly on January 18, 1918 . Russia has not recovered from that suppression .
Political structures in Russia had no independent authority and were always used as vehicles for arbitrary power . In its wake, political structures had noIndependent authority .
 Russia’s pro-democratic public probably amounts to no more than 10 to 15 percent of the population . The experience of the perestroika period suggests that they can carry millions with them .
 democratic forces can break with Russia's tragic history and lay a basis for the country’s future . But it can enable the democratic forces to break with the tragic history .
 They need only to defend the worth of the individual and let truth be their guide . They need to defend their worth and let the truth be the guide .
 Viktor Davidoff, ‘David Satter, the Kremlin’s Bete Noire,’ says Moscow Times . Davidoff: “David Davidoff is the Kremlin's Bete noire.’
 Why Russia has Failed to Become the West and the West is Weary of Russia . Russia has failed to become the West.
 Patrick Cockburn, “Russia Planned Chechen War Before Bombings,’s ‘Russia PlannedChechen War before Bombings.’
 Colonel General Vyacheslav Ovchinnikov is commander of Russia’s internal troops . This is the opinion of Colonel General Olyvkov .
 Oksana Yablokova, Simon Saradzhyan, and Lera Kor, “Apartment Block Explodes, Dozens Dead,” Moscow Times, September 10, 1999 .
 Dunlop, The Moscow Bombings, 238; “September 1999 Russian Apartment Bombings Timeline,’ The Fifth Estate, January 8, 2015, www.cbc.ca/fifth/blog/september-1999-russianapartment-bombings
 David Satter, ‘Anatomy of a Massacre,’ was published in the Washington Times, October 29, 1999 .
 Noviye izvestiya, March 21, 2002. Alexei Levchenko and Lev Moskovsky, “Seleznev znaet, kto zryval Rossiyu’s,’.
 The world's most famous woman, Novaya Gazeta, was born on January 21, 2001 . She was born in Russia .
 Anders Aslund, “Tri Osnovye Istochniki Bogatstva Novykh Russkikh’s,’. ‘Tri OsNovykh’ is the name of a Russian-born man who died in 1996 .
 Svetlana Glinkina, “The Criminal Components of the Russian Economy,’s working paper no. 2, is published in the Russian Economic Journal .
 Between 1990 and 1998, Russia sold more enterprises than any country in the world . Russia was in twentieth place in terms of revenue in the 1990s .
 Even Hungary, where the state controlled much less than in Russia, earned $2. billion more than Russia did .
 In Russia, privatization revenue was $54.60 per capita, compared with $2,560.30 in Australia and $1,252.80 in Hungary . In Australia, the same amount was $2.30 per capita .
 The Socio-Economic Situation in Russia has been described as "Russia’s Population Meltdown" Johnson's Russia List was published in 1998 .
 Leonid Proshkin, “Shturm kotorogo ne bylo’s” Sovershenno Sekretno, no., 1998 .
 There seems to have been a decision to force through adoption of the draft constitution at any price . The draft constitution is expected to be adopted by the end of the year .
 The threshold for the approval of the new constitution was set at 50 percent of actual voters . The previous April in the referendum on trust in Yeltsin and his economic policies was set.
 The threshold for approval was thus dropped from 50 percent of eligible voters to 25 percent . The threshold is now 25 percent for approval .
 Western observers were barred from the Central Election Commission headquarters during the vote count .
 Official results published not within ten days of the voting, as required by law, but more than two months later . Official results were published not in ten days, but two months after the vote .
 Sobyanin’s team was barred from its offices and its archives were confiscated . Sobyanins found that the turnout had been falsified by nine million votes .
 Den’gi Mozhet Byt ne Tol’ko ‘Derevyannyie’ no Tozhe ‘Berezovskyi’ Moskovsky Komsomolets, July 31, 1997 .
 David Satter, “A Low, Dishonest Decadence,’s National Interest, was published in 2003 . Satter's book, "DishonestDecadence," was published by National Interest .
 The World Health Organization considers that if per capita consumption of alcohol in a country exceeds eight liters, each additional liter subtracts eleven months from the life expectancy of the average male and four months from a female life expectancy .
 Ada Gorbacheva, “Poka Nadeyus-Dyshu’s” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, January 26, 2001, was born .
 Andrei Illarionov testified before the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs in 2009 .
 The INDEM think tank was founded in October 1997 by Georgy Satarov, a former adviser to Boris Yeltsin . It does independent sociological research .
 The broadcast had served as a key irritant in the company’s relations with the FSB and with the Russian government .
 Sergei Kanev, “Kak ustroeni ‘kryshi’ v Rossii,” Novaya Gazeta, October 22, 2007, is the author of the book "Kak Ustroeni’s"
 The total capitalization of just three state-run companies, Gazprom, Rosneft, and Russian Railways, is $380 billion . The total Capitalization of the three companies is $ 380 billion .
 "Unmasking President Putin’s Grandiose Myth," says Anders Aslund . Aslund: “Unmasked President Putin's Grandioses Myth,’.
 6. percent of Gazprom's shares, worth $20 billion, disappeared . According to Vladimir Milov and Boris Nemtsov, while Medvedev was the head of the Gazprom, 6 percent of the shares disappeared .
 What Ten Years of Putin Have Brought: An Independent Expert Report, trans. What Ten years of Putin have Brought.
 Luke Harding, “Putin, the Kremlin Power Struggle, and the $40 bn Fortune,’s $40bn Fortune.
 The Kremlin Fixes Another Election,” World Affairs, September-October 2011 .
 Bill Bowring, “Judicial Independence in Russia,’s ‘Judicial independence in Russia’ The EU-Russia Review, no., May 2006, was published in the European Union .
 Guy Chazan, “In Russia’s Courts, a Judge Speaks Up and Gets Fired,” Wall Street Journal, August 5, 2004 .
 Garbielle Tetrault-Farber, “No Closure for Victims of Theater Hostage Crisis, 12 Years On,’s 12 years on. ‘No Cl closure for victims of theater Hostage crisis’
 Alexander Podrabinek, “Politika na Krovi,’s ‘Politika’ was published in November 2002 .
Fred Weir, “Gas Clouds Moscow Rescue,’s’ After Siege,” October 28, 2002 . Oliver Bullough, � “Putin Vows No Deal with ‘Terrorists’ after Siege’, ‘Putin Vow No Deal With
 Svetlana Gubareva, Karina Moskalenko, and Olga Mikhailova, ‘Nord-Ost,’ Gaz ne spasal ot vzriva,” Novaya Gazeta, March 21, 2005 .
David Satter, “Remembering Beslan’s Beslan,’ David Satter and Dunlop, Hostage Crises, 17. Satter.
 Lidiya Grafova, “Chtoby nigde inikogda’s” Novaya Gazeta, August 29, 2005, is the author of the book, "Cht Toby nigde Inikogga"
 "Agentura vyshla uz-pod kontrolya. i Dosha do Beslana,” Novaya Gazeta, August 31, 2009 .
 Lidiya Grafova, “Nado zhe Komu-to Verit’s” Novaya Gazeta, September 15, 2005 .
 “Net Tightens on the Amateur Assassins’s Amateur Assassins,’
 Sostoyalas’ press-konferentsiya, nosvyashchennaya zavershivshemusya, no. ot, February 18, 2009; Philip P Pan, “3 Acquitted in Killing of Russian Reporter,’s
 David Satter, “Who Killed Litvinenko’s” Wall Street Journal, November 27, 2006 . Satter: ‘Who Killedlitvinenko?’
Quoted in David Satter, “Putin in Charge,” Wall Street Journal Europe, December 13, 2007 . ‘Putin in charge,’ says Satter .
 Russia Must Be Strong To Withstand Foreign Threats, Russia must be Strong to Withstand foreign Threats .
 Andrew Osborn, “All-Female Sect Worships Vladimir Putin as Paul the Apostle,’ says Osborn .
 Charles Clover, ‘Russia’s Middle Class Finds Its Feet,’ was published in the Financial Times, December 12, 2011 .
 Operative in the Kremlin (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2013), 356. Operative In the Kremlin.
 Denys Kazanskyi, ‘Akhmetov’s Losing Bet,’ is Ukrainian Week, May 18, 2015 . The event is part of Ukrainian Week .
 Militsioneri Vradiivki za 3 roki zgvaltuvali I vbili 5 zhinok,’s.
 The BBC News, November 13, 2014, www.bbc.co.uk/news/worldmiddle-east-world-26248275 .
 The Ukrainian Health Ministry says the death toll was twenty-eight . The death toll is 20 .
 S nachala stolknovenii pogiblo 28 chelovek,” Ukrainskaya Pravda, February 20, 2014, is the Russian capital .
 Flaws Found in Ukraine’s Probe of Maidan Massacre,” October 10, 2014 .
 Dozens dead as Kiev protesters take to the streets .
 President of the Russian Federation, President of Russia, March 18, 2014, en.Kremlin.ru/events/president/president.com .
 Alexander Prokhanov, “Kto ty ‘Strelok’?,’s interview with Yegor Strelkov, Zavtra, November 20, 2014 .
 Rebels claim High Turnout and Landslide ‘Yes’ Vote in Plebiscite on Independence .
 "Uneasy Standoff in Ukraine’s pro-Russian Stronghold of Slvayansk," says Luke Harding . Harding: “ Uneasy standoff is in Ukraine's pro- Russian stronghold of SlVayansk .
 Margaret Coker and Robert Wall, “Ukraine Knew of Separatists’ Air-Defense Capabilities, Say Officials,” Wall Street Journal.
 Tatyana Lokshina, “Civilians Despair as Both Sides Break the Rules in East Ukraine’s East Ukraine,’
 Russia Prepared Raising Raising Nuclear Readiness over Crimea .
 "Russia Warns Denmark its Warships could become Nuclear Targets," says Julian Isherwood .
 Institute of Modern Russia, December 23, 2014, imrussia.org/en/analysis/nation/2135-putins-ratings-anomaly-or-trend .
 “Address by President of the Russian Federation.” en.kremlin.ru .
 Inopressa.ru.ru, trans. and rpt. from Wall Street Journal, November 1, 2002 .
 Testimony before the House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs, February 25, 2009 .
 The Kremlin Fixes Another Election, September-October 2011 .
 Kramer, A ‘The Role of the Masses During the October 1993 Moscow Rebellion’ Kramer, a “The role of the masses during the 1993 Moscow rebellion.’
 Palmer, Richard L Testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives Banking and Financial Services Committee, September 21, 1999 . Palmer testified before the United States House of Representative in 1999. Palmer was the first person to testify before the committee .
 Nezavisimaya Gazeta—Politekonomiya, Johnson’s Russia List, April 17, 2001 .
 Russian Studies Centre, Henry Jackson Society, in cooperation with the Russian Service, Radio Liberty, in October 2014 .
 Znak.com, August 25, 2014, rpt.com.com: August 26, 2014 .
 Arsamikov, Askyonov, Serhiy, and Ryazan are among those killed in the Russian capital .
 See presidential elections Elmurzaev, Ruslan, Estemirova, Natalia, and Fatherland-All Russia movement, Fear Factor, Federal Security Service .