 As pro-Russian protesters became increasingly assertive in Crimea, groups of armed men surrounded the airports in Simferopol and Sevastopol .
 Voice and data links between Crimea and Ukraine were severed . Russian authorities acknowledged that they had moved troops into the region .
 Russian Pres. Turchynov criticized the action as a provocation and a violation of Ukrainian sovereignty . Russian President Vladimir Putin called the action a provocation .
 Vladimir Putin characterized it as an effort to protect Russian citizens and military assets in Crimea . Putin characterized the move as an attempt to protect Russia's citizens, military assets .
 Aksyonov declared that he, and not the government in Kyiv, was in command of Ukrainian police and military forces in Crimea . He said he was not in charge of the Ukrainian police or military forces .
 Russia annexed Crimea and the city of Sevastopol in Crimea in March 2014 . Russia annexed the Crimea in the same month .
 Crimean parliament voted to secede from Ukraine and join the Russian Federation . A public referendum on the matter is scheduled for March 16, 2014 .
 Yatsenyuk affirmed Kyiv’s position that Crimea was an integral part of Ukraine . Meanwhile, Yatsenuk affirmed the position of Kyiv that Crimea is part of the Ukraine .
 The result was an overwhelming 97 percent in favour of joining Russia . On the day of the referendum, observers noted numerous irregularities .
 The interim government in Kyiv rejected the result, and the U.S. and the EU imposed asset freezes and travel bans on numerous Russian officials and members of the Crimean parliament .
 On March 18 Putin met with Aksyonov and other regional representatives and signed a treaty incorporating Crimea into the Russian Federation .
Masked gunmen stormed a Ukrainian military base outside Simferopol . Within hours of the treaty's signing, a soldier was killed .
 Ukraine initiated the evacuation of some 25,000 military personnel and their families from Crimea . Russian troops moved to occupy bases throughout the peninsula .
 Putin signed a law formally integrating Crimea into Russia. On March 21 after the ratification of the annexation treaty by the Russian parliament .
 Yatsenyuk negotiated with the IMF to craft a bailout package that would address Ukraine’s $35 billion in unmet financial obligations .
 Yatsenyuk signed a portion of the association pact that had been rejected by Yanukovych in November 2013 . He also met with EU officials in Brussels, and met with Brussels officials in March .
 The IMF ultimately proposed an $18 billion loan package that was contingent on Ukraine’s adoption of a range of austerity measures that included devaluation of the hryvnya and curbs on state subsidies .
 Russia continues to solidify its hold on Crimea . It abrogated the 2010 treaty that had extended its lease on the port of Sevastopol in exchange for a discount on natural gas .
 The price Russia charged Ukraine for natural gas skyrocketed some 80 percent in a matter of weeks . The price of natural gas in Ukraine has soared 80 percent .
 Russian officials publicly stated that they had no additional designs on Ukrainian territory . Russia openly exerted economic pressure on the interim government in Kyiv .
 NATO press briefing revealed the presence of an estimated 40,000 Russian troops, massed in a state of high readiness, just across Ukraine’s border .
 heavily armed pro-Russian gunmen stormed government buildings in the eastern Ukrainian cities of Donetsk, Luhansk, Horlivka, and Kramatorsk .
 In Kharkiv, a group of ostensibly local gunmen mistakenly seized an opera house, believing it to be city hall .
 Crimea has seen a number of takeovers by Russian men with Russian equipment . In Crimea, the takeovers were executed by men with no insignia, acting with military precision .
 Pro-Russian militiamen occupied buildings and established roadblocks in Slov’yansk in Donets Basin .
 Turchynov imposed a deadline on those occupying the buildings . He offered them immunity from prosecution if they surrendered but threatened a military response if they did not .
 The deadline passed without incident, the occupiers consolidated their gains . Turchynov called on the United Nations to dispatch peacekeeping forces to eastern Ukraine to restore order .
 He signaled his support for one of the key demands of the pro-Russian camp . He signaled support for a popular referendum on the conversion of Ukraine into a federation .
 Ukrainian military successfully retook the airfield at Kramatorsk on April 15 . The following day Ukrainian troops surrendered six armoured personnel carriers to pro-Russian militiamen .
 Ukrainian troops in Mariupol repelled an assault by pro-Russian gunmen that left several militiamen dead . As emergency talks between Ukraine, the United States, the EU and Russia began in Geneva .
 All parties at Geneva agreed to work to defuse the conflict in eastern Ukraine . Russia commenced military maneuvers on its side of the border, and pro-Russian militants expanded their zone of control .
 Volodymyr Rybak, a Horlivka city council representative, was kidnapped and killed by a pro-Russian militia . He was a member of Tymoshenko's Fatherland party .
 Dozens would be abducted and held by pro-Russian forces, including eight members of an Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe monitoring mission . Several members of Ukrainian police and security services would also be abducted .
 Ukrainian government restarted its offensive against pro-Russian forces in Slov’yansk on May 2 . On May 2 the Ukrainian government started its offensive.
 Two helicopters were lost to hostile fire, Turchynov reported . Many separatists had been killed or arrested, he said .
 Dozens of pro-Russian demonstrators were killed when the building they occupied caught fire . That same day, violence erupted in Odessa, which had been relatively unscathed until that point .
 Putin celebrated Victory Day, a holiday that commemorates the defeat of Nazi Germany in World War II . Putin also visited Crimea and reviewed Russia's Black Sea Fleet .
 The Council for Civil Society and Human Rights had released a cautionary report about Crimea . It sharply contradicted the officially published results of the March 16 independence referendum .
 Actual voter turnout was estimated to have been between 30 and 50 percent . Just over half of those casting ballots chose annexation by Russia .
 As self-declared separatist governments in Luhansk and Donetsk prepared to stage their own referenda on independence, Ukrainian security forces continued to contest territory with pro-Russian militias . A particularly bloody clash in Mariupol left as many as 20 dead, according to
 Those referenda, held in separatist-controlled cities on May 11, were dismissed by Kyiv as ‘a farce’ and widely criticized throughout the West .
 Putin said he respected the will of the voters, even as the Kremlin called for negotiations . Putin stopped short of recognizing the results of the referenda, which overwhelmingly favoured independence .
 The EU responded by expanding its sanctions against Russian individuals and companies . The EU also expanded its sanctions on Russian individuals, companies .
 The Poroshenko administration Skirmishes between separatist militias and government forces continued in the east . The remainder of the country prepared for presidential elections on May 25 .
 Petro Poroshenko won in a landslide, easily topping the 50 percent mark necessary to secure a victory in the first round of polling .
 Tymoshenko finished a distant second, with 13 percent of the vote, while candidates from ultranationalist Svoboda and Right Sector parties received barely 1 percent .
In the days following the election, intense fighting resumed in eastern Ukraine . In the days after the election.
 Ukrainian military helicopter was shot down outside Slov’yansk, killing all 14 people aboard . Dozens of pro-Russian separatists were killed in a battle over Donetsk’s international airport .
 Poroshenko was sworn in as president on June 7 . He immediately set forth a proposal to restore peace in separatist-controlled regions .
 A trio of unidentified Soviet-era tanks appeared in Ukrainian towns near the Russian border . Russia was again accused of directly supporting the rebels .
On June 14, the Ukrainian army suffered its largest single-day loss of life to that point, when rebels shot down a transport plane carrying 49 people as it attempted to land in Luhansk .
 Poroshenko calls a halt to military operations in the east . He offers a temporary truce, as well as amnesty to separatists who lay down their arms .
 He dispatched former president Kuchma to negotiate with rebel leaders . They indicated their acceptance of the proposed cease-fire . He dispatched ex-president to negotiate .
 Putin cites a desire to help normalize the situation in eastern Ukraine . He rescinded an order issued before the annexation of Crimea .
On June 27, amid strenuous Russian objections, Poroshenko signed the long-delayed association agreement with the EU . The deal was signed by the Ukrainian president, who pledged closer ties with Europe .
 Ukrainian military recaptured the cities of Slov’yansk and Kramatorsk in the following weeks .
 Separatist militias began to deploy increasingly sophisticated weapons systems . At least 19 Ukrainian soldiers were killed and scores wounded during one attack in eastern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian military became more assertive with its use of attack aircraft . Pro-Russian forces intensified their air-defense campaign .
 On July 14 a Ukrainian transport plane was shot down at an altitude of more than 20,000 feet . A range far beyond the capabilities of the portable air-defense systems that separatists had used previously .
 On July 16 a Ukrainian fighter jet was shot down over the Donetsk region, about 12 miles from the Russian border .
 Ukrainian officials blamed both attacks on the Russian military, whom they alleged were taking an active role in the fighting . Ukrainian officials said both attacks were carried out by Russian military .
 Igor Strelkov Igor St Relkov Pro-Russian separatist leader Igor Girkin held a media briefing on July 28, 2014, in Donetsk, Ukraine .
 Hear the Dutch Safety Board's investigation about the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 on July 17, 2014 . A video released in October 2015 summarizing the board's investigation.
 U.S. intelligence analysts confirmed the jet was brought down by a surface-to-air missile . Both Ukrainian and pro-Russian forces were quick to deny responsibility for any role in the downing of the jet .
 Investigators and recovery workers found their efforts hampered by the pro-Russian forces who controlled the crash site . Days passed before the majority of the bodies could be collected .
 Malaysia Airlines flight 17 crashed near the village of Hrabove, eastern Ukraine, July 20, 2014 . Emergency workers examining charred debris at the crash site .
 The government in Kyiv ground to a standstill after the crash .
 Svoboda and UDAR withdrew their support from the ruling coalition . Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk announced his resignation .
 Parliament ultimately rejected Yatsenyuk’s resignation after agreeing to his proposed budget amendments . Poroshenko proceeded with a call for early elections to be held in October 2014 .
 In the east, the area under separatist control continued to recede, as the Ukrainian military steadily advanced on rebel strongholds of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Russia continues to deny involvement in the conflict . In August Moscow confirmed that a squad of Russian paratroopers had been captured while inside Ukraine .
 Ukrainian authorities released video interviews of the prisoners . Russian military officials stated that the soldiers had accidentally crossed the border .
 Ukrainian government troops experienced a sharp reversal of fortunes in late August . rebel forces opened a new front in the south, taking the city of Novoazovs’k and threatening the key port of Mariupol .
 Poroshenko flatly declared that Russian forces had entered Ukraine . NATO analysts estimated that more than 1,000 Russian troops were actively participating in the conflict .
 Ukraine and Russia met with separatist leaders in Minsk, Belarus, on September 5 . They agreed to a cease-fire that temporarily slowed, but did not stop, the violence continued .
 Poroshenko proposed a series of political and economic reforms that were designed to prepare Ukraine to apply for EU membership in 2020 .
 Poroshenko’s mandate received approval from voters on October 26, when pro-Western parties triumphed in snap parliamentary elections .
 Heavy fighting between government forces and rebels led to electricity shortages in the Luhansk region in October 2014 .
 Petro Poroshenko in Minsk, Belarus, in an effort to end the fighting in eastern Ukraine, August 26, 2014 .
 On November 2 separatists held local elections in Donetsk and Luhansk in violation of the Minsk cease-fire agreement .
 Ukrainian and Western authorities dismissed the results, which predictably favoured separatist candidates . Russia initially stated that it would recognize the elections, but it later walked back those comments .
 Poroshenko responded by vowing to rescind an agreement that would have granted additional autonomy to Donetsk and Luhansk . Poroshenko said the agreement would have given more autonomy to the two cities .
 In January 2015 the U.N. estimated that more than 5,000 people had been killed since the beginning of hostilities . The United Nations estimates more than five,000 have been killed.
 The cease-fire agreement had been largely discarded by both sides . By that point, both sides had largely discarded the agreement .
 Russian economy had been pushed into recession by Western sanctions and low oil prices . advanced Russian military equipment continued to appear in eastern Ukraine .
 rebels occupied Donetsk airport in late January after months of heavy fighting . They intensified efforts to capture the government-held town of Debaltseve .
 Hundreds killed in shelling of civilian areas in the conflict zone . At least 30 killed in a separatist rocket attack on Mariupol . World leaders pressed for a diplomatic solution to the crisis .
 The leaders of Ukraine, Russia, France, and Germany agreed on a 12-point peace plan on February 12, 2015 . It proposed the cessation of fighting, the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the release of prisoners, and the removal of foreign troops from Ukraine .
 The tenuous peace held, and heavy weapons were pulled back by both sides in early September 2015 .
 Frequent violations of the truce left over 9,000 dead and more than 20,000 wounded by year’s end .
 Ukrainian authorities estimated that over 2,000 Russian troops had been killed since the beginning of fighting in April 2014 .
 World leaders meeting in Minsk, Belarus, to discuss the terms of a cease-fire in eastern Ukraine, February 11, 2015 . The Ukraine crisis is the latest in the Ukraine crisis .
 As the situation in the east settled into a frozen conflict, Ukrainians grew impatient with the pace of political and economic reform .
 The Poroshenko administration had promised transparency and a renewed effort to stamp out endemic corruption . But it could claim few real successes .
 In May 2015 Poroshenko tapped former Georgian president Mikheil Saakashvili to serve as governor of the Odessa region . But he soon encountered resistance from Kyiv as a tug-of-war developed between anti-corruption crusaders and politicians aligned with the country’
 Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk narrowly survived a vote of no confidence in February 2016 . He resigned in April of that year .
 Poroshenko quickly moved to install his ally Volodymyr Groysman as prime minister . He was dogged by revelations about his use of offshore tax shelters during his tenure as president .
 A leak of documents from the Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca unveiled a money-laundering and tax-evasion operation of breathtaking scope . It implicates dozens of public figures and politicians from around the globe .
 Poroshenko denied any wrongdoing and stated that he had fully complied with the law . Poroshenko denies any wrongdoing .
 Poroshenko’s public approval rating sagged into the single digits approaching the 2019 presidential election . A pair of events in late 2018 boosted his popularity .
 In November 2018 Russian naval vessels in the Kerch Strait fired on Ukrainian ships and seized both the ships and their crews .
 Poroshenko declared martial law in 10 regions, the first time such a step had been taken since Ukraine's independence from the Soviet Union .
 Ukraine appealed to the United Nations, and the General Assembly voted in favour of a resolution . The resolution called on Russia to withdraw its forces from Crimea and to end its occupation of Ukrainian territory .
 The third of Poroshenko’s major pre-election policy initiative would be the creation of an independent Ukrainian Orthodox Church .
 The Orthodox churches of Ukraine had been under the jurisdiction of the Moscow Patriarchate since the 17th century . In December 2018 Poroshenko and Orthodox leaders announced a break with Moscow .
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I formally granted the Ukrainian Orthodox Church autocephalous status in January 2019 . By this point, the Russian Orthodox Church had already severed ties with Constantinople and the ecumenical patriarchate .
 The election of Volodymyr Zelensky and continued Russian aggression. In spite of Poroshenko’s efforts to direct the public conversation in the months leading to the March 2019 presidential election, official corruption and the economy remained voters’ key concerns .
 The race had initially appeared to be a replay of the 2014 contest between Poroshenko and Tymoshenko . TV personality Volodymyr Zelensky shattered the established order .
 Zelensky portrayed the president of Ukraine in a popular situation comedy . He leveraged his massive online following into a serious campaign against official corruption .
 In the first round of polling on March 31, 2019, Zelensky won over 30 percent of the vote . Poroshenko finished second with 16 percent .
 Zelensky crushed the incumbent in a landslide, capturing more than 73 percent of the vote . The second round was held on April 21 .
 Poroshenko's concession speech was marked with a promise that his political career was not yet over . Zelensky vowed that his first goal as president would be to achieve a lasting peace in war-torn eastern Ukraine .
 Zelensky took office on May 20, 2019, and used his inauguration speech to announce the dissolution of parliament and the triggering of snap legislative elections . He took office in May.
 Those elections, held on July 21, delivered an absolute parliamentary majority to Zelensky’s Servant of the People party .
 Zelensky's mandate allowed him to promote a peace settlement that would see Ukrainian forces and Russian-backed insurgents withdraw from the so-called “contact line’s” in eastern Ukraine .
 Zelensky's opponents characterized the move as a capitulation that would do nothing but legitimize Russian aggression in the Donets Basin and Crimea . He retained widespread support from a war-weary public .
 Zelensky's months-old administration focused on Ukraine's foreign and domestic challenges . He soon found himself drawn into a political scandal in the United States .
 Some $400 million in military aid for Ukraine had been approved by the U.S. Congress .
 Donald Trump put a hold on the funds prior to a July 25, 2019, phone call with Zelensky .
 Trump urged Zelensky to investigate the son of a political opponent, Joe Biden . Biden had served on the board of one of Ukraine's largest natural gas companies .
 Democrats were investigating Trump's alleged attempt to pressure Ukraine . Over a month later the military aid was finally released .
 That investigation eventually served as the basis for an impeachment inquiry against Trump . The investigation was launched on September 24, 2019 .
 Trump was acquitted by the United States Senate in a largely party-line vote . He responded by purging senior U.S. government and national security officials .
 Alexander Vindman, the top Ukraine expert on the National Security Council, was fired . The post of United States ambassador to Ukraine would remain vacant beyond the end of Trump’s term .
 The spread of the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 pandemic led to massive disruptions of daily life in Ukraine . The Ukrainian economy took a sharp hit from lockdowns and the closure of nonessential businesses .
 The situation was especially dire in the Donbas, as infrastructure damage from the Russian-backed insurgency led to serious disruptions of the water supply .
 Zelensky’s national mitigation strategy against COVID-19, the potentially deadly disease caused by the virus, put him at odds with some local politicians who sought to assert their independence under 2014 government decentralization reforms . This clash would have a significant effect on local elections in October
 Local parties dominated mayoral races, while national parties, including Zelensky’s Servant of the People, struggled .
The poor showing in local elections also reflected an overall decline in Zelensky’s public approval . The poor showing also reflected a decline in public approval of Zelenski .
 There appeared to be little progress on the populist reform agenda that had swept him into office . The conflict in the Donbas remained unsettled .
 Zelensky addressed the former matter with the passage of a law intended to curb the influence of oligarchs . The issue would soon devolve into the greatest threat to regional stability since the end of the Cold War .
 Russia began a massive buildup of troops and military equipment along its border with Ukraine . Between October and November 2021, Russia began the massive buildup .
 The Russian-backed separatist enclave of Transdniestria in Moldova, Moldova and Crimea were also sent to Belarus . Over the following months, additional forces were dispatched to Belarus and Crimea .
 By February 2022 Western defense analysts estimated that as many as 190,000 Russian troops were encircling Ukraine . They warned that a Russian incursion was imminent .
 Putin dismissed these accusations and claimed that an accompanying Russian naval buildup in the Black Sea was a previously scheduled exercise . Putin dismissed the accusations and said an accompanying naval buildup was previously scheduled .
 Putin issued demands that included de facto veto power over NATO expansion and containment of NATO forces . Western leaders consulted with both Zelensky and Putin in an effort to stave off a Russian invasion that appeared inevitable .
 This would remove the NATO security umbrella from eastern and southern Europe as well as the Baltic states . This would, in effect, remove the security umbrella. This would also remove the European and Baltic states.
 On February 21, 2022, Putin responded by recognizing the independence of the self-proclaimed people’s republics of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Putin ordered Russian troops into Ukrainian territory as “peacekeepers,” and Russian military activity in the Donbas . Putin has consistently disavowed by the Kremlin, but at last became overt .
 Western leaders, pledging solidarity with Ukraine, responded by levying a raft of sanctions against Russian financial institutions . Western leaders have pledged solidarity with the Ukraine .
 Zelensky delivered an impassioned plea for peace in the early hours of February 24 . He said Ukraine would defend itself .
 Within minutes explosions were heard in major cities across Ukraine . Air raid sirens began to sound in Kyiv .
Around the world, leaders condemned the unprovoked attack and promised swift and severe sanctions against Russia . Around the world.