 State Audit Service chief charged with profiteering released on personal recognizance . State Audit service chief is charged with profiteering on personal recognition .
 Volcker and Surkov are meeting for the first time in three years . Volcker's meeting with Surkov is unlikely to be worth it, according to the pair .
 Russia is studying Britain's critical infrastructure and may hit the power supply system . Russia is looking at Britain'scritical infrastructure and could hit the system .
 Even the supporters of Putin are afraid to speak to the occupied Crimea, the American correspondent Kim.
 The most developed robot in the world "froze" after the question of corruption in Ukraine at the forum in Davos .
 President Petro Poroshenko is convinced that Ukraine will gain a prospect of membership in the EU in 2021 . President Poroshenko believes Ukraine will get membership in Europe in 2021.
 The only thing that will change in 2021 is that Ukraine will gain EU membership prospect with the support of Poland and Lithuania, Poroshenko said .
 The president stressed the need for unity among the European Union’s nations and other democratic countries . The president also stressed the importance of unity among European nations .
 Ukraine signed the Association Agreement with the EU in 2014 following the Revolution of Dignity .
 In 2014-2017, the agreement was ratified by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, the European Parliament, and the parliaments of all the EU countries .
 Former Commander of United States Army Europe Lieutenant General Ben Hodges believes Russia will make every effort to locate the sites where Ukraine stores U.S.-supplied Javelin anti-tank missiles .
 The fact that Ukraine now has Javelins in its arsenal might prevent Russia from making “small land grabs’ and “moving the line’s line” at certain favorable periods .
 As reported, the United States administration announced its decision to allow selling lethal weapons to Ukraine .
 United States officials also reported that Ukraine had received Javelin ATGMs . U.S. officials also said Ukraine had also receivedJavelin.
 There is a training aspect to it, says Hodges . "It does not have magical powers but it is very good,’ he says .
 U.S. move to arm Ukraine did not spark harsh reactions in Europe and Russia, Hodges said . Hodges also said that the United States move did not sparks harsh reactions .
 Ambassador Volker did a great job of laying the groundwork and making sure that this decision did not break the unity of the Alliance, he said . I haven’t seen as much of a reaction from the Russians or Europeans to that decision, which tells me,
 Russian serviceman Viktor Ageev sentenced to 10 years in prison . The court in the government-controlled part of the Luhansk region passed a guilty verdict .
 Ageev’s lawyer Viktor Chevhuz wrote on social media, Censor.NET reports .
 The trial and legal debate in the criminal case of the Russian national were completed yesterday . The Russian national is accused of being a member of a criminal gang .
 The prosecutor considers the so-called self-proclaimed "Luhansk People's Republic" a terrorist organization . Ageev joined under the contract .
 Ageev was also charged with illegal possession and carrying of firearms and ammunition . Ageev is also accused of illegal possession of weapons and ammunition.
 The prosecutor requested to sentence him to 12-year imprisonment with confiscation of property for multiple offenses . The lawyer said the prosecutor requested the sentence .
 The defense sees the penalty as disproportional and intends to appeal against it . The defense says it will appeal against the penalty .
 Russian scout Ageev, born in 1995, was captured by fighters of the Ukrainian Army in a skirmish on June 24 .
 Lidia Havrylova, chief of the State Audit Service, was recently indicted on charges of illicit enrichment . She was released on personal recognizance until March 25 .
 Judge Oleksandr Bobrovnyk made the decision, according to Censor.NET .
 Havrylova will be released on personal recognizance until March 25, the judge announced . The judge announced the release on Monday .
 The court also ordered Havrylova to hand over all the passports, cooperate with investigators, and avoid contacts with witnesses in the case .
 Prosecutors requested to place Havrylova into pre-trial detention with the right to post 1 million hryvnia in bail . It is noteworthy that the prosecutors requested to put Havrieslova in pre- trial detention .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko is optimistic about relations with Washington . He declares substantial support from the United States for the presidency of Donald Trump .
 Russia is our neighbor. We need to try to keep the balance because it's our neighbor . Another thing is Russia, and we need to keep it balance .
 We need to try to establish a dialogue at a low level, but we need to demand respect for international law and also respect not only in Europe, the whole world, says the author .
 "We have very bad examples in the last 10 years Georgia, Ukraine" says Dud . "We've very bad example in the past 10 years," he says .
 The construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline is a political rather than an economic project . The pipeline is being built in a bid to build a gas pipeline in the region .
 Nord Stream 2 involves the construction of two gas pipelines with a total capacity of 55 billion m³ of gas a year from Russia to Germany . The two pipelines will be built along the Baltic Sea .
 The current Nord Stream gas pipeline consists of two 20 threads of length 1224 km with a throughput capacity of 27. bcm each . Gazprom began supplying this pipeline in 2012 .
 President of the European Council, Donald Tusk, said the project for the second stage of the North Stream pipeline is not in line with the EU energy rules . Tusk said that the project undermines Ukraine's role as a gas transit.
 Eight EU countries signed an appeal to the European Commission to protest the gas pipeline project . In March 2016, eight countries signed a petition against the pipeline project.
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko said on June 25, 2017 that the North Stream 2 is a very serious threat to Ukraine .
 The goal of the Russian project is to save Ukraine $ 2 billion that it receives for gas transit . He noted that the goal is to saving Ukraine $2 billion that the country receives for transit .
 The Ukrainian side was able to hinder the implementation of the initiative to return the Russian delegation to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe . The Russian delegation was unable to return to the parliamentary assembly .
 I thank almost the entire Ukrainian delegation, the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the Council of Europe and the BP secretariat who worked with us in Strasbourg for a cohesive work .
 The World Congress of Ukrainians and, personally, to Mr Eugene Czolia for holding a joint round table . The war on the Donbass managed to organize despite the resistance of certain CE officials .
 The Russian Federation has returned to the Russian Federation . We managed to stop blitzkrieg from returning to Russia .
Kremlin urged not to wait for the results of a meeting between the assistant to the president of the Russian Federation Vladislav Surkov and Kurt Volker .
 The press secretary of the head of the Russian state Dmytro Peskov said . The Russian state's press secretary said that the Russian government is not interested in the situation .
 The Kremlin is waiting for this event, he says . "This is a"" clock alignment, ""a working process," he tells reporters .
 V Surkov and K Volcker will meet in Dubai on Friday . As expected, the meeting will take place in Dubai .
 A Russian journalist, accredited at the Economic Forum in Davos, tried to provoke President Petro Poroshenko .
 A Russian propagandist asked Poroshenko in Russian why Ukraine "adopted a law on the war" The TSN was dressed in embroidery .
 He added that he would answer the question if it would sound in Ukrainian . And he said he would also answer if it was in Ukraine .
Russia is studying the critical infrastructure of Britain and its connection to the energy supply system . Russia is studying Britain's critical infrastructure and its link to energy supply systems .
 Russia is studying the critical infrastructure of Britain and its connection to the energy supply system . In an interview with the publication, Williamson noted that Russia is study the UK's critical infrastructure .
 UK Defense Secretary Gavin Williamson warned of Russia's plans for destruction of British infrastructure . He said thousands of casualties could be caused by Russia's destruction of infrastructure .
 Russia has been monitoring the UK's energy supply system for a long time, according to Williamson . Thousands of casualties could be caused by the blocking of the system, causing chaos .
 Britain has four underwater channels for supplying electricity from the continent and four more for the transportation of gas to the country .
 Polish Sejm on Friday adopted the bill submitted by the Kukiz'15 party setting a ban on promoting the so-called "Bandera ideology" with its historic roots from Ukraine .
 Radio Poland quoted leader of the party Pawel Kukiz as saying on social media . Radio Poland quotes him as saying in a statement .
 The bill defines the crimes of Ukrainian nationalists and Ukrainian units who collaborated with the III Reich . It introduces a possibility of launching criminal probes against deniers of such crimes .
 Residents of occupied Crimea complain that there is no work, prices have doubled, and even bribes have doubled . Residents of the occupied Crimea say there are no work and there are bribes and bribes .
 Lucian Kim said that the record is afraid to speak . Even supporters of the president of neighboring Russia Vladimir Putin are afraid to talk .
"One driver even told me that the bribes had doubled," the publication quoted . One driver even said that the bribe had doubled.
 Failure to fulfill Putin's promises of economic improvement in Crimea is disappointing with the population, says Lucian Kim .
 "Like the lack of political will, lack of economic opportunities, "said an American correspondent . Now he is very dissatisfied and wants to leave.
 Personality of Putin, in the opinion of the correspondent, is an important factor for the inhabitants of the peninsula . Putin's personality is a key factor for inhabitants of peninsula .
 The neighboring Russia is trying to make the process of returning the Crimea to Ukraine impossible . According to the neighboring Russia, the process is impossible .
 The robot has 62 mechanisms responsible for facial expressions and neck movements . The robot is designed to make facial expressions more natural .
 In Sofia's eyes, there are cameras that allow you to identify your face and set up visual contact .
 The U.S. Treasury Department has expanded the list of sanctions against Russia due to aggression in Ukraine . The sanctions are due to Russia's aggression in the Ukraine .
 The updated list contains 21 surnames of Russian citizens and Ukrainian citizens who are active participants in illegal organizations "LNR" and "DNR" The list also includes the names of 9 companies .
 The sanctions were imposed against Minister of Energy of the Russian Federation Andriy Cherezov and the Director of Operational Control and Management of Electricity Yevhen Hrabchak .
 Surgutneftegaz, Power Machines and Technopromeksport are among the companies that came under the sanctions .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko said that already known dates when the United States will supply defense weapons to Ukraine . They will not be publicly disclosed to the public .
 Rex Tillerson met with U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland . He said this on Friday, January 26, at a briefing on the results of a meeting with the Secretary of state .
"We are already seeing new opportunities for cooperation in the defense field today," Poroshenko said . " We are already see new opportunities" for cooperation, he said .
Militants in the Donbas are much more cautious to the front line, says one of them . They are more cautious after learning about Ukraine's new weapons .
 "As you understand, as it is a weapon, defense cooperation, I am not what I do not want, but definitely not interested in disclosing it," Poroshenko said .
 The U.S. supplies arms to Ukraine is rather small compared with the number of tanks that the Russian Federation has placed in the Donbas .
 CJSC Vneshtorgservis, OOO Technopromexport and Power Machines are among the companies included in the new U.S. sanction list .
 The last two appeared in the supply of Siemens turbines to the annexed Crimea . The turbines were used in Crimea .
 Russia sent gas turbines to the Crimea of German concern Siemens to Crimea . Despite EU sanctions, Russia sent turbines to Crimea in July 2017 .
 The Russian company acknowledged the supply of modernized Siemens turbines to Crimea . The company acknowledged that it supplied the turbines to the Crimea .
New sanctions against Russia were approved by the EU through Siemens turbines . Subsequently, new sanctions were approved through Siemen turbines . The EU approved the new sanctions on Russia by the same way .
 Russia threatened Siemens with sanctions due to EU restrictions . It was also reported that Russia threatened the company with sanctions .
 Siemens announced changes in the work with Russian customers after the delivery of turbines to Crimea .
 Siemens continues to take part in contests for the supply of equipment . In November, the Ministry of Energy of Russia stated that Siemens continued to participate in contests .
 On December 19, 2017 Siemens signed an agreement with Russia on the supply of gas turbines . Siemens also signed a deal with Russia.
 The United States imposed sanctions against a company through which the Russian Federation legalized trade with the ""DPR"" and ""LNR"" Vneshtorgservice . The company's leader Volodymyr Pashkov, a former vice governor of the Irkutsk region in the
 "Vneshtorgservis" transferred to the management of factories, mines and other enterprises in the territory of self-proclaimed republics .
 Russia is among the few countries that have recognized South Ossetia as an independent country . In turn, Russia is one of the few nations that has recognized the country as independent .
 The trade of the Russian Federation with self-proclaimed republics is legalized in South Ossetia . The trade is through the companies registered in the country .
 Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has not changed the tradition of wearing colored socks during a visit to the World forum in Davos .
 During a speech at the forum on Trudeau were wearing socks with yellow ducks .
"Even the money for normal socks is not enough," the network users are joking . The network users say they are joking about the lack of money .
 The Canadian PM was in dark colored socks with a white abstraction during his official visit to Ukraine .
 Recently, there has been a change in the more rigid policy towards Russia, which was not the case before .
 Russian political scientist Lilia Shevtsova writes in his column for "Apostrophe" He writes about his work in a book called "A Postrophe"
 Russia is no more a serious factor a new list of sanctions against the elites, according to a political scientist . A radical change in the Russian course in U.S. foreign policy, says the scientist .
 Already very soon the United States will present the so-called Kremlin report . The U.S. will be presenting the report soon .
 The U.S. Department of the Treasury has to prepare a list of high-ranking Russian officials and businessmen close to Vladimir Putin . Further personal sanctions may be imposed .
 This Washington step marks a new policy of hard pressure on the Kremlin, which will have consequences for Russia and the whole of the West . This step, like some others before, marks the new policy.
 Russian political scientist Lilia Shevtsova writes in his column for "Apostrophe" This is written in a column for the Russian political science scientist .
 Official Moscow has been in a state of nervous expectation for several months . Official Moscow is in a 'nervous expectation' for months .
 Russian statehood's guarantors were dependent on another state. Such is the price of statehood, whose guarantors are dependent on each other .
 The U.S. "list" should excite the Russian elite, but not the main event that can affect the Russian political landscape .
 The range of strategic decisions of the U.S. establishment over the past six months indicate radical changes in American foreign policy . Much more serious is the range of decisions.
 The paradox is that these shifts occur during the term of Trump's presidency, which is the most pro-Russian president in U.S. history .
 U.S. is turning tough restraint on Russia, including measures to undermine the Russian political regime . But it is for him that the United States is turning tougher restraint on the Russian regime .
 In August 2017, the United States Congress endorses the law "On Resistance to American Opponents with Sanctions" The law equates Russia with states that, in the sense of American legislators, are global "rogue" In January 2018, Washington endorses a new National Defense Strategy
 Republicans should not give the Republicans a chance to mitigate the Russian course, according to the GOP . Russia should become a party orientation towards Russia and not give them a chance.
 It is unlikely that Trump will be able to exit the current course and decide on a new reboot relative to Moscow .
 America creates an extremely unfavorable field for Russia to develop its economy and to meet the interests of the ruling class personally . America creates a very unfavorable field.
 Russian ruling class receives rents in Russia and exports it to the West . Western structures and groups involved in servicing Russia must also be nervous .
 Russian kleptocracy. Now they will have to lose their reputation, but also their income for servicing Russian k Leptocracy .
 There is a threat to the whole system of servicing corrupt officials from other authoritarian states, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The campaign could have seismic consequences for Russia and the whole of the West . The West is gaining support for authoritarian kleptocracies .
 The Russian ruling class will increasingly feel its vulnerability if Europe decides to join the policy of hard pressing .
 It will come to realize that Putin is not a guarantor of their well-being and security . It will also come to realizing that Putin isn't a guarantors of their security .
 The Russian ruling class will realize that Putin is not a guarantor of his welfare and security, according to a political scientist . The West has pressure from the West, the scientist says .
 Washington's decisions undermine the conditions for Russian modernization, but also a model of the survival of the elite at the expense of parasitic in Western society .
 The Kremlin will answer, but so that America will not even annoy even more, and so as not to give the Russian audience an idea that it is about protecting the ""trillion"" stolen from Russia . Most likely, the Kremlin will answers, but the Kremlin is likely to answer .
 Russian elite publishing a list of non-hitters. So let's see what will become for the Russian elite.
 The fighters are fighting against the forces of the ATO in the Donbas . They are in an unstable position due to the return of the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 He noted that Ukraine continues to build its military potential and pointed to the unchanging U.S. position on the Donbas .
 The editor-in-chief of the Internet Resource ""Information Resistance" Yuriy Karin also follows a similar point of view .
 The trade union is not capable of carrying out combat operations by units . It is unlikely that they will be taken by the occupiers to Russia, says Karin Karin .