 The plot revolves around the arrival of a foppish young man who is mistaken for an important government official working undercover .
Russian Drama Theater in Crimean capital of Simferopol, Crimea, has added resonance . The lines have an added resonance.
 Two policemen in combat fatigues stand at attention nearby, ready to carry out orders .
 Gogol’s play sounds strangely familiar, as if art and life were indistinguishable from each other . The play has been described as 'gogol'
 The Crimean Academic Russian Drama Theater is an imposing, gray, neoclassical building at the intersection of Pushkin and Gorky streets . The building is just a stone's throw from the Crimean Parliament .
 The theater company was founded nearly two centuries ago in a modest, stone barn . It was founded by an ailing Moscow merchant on the advice of his physician .
 Over the years, the barn was expanded, then replaced by newer structures . The barn was built in the 1930s, then expanded into new structures .
 The theater director is Anatoly Novikov, a theater director . The palace is ruled by the will of one man . It could rival any royal palace .
 Eighty-seven years old, dressed in dark-green, double-breasted suit and purple necktie with a gold pin, he projects an air of elegant, incontrovertible authority .
 His hairline may have receded, but he dyes his comb-over black, and his smile reveals a perfect set of white teeth .
 The hearing aid in his right ear seems to be a ruse . He can choose to hear with or without it as he pleases .
 If Novikov speaks with bombast about the survival of theater, it is largely because he is a survivor himself . He says he's a survivor.
 Born in the Donbas area of eastern Ukraine, as a child he lived through the mass famine of the early 1930s . Joseph Stalin's decision to confiscate all the grain from the countryside triggered the famine .
 Two Nazi officers lodged in the family house and offered him and his parents a modicum of protection, as well as food . He managed to survive the Second World War partly because two Nazi officers stayed in the house .
 Novikov continues to direct and act and has played every major role in the theater’s repertoire . He is the demonic mastermind in Mikhail Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita .
 Novikov's character Woland is his favorite character, he calls Woland “my guardian’s guardian. The latter is hisfavorite character .
 He can play friend, lover, lover and lover, joker, teacher, politician, and—best of all—tyrant . He can be a teacher, a lover, a teacher and a politician .
 In 2010, more than a dozen theater workers rebelled against him, he fired the leaders immediately . When he quit smoking, the whole theater became smoke-free .
 In his office, an oriel with tall stained-glass windows throws colorful patterns across the floor . The oriel is a colorful oriel that throws colorful colors across the floors .
Large sculptures of women and cats made of tropical woods, decorative sabers and knives, and what, during Soviet Union, must have been expensive furniture available only to Communist-party elite .
 Icons and paintings hang on the walls, including heavy wood-carved portraits of Jesus and Shakespeare . Icons, paintings and portraits of Shakespeare and Jesus also hang on walls .
 Viktor Yanukovych is the recently deposed president of Ukraine . Among his numerous accolades is a framed letter by Viktor Yanukovych, congratulating Novikov on his birthday .
 The enlarged photograph shows Novikov in intimate conversation with Russian president Vladimir Putin .
 These were Russian special-operation forces, sent in response to the coup in Kiev that had removed Yanukovych, a pro-Russian president, from power . They were sent to Kiev after Yanukovych was removed from power.
 Ukraine is slipping out of Russia’s centuries-old grip and moving closer to economic and political integration with the European Union . Putin acted quickly.
 The peninsula had remained part of Ukraine after the Soviet Union's collapse . It was Ukraine's most heavily ethnic Russian region, the home of Russia’s Black Sea fleet .
 Vladimir the Great accepted Christianity for himself and his state in 988d. It was on the site of Crimea’s ancient colony of Chersonesos .
 Crimea was inherently Russian on all but paper, and the crisis in Kiev offered an opportunity to bring the peninsula back under Moscow’s control and reassert Russian geopolitical power .
 Once governed by the Crimean Khanate, the peninsula became part of Russia in 1783 . It was annexed by Catherine the Great when it was part of the Ottoman Empire .
 Petersburg was the empire’s modern “window to the West,” Crimea was the southern casement overlooking the classical world, an ancient land of fairy tales and oriental myth .
 Crimea, along with the Caucasus region, became a locus of inspiration for the Russian Romantic movement . Crimea's verdant mountains rose out of a wine-dark sea, and its Caucasus region became an inspiration for Romantic movement.
 Alexander Pushkin wrote in "The Fountain of Bakhchisaray" The poem is about the tragic love of a Crimean khan for one of his Christian captives .
 The region has been transformed into a bohemian playground with palaces and elaborate villas, casinos and bathing establishments . The rugged coast of the region is dotted with resorts and casinos .
 Peace was briefly interrupted in the 1850s by the Crimean War, in which Leo Tolstoy fought as an army officer .
 Crimea's romance endured and the peninsula eventually recovered. Despite the war’s devastation, Crimea”s romance endured .
 Anton Chekhov composed his famous plays Three Sisters and The Cherry Orchard . It was in the upscale resort town of Yalta that he composed the plays .
Maximilian Voloshin hosted many of Russia’s most talented writers . Marina Tsvetaeva, Osip Mandelstam, and Andrei Bely.
 Even during the Soviet era, when the resorts were downgraded into drab sanatoria for the newly emerging proletariat, the peninsula retained some of its literary character .
 The Black Sea was the most exotic corner of the USSR . It was a stage set against the waters of the Black Sea .
 Novikov knows that his mission as director is as much political as it is artistic . He knows that he's not only political but artistic .
 Crimea's close historical and cultural ties to Russia became Putin's strongest rationale for military occupation . Crimea’s history and cultural links to Russia were Putin's strong rationale for the occupation .
 Pushkin, Tolstoy, and Chekhov had briefly resided in Crimea . In the nationalistic mindset, it made it essentially a Russian province .
 Novikov’s theater helped strengthen conservative Russian identity, which arguably made the occupation possible .
 Novikov looks assertively at his actors in an immense rehearsal room .
 Russian playwright Alexander Ostrovsky is working on a new production of Guilty Without Fault . But no one seems to be in the mood.
 The Crimea referendum will determine whether Crimea stays in Ukraine or rejoins Russia . The referendum is scheduled for March 16 .
 The actors stand in a semicircle around their director, murmuring approval . All the members of the company consider themselves Russian, even though their passports are Ukrainian .
Russian and Soviet greatness is centered around Moscow, not Kiev. Raised on a steady historical diet of Russian and Soviet greats .
 Konstantin Stanislavski was Russia's most renowned theater director and later a darling of Soviet drama . On one wall hangs a portrait of Stanislvski, Russia’s most famous theater director .
 A large socialist-realist painting of a group of Simferopol actors executed by the Germans at the end of the Second World War for secretly aiding the Soviet government .
 There is occasional dissent among members of Novikov’s company. There is, of course, occasional dissent.
 When the occupation began, one actor refused to live under Russian rule and moved to the western Ukrainian city of Lviv .
 A young actress tells me that she doesn't think joining Russia will do Crimea any good, and that she fears oppression . She fears oppression, she says .
 Novikov's uncompromising authority has cowed the bravest among the dissenters . But those are isolated opinions, and even the bravests have been cowed into silence .
 A few days after the popular referendum in Crimea, people fill the seats at the Russian Drama Theater to watch a performance of Chekhov’s Uncle Vanya .
Professor and his young and attractive wife Yelena visit their country estate . Their presence causes much consternation and upsets the order of daily life .
 Most people have seen the play a number of times; they have studied it in school, written papers .
Novikov’s interpretation of Uncle Vanya does not strive for originality or novelty . Novikov's interpretation is not originality and novelty .
 The period costumes and set are conventional, the acting generally solid but full of pathos and emotional overreach . The acting is typical of a lot of classical Russian drama .
 The production is rooted in the belief that theater should not innovate but preserve an inviolable tradition . It is a production rooted in a belief that theaters should not innovate but preserve a tradition .
 Novikov steps to the front of the stage, much more nimbly than his character . When the play ends, the house erupts into applause .
 The plum and cherry trees are already blossoming in flashes of white and pink . Outside, in the warm night, they are already blooming .
Only a few bored soldiers with automatic rifles stand guard on street corners . Only a few of them stand guard.
 Reporting for this project was funded by the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting . The project is based on a project from the Pulitzer Centre on Crisis reporting .
 Boryana Katsarova is a freelance photographer specializing in documentary, editorial, and portrait photography .