 The state of Ukraine today is a sad outcome of Stalin's attempts to mix up nations and boundaries, disrupt natural historical ties and create a new Soviet man .
 Taking it into consideration is the starting point of our thinking, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's something that is sadly missing in the political debates today"
 Ukraine has no historical tradition of statehood, and in over 20 years of its existence the country failed to create a state that would be accepted by its population .
 The state was not born out of its people's efforts to gain self-determination and sovereignty . It came into being through the dissolution of the Soviet Union by its political leadership . It was created by Moscow in their then valid borders .
 The largely passive population's anti-Moscow sentiment was exacerbated by Gorbachev's perestroika and its catastrophic results . The largely Passive population'sAnti-Moscow sentiments were exacerbated by the Soviet regime .
 The local party nomenklatura also feared Yeltsin's policies aimed to crush the old system . The local Soviet party nomklatur a also feared the new system .
 At the beginning of its independence, Ukraine functioned under the leadership of the Russian-speaking Soviet elite from the eastern part of the land as a sort of a Russian B-state . Ukraine is a part of a vast post Soviet space with enormous potential .
 The Russian and russified areas of the east and south of Ukraine were artificially linked to the originally Polish Galicia and Subcarpathian Ruthenia . The lands that had never belonged to any of the old Slav states in the East.
 The Ukrainian government is considered very controversial outside the nationalistic western Ukraine . Their legacy is very controversial.
 The Kievan Rus period, the acceptance of orthodox Christianity, or the tradition of the Zaporozhian cossacs who fought the Turks and the Poles and brought Ukraine of the time into Russia .
 The common Russo-Ukrainian experience of the Soviet times as well as World War II created strong human, social, economic, economic and political bonds that cannot be easily replaced . The common Russian experience of Soviet times created strong social, social and economic bonds .
 More than 20 years of Ukrainian independence were not enough to create a common Ukrainian identity . The people of this very heterogenous land have not been convinced that independent Ukraine is the right social formation .
 Ethnic Ukrainians living in the west harbor anti-Russian feelings and wish to build Ukraine as a Ukrainian nation state . Such ambition is seen in especially among ethnic Ukrainians who accentuate the tragic experience of the Soviet era .
 The position of a ‘second’ Russian state as sought by Presidents Kravchuk and Kuchma is unacceptable to them . The position is unacceptable, says the Russian President .
 It is no coincidence that this backward and weak western part of Ukraine was the moving force behind the 2004 Orange Revolution as well as the Maidan protests in 2014 .
 By overthrowing Janukovych, the nationalist western part of the land assumed exclusive power on the West, the EU and the U.S. The West is trying to disrupt the long, traditional Ukrainian ties to Russia .
Western Ukraine is not strong enough to fulfill its plans, according to experts . The economic weight of its eastern part so far has prevailed every time, they say .
 Ukraine's Russians do not and cannot share the nationalist ambitions of western Ukrainians . Ukraine's Russia is a great cultural nation, formerly dominant throughout the region .
 The disruption of close ties with Russia, generally wealthier, more successful and orderly today, is unthinkable to them . The disruption is unthinkable.
 They do not see the Soviet era as an occupation by a foreign power . They consider themselves as victors of World War II, not victims . They do also see themselves asvictors of WW2 as victims .
 Bandera's sympathizers are traitors and fascists in their eyes, a state built on such legacy is unacceptable . The state's sympathizer is traitor and fascist in their eye, says the author .
 Russians mistrust the West and do not want to be part of blocks aimed against Russia . Like Russians, they mistrust West and don't want to join blocks aimed at Russia .
 Militant anti-russism of western-Ukrainian nationalists is insulting and threatening to them . The group's anti-Russism is threatening and insulting to them.
 Due to the Soviet tradition, this part of the population has long been indifferent to national issues .
Present developments make this group more aware of national feelings . However, present developments make the group more and more antagonistic in that respect .
 Ukraine is a divided country on the threshold of economic bankruptcy . After 20 years of independence, Ukraine is on the verge of bankruptcy .
 Two nations with different and probably antagonistic visions of the future, two nations growing apart every day . It is home to two nations.
 Both nations look up to the world outside with unrealistic expectations . One to the West, one to Russia, the other to the Russia .
 Ukraine in its current shape could have been saved by several decades of peaceful development with a modest and sophisticated foreign policy . The country is gradually improving its economy and standard of living .
 Attempts at radical change represent a fundamental threat in such a fragile, heterogenous and politically sensitive country, says author .
 Ukraine is a country that has a history of violence and violence in its history . The country has been known to be a major source of violence in recent years .
 Ukraine was born after the downfall of Communism as an essentially non-historical state, cursed with a fundamental identity problem from day one .
 That has always been a serious hinderance in the country's development, and it remains so still today . That's always been an issue, but it's still a problem today .
Even two decades of massive western support to Bosnia and Herzegovina, artificially created after the disintegration of Yugoslavia bore no fruit. Till this day they have not learned anything from the fact the repeated attempts to ‘export democracy’ have failed .
 Ukraine has not implemented a consistent post-Communist transformation, the way it was carried out in other post-communist countries . Ukraine has been criticized for its lack of a consistent transformation .
 No standard system of political parties was introduced, and the Ukrainian parliament is still not a standard parliament .
 The ‘Orange Revolution’ took place twenty years after our ‘velvet’ counterpart, but even this delay did not bring about the necessary change . The „Orange Revolution.’s“ took place 20 years after their „velvet.
There was no consistent economic transformation, although the communist system was forsaken . There was no consistency of economic transformation .
 The outcome of that was that was the seizure of the economy by oligarch clans, stagnation, industrial decay, high unemployment, continued dependence on Russia, etc.
 The comparison with Belarus is revealing, whether we like Mr Lukashenko or not .
After the fall of communism, both countries started out with comparable results . Today the per capita GDP in Belarus is 50 percent higher than in Russia .
 10 percent of Ukraine's population had left the country over the last twenty years . Over 5 million people or 10 percent had left Ukraine in the last 20 years .
 The inexorable duels between Jushchenko, Tymoshenko and Yanukovych led to no good, it was revealed .
 The enormous wealth of politicians and oligarchs as presented in the media is something unimaginable in Eastern Europe . The Czech Republic is much less in the Czech Republic .
 The amount of frustration is high enough to see even for those who are not experts on Ukraine . The level of frustration has been high enough for those not experts to see .
 At any rate, this is a fragile, unstable country easily vulnerable by outside interference . The country is vulnerable to outside interference.
 It does not have to be a military intervention, political interference is enough. Political interference is not enough, it doesn't need to be military intervention . It does have to have a military Intervention, political intervention is enough .
 All it takes is incitement of unrest, riots, plotting groups of population against one another, populist games against all local authorities . The unleashing of nationalist conflicts or downright hatred.
 The Ukrainian dispute can be interpreted in a more simple and obvious way if we turn it into a model, where details disappear and the bare skeleton of the issue remains .
 Ukrainians are deeply and justifiably dissatisfied with the situation in their country. This model is based on a probably correct thesis that Ukrainians are very dissatisfied with their country .
 Government refuses EU association agreement instead of focusing on ‘bringing the country to Europe’ and tough bargaining with Russia on gas prices and other things .
 The demonstrators are joined by trained and highly armed individuals as well as domestic and foreign organized groups . Russian support is absent .
 There is general assumption that Russia is happy about this process of destabilization in this important neighboring country, if not directly supportive of it .
 In 1939 and 1968 the democrats of the world did not protest strongly enough, therefore it has to be done properly now . The democrats did not Protest strongly enough in 1939 and1968 .
 The Hitler-Brezhnev-Putin line is plain to see and those who don't see it, did not see it then, either . Millions of Russians living in it and has to find some sort of a modus vivendi with Russia .
 This repeatedly surfacing crisis has been chosen as a pretext to bring about a new confrontation between the West and Russia, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: This is the reason to despise Russia .
 Russia has painted the picture of Russia as an expanding superpower that is anxiously waiting for an opportunity to occupy Ukraine . These people have known full well that destabilization of an important neighbor is something that Russia cannot accept easily .
 This is exactly what is happening in the U.S. and Western Europe. This is the same thing that is happening to the United States and Europe .
 It is obvious that these people did not feel like remaining in a vacuum and wished to return to Russia . It's obvious that they did not want to return.
 The sequence of events was different from what we find in mainstream media purporting that Russia annexed Crimea on its own will . It is equally obvious Russia can be happy about it, but it is also obvious that it can behappy .
 Crimea became part of Russia as an example of renewed Russian imperialism . The West interprets the fact that Crimea is part of the Russian state as a sign of Russia's imperialism .
 We consider this to be irrational, but our fear is that this is the mainstream interpretation of the Ukrainian situation . Russia's intentions in the Czech Republic, Europe and probably America, too, too .
 Russia's president is trying to avert risky steps towards a new cold war of which we and our freedoms would be the inevitable victims . That is why our polemic is not in defense of Russia and its president, but an attempt to avert dangerous steps .
 "Model of two different views of the Ukrainian crisis can be further developed, supplemented or enriched" "We are convinced that it is good for basic orientation," says the author .
 Crimea is being controlled more and more by people and groups from the western,e.e. non-Russian part of Ukraine, people whose dominant policy is to oppose Russia and the Russians .
 Crimea wants to be part of the wealthier and more successful Russia . It is no surprise that the people of Crimea want to be more successful and wealthier .
 The Ukrainian army in the Crimea hardly put up any resistance, allowing itself to be disarmed . The Russian army largely crossed over to the other side – the Russian army .
 Western commentators present various legal arguments asserting that such steps are in contradiction with the legal and constitutional framework of Ukraine today . The separation of Crimea and its incorporation into Russia, the ongoing declarations of all kinds of separatist Russian “republics’ and further demands for referenda aimed at
 Ukrainian law has to be put in the appropriate context, without trying to look like experts on Ukrainian law . This, too, has to have been put in a appropriate context .
 Some of the separatist moves may be illegal, but that is only one half of the truth . These largely academic arguments may be correct when analyzing the illegality of some separatist moves .
 Real life is always ahead of the law and the law adjusts to it only retroactively . The law changes to the law every time it is changed .
 The changed reality induces new laws and these are by definition only temporary, too, too .
 Real life and real needs usually find their ways, and very seldom the legislative changes that come with them manage to keep up .
 In recent history, there was only one case of a truly constitutional and legally implemented division of a state, namely that of the Czechoslovak federation .
 The disintegration of Yugoslavia, and later Serbia, was chaotic by nature, often taking place in confrontation and violence with many cases of fait accompli .
 The majority of modern countries in Europe and around the world have gained their independence as a result of a violent struggle, ignoring the law of the time .
 To deny the people this right by pointing out the illegality of separatism is impossible. To deny this right is impossible, says David Cameron . To deny a right to separatism, he says.
 The Austro-Hungarian empire in 1918 was born in contradiction with the constitution of the United States . Failing to accept that, we would have to deny the legality of the U.S. or indeed our own state, too .
 International acceptance of the changing borders is not a legal issue first and foremost . It depends more on the actual balance of power in the country, region or world .
 Modern times differ from ancient history only ever so slightly . In that respect, modern times differ only so slightly.
 Should we insist on international and legal assessment of this kind of changes, we would find ourselves in a fatal trap of double standards and contradictions, says John Sutter .
 It is clear that chaos, anarchy and economic crisis make it easy for the West as well as Russia to interfere in Ukrainian affairs .
 Most ethnic Russians look up to the relatively wealthy, stable and powerful Russia . It is also not surprising that most ethnic Russians, dissatisfied with the unfavorable conditions in Ukraine, look up.
 Most of them have no reason for loyalty towards Ukraine, and massively speak out in favor of joining Russia in a referendum . The fact that most of them are biased can surprise only the most biased observer .
 There is no reason to cast doubt over such stance by rejecting individual conditions of the respective referendum . There is therefore no reason for cast doubt on such stance.
 There is no way to maintain Ukraine's unity through legal arguments, laws and the constitution . Ukraine's constitution is a key part of the country's unity .
 It is equally impossible to do so through the very democratic procedures such as the elections, whether parliamentary or presidential . It is also impossible to make such a decision through the democratic procedures .
 Should the west overpower the east in an election or vice versa, it will not be a solution even if the winner has a democratic majority and is therefore legitimate . If the winner of the election has a majority, it is not a solution .
 Ukraine's future can only lie in the victory of a broad Ukraine-wide project satisfying both sides, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Ukrainian developments will have a number of direct or indirect consequences in the short and long term, from the political as well as economic point of view .
Short-term consequences of the economic kind are obvious for the Czech Republic . A decreasing number of tourists from Russia and Ukraine, less business in spas of western Bohemia, the slowing down of certain economic and investment activities .
 That is certainly unpleasant for certain concrete Czech businesses, but probably not fatal for the country as a whole .
 Sooner or later activities of this kind will go back to the old levels of this type of activities .
Businesses with Russia and Ukraine are affected by the situation . We know it is difficult for those affected to take this relaxed position .
 The state has to be worried and we do not expect the state to offer any compensation . They have to be concerned and we don't expect any compensation, we say .
 International politics will be radicalized, there will be a new level of confrontation between the West and the East . The conflict between western Europe and Putin's increasingly self-confident Russia will be ever sharper .
 The Czech Republic is a small country in the vicinity of the symbolic borderline between the East and the West . This increased international tension is a definite disadvantage for the Czech Republic .
 The European political mainstream makes a calculation that the Ukrainian crisis can be used to strengthen European centralization and unification . The idea has been resisted by most member states so far .
 This further toughening of European unification and centralization goes against the real interests of the Czech Republic . President Zeman thinks otherwise .
 We fear the limitation of civil rights, especially freedom of speech, and the freedom of dissent from official opinion . We fear that civil rights will be limited, especially free of speech and dissent .
 A large part of the European political mainstream tries, together with the United States, to turn Russia into a “bogey man in the East’s East, something that is in the U.S. interest .
 That, too, is not in our interest and there are no benefits in it for us, too . That's not in the interest of us, and there's no benefits for us .
 Czech "neocons" keep propping up their careers in the belated battles against communism and Russian imperialism . Some Czech citizens still lend their ears to such propaganda, says author .
 It is clearly a surrogate activity, manifesting an obvious absence of a positive political agenda . It's clearly a surrogacy activity, says David Frum .