 Medvedev pursued a reset with the incoming Obama administration and spoke about the importance of the rule of law domestically .
 Putin’s candidacy and the subsequent fraudulent parliamentary and presidential elections sparked popular protests . The subsequent fraudulent elections sparked new political repressions .
 Economic growth rates in its aftermath stagnated, despite the fact that the price of oil generally remained high .
 Russia's political and economic ties with CIS countries showed signs of decline . Putin’s popular support within the country started to decrease in 2012 and 2013, according to the report .
 The Kremlin has started preparations for more radical steps in accordance with the old frozen-conflicts strategy . To keep its political grip both internally and regionally, the Kremlin started preparations .
 When Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych did so, demonstrations involving tens of thousands began . The protests began when the president did so .
 An effort to repress those protests brought hundreds of thousands into the streets . Hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets to protest against the protests .
 Putin responded by seizing Crimea forcibly, “annexing’s it, and starting a hybrid war in Donbas, Russia says . Yanukovych fled Ukraine for Russia after the Revolution of Dignity of February 2014 .
 This in turn prompted Western sanctions, increased NATO deployments to the east, and tensest East-West relations since the height of the Cold War .
 Putin's popular approval spiking even higher than before 2012, allegedly to 86 percent . For internal Russian audiences, the “return of Crimea” and “standing up to the West” were claimed by Putin as a political victory .
Western sanctions were accompanied by a sharp fall in hydrocarbon prices in late 2014 . At the same time, domestic problems worsened as Western sanctions worsened .
 Russian GNP fell by over 3 percent in 2015 and living standards by nearly 10 percent . Living standards by 10 percent also fell by more than 10 percent in 2014 .
Recovery since then has been slow, even as oil prices rose to over $70 per barrel . Recovery since then is slow, despite the rise of oil prices.