 Ukrainian military pilot Nadia Savchenko arrived home in Kyiv today after nearly two years in a Russian jail . Two Russians held in Ukraine were returned to Moscow in a prisoner swap .
 European Union's foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini, hailed Russia's release of Savchenko . She said she was celebrating with Ukraine .
 Mogherini said on Twitter that the EU celebrates together with her country . "Long awaited good news"
 Mogherini had repeatedly urged Russia to free Savchenko since his arrest in 2014 . He had warned at one point that the Ukrainian was at risk of death because of a hunger strike .
 Germany has welcomed the swap of two Russian prisoners in exchange for Savchenko . Savchenko was jailed for alleged involvement in an attack that killed two Russian journalists on eastern Ukraine's frontline .
 Ukrainian court sentenced two Russian soldiers captured last May to 14 years in prison for their involvement in the pro-Russian separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 Handing over Savchenko is likely to ease tensions between Moscow and the West . European Union may decide whether to extend sanctions against Russia .
 Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Savchenko was granted a pardon by Russian President Vladimir Putin to leave jail and return home . Savchenko, who was elected a member of the Ukrainian parliament, was granted the pardon .
 Alexander Alexandrov and Yevgeny Yerofeyev landed at Moscow’s Vnukovo airport on a special flight from Kyiv . Peskov also said that the two Russians, Alexander Alexandro and Yerfeyev, were now back in Russia .
 Ukraine accused them of being Russian special forces officers fighting in eastern Ukraine . Moscow has never acknowledged the two were following its orders .
 Savchenko volunteered to fight with a ground unit against pro-Moscow separatists who rose up against Kyiv’s rule .
 She was accused of acting as a spotter, calling down the fire that killed the journalists . But she denied the accusation .
 She is widely seen in Ukraine as a symbol of resistance against Russia . Her defiant behaviour in court during her trial was bolstered by her defiant behaviour .
 At one point, she interrupted the judge reading out his verdict by standing on a bench by singing the Ukrainian anthem at the top of her voice .
 Yerofeyev and Alexandrov both said in interviews last year they were Russian special forces soldiers . They were captured while carrying out a secret operation in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia's relations with Ukraine have been toxic since an uprising in 2014 forced out the Moscow-backed Ukrainian leader Viktor Yanukovich and installed a pro-Western administration .
 Moscow said it was protecting the local Russian-speaking population from persecution by the new authorities in Kiev . Western governments called it an illegal land-grab and imposed sanctions on Moscow .
 Pro-Moscow separatists began an armed separatist rebellion in the Donbass region of eastern Ukraine . The region has a large-Russian speaking community .
 Fighting between rebels and Ukraine’s forces killed thousands of people .
 A fragile ceasefire has been in place since last year, but there is no permanent settlement to the conflict . The conflict has been a fragile ceasefire since 2013 .