 World leaders tend to be tactful people, whatever else might be said about them . World leaders — heads of state especially — tend to being tactful .
 The phone-conversation between Ashton and Paet was annotated by the author to explain what they were referring to . It was accompanied with a link to the phone-Conversation itself .
 Paet regretted needing to inform Ashton that the pro-EU side was actually controlled by some scoundrel . Ashton was shocked to hear this; but as Ashton made evident from her response, she didn't want to discuss this matter any further .
 Two seasoned diplomats. Both understood that there was nothing they could do about water already “under the bridge’s bridge, and on its way .
 Both of them realized, now, that its way was anything but democratic . But both realized now, now. But both of the two realized that it was not just democratic .
 This assignment ended up being fulfilled on 26 February 2014, just four days after the February 22nd coup . The assignment was fulfilled on February 26, 2014 .
 Obama wanted Yulia Tymoshenko to win the election to replace Yanukovych as President . The post was put up for a vote in only the northeastern half of Ukraine, the half that favored the EU and the United States over Russia .
 Obama had to settle for the slightly less racist-fascist anti-Russian, Petro Poroshenko, when he won on May 25th . He was downgraded to little more than a figurehead status .
 Putin enabled them to hold a plebiscite in Crimea on 16 March 2014 . The result was 96% to rejoin Russia — virtually the same percentage that was shown in opinion-polls of Crimeans .
 President Obama wanted to punish Putin for taking this defensive measure against the anti-Russian coup in Ukraine . U.S. President Obama wants Putin to be punished for his actions against Ukraine .
 The EU went along with the weakest sanctions that Obama pushed for against Russia . The EU held out for as long as they could to delay the serious ones, until 17 July 2014, when the Obama regime in Ukraine sent up at least one fighter-jet and downed the MH17 Malaysian airliner
 EU now consented to join really stiff sanctions against Russia . The EU believes that the downing wouldn't have happened if Russia had not helped the separatists to do it .
 EU leaders came to know that Obama had been behind the atrocity too . But then, then, they came to known that Obama was behind this atrocity .
 Nuland's 'F—k the EU' was now the EU's complicity with the racist-fascist, or ideologically nazi, anti-Russian coup-imposed Government that she and Obama had placed into power in Ukraine .
 A lot of influential people in Europe aren’t as accepting of nazism as Obama quite evidently is .
 Ukraine claimed to be protecting against ‘Terrorists’ via Ukraine’s ‘Anti Terrorist Operation’ or ‘ATO’ for short . Two successive invasions of the resisting Ukrainian region failed to do anything other than to destroy the region that Ukraine claimed
 U.N. vote in November 2014 on whether to condemn racist fascism, and especially to condemn Nazi Germany’s World War II Holocaust against mainly Jews .
 The United States was one of only three countries to vote against this resolution . The U.S., Ukraine, and Canada were shocked by the vote .
 Viktor Orban, Hungary's leader, was outraged at Obama's treatment of Hungary as if it were a vassal-state of the United States Empire .
 Milos Zeman, Czech head-of-state, joined Orban in January 2015 . Zeman is the Czech head of the Czech Republic .
 The majority of the EU are resisting Obama’s contemptuous treatment of every other nation than his or her own .
 11 of the 28 EU member-nations had agreed to supply Ukraine with weapons . Ukraine’s figurehead President announced that he had reached agreement with ‘a series of the EU countries on the supply of armament’
 washingtonsblog bannered, ‘Major American Allies Ignore United States Pleas and Join China’s Alternative Bank’ and reported that UK, Australia, New Zealand, New Zealander, Singapore, India, France, Germany, and Italy, had all agreed to join China
 Russia, China, Russia, and the rest of the BRIC countries are seeking to replace the dollar-monopoly . The rising developing economies are seeking the replacement .
 The Obama Administration has been twisting arms all over the world to try to block nations from signing onto China’s new world bank . Many of these nations, many of which have been traditional U.S. allies, are rebuffed by all these nations .
 Good-bye, Uncle Sam, you're not the nation you were during World War Two . You've instead become the global enemy; you’ve turned and become fascist yourself, he says .
 Russia is by far the most ‘aggressive’ country in the world, according to the U.S. President Barack Obama . He thinks Russia is more aggressive than any other country .
 Obama is re-arming his Ukrainian stooge-regime for yet a third attempt at exterminating the residents of the area that had voted 90% for the man he overthrew .
 Obama and his stooges apparently think that they can get away with everything . The president and his wife seem to think they can do everything .
 Republicans in the U.S. Congress complain not that he's doing this, but that he’s not giving Ukraine enough weapons to do it .
 The news-reports listed only the top six-mentioned nations, and Russia wasn't among them . Russia wasn’t even listed in the reports .
 Gallup yanked the question from their polling during 2014, especially after all of the international mayhem that the U.S. perpetrated last year .
 EU leaders are finally getting the message, and even Japan and Australia are getting it . Europe's leaders are starting to get the message.
 When George W Bush put together a coalition of English-speaking countries to invade Iraq in 2003, nuclear weapons weren't an issue .
 The world's leaders are trying to dispense with "the one indispensable nation" so that they won't be dispensed with, themselves .
 O’Bomba represents them just as much as his Republican ‘opposition’ do .
 Even the aristocrats in other nations are increasingly abandoning him . But now, even the aristocrat in other countries are abandoning him.
 'Democrat' would have FDR twisting in his grave if only he saw this . All he evidently still has going for him is liberal and Democratic fools in the U.S.
 President O'Bomba might become even more isolated internationally than he is at home . There are enough liberal fools to keep him barely aloft, and enough conservative fools toKeep alive the myth that he's a Marxist Muslim .
 The United States has become a nut-hatchery, and the foreigners are beginning to notice . The U.S. has become an increasingly popular tourist destination .