 Russian nationalists have posted similar stuff on a podcast. I heard similar stuff recently at Sputnik & Pogrom podcast .
 Unlike Russian nationalists, some out there even believe that Russia should have helped Yanukovych back to Bankova .
 Criticism of Putin's handling of the Ukrainian crisis finds a home both on the right and on the left of Russia’s political spectrum .
 Russia’s current position is that the republics are ‘self-declared’ The republics should be reintegrated into Ukraine in some form of a federative arrangement, Russia says .
 The kremlins’ view recognition of the Donbass republics as a step in the extreme, perhaps after Ukraine attempts to take the republics over by force .
 Donbass republics are viewed as a part of Ukraine, forcibly torn away by Russian aggression . On the other side in Kiev, Donbass Republics are seen as part of the Ukraine .
 Ukraine is a unitary state, and without a change to the constitution, federalism is impossible . According to Ukraine's constitution, Ukraine is an unitaryState .
Donbass republics, high levels of criminality, and poor handling of the republics by Russian curators as Anatoly Karlin notes, don't add to Russia’s good image .
 Russia would be forced to support the odious persona of Viktor Yanukovych as the legitimate president . First of his arguments is that Russia would support Yanukovych as president .
 There aren't any other pro-Russian politicians in Ukraine, says Regionnaires . He says, other than the Regionnaires, there aren’t any other Pro-Russian politician .
 Regionnaires have now all become United Russia members in Crimea . This is probably what would have happened. The latter I would disagree with, but given that Regionnaires are now all members .
 The kremlins seem very comfortable with former Regionnaires . But even they must realise that the relationship with them was counterproductive .
 Belov's second argument is that Russia would have to enter some serious military conflict . Belov’s second argument: Russia would need to enter a serious conflict .
 If not with the Ukrainian army, then with Ukrainian nationalist battalions. If not the Ukrainian Army, then the Ukrainian nationalists .
Ukrainian nationalists would likely resort to guerrilla tactics of terrorism and sabotage, he said . He said the Ukrainian nationalists would probably resort to terror and sabotage .
 Russia denies that Russia intervened in some capacity to help the Donbass republics . Russia denies the allegations .
Donbass conflict barely registers in Russian public opinion. But given kremlins’ efforts to freeze the conflict, Donbass conflict hardly registers in Russia's public opinion .
 The ideology of the post-soviet public is that of comfort and abundance, in the words of Denis Seleznev . Too many casualties would probably not sit well with the Russian public .
Russia's occupied territory would put a strain on the Russian budget, and money would likely be stolen by the Regionnaires .
 Under occupation of Ukraine, Gazprom would be in a precarious situation in which transit through Ukraine would remain in place .
 One can only remember how Ukrainian nationalists blew up electric lines going to Crimea . One can also remember how Ukraine blew up electricity lines in Crimea .
 Gas exports are a major source of revenue for the Russian budget . Putin's Western partners will be reluctant to put sanctions on, says the Russian president .
 Any occupation regime in Ukraine is always forced to buy loyalty of the “titular nation’s” language and culture . The fifth argument is that any occupation regime would have to support local language.
 Russia would need to engage in feeding Ukrainian separatism much like the Soviet Union did to her own detriment .
 Some Russian nationalists may entertain the notion of invading Ukraine with the aim of instituting a Russification programme . While some Russian nationalists might entertain the idea of invading the country .
 The reality is that not even the Russian Empire, which denied the validity of Ukrainism altogether, was able to do anything about it . The Russian Empire denied it altogether .
 sanctions may have been inevitable, but that clearly was not a reason to invade Ukraine and reinstate Yanukovych . As we can see, sanctions may be inevitable. But that clearly wasn't a reason for the invasion .
 Novorossiya from Transnistria to Donbass was likely not feasible either . The move was likely to be difficult for both sides .
I doubt Russia is economically strong enough to absorb 20 million people . I doubt Russia's economic strength is enough to cover 20 million.
 The liberation of Donbass was not completed but the kremlins were more interested in freezing the conflict than having to take care of the entire Donbass . We can only wonder why the liberation of the Donbass wasn't completed .
 Yarowrath: The ideology of the Russian elite is “less people more oxygen’s more oxygen, so tough luck. Always remember the words of YarOWrath.