 A notation in the constitution about the pursuit to enter the EU and NATO, a ban on observing elections in Ukraine by Russia . A proceeding against the main advocate of the Kremlin’s interest in Kiev .
 All the mentioned activities are for sure good for the interest of Ukraine . Ukraine is a country that has a history of violence and violence .
 Petro Poroshenko based his electoral programme on the confrontation with Russia and the dominance of the Russian matter in the presidential campaign would be the most favourable to him . But they additionally favour the president, as it is Petro Por Petrooshenko .
 Viktor Medvedchuk served as chief of the presidential administration of Leonid Kuchma . Medveduk served as the president of the country's presidential administration .
 Medvedchuk was one of the people responsible for military intervention of Russia in the Crimea and referendum on the annexation of the peninsula to the Russian Federation . In 2014, he was included in American sanctions as being responsible for the military intervention .
 Medvedchuk is considered in Ukraine as the main lobbyist of the Kremlin’s interest . Currently, he is considered to be in Ukraine.
 Kiev authorities in Kiev are using his services. This fact was not a problem for current authorities to use his services .
 Medvedchuk participatedg. in talks about the exchange of captives from the conflict between pro-Russian separatists and authorities in eastern Ukraine .
Medvedchuk has become politically active due to the upcoming elections . Medvedchuk is a former member of the Communist Party of Russia .
 At the end of July 2018, he accepted the invitation of Vadim Rabinovich’s ‘For life’ party . He has been invited to the party for the next year .
 Rabinovich and his party started exerting pressure on unification of pro-Russian forces just after joining Medvedchuk’s grouping .
 Medvedchuk announced an autonomous region with its own parliament and government should be established in Donbas . It was during the recent meeting of the leadership of the “Opposition Platform – For Life’ in Kiev .
 The status of this region should be included in the Ukrainian constitution, says the country's constitution .
 Office of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine opened proceedings against Medvedchuk . The Ukrainian prosecutor general's office has opened proceedings.
 Medvedchuk announced that the case against him was “ridiculous and totally illegitimate’s’ case was against him . Authorities were dealing with their political opponents by introducing repressions against unwelcome people .
 Earlier, he was allowed to participate in cases such as Minsk negotiations or exchange of captives . He was the only direct channel of communication with the Kremlin .
 This politician is becoming a rising threat due to his influences in the media . He is also a rising influence in the political world . He has been involved in two key electoral campaigns .
 Kremlin's strategy aims at legalisation of separatists in Donbas by accepting region’s autonomy by Kiev .
 The Moscow camp in Ukraine would gain a significant influence on the politics of the whole country . Then, the Moscow camp would gain the influence of the entire country .
 Struggle with such views in the electoral campaign is within the Ukrainian security interest. Struggle in the election campaign is in Ukraine's security interest .
 At the same time it favours Poroshenko who is leading a campaign based on defending the state from Russia .
After the conviction of Yanukovych, Medvedchuk's case will enhance the president’s chances . The conviction will enhance his chances.
President Barack Obama was ousted by the overthrown president last year . He was charged with murder and other charges against him at a conference hosted by the ousted president .