 Maxim Kamenev has long been studying and reporting on Ukrainian politics . This is an opinion-style article by Hromadske.
 The views and opinions expressed in it are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the publication . The opinions of the writer and the author are not necessarily reflected in the publication's views .
 Zelenskiy’s campaign has much in common with the Poroshenko campaign in 2014 . The campaign has a similar style to the 2014 campaign in Ukraine .
 During the Revolution of Dignity, Poroshenko stayed in the shadows of then-opposition leaders . Poroshenko is a former Ukrainian president .
 Poroshenko started his candidacy just two months before the vote . Yulia Tymoshenko had just come out of prison and was unable to contend for the presidency .
 Ukraine's pro-Russian factions were demoralized by Yanukovych’s departure, the only ranking politician, Vitali Klitschko, endorsed Poroshenko .
 Zelenskiy also entered the race late – he announced on New Year's Eve that he would run – just three months before the elections in 2019 . Zelenkiy will run for the first time in three months .
 In 2014, Poroshenko’s team tried to create an image of a successful businessman who wouldn’t need to steal from the state budget . Poroshenko's team has been trying to create a positive image of the businessman .
In 2019, these illusions were shattered by allegations of his association with embezzlement from the defense industry . In 2019, he was accused of being involved in embezlement from defense industry.
 Zelensky is a successful businessman who built the Kvartal 95 Studio, one of the most popular in the former Soviet Union . He was handed a gift – just like his opponent 5 years ago – to position himself as a talented actor .
 Zelenskiy's business in Russia resembles Poroshenko’s Roshen confectionery factory in Russia .
 Poroshenko is still ‘chocolate king’ with his Roshen candy stores found in every city in Ukraine .
 Ihor Kolomoysky has a personal dispute with Poroshenko . On the other hand, he accuses Zelenskiy of being a puppet to exiled oligarch IHor Kolomoyssky .
 Former Dnipro region governor Ihor Kolomoisky stands in front of journalists before the start of a football congress in Kyiv on March 6, 2015 .
 Poroshenko's strategy in 2014 was to secure victory in the first round . Poroshenko’s strategy was to win in first round in 2014 .
 Russia only occupied Crimea, and in the east the anti-terrorist operation continued . At the time, Russia onlyoccupied Crimea .
 Poroshenko promised that during his presidency, Ukrainians would live freely, comfortably, honestly and safely .
 Almost 55% of citizens who came to the polls supported him. As a result, almost 55% supported him .
 Zelenskiy speaks about the Ukraine of his dreams. Fast-forward five years and it is now Zelenskyy's dream .
 He describes the citizens of his vision as “worthy, free, and rich Ukrainians,” without providing details . He promises peace and the return of the occupied territories through diplomacy .
 Preliminary results of the first round show that Ukrainians are not ready to unconditionally trust one or other candidate . The first round results show that Ukrainian people are not willing to trust any other candidate.
 Data by the CEC shows that this time around, the election tendencies across Ukraine have changed .
 In 2014, residents of the southern and eastern regions mostly ignored the presidential elections . The presidential elections were held in 2014 .
 In 2019, there was a high turnout in Russia's predominantly Russian-speaking regions . In 2018, there were more than 100,000 people in the region .
 In the Donbas, he lost to Donetsk native Yuriy Boyko, and in the Lviv and Ternopil regions . In the Donetsk region, he was elected to the incumbent .
 If anyone can claim they united Ukraine in the votes, it would be Zelenskiy . However, if anyone could claim theyunited Ukraine in a vote, it could be Zelenkiy.
 Zelenskiy even won the military vote – despite the fact that Poroshenko is the commander-in-chief .
 Even if Poroshenko wins, the results of the first round will haunt him, he says .
 Some sociologists say the first round more accurately represents the will of the people . In the second round, citizens will vote “against” a candidate, they say .
 Poroshenko admits that he did not manage to beat poverty, otherwise that wouldn't be one of his pre-election promises in 2019 .
 In his campaign, Poroshenko no longer discusses the paramount importance of fighting corruption . Ukrainians still consider it one of the five key problems in the country .
 Kateryna Handziuk’s case has gone off the radar. Courts under his president have been unwilling or unable to decisively enforce justice .
President Poroshenko's earlier promises of "safe life" seem ironic to many . Even if the president cannot directly solve these crimes, Poroshenko’s promises of ‘safe life’ seem ironic .
 Poroshenko said he understood the result of Zelenskiy’s win . He was speaking at his campaign headquarters .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin promises to apply for EU membership . Poroshenko reminds youth of travel to the EU visa-free, he tells them .
 NATO, the ""peacekeepers" in the Donbas and of course, seriously deal with the economy .
 Polls show that Poroshenko could not convince the majority of Ukrainians about the threat of Russian aggression . Poroshenko's campaign is a key pillar of his campaign .
 A nation-wide poll in December 2018, on the eve of the start of the presidential campaign, showed that a Russian invasion ranks only fifth in a list of concerns Ukrainians have .
 Ukrainians want peace – but do not really believe in the threat of a Russian invasion . In other words, they want peace - but don't believe in a Russian attack .
 The most obvious testimony to this is the reaction of Ukrainians to martial law . The President introduced the law in November in 11 regions of the country .
 Poroshenko argued this was necessary to counter a full-scale Russian invasion . He said this was needed to counter the Russian invasion.
 The most militant faction of the Verkhovna Rada were skeptical of this idea . But even the president's allies in the parliamentary coalition of the People's Front were skeptical .
 After the end of martial law, only 21% of citizens fully supported this move . Almost 60% did not support it, while 21% supported it .
 Zelenskiy laughs off the question of how he'll negotiate with Moscow . Poroshenko is casting Putin as a boogeyman, but he previously promised to do .
 Hromadske asked the candidate what he would say to Putin during their first meeting . The Zelenskiy campaign headquarters and after the exit polls results were announced, Hromadke asked him what he'd say .
 Zelenskiy’s election program does not mention that Ukraine will be an EU member . He believes the question of a NATO membership should be a referendum matter .
Members of Zelenskiy’s team promise ordinary Ukrainians will have more power . They will be able to dismiss officials, deputies and even repeal laws .
 In August 2014, he did not rule out holding “bilateral consultations with the president of Russia’s president . In August 2013, he said he would hold ‘bilateral discussions’ with Russia's president .
 In the last two years he has been assuring that if he communicates with Putin, it would only be about the release of Ukrainian prisoners of war and hostages . But in the past two years, he has said he would only talk to Putin if he could release Ukrainian prisoners
 The idea that it is impossible to agree on something with Putin was only realized after many hours of negotiations in the Normandy format .
 Throughout his presidency, Poroshenko has changed his views on many things . He has changed many things, including his stance on the economy .
 The need to provide autocephaly to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, the need to create anti-corruption courts in the country, and many other areas, says the author .
 To some extent, Poroshenko himself created a situation where a comedian can win in the second round .