 References do not include separatist-controlled areas in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine or Russiaoccupied Crimea .
 At the end of this report is a section listing human rights abuses in Russian-occupied Crimea . The report also lists human rights violations in Crimea .
 The country last held presidential and legislative elections in May 2014 and October 2014 . International and domestic observers considered both free and fair .
Civilian authorities generally maintained effective control over security forces . Civilian authorities maintain effective control of security forces.
 Authorities did not have control over security forces in the eastern part of the country controlled by Russian-backed separatists and in Russian-occupied Crimea .
 The United Nations reported that, as of November 15, more than 9,000 persons had died and 18,000 had been wounded as a result of Russian aggression in these regions . Russian-backed separatists, including civilians, members of the Ukrainian armed forces, and members of
 Separatists systematically engaged in abductions, torture, and unlawful detention. Separatist groups are responsible for abductions and torture, according to reports .
 To a lesser extent, there were also reports of these practices by government forces .
 Separatists also employed child soldiers and restricted humanitarian aid . Separatist also employed children soldiers and limited humanitarian aid.
 The government imposed restrictions on freedom of movement . The government also imposed restrictions.
 Internally displaced persons faced difficulties obtaining legal documents, education, pensions, and access to financial institutions and health care .
 Russian occupation authorities committed numerous human rights abuses in Crimea, particularly Crimean Tatars, as well as independent journalists and anyone perceived as opposing the UKRAINE 2 Russian occupation regime . In Crimea, Russian occupation officials committed numerous Human Rights abuses, particularly in Crimea .
Third, the country suffered from corruption and deficiencies in the administration of justice . Third, the nation suffered from the country's lack of justice and corruption .
 Human rights groups and the UN noted there were few investigations into human rights abuses committed by security forces .
 In particular, the Security Service of Ukraine and Ministry of Internal Affairs operated with impunity . In particular.
 Corruption in the Prosecutor General’s Office and the judiciary was of particular concern . The judiciary was also a concern .
 There also were limitations on workers’ right to strike; forced labor; and failure to enforce effectively labor laws and occupational safety and health standards for the workplace .
 The government generally failed to take adequate steps to prosecute or punish most officials who committed abuses . The government's lack of action has led to a climate of impunity .
 Investigations into the 2014 Euromaidan shootings in Kyiv and riots in Odesa remained incomplete more than a year later .
 Investigations into human rights abuses related to the Russian occupation of Crimea and the conflict in the Donbas region also incomplete .
 The country is not a signatory to the Rome Statute . In September the government granted jurisdiction to the International Criminal Court under Article 12 . It allows nonmembers states to grant authority to investigate crimes against humanity committed on their territory .
 Neither Russia nor Russian-backed separatists conducted investigations of the above-mentioned human rights abuses in Crimea or separatist areas .
Several reports that the government or its agents committed arbitrary or unlawful killings . There were several reports of the government and its agents killing people .
 Three military personnel summarily executed a civilian with pro-Russian political views in the village of Talakivka, near Mariupol, on May 8 .
 Authorities arrested the men, and they faced trial, but the status of the case was unknown at year’s end .
Volodymyr Kulmatytskiy, the former deputy mayor of Slovyansk, and his driver, were abducted on January 28 .
 Security forces killed one alleged perpetrator while being apprehended . The alleged perpetrator was killed by security forces, police said .
 Authorities convicted three others on weapons charges and released them . Authorities convicted 3 others on weapon charges and release them .
 There were several reports during the year of politically motivated killings by nongovernment actors .
 On February 22, a bomb killed four persons and wounded 10 at a march in Kharkiv promoting national unity . The march was held in the capital city of Kharkov .
 Authorities arrested four individuals who they claimed were armed and trained in Russia . Authorities say they were trained and armed in Russia. Authorities arrested the four individuals .
 On August 31, demonstrators protested outside the Verkhovna Rada against passage of a constitutional amendment on decentralization . Protesters beat law enforcement officers and sprayed tear gas.
 One protester threw a grenade at National Guard forces, killing four persons and wounding 141 . The incident happened in the early hours of the morning .
 Law enforcement authorities detained 30 persons, including the suspected attacker . The suspected attacker is believed to be in custody .
 Law enforcement agencies continued their investigation of crimes committed during the Euromaidan protests in Kyiv from November 2013 to February 2014 .
 Oleksandr Marynchenko and Serhiy Tamtura, two former Berkut riot police officers, were arrested February 24 . They were accused of involvement in the death of 39 Euromaidan activists .
 Ramil Islamli and Aziz Tahirov found guilty of kidnapping and assaulting Euromaidan activists . They were sentenced to four years of imprisonment for kidnapping and assault .
 As of year's end, authorities had charged nine individuals with crimes related to the Euromaidan protests .
 Human rights groups remain critical of the perceived slow pace of the investigations . The investigation has been ongoing for years .
 Law enforcement agencies also continue their investigation into the events in May 2014 in Odesa . 48 persons died, including six supporters of the Ukrainian government and 42 persons who supported more autonomy for regions .
 Those who supported autonomy died in a fire at the Trade Union Building . Authorities largely failed to investigate these deaths, focusing on alleged crimes .
 A Council of Europe report from November 4 found that the government's investigation lacked independence . The Prosecutor General’s Office and the Ministry of Internal Affairs failed to conduct a thorough, coordinated investigation .
 The COE also expressed concern that authorities released some suspects . Some suspects were also released .
Multiple reports of politically motivated disappearances . There were multiple reports of political disappearances.
 Media and human rights experts from both domestic and international organizations recorded cases of progovernment paramilitary or volunteer military units kidnapping individuals .
Authorities arrested a commander and seven members of the Tornado volunteer battalion . They were charged with kidnapping, unlawful detention, rape, and torture of local residents of government-controlled territory .
 There were reports that law enforcement authorities engaged in such abuse . The constitution and law prohibit torture and other cruel punishment .
 There were reports that police and other law enforcement officials abused and at times tortured at times . Courts cannot legally use as evidence in court proceedings confessions and statements made by persons in custody under duress .
 Amnesty International and other human rights organizations reported violation of rights of detained persons . Amnesty International, other human Rights organizations reported violations of rights.
 In the Donbas region, there were reports that government forces and progovernment battalions engaged in military operations at times committed human rights abuses, including torture .
 Separatist forces in the self-proclaimed ‘people’s republics’ of Donetsk and Luhansk committed numerous abuses, allegedly including torture, to maintain control .
 A resident of Slovyansk, Donetsk Oblast turned to the Office of the Ombudsperson in connection with the abduction of her husband in February .
 On March 26, she received a response from the SBU that her husband had been detained by the Dnipropetrovsk SBU office .
 The detainee informed the Ombudsperson’s Office that after his abduction, authorities took him to a bomb shelter for 26 days . He was held incommunicado and tortured to confess to illegal activities in support of separatists in Donetsk Oblast .
 Abuse of prisoners and detainees by police and prison authorities remained a widespread problem . Abuse of prisoner and detainees remains a problem .
 Authorities beat Andriy Danylyuk to death in a Khmelnytsky pretrial detention center, reports say .
 Authorities initially told his wife that he died of a heart attack . But observers later established that authorities had handcuffed Danylyuk and beaten him to death with a hammer .
 Danylyuk’s wife alleged he was killed because of his intention to expose the involvement of prison leadership in drug trafficking and corruption . He is alleged to have been killed because he was trying to expose prison leadership.
 The Khmelnytsky prosecutor’s office launched criminal proceedings against two officers of the penitentiary service .
SBU officers removed persons from their cells and placed in the basement or other places within the building . A number of persons claimed to have been held and abused in this facility .
 The HRMMU Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 received reports that authorities detained 27 persons at the facility . Authorities allegedly subjected them to torture and mistreatment .
 HRMMU, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, and human rights groups of a detention facility at the Mariupol Airport operated by the SBU . Security officials allegedly hold prisoners incommunicado and subjected them to abuse without accountability .
 Authorities denied UN special rapporteur on summary executions access to the airport in September . Authorities denied the UN special.
 During the first eight months of the year, the Prosecutor General’s Office opened criminal investigations into alleged torture by police .
 Authorities forwarded cases specifically alleging torture or degrading treatment involving law enforcement officers . Of that number authorities forwarded cases, 24 cases specifically alleged torture or degrade treatment involving officers .
 Authorities imposed disciplinary actions against an additional 84 officers and fired 26 from the law enforcing bodies . Authorities impose disciplinary action against an extra 84 officers .
 Prison and Detention Center conditions remained poor, did not meet international standards . At times posed a serious threat to the life and health of prisoners, officials said .
 Physical abuse, lack of proper medical care and nutrition, poor sanitation, and lack of adequate light were persistent problems . Lack of proper health care, poor nutrition, and poor light were also problems .
 The Ukrainian Human Rights Union reported correctional officers conducted a mass beating of convicts who arrived at Penal Colony 77 in Berdyansk, Zaporizhzhia Oblast, on February 27 .
 A UHHRU investigation determined that a mass beating occurred, and authorities subjected inmates to inhuman treatment . Authorities failed to provide sufficient medical care and attempted to conceal their actions .
 Authorities generally held men, women, and juveniles in separate facilities . There were reports that in some pretrial detention facilities, there was no separation of juveniles and adults .
 Conditions in police temporary detention facilities and State Penitentiary Service pretrial detention facilities were harsher than in lowand medium-security prisons .
There was a reduction in the number of inmates in pretrial detention facilities . Overcrowding decreased, but overcrowding remained a problem .
 Temporary detention facilities often lacked adequate sanitation and medical facilities . The facilities often lack adequate sanitation, medical facilities and facilities .
 A 21-year-old convict died in Lukyanivska remand facility in Kyiv on January 25 .
 Inmates claim authorities ignored requests for medical help and refused to enter the prisoner’s cell .
 The committee found an “atmosphere of fear’ in the penal colonies . The committee noted the reluctance of prisoners to talk to the committee .
 The committee heard allegations that authorities used severe physical mistreatment or torture to maintain internal order . Prisoners who cooperated with the committee could expect to be punished, the committee heard .
 The Association of Independent Monitors and the Ombudsman’s Office say authorities failed to protect the lives and human rights of prisoners . Authorities failed to evacuate staff and inmates in a timely fashion, they say .
 Only 30 inmates remained in the facility, while 83 returned in the following days . Another 23 turned themselves in to Ukrainian military units .
 The condition of prison facilities in separatist held areas was poor, according to reports . There were reports of lack of food, water, heat, sanitation and proper medical care .
 Authorities kept records of prisoners in detention, but they were occasionally incomplete . Authorities kept record of prisoners.
 Authorities lacked record keeping, leading to difficulties for prisoners held in separatist areas . Authorities lacked central record keeping .
 Human rights groups report instances in which authorities confiscated prisoners’ passports and failed to return them upon their release . Human rights group: Authorities confiscated prisoners' passports and didn't return them .
 Prisoners released by separatists often had no Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 . U.S. Department of State had no country reports on human rights practices for 2015.
 Alternative sentencing, such as fines or community service, was available for some nonviolent offenders .
 As of December 1, the ombudsman’s office received 1,695 complaints from prisoners .
 The most common complaints regarded cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment; public humiliation, public humiliation and limited communication with family members and relatives .
 Prisoners complained about inadequate medical treatment and precautions . Prisoners also complained of inadequate medical care and safety .
 Authorities did not isolate prisoners with contagious tuberculosis from other patients . For example, authorities did not isolated prisoners with tuberculosis from others .
 Prisoners complain about lack of appropriate living space and poor sanitary conditions . Prisoners also complain about the lack of adequate living space, poor conditions .
 Rights groups report legal norms did not always provide for confidentiality of complaints . Rights groups reported legal norms were not always provided for confidentiality .
 Officials generally allowed prisoners to receive visitors, with the exception of those in disciplinary cells . Officials generally allow prisoners to get visitors, but not visitors .
 Prisoner rights groups noted some families had to pay bribes to obtain permission for prison visits to which they are entitled to .
 During the year the ombudsperson’s office together with representative of civil society made monitoring visits to 17 penitentiary facilities located in nine oblasts .
Government responded to concerns raised by the CPT in letters dated February 11 and 23 . The government responded to the concerns raised in letters from February 11 to 23 .
 Authorities reported that the government had dismissed the directors of Colonies 25 and 100 . The minister of justice had issued detailed instructions to all prison directors to prevent mistreatment.
 The constitution and law prohibit arbitrary arrest and detention, but serious problems remain . Arbitrary Arrest or Detention is a violation of the constitution .
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs is responsible for maintaining internal security and order . The Police and Security Apparatus are responsible for the police and security.
 SBU is responsible for all state security, nonmilitary intelligence, and counterintelligence . The SBU has been in charge of state security for more than 20 years .
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs reports to the Cabinet of Ministers, and the SBU reports directly to the president .
 The State Fiscal Service exercises law enforcement powers through the tax police and reports to the Cabinet of Ministers .
 The State Migration Service implements state policy regarding border security, migration, citizenship, refugee registration and other registering other migrants . Ministry of Internal Affairs oversees it .
 Civilian authorities generally had control over law enforcement agencies but rarely took action to investigate and punish abuses committed by security forces . Civilians generally have control over police but rarely take action to punish abuses .
 Human rights groups expressed concern that authorities have not properly investigated crimes committed by Ukrainian forces and have not punished them .
 Aidar Battalion's alleged crimes remain unsolved, including the killing of two persons in Shchastya .
 Authorities sometimes brought charges against members of the security services . Cases often remained under investigation without being brought to trial . Authorities allowed alleged perpetrators to continue their work .
 The HRMMU noted the case of Oleksandr Agafonov, allegedly beaten to death by SBU officers in Kharkiv .
 It took investigators more than a year to identify the alleged perpetrators . Authorities released both men on bail .
Human rights groups criticized the lack of progress in investigations of alleged separatist crimes in areas retaken by Ukrainian forces .
 In particular investigations of alleged crimes committed by separatists in Slovyansk and Kramatorstk in 2014 appeared stalled . In particular, the investigations appeared stalled in 2014 .
 Human rights groups believed that many of the local law enforcement personnel in both cities collaborated with separatists when they controlled these cities .
 Under the law members of Verkhovna Rada have authority to conduct investigations and public hearings into law enforcement problems .
 The parliamentary ombudsman for human rights may also initiate investigations into abuses by security forces . The parliamentary Ombudsman for Human Rights may also start investigations into security forces abuses .
 At times, protesters used excessive force to disperse protests and, in some cases, failed to protect victims from harassment or violence . At times they used excessive Force to disperse protesters and failed to stop them from violence .
 Approximately 30 persons attacked a group of international students in Kharkiv. For example, on June 11, approximately 30 people attacked the group .
 Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees may detain a suspect for three days without a warrant . A judge must issue a warrant authorizing continued detention .
 Authorities detained persons without a warrant in some cases, but some were detained without a warrants .
 Prosecutors must bring detainees before a judge within 72 hours . pretrial detention should not exceed six months for minor crimes and 12 months for serious crimes .
 Prosecutors may detain suspects accused of terrorist activities for as long as 30 days without charges or a bench warrant . The law says suspects may be held without charges.
 citizens have the right to be informed of the crimes brought against them and to challenge an arrest in court or by appeal to a prosecutor . Under the law citizens can appeal an arrest or an appeal in court .
 Authorities must promptly inform detainees of their rights and immediately notify family members of an arrest . Authorities must immediately notify relatives of the arrest .
 Police at times failed to keep records or register detained suspects, and courts often extended detention to allow police more time to obtain confessions .
 Authorities kept suspects under house arrest and occasionally held incommunicado, in some cases for several weeks .
 The HRMMU interviewed detainees in an Odesa pretrial facility arrested on suspicion of terrorism . In April and May, the HRMM U interviewed detainees.
 HRMMU says police carried out searches without warrants and used excessive force . Authorities did not inform detainees of their rights; officials delayed access to legal aid .
 Detainees claimed authorities subjected them to mistreatment and torture, including beatings, administration of electric shocks, and deprivation of food and water . Detainee claims authorities tortured them with electric shocks and electric shocks .
 Under the law the government must provide attorneys for indigent defendants . The law also requires attorneys for the indigent defendant .
 Compliance was inconsistent because of a shortage of defense attorneys or because attorneys, citing low government compensation, refused to defend indigent clients . Compliance was consistent because of the shortage of lawyers or because of low government Compensation .
Free legal aid centers throughout the country assigned 65,983 retainers to lawyers to provide free legal aid during the first 10 months of the year . Ministry of Justice: Free legal aid center in the U.S. assigns 65,000 retainers.
 The ombudsman’s office estimated that 70 percent of the population did not understand their right to free legal aid . The office of the ombudsman's office said 70 percent didn't understand their rights .
 The law provides for bail, but many defendants could not pay the required amounts . Many defendants were unable to pay the necessary amounts .
 Courts sometimes impose travel restrictions as an alternative to pretrial confinement . Courts sometimes imposed travel restrictions.
 Under the criminal procedure code, prosecutors need a court order to impose travel restrictions on persons awaiting trial .
 Prosecutors must prove restrictions are the minimum possible to ensure suspects will appear at hearings and will not interfere with criminal proceedings . Prosecutors must be able to prove the restrictions are minimum.
 The HRMMU discussed a case where a woman reported her husband missing in Slovyansk on February 28 . It's 10th report the HRMM U discussed the case .
 On March 26, SBU informed her that authorities held her husband in Dnipropetrovsk where they allegedly tortured him . The SBU told her they allegedly held him in a hotel where they tortured him.
Human rights groups report that members of the Ukrainian armed forces arbitrarily detained and held incommunicado individuals . Also, human rights groups say members of Ukraine's armed forces are arbitrarily detained .
 A separate report by the International Federation for Human Rights, in conjunction with the Center for Civil Liberties, discussed an instance where troops from the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices detained a man in Dzerzhynsk on May 6 and held him incommunicado for five days .
 There were reports from human rights NGOs that authorities subjected Romani individuals to arbitrary arrest . Romani people were arrested by authorities, according to reports .
 Police officers raided a Romani settlement in Zolotonosha, Cherkasy Oblast, October 29 .
 Police entered homes and arrested Roma without just cause, beating and humiliating them in the process, human rights groups say . Roma were beaten and humiliated by police, they say .
 An OSCE ODIHR mission visited the settlement in November . The case remained under investigation by authorities at the end of the year .
 Crimean Human Rights Group notes that progovernment battalion members arbitrarily arrested Crimean residents with Russian passports attempting to cross the administrative boundary from mainland Ukraine to Crimea .
 Azov Battalion members reportedly arrested and beat Rostislav Stetsenko, a Crimean resident with a Russian passport, and posted a recording on social media .
 Stetsenko reported to the CHRG that battalion members had beaten him and threatened sexual violence during arrest .
 As of September, law enforcement bodies registered 515,648 charges against suspected criminals .
 Approximately 12,000 were in pretrial detention facilities, according to the Ministry of Internal Affairs . In 2014, 10,000 in 2014 and 18,000, compared with 10,00 in 2013 .
 Authorities frequently detained asylum seekers for extended periods without court approval . Authorities often detained asylum seeker for extended period without court permission .
 They also regularly detained asylum seekers prior to their deportation (see section 2.d.) e.d. e. The asylum seekers were also detained before their deportation .
 Courts remained vulnerable to political pressure and corruption and were inefficient . The constitution provides for an independent judiciary .
 The Verkhovna Rada adopted the Law on Ensuring the Right to Fair Trial on February 12 . It provides for a competitive selection in hiring judges, review of rulings, and background checks of all judges .
 Under the new law, any person can Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 United States Department of State . All court rulings are to be made public in a unified state register .
 The law provides for an interim commission to investigate complaints about judges . The law also provides for a commission to look into complaints against judges .
 As of December the Prosecutor General’s Office was conducting investigations of 20 criminal proceedings against 19 judges . 16 cases with indictment against judges had been brought to court .
 Judges continued to complain about deterioration of the separation of powers between the executive and judicial branches of government .
 Some judges claimed high-ranking politicians pressured them to decide cases in their favor, regardless of merits .
 Other factors also impeded the right to a fair trial, such as lengthy court proceedings, particularly in administrative courts, and inadequate funding .
Authorities fully executed only 40 percent of court rulings, ombudsman says . Human rights ombudsman: Authorities executed only 30 percent of rulings .
 Two judges and three public assessors hear trials on charges carrying a maximum sentence of life imprisonment . A single judge decides most cases, although two judges and two public assessor have legal training .
 The law provides for crossexamination of witnesses by both prosecutors and defense attorneys and for plea bargaining . The law also provides for the defense and prosecution of witnesses .
 The law presumes defendants are innocent, and they cannot be compelled to testify or confess . High conviction rates called into question the legal presumption of innocence .
Defendants have the right to be informed promptly and in detail, with interpretation as needed of charges against them . Defendants can communicate privately with an attorney of their choice and have adequate time and facilities to prepare a defense .
 The law allows defendants to confront witnesses against them, present witnesses and evidence . The law also allows defendants also access to governmentheld evidence, and the right to appeal .
 Defendants have the right not to be compelled to testify or confess guilt, court says . The right to testify is not to confess guilt.
 Appeals courts cannot dismiss convictions or order new trials based on missing documents, nor may they coerce defendants to sign copies of missing documents . Appeals courts can't dismiss convictions, nor can't order new trial based onmissing documents .
 The law applies to the rights of all defendants regardless of ethnicity, gender, or age .
 Some judges prohibited the media from observing proceedings . Trials are open to the public, but some judges prohibited media from watching .
 The U.S. Department of State has filed 14 charges for Human Rights Practices . Trial trials must start no later than three weeks after filing of Country Reports on Human Rights practices .
 Human rights groups reported that officials occasionally monitored meetings between attorneys and their clients .
 Political Prisoners and Detainees Human rights groups called arrested blogger Ruslan Kotsaba a political prisoner .
 Kotsaba, a blogger from Ivano-Frankivsk, is charged with state treason and obstructing the lawful activities of the armed forces and other military formations . He opposed military mobilization in the country .
 AI called him the first Ukrainian “prisoner of conscience’ in five years . He was also called the first “ prisoner of conscience.’s’
 Authorities gave him the same protections as other prisoners, and they permitted him access to human rights organizations .
 The constitution and laws provide for the right to seek redress for any decisions, actions, or omissions of national and local government officials that violate citizens' human rights .
 An inefficient and corrupt judicial system limited the right of redress, says the judge . The judge says the judicial system is inefficient .
 Individuals may appeal to parliamentary ombudsman for human rights at any time . Individuals may also appeal to the European Court of Human Rights after exhausting domestic remedies .
 The SBU may not conduct surveillance or searches without a court-issued warrant . By law the SBU can not carry out surveillance without a warrant .
 searches are sometimes committed without a proper warrant . In practice, searches are often committed without proper warrants .
Emergency authorities may initiate a search without prior court approval . They must seek court approval immediately after the investigation begins .
 Citizens have the right to examine any dossier in the possession of the SBU that concerned them . Citizens can also recover losses resulting from an investigation . Citizens are allowed to look at any dossier that concerns them .
 Many citizens were not aware of their rights or that authorities had violated their privacy . Because there was no implementing legislation, authorities generally did not respect these rights .
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 United States Department of State . Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 15 g. The U.S. State Department reports on human rights practices .
 Use of Excessive Force and Other Abuses in Internal Conflicts continued a violent, armed conflict against the Ukrainian government . Two ceasefires were signed in Minsk by Russian and Ukrainian officials in September 2014 and February 12 .
 Russian-separatist forces launched offensives near Mariupol, the Donetsk Airport, and Debaltseve . Military activity was the most intense in the first two months of the year .
 Combined Russian-separatist forces continued attacks on Ukrainian positions using heavy weaponry throughout the year . Two subsequent ceasefires have been declared after ceasefires .
 International organizations and NGOs issued periodic reports of human rights abuses in the Donbas region by separatist and government forces .
Fighting and violence in the Donbas region deprived more than five million residents of the ability to access education, health care, and housing .
 As of November 15, fighting had killed at least 9,078 persons, including civilians, Ukrainian armed forces, and armed groups .
 More than 2. million residents left separatistcontrolled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts since the start of the conflict .
 As of November 15, the Ukrainian Ministry of Social Policy had registered 1,578,925 IDPs . Civil society groups believed the actual number of IDPs was much higher .
 Approximately 1. million Ukrainian refugees in other countries, including 912,000 in the Russian Federation . According to UNHCR there were approximately 1.million Ukrainian refugees .
 Media and human rights groups continued to report widespread human rights abuses in separatist held area . Media and Human Rights groups continue to report human rights violations .
 In May, HRMMU said there was a “collapse of law and order’ in separatist-held areas . “serious human rights abuses’ occurred, including killings, torture, looting, and extortion, the report said .
 International monitors and the media reported arbitrary and unlawful killings in the Donbas region . The region is in the eastern part of the country .
 The government took steps to investigate abuses by its forces but claimed it was hampered by a lack of resources and access to crime sites . International and human rights organizations noted Country Reports on Human Rights Practices .
 The HRMMU, OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and human rights groups did not cite any instances of extrajudicial killings committed by Ukrainian or progovernment forces during the year in connection with the conflict in Donbas region .
 Several cases from 2014 remained under investigation, including the discovery of the bodies of two separatists that had been bound and shot in the head in autumn 2014 .
 During the first two months of the year, combined Russian-separatist forces launched sustained attacks against Ukrainian positions, in particular at the Donetsk Airport, and at Debaltseve .
 On February 10, a rocket attack from separatist held areas near Kramatorsk killed seven civilians and injured at least 16 in government-controlled Kramatork .
 Following the withdrawal of Ukrainian forces at Debaltseve on February 20, shelling subsided somewhat .
 Civilians continue to be killed and injured by mines and unexploded ordinance . Civilians continued to die and injured from mines and explosives .
 Separatists and Ukrainian authorities accused each other of indiscriminate shelling of civilians . 13 civilians were killed in a mortar attack on a bus stop in the southwestern part of the city of Donetsk .
 An artillery attack killed eight civilians and injured 19 in Horlivka on January 29 . The attack took place on the same day as the attack on January 28 .
 Combined Russian-separatist forces targeted civilian populations while launching artillery attacks.
 Russianseparatist forces launched a rocket attack on a Ukrainian checkpoint at Volnovakha, hitting a bus, killing 13 civilians and injuring 18 .
 Between January 16 and February 20, separatists launched a protracted assault on the city of Debaltseve . separatists and elements of the Russian military continuously and indiscriminately shelled the city .
Of a preconflict population of approximately 25,000, only 7,000 people remained in the city after the assault . Of the preconflicts population of about 25,00, only 5,000 remained in city .
 On January 24, combined Russian-separatist forces attacked residential neighborhoods in Mariupol using Grad and Urgan rockets . 30 civilians were killed and 108 injured in the attack .
 The high representative of the EU for foreign affairs and security policy, Federica Mogherini, condemned the attack . The attack was carried out by an unknown group of people .
 In a May report, AI documented summary executions of captured Ukrainian soldiers by separatists . The report was published in May .
 Arseny Pavlov, also known as “Motorola,’ executed Ukrainian soldier Ihor Branovytsky after a battle at Donetsk Airport on January 21 . For example, according to AI, the separatist commander Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 .
 Witnesses reported Branovytsky was alive after the battle and heard Pavlov admit to shooting Branovyetsk . Witnesses reported he was alive when the battle took place .
 A Ukrainian death certificate stated that Branovytsky died of two gunshot wounds to the head . The death certificate said he died of a gunshot wound to his head .
 Pavlov bragged that he had executed 15 Ukrainian soldiers . In an April interview with the Kyiv Post.
 There were no reports by HRMMU or human rights organizations of extrajudicial killings of civilians by separatists .
 Observers identified previously unreported cases of extrajudicial killings from 2014 . Authorities have not yet investigated those cases .
 separatists in Peremozhne, Luhansk Oblast, kidnapped and executed a man and woman accused of aiding Ukrainian soldiers . For example, HRMMU reported that in August 2014, a man was executed by separatists .
 Authorities discovered their bodies in January and performed an autopsy in June . The bodies were discovered in June and the autopsy was performed in January .
 Combatants reportedly summarily executed an additional four persons in the same town also in August 2014 . Combatant reportedly executed an extra four persons.
 Russian-backed separatists have not conducted investigations into any of these killings . Russian- backed separatists are not conducting investigations into the killings .
 33 percent of military personnel and 16 percent of civilians interviewed told human rights monitors they had witnessed extrajudicial killings and deaths resulting from torture at the hands of separatists .
 Separatists, government forces, and criminal elements engaged in abductions. Separatist, government force, and criminals engaged in abduction.
 Human rights groups reported that separatists routinely kidnapped persons to settle vendettas or for ransom .
 A May report by AI documented several abductions of civilians by progovernment battalions . Three building contractors were detained by militia members and transferred to an SBU detention facility, where they were allegedly beaten, suffocated, and subjected to mock burial .
 During her periods of captivity, she reported severe beatings, threats against her relatives, and an attempted gang rape .
 Separatists abducted journalists attempting to cover the conflict . Separatist also abducted journalists trying to cover a conflict .
 Maria Varfolomeyeva, a pro-Ukrainian journalist from Luhansk, was detained on January 9 . She was detained by separatists on January 8 .
 According to Reporters without Borders, captors subjected her to series of carefully staged and videoed confessions .
 On January 5, separatists released journalist Serhiy Sakadinsky, seized in August 2014 . The journalist was released by separatists .
 His wife reported that his captors beat him and broke his hand during his captivity . His wife said he was held captive for more than two years .
 Government and separatist forces reportedly abused and tortured civilians and soldiers in detention facilities . Government and separatists reportedly abused, tortured civilians.
 Reported abuses included beatings, physical and psychological torture, mock executions, sexual violence, deprivation of food and water, and forced labor .
 The HRMMU reported a “persistent pattern’s of physical abuse and torture by government forces . TheHRMMU report a ‘persistentpattern’ of physical Abuse and torture.
 A December HRMMU report documented “recurrent allegations’ of mistreatment during arrest and interrogations by the SBU . The SBU interviewed several individuals detained on suspicion of taking part in terrorist acts .
 SBU authorities beat them heavily, restrained them in painful poses for long periods . They subjected them to suffocation while in custody .
Report: Captors abused 86 percent of military men and 50 percent of civilians captured by pro-Russian rebels . Captors subjected women, including pregnant and elderly, to physical abuse or torture, report says .
 The detainees lacked any safeguards against abuse and detention centers lacked clean water, adequate sanitation, heat, and bomb shelters to protect from an attack . Their report stated that detainees lack any safeguards.
 Separatists repeatedly beat Lieutenant-Colonel Serhiy Kuzminykh and eight Ukrainian soldiers captured on January 20 following fighting at the Donetsk Airport .
 In the video Tolstykh forced the soldiers to eat the epaulettes he cut from their uniforms .
 The Russian-backed separatists particularly targeted certain religious groups for abuse . The separatists targeted some religious groups .
 Ukrainian Orthodox priest was delivering food to soldiers and civilians in Artemivsk .
 separatists forced him to lie on the ground, and several fighters started jumping on his body . The separatists forced the man to lie.
 His captors beat him for several hours before transferring him to a nearby village . They then transferred him to another village for interrogation, which lasted several hours .
 Separatists detained him for 50 days in various places, along with approximately 70 other detainees . Separatist held him for around 50 days .
 separatists reportedly detained four members of Jehovah’s Witnesses, blindfolded them, and took them at gunpoint to the local military headquarters . separatists severely beat them and subjected them to mock executions .
Russian-separatist forces demanded that the youngest member join combined Russian-separate forces . They demanded that all of the members confess the Orthodox faith as the only true religion .
 Women reported attempted rape and sexual abuse at the hands of separatists .
 Women IDPs who left separatist control reported they fled principally because they feared they or their children would be sexually abused . Women IDP who fled said they fled because they were afraid they would be abused .
 Both sides employed land mines without measures to prevent civilian casualties . Both sides employ land mines. Both sides used land mines in order to avoid civilian casualties.
 The UNHRMM report from December 10 noted an increased numbers of deaths from exploding ordinance, including land mines . The UN HRMM report noted an increase in deaths from exploded ordinance .
 More than half of the civilian deaths recorded between August 16 and November 15 were due to mines . More than 50% of the deaths were caused by mines .
 separatist forces have ordered humanitarian aid groups to cease social programing . Mine education programs have been sharply limited in the region .
 UN Children’s Fund could not confirm the presence of child soldiers in Ukraine . There were no media reports of children serving with Ukrainian forces .
 There were reports that children as young as 12 served as soldiers with separatists . There were also reports of children serving as children with separatists.
 On May 28, OSCE SMM observers noted a child between the ages of 12 and 14 wearing camouflage Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 .
 OSCE monitors have seen child soldiers in separatist-controlled areas near Shyrokyne . On June 17, a spokesman for the OSCE SMM stated that monitors had seen children in separatist areas .
 There were multiple instances where child soldiers in separatist-controlled territory posted pictures online of themselves on patrol or supporting combat operations .
 ZDF broadcast interviews of two 16-year-olds who had fought on the side of separatists . The interviews were broadcast on November 10 .
 The Dutch Safety Board concluded its investigation into the crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur in July 2014 . The crash occurred in separatist-controlled Donetsk Oblast .
 A Russian-built 9M38-series surface-to-air missile with a 9N314M warhead shot down the plane .
 At the time of the crash, separatists and Russian media reported that it had shot down a Ukrainian AN-26 but quickly retracted and deleted these reports . It became clear that a civilian airliner had been shot down .
 Russian authorities and separatists continue to deny that a missile launched from inside separatist territory with a Russian missile system shot down the plane .
 separatists in Donetsk Oblast began restricting the delivery of humanitarian aid to areas they controlled . Starting on July 21, they began restricting aid delivery to parts of the city .
 separatists in Luhansk Oblast ordered all humanitarian aid organizations except for the ICRC to cease operations . On September 25, separatists ordered all aid organizations to stop operations .
 Separatists displayed increasing hostility towards humanitarian aid groups . Separatist groups displayed increased hostility towards aid groups, including the UN .
 Approximately 150,000 people were not receiving food aid, according to the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs . 1. million people lacked access to clean water .
 On March 4, a shell struck a hospital in the city of Donetsk, killing four persons and injuring 25 . The shell struck the hospital in Donetsk .
 During the year the UNHRMM reported that fighters had attacked hospitals in Adiivka, Luhansk, and Horlivka . It was concerned medical facilities were hit by shelling .
 Doctors without Borders banned from operating in separatist-controlled areas of Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts . Separatists prohibited the international medical aid group Doctors Without Borders from operating .
 This prohibition led to a sharp restriction in medical assistance to persons suffering from diabetes, kidney failure, and tuberculosis . The prohibition also led to an increase in medical aid to persons with kidney failure and tuberculosis.
 The UNHRMM noted that separatists intimidated and harassed employees of hospitals and medical facilities .
 Separatists continued to allow convoys of Russian “humanitarian aid,” which Ukrainian government officials believed contained weapons and supplies for separatists .
 In September the government opened “service centers’s” close to separatist-held territory . civilians could access banking services and purchase food and medicine .
 Residents of Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts under separatist control were unable to participate in the October 25 local elections held country-wide . elections could not be held under Ukrainian law and in accordance with international standards .
 The constitution and law provides for freedom of speech and press, but authorities did not always respect these protections .
 The government took some positive steps to improve freedom of expression . It also introduced measures that banned or blocked information, media outlets, or individual journalists deemed a threat to national security .
 "jeansa" payments to journalists for favorable news reports disguised as objective journalism. Other problematic practices continued to effect media freedom, including self-censorship, and slanted news coverage .
 In the Donbas region, separatists suppressed freedom of speech and the press through harassment, intimidation, abductions, and assaults on journalists and media outlets . In the region, the separatists suppressed free speech and press through intimidation and abductions .
 Separatists prevented the transmission of Ukrainian and independent television and radio programming in areas under their control . Separatist forces prevented transmission of Ukraine and independent TV and radio programs .
 Some individuals in areas not under Russian occupation or Russian-backed separatist control could criticize the government publicly and privately .
 On May 15, the country adopted a law prohibiting the display of communist and National Socialist symbols . The law was enacted on May 15 .
 The law prohibits an exhaustive list of communist and Nazi symbols . penalties running to five to 10 years in prison . The law also criminalizes their use and dissemination .
 Human rights defenders, historians, historians and the wider expert community criticized the law for its shortcomings . The law was passed by a vote in June 2013 . It is the first time the law has been allowed to be debated before its passage .
Independent media and internet news sites were active and expressed a wide range of views . Independent media and Internet news sites are active and express a widerange of views.
 Privately owned media often presented viewers a “biased pluralism,” representing the views of their owners . The most successful of which wealthy and influential ‘oligarchs’ generally owned, generally owned.
Both independent and state-owned media periodically engaged in self-censorship when reporting stories that might expose political allies to criticism . Both independent and State-owned news outlets have a history of self- censorship .
 The Verkhovna Rada passed a law prohibiting the broadcasting of content produced in an ‘aggressor state’ after January 2014 as well as any content produced between August 1991 and January 2014 that promotes state agencies of an “aggress or that promote aggression against the
 As of November authorities declared only Russia an “aggressor state’s” for purposes of implementing the law .
 Russian authorities adopted the law to combat Russian propaganda . Human rights groups criticized it as overly broad because of its blanket restrictions .
 The government continued the practice of banning specific works by pro-Russian actors, film directors, and singers .
 On August 8, authorities banned the works of 13 actors and singers from television and radio broadcasts . The ban includes the films of French actor and Russian citizen Gerard Depardieu .
41 foreign journalists banned from travelling to the country for a year . The list included 41 foreign journalists, including 41 journalists .
 Authorities removed six journalists, including three journalists working for the BBC, from the list the day after it was announced . Authorities removed the six journalists.
 The government continues to block 14 Russian television channels from broadcasting in the country . The government says the perceived dangerous effects of Russian propaganda are dangerous .
 A court in Melitopol fined a local television provider 2,000 hryvnias for broadcasting Russian channels .
 Authorities took steps to search and prosecute several local media outlets suspected of supporting separatism . Authorities have taken steps to find and prosecute some of the media outlets .
 The investigation continued at the end of the year, according to the editor in chief . There had been no further contact with authorities .
 The practice of jeansa continued, especially during local elections in October .
 The October elections produced “the largest pre-election jeansa campaign’s it had witnessed, the Institute for Mass Information says .
 The problems were worst in Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhzhia, and Mykolaev oblasts .
Authorities investigated and brought charges in only 4 percent of recorded infringements of the rights of journalists during the year . A significant increase over the 2014 figure of 1 percent, the Institute for Mass Information says .
 On May 14, the Verkhovna Rada passed a law strengthening criminal penalties against individuals who threaten or use violence against journalists . The law was passed by the Rada.
 Authorities have not prosecuted any cases under the new law, and government officials occasionally harassed journalists . The new law has not been applied to journalists .
 During the year there were 58 assaults on journalists and two killings . According to the Institute of Mass Information, two killings occurred .
 This represented a significant decrease in attacks from previous years . Unlike in prior years, private citizens, not law enforcement and officials, committed the majority of the attacks on journalists .
 On April 16, assailants shot and killed journalist Oles Buzina in Kyiv . The journalist was killed by assailants on April 16 .
 Denys Polishchuk was released from pretrial detention under house arrest in December . Authorities detained two suspects; in December authorities released two suspects .
 Authorities ordered Andriy Medvedko to remain in custody until January 31, 2016 . Authorities ordered him to stay in custody.
 There were multiple reported attacks on journalists investigating corruption . There were also reports of attacks on reporters investigating corruption.
 unknown men attacked a crew from ZIK TV who were filming an expose about lavish property allegedly owned by Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs Serhiy Chebotar . For example, on April 29, in the village of Lesniki in Kyiv Oblast, in
 The prosecutor's office investigation of the incident continued at year's end . The prosecutor’s office investigation continues at year’S end .
 Authorities took measures to regulate and occasionally censored information deemed a national security threat . Authorities took steps to regulate information deemed national security threats .
An episode of "Shuster Live" was removed from Channel 1+1 shortly before its scheduled broadcast . The show was scheduled to air on Channel 1 +1 .
 Journalist Savik Shuster and others alleged that the government removed the show because the government opposed certain guests appearing on the episode .
 According to the station, it canceled the show because of the ‘intense’ and “politicized’ nature of the evening’s guests .
 The signal for Inter has been intermittently jammed since August 2014, the Committee to Protect Journalists says . The signal is intermittent during news broadcasts and political shows .
Law enforcement authorities claimed they had not Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 . CPJ had made multiple requests for an investigation .
 Inter’s content included programming that was critical of the government .
Local media observers express concern over high monetary damages awarded for alleged libel . Law limits the amount of damages a plaintiff can claim in a lawsuit .
 Government entities, and public figures, used the threat of civil suits, sometimes based on alleged damage to a person’s “honor and integrity” to influence or intimidate the press and investigative journalists .
 Elena Makarova from Channel One and Andrei Grigoriev from NTV were arrested on February 26 . They were deported and banned from Russia for five years .
 The deportation and ban was in response to “the anti-Ukrainian propaganda’s carried out by journalists. A spokesperson for the SBU stated that the deportation and Ban was in reaction to the anti-Ukraine propaganda”
 On March 19, President Poroshenko signed a law creating an independent, national public television network . The law was signed on March 19 .
 The measure combines 32 stateowned broadcasters into a single institution . It offers viewers an alternative to commercial television . It often reflected the viewpoint of the station's owners .
Internet Freedom Authorities did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor online content . Internet Freedom Authorities have not restricted or disrupted access to internet.
 Law enforcement bodies monitored the internet, at times without appropriate legal authority, without appropriate authority .
 Facebook and VKontakte users sometimes had their access temporarily blocked for innocuous or straightforwardly political posts . Many internet users in the country are thought to be agents of the Russian government .
 A block of a blocked Facebook user led to a block of that user . A post in support of the blocked user simply read, “we’re with you,’s with you.
 Popular outrage at what many internet users perceived as bias toward Russia among Russian-language Facebook administrators led some users to call for Facebook to open a branch office in the country .
 Facebook users whose primary online language was Russian began writing their posts in Ukrainian to avoid being blocked . Some Facebook users who wrote in Ukrainian began writing in Ukrainian.
Several reports of government restrictions on academic freedom or cultural events . Academic Freedom and Cultural Events were reported to be restricted .
 Odesa Governor Mikheil Saakashvili called on the border police to prohibit his entry into the country because of disparaging remarks he had made about Ukraine .
 The constitution provides citizens with the right to freedom of assembly, and the government generally respected this right . The government generally respects this right.
 There are no laws, however, regulating the process of organizing and conducting events to provide for freedom of peaceful assembly .
 Authorities have wide discretion under a Soviet-era directive to grant or refuse permission for assemblies on grounds of protecting public order and safety . Authorities have a wide discretion.
 Organizers are required to inform authorities in advance of plans for protests or demonstrations . Organizers must also inform authorities about plans for demonstrations or protests .
 During the year citizens generally exercised the right to peaceful assembly without restriction in areas of the country under government control .
 Most assemblies were peaceful and at times accompanied by a very large police presence to maintain order . Most of the assemblies that took place were peaceful .
 A member of the right-wing Freedom party threw a grenade at police during a protest outside the Verkhovna Rada .
Right-wing activists violently disrupted peaceful events supporting LGBTI rights . Despite protection by security services, security services were not able to stop the violence .
 On June 6, persons claiming to belong to Right Sector attacked an LGBTI equality march in Kyiv . Nine police officers and 10 marchers were injured .
 Authorities charged the alleged attackers with hooliganism . Authorities placed five attackers under house arrest, and released two on bail .
 The constitution and law provide for freedom of association, and the government generally respected this right .
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 U.S. Department of State . Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 28 c. c. The United States Department of state is responsible for the report .
 The Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report is published by the U.S.
 The constitution and law provide citizens with freedom of internal movement, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation . Freedom of Movement, Internally Displaced Persons, Protection of Refugees, and Stateless Persons are also included .
 The government has restricted these rights, particularly in the eastern part of the country . The government, however, restricts these rights in the east .
 The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection and assistance to internally displaced persons .
 International and domestic organizations reported the system for protecting asylum seekers, stateless persons, and other persons of concern did not operate effectively .
 The government strictly controlled the freedom of movement between government and separatist-controlled territories in the Donbas .
 The SBU introduced a temporary order controlling movement on January 11 . The order went into effect on January 21 .
 The order imposed significant hardships on persons crossing into government-controlled territory . Those seeking to receive pensions and government benefits had ceased in separatist territory in November 2014 .
 Those who wished to enter needed to apply in person at a checkpoint, and then return several days later to obtain a pass . Those who wanted to enter need to apply at the checkpoint, then return to obtain the pass .
 Those who lacked a pass reportedly paid bribes of up to 1,000 hryvnias to cross . Those who didn't have a pass allegedly paid bribes to cross.
 On June 16, the government amended its procedures, introducing electronic passes that applicants could apply for online . The government amended the procedures on June 16 .
 The amended procedures simplified crossing for those who had lost documents or were fleeing an emergency and allowed children to cross into governmentcontrolled territory with notarized statements from parents .
 The government prohibited commercial bus service to separatist-controlled areas . It required persons to pay for a taxi ride or walk several miles .
 OSCE monitors reported waits at checkpoints of up to 24 hours, potentially exposing civilians to shelling . OSCE monitored waits at checkpoint sites in the past 24 hours .
 To avoid lines persons attempted to cross via unauthorized Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 . U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 29 routes .
 On March 25, four persons died after a mine blew up a bus trying to circumvent a checkpoint near Artemivsk . The mine exploded on March 25.
 Authorities subjected individuals crossing from Russian-occupied Crimea to strict passport controls at the administrative border between Kherson oblast and Crimea .
 Authorities prohibited rail and commercial bus service across the administrative boundary . People either to cross on foot or by private vehicle .
 On June 4, the Cabinet of Ministers adopted a resolution regulating entry and exit from Crimea . The resolution imposes travel restrictions on individuals crossing between the Kherson Oblast and Crimea .
 Children under the age of 16 required the permission of both parents to cross . Children under 16 required permission from both parents.
 Authorities did not announce the decision in advance, and children on summer holidays in Crimea were unable to return as scheduled .
 The government did not permit foreigners to cross the administrative boundary without permission . The government didn't allow foreigners to do so without permission.
Authorities amended rules after complaints from civil society . Authorities amended rules in September .
 Crimean Tatar activists along with volunteers from paramilitary groups began a blockade of commercial goods entering Crimea from governmentcontrolled territory at the administrative border .
 Human rights groups report instances of paramilitary groups illegally detaining individuals, performing illegal searches, and destroying and confiscating property .
 As of August 15, there were more than 1. million internally displaced persons due to the conflict in the Donbas .
 NGOs believed the actual number may exceed two million . Many IDPs have not registered, as many IDPs not registered .
 The largest number resided in areas immediately surrounding the conflict zones, in government-controlled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts .
 Many resided in areas close to separatist control in hope that they would be able to return home . Many lived in areas near separatist control .
 According to the law, the government should provide IDPs with housing . But the government has not taken effective steps to do so, says the law .
 During the year the country improved the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 . The U.S. Department of State improved the country's overall human rights practices .
 Humanitarian aid groups have good access to areas under government control . Humanitarian groups are able to get access to parts of the country under the government's control .
 Local civil society organizations and international humanitarian organizations provided the bulk of assistance for IDPs on a temporary basis . The aid was provided by local civil society groups and humanitarian organizations .
 NGOs reported that their ability to support IDPs was limited and nearing exhaustion . NGOs said their ability was limited.
 UN agencies reported that the influx of IDPs led to tension in the form of competition for resources . UN agencies said the influx led to tensions.
 Critics accused internally displaced men of evading military service . Competition rose for housing, employment, and educational opportunities in Kyiv and Lviv .
 Some IDPs in Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts lacked access to potable water, sanitation, shelter, and access to water . Some IDP, particularly those in government-controlled Donetsk, lacked sufficient sanitation and shelter .
 IDPs continued to have difficulty obtaining education, medical care, and necessary documents . IDPs continue to have difficulties obtaining education and medical care .
 Romani activists expressed concern that some Roma in eastern Ukraine could not afford to flee the conflict areas . Others had no choice but to leave their homes, some said .
 Kyiv Administrative Court of Appeal overturned a National Bank decision that Crimean IDPs were nonresidents . The decision was overturned on September 1 .
 The bank decision had restricted access to banking and financial services by Crimeans who had fled the Russian occupation .
Media reports indicated that banks continued to restrict banking services for Crimean IDPs even after court decision .
 The country is a transit and destination country for refugees . It is principally from Afghanistan, Somalia, and Syria .
 Refugees are especially vulnerable due to the ongoing conflict in the Donbas . Refugees were especially vulnerable to the current conflict . The Donbas is the largest city in the region .
 In September, UNHCR advised concern regarding returning asylum seekers to Ukraine due to the security situation .
 The law provides for asylum or refugee status, and the government has established a legal system to protect refugees .
Protection for refugees and asylum seekers was insufficient, due to gaps in the law and the system of implementation .
 Human rights groups noted that the refugee law falls short of international standards due to its restrictive definition of who is a refugee . The law has been criticised for being too restrictive .
 The law permits authorities to reject many asylum applications without a thorough case assessment .
 In other instances, officials declined to accept initial asylum applications without a legal basis . The U.S. Department of State says 31 applications without legal basis were rejected .
 Asylum seekers in detention centers were sometimes unable to apply for refugee status within the prescribed time limits and had limited access to legal and other assistance . Asylum seekers were often unable to application for refugeestatus within the time limits .
 Asylum seekers have five days to appeal an order of detention or deportation . Asylum seekers can also appeal a detention order or deportation order .
 A lack of access to qualified interpreters also hampered the full range of asylum procedures . The asylum process was also hampered by a lack of qualified interprets .
International observers noted the government did not provide resources for interpreters . International observers noted that it created opportunities for corruption and undermined the fairness of asylum applications .
 During the first nine months of the year, the State Migration Service reported a slight increase in applications for asylum .
 A total of 1,115 people applied for asylum during the first nine months of the year . The asylum application was the first time the asylum application had been submitted .
 The International Organization for Migration noted a steady although not critical increase in transit migration flow through Ukraine during the year . The International Organisation for Migration said the increase was not critical .
 The government did not provide for protection against the expulsion or return of asylum seekers . There was reason to believe their lives or freedom would be threatened on account of their race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion .
 UNHCR described refoulement at the border as a “largely hidden phenomenon’s” as persons seeking asylum may not receive legal aid or interpretation at border crossing points or temporary holding facilities .
Human rights groups noted the law offers legal protection against forcible return . Human rights groups said the law offered legal protection.
 Most asylum seekers were unable to obtain a work permit as required by law . Authorities did not provide employment assistance, and most asylum seekers did not receive employment assistance .
 Authorities only provided language instruction for asylum seekers in Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Odesa . Authorities only provide language instruction.
 Only three asylum seekers obtained official status as an unemployed person . Only one secured Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 .
 Some attempted to work illegally, increasing their risk of exploitation . Some tried to work illegal, increasing the risk of being exploited .
 During the year the government adopted a national plan on the integration of refugees, it did not allocate resources for its implementation .
 Human rights groups reported that authorities did not provide social and economic support to asylum seekers or assist them .
 refugees and those seeking complementary protection could receive residence registration at homeless shelters for a period of up to six months . State Migration Service says refugees could get residence registration for up to 6 months .
 UNHCR noted an improvement in the quantity and quality of food provided in migrant custody centers . There was a lack of educational programs and vocational activities.
 UNHCR says gaps in housing and social support for unaccompanied children left many without access to state-run accommodation centers or children’s shelters .
 Authorities registered 53 during the year, of whom 12 expressed a desire to apply for refugee status . Authorities registered 52 people in 2013, 12 of whom wanted to apply .
 Many children had to rely on informal networks for food, shelter, and other needs . Many children remained vulnerable to abuse, trafficking, and others forms of exploitation .
 Stateless Persons According to law a person may acquire citizenship by birth, territorial origin, naturalization, restored citizenship, and adoption . Stateless persons may acquire Citizenship by birth or territorial origin .
 At the end of the year there were 69,890 foreigners and stateless persons residing in the country . The State Migration Service says 69,000 people were living in the United States .
 During the first nine months of the year, the government naturalized 9,308 stateless persons . 61 of them through a simplified process .
 The law requires establishing identity through a court procedure . Some applicants had more time and money than some applicants had .
 UNHCR reported Roma were at particular risk for statelessness . Many did not have birth certificates or any other types of documentation to verify their identity .
 In May 2014 citizens elected Petro Poroshenko president in an election considered free and fair by international and domestic observers . The election was considered free, fair and fair.
 In October 2014 the country held early legislative elections that observers also considered free and fair . The elections were held in October 2014 .
 The first round of local elections were held on October 25 in Mariupol and Krasnoarmeysk . Authorities delayed voting until November 29 due to a dispute about alleged irregularities .
 OSCE observer mission says elections were well organized and democratic, but influenced by economic interests . OSCE mission: Election was well organized, democratic, and democratic .
 Some parties started campaigning prematurely, leading to unfair advantages for certain candidates and parties . OPORA monitors elections in the country .
 OPORA recorded numerous technical errors by candidates and local election boards, leading to registration delays .
 Observers from the OPORA network and the Committee of Voters of Ukraine repeatedly recorded conflicts between candidates and local election commissions .
In most cases the courts ruled in favor of candidates, and election commissions registered them . In most cases, the court ruled in favour of candidates .
 Central Election Commission dismissed local election commissions that refused to comply with these obligations . In several instances the commission dismissed the local election commission .
 Authorities delayed elections in Mariupol and Krasnoarmeysk due to concerns that ballots were printed improperly . Authorities delayed the elections because of concerns that ballot papers were printed incorrectly .
 According to the OPORA, the elections were free and fair with only minor electoral irregularities . The elections were held in the U.S.
 At year's end the mayoral election in Kriviy Rih remained disputed as Opposition Bloc candidate Yuriy Vilkul won by several hundred votes in the second round .
 Samopomich candidate Yuriy Myloboh claimed Vilkul’s election was fraudulent and appealed to the Central Election Commission . The commission found in VilKul”s favor, according to the commission .
 The Verkhovna Rada passed legislation to hold an additional by-election in March 2016 . The Rada also passed a bill to hold a further by-elections in 2016 .
 Several parties, most notably Opposition Bloc, encountered difficulties registering in Kharkiv Oblast . Some observers suspected political motives for the refusal .
 This delay interfered with Opposition Bloc’s ability to wage an effective election campaign . This delay interference interfered with opposition Bloc's ability to Wage an effective campaign .
 On August 3, approximately 50 persons throwing stones, smashing windows, and damaging a bus attacked offices of the Opposition Bloc in Kharkiv Section 4 .
 The law provides criminal penalties for corruption, but authorities did not effectively implement the law . Some officials engaged in corrupt practices with impunity .
 The number of reports of government corruption was low, but it remained pervasive at all levels in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government .
 During the year the country made some progress on establishing anticorruption institutions . But these newly established institutions had yet to become fully functioning by year’s end .
 The government publicized several attempts to combat corruption . It remained a serious problem for citizens and businesses alike .
 While authorities tried a large number of corruption cases, they were almost exclusively minor violations . The corruption cases were mostly minor violations.
 Authorities did not bring any such cases to trial or formally lay charges . Despite reports of cases initiated against high-level officials, authorities did not charge them .
 The State Financial Monitoring Service blocked $1.5 billion in accounts linked to former president Yanukovych’s regime . prosecutions of these officials remained delayed .
 The government has received significant criticism for its lack of progress in bringing cases to court . Some cases allow the alleged perpetrators to travel to Russia .
 Judges may not be arrested or detained before courts convict them, unless the Verkhovna Rada rescinds their immunity . Judges may also not be detained before court convict them .
 On January 25, a 2014 anticorruption law took effect that provides for the formation of two new governmental bodies . The National Agency for Prevention of Corruption and the National Anticorruption Bureau were created .
 The National Agency for Prevention of Corruption is responsible for implementing the development of national anticorruption policies . The agency is also responsible for monitoring national compliance with anticorrupt legislation .
 The 2016 budget contained provisions that delayed the requirement for public officials to declare assets until the start of 2017 . The budget, however, contained provisions to delay the declaration of assets .
 The selection process for the National Agency or the Prevention of Corruption continued at the end of the year . The selectionprocess for the national agency or the prevention of Corruption continues .
 The law designates the National Anticorruption Bureau as the lead investigator of allegations of corruption by senior government officials at all levels . President, Cabinet of Ministers, members of the Verkhovna Rada, and local governors are among those accused .
 Many observers criticized the government for the lengthy process of constituting the bureau . The bureau was created in 2007, but the government has not yet completed it .
 Nazar Kolodnitskiy appointed as lead anticorruption prosecutor on December 1 . Observers called a step towards establishing the bureau’s capacity to prosecute high-level corruption .
 President signs law regulating asset confiscation and recovery procedures . President signed law on December 9 .
 The law intends to create a single-source for the detection, investigation, and management of assets derived from corruption and other crimes .
 The government tasked the agency to search for illegally gained assets and to manage the assets after their seizure .
 The law envisions the agency maintaining its operations from the proceeds of asset management .
 The public council and commission for external control would supervise the agency in a manner similar to the National Anticorruption Bureau of Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 .
 The law requires these entities to publish an annual report on the work of the agency’s work .
 On April 26, a law came into effect requiring companies to have internal compliance programs . The law was passed in April .
 Law applies to almost all companies that participate in public tenders and to state-owned enterprises that are above a specified size .
 The law requires companies to appoint a compliance officer who reports to shareholders and also has responsibility for implementing company compliance programs .
 Implementation of a 2014 law on lustration resulted in dismissal of large numbers of state officials in some institutions . 42 percent of the State Fiscal Service central office and 15 percent of regional SFS offices were dismissed .
 The law mandates the filing of income and expenditure declarations by public officials and a special review process . The law sets penalties for either not filing or for filing a false declaration .
 National Agency on Corruption Prevention is responsible for reviewing financial declarations and monitoring the income and expenditures of high-level officials . The process of declaration verification has not started and will only begin after the National Agency of corruption Prevention is operational .
 The country has made several steps to enable asset declaration verification by the public . The country made several Steps to enable the public to verify asset declaration .
During the year the government opened the Real Estate Registry, the Land Cadaster and the Registry of Vehicle owners for public access .
 The constitution and law require authorities to provide government information upon request, unless it pertains to national security . It also requires authorities to give government information on national security.
 The U.S. Department of State must respond to regular requests within five days and Country Reports on Human Rights Practices within 20 days .
 Requesters can appeal denials within agencies and ultimately to the court system . Requesters are able to appeal denial of denials .
 The implementation and training of officials on the regulations on public access to information requirements remained inadequate . The implementation of the regulations remained inadequate, according to the government .
 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights . A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without government restriction .
 The government invited human rights groups to participate in monitoring, drafting legislation, and adopting administrative rules . The government asked them to take part in monitoring.
 The government cooperated with international organizations such as the OSCE, the COE, and the HRMMU as well as the investigation into the downing of flight MH 17 .
 The National Human Rights Strategy came into force with a presidential proclamation on August 25 . International and domestic human rights groups collaborated with the government to draft the strategy .
 Some human rights groups expressed concerns about a lack of transparency . The text of the document was unknown, and there was no information about next steps .
 On September 8, the country accepted the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court over crimes against humanity and war crimes committed on its territory since February 2014 . The court has been in charge of the ICC since February 2013 .
 The constitution provides for a human rights ombudsman, officially designated as the parliamentary commissioner on human rights .
 Valeriya Lutkovska served as parliamentary ombudsman for human rights during the year . Observers considered her office an effective promoter of human rights .
 The Ombudsman’s Office was a partner with leading domestic human rights groups and an advocate on behalf of IDPs, Roma, persons with Country Reports on Human Rights Practices .
 Discrimination, Societal Abuses, and Trafficking in Persons. The government lacked effective legal instruments to enforce the prohibitions . Both governmental and societal discrimination persisted .
Experts raised concerns the definition of discrimination was too narrow and the law lacked meaningful enforcement mechanisms . The law covers discrimination, but experts raised concerns that it was not enough .
 The courts may use a law against “forced sex with a materially dependent person’s’ as grounds to prosecute spousal rape .
 Under the law authorities can detain a person for up to five days for offenses related to domestic violence and spousal abuse .
 Advocacy groups asserted the percentage of women subjected to physical violence or psychological abuse at home remained high .
 Human rights groups noted the ability of agencies to detect and report cases of domestic violence was limited . preventive services remained underfunded and underdeveloped .
Law enforcement authorities did not consider domestic violence to be a serious crime but rather a private matter to be settled between spouses . Human rights groups stated that law enforcement authorities didn't consider domestic abuse to be serious crime .
 Russian aggression in the Donbas led to a surge in violence against women across the country, says La Strada .
 Human rights groups attributed the increase in violence to post-traumatic stress experienced by IDPs fleeing the conflict and by soldiers returning from combat .
 IDPs reported instances of rape and sexual abuse; many Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 . 39 claimed to have fled because they feared sexual abuse .
 Police issued almost 41,000 domestic violence warnings and protection orders during a six-month period . The Ministry for Social Policy says police issued almost 40,000 warnings and orders .
 Approximately 68,000 persons were under police monitoring in connection with domestic violence . According to the ministry, approximately 68,00 people were under monitoring .
 Punishment included fines, administrative arrest, and community service . Punishment also included fines and administrative arrest .
 La Strada operated a national hotline for victims of violence and sexual harassment . The hotline was set up to help victims of sexual harassment, violence and violence .
 According to La Strada, 48 percent of calls related to psychological violence are related to violence .
 The NGO reported that expanded public awareness campaigns increased the number of requests for assistance it received each year .
 The law requires the government to operate a shelter in every major city . It did not do so, in part due to lack of municipal funding .
 During the year officials reported 18 centers for social and psychological help and nine centers for psychological and legal help for women who suffered from domestic violence .
 There were concerns that government austerity measures implemented during the year could lead to the elimination of some services provided by these centers .
 Social services centers monitored 4,000 families in matters related to domestic violence and child abuse . Social services center monitored 4.000 families for abuse and abuse .
Women's rights groups noted many nongovernment shelters closed due to lack of funding . NGOs operated additional centers for victims of domestic violence .
 According to women’s advocacy groups, municipal and privately funded shelters were not always accessible .
 Some shelters did not function throughout the year, and administrative restrictions prevented women and families from accessing services . Some shelters didn't function during the year .
 For example, some shelters would only accept children of certain ages . Others did not admit women not registered as local residents .
 Government centers offered only limited legal, psychological, and economic assistance to survivors of domestic violence . Government centers only offered limited legal and psychological assistance .
 Each center could accommodate approximately 30 women and children, which was often inadequate . On average each center could accommodate approximately 30 people and children .
 The law puts sexual harassment in the same category as discrimination, but women’s rights groups say there is no effective mechanism to protect against sexual harassment .
 They reported continuing and widespread sexual harassment, including coerced sex, in the workplace . They reported continued and widespread sex harassment .
 Women rarely sought legal recourse because courts declined to hear their cases and rarely convicted perpetrators . Women rarely seek legal recourse as courts declined.
 Law prohibits coercing a “materially dependent person’s” to have sexual intercourse . Legal experts said safeguards against harassment were inadequate .
 The government recognized the right of couples and individuals to decide the number, spacing, and timing of their children, manage their reproductive health, and have the information .
 Under the law women enjoy the same rights as men, including under family, labor, property, nationality, and inheritance laws, and entitled to receive equal pay for equal work .
 Children The Office of the Parliamentary Ombudsman for Human Rights includes a representative for children’s rights, nondiscrimination, and gender equality .
 A child born to stateless parents residing permanently in the country is a citizen . The child was born in the U.S. to a stateless parent .
 The law requires that parents register a child within a month of birth . It also requires that a child be born in a month.
 Registration of children born in Crimea or born in areas under separatist control remained difficult. Registration of kids born in Ukraine or in Crimea remained difficult .
 Russian or separatist ‘authorities’ routinely keep such paperwork if parents registered children in territories under their control . It is difficult for the child to obtain a Ukrainian birth certificate .
 Authorities do not recognize documents issued by Russian-occupied Crimean or separatist entities . They sometimes refuse to issue birth certificates to children born in those areas .
 As of September 30, the Ministry of Internal Affairs reported crimes victimizing 4,482 children .
 Human rights groups noted that authorities lacked the capability to detect violence against children and refer victims for assistance .
 Authorities did not take effective measures at the national level to protect children from abuse and violence and to prevent such problems .
 The Parliamentary Ombudsman for Human Rights noted the imperfection of mechanisms to protect children who survived violence or witnessed violence .
 According to the law, parents were legal representatives of children, even if they perpetrated violence against them . The law says parents are legal representatives.
 There is no procedure for appointing a temporary legal representative of a child during the investigation of a case of parental violence .
 A major consequence of the violence in Donbas was its effect on children. A major effect of violence in the region was its effects on children . The violence has been blamed for the deaths of children .
 Children in separatist-controlled territory did not receive nutritional and shelter assistance . Children living in separatist territory were not given nutritional and Shelter assistance .
 Human rights groups reported that children who experienced the war or fled from separatist territory suffered psychological trauma . Children who had been in separatist territory or fled had psychological trauma.
 Court may grant a child as young as 16 years old permission to marry . If it finds marriage to be in the child’s interest, a court may grant the child permission .
 Romani rights groups reported early marriages involving girls under 18 were common in the Romani community . Romani women's rights groups said early marriages were common .
 Molesting children under the age of 16 is punishable by imprisonment for up to five years . Molesting under the 16s can be punishable by up to 5 years in prison .
The same offense committed against a child under 14 is punishable by imprisonment for five to eight years . The same offense commits the same offense against a children under 14.
 Sexual exploitation of children remained significantly underreported, but underreported . Sexual abuse of children remains underreported.
 42 domestic and foreign law enforcement officials reported a significant amount of child pornography on the internet continued to originate in the country .
 The International Organization for Migration reported that children from socially disadvantaged families continued to be at high risk of trafficking and exploitation for commercial sexual exploitation and the production of pornography .
Authorities registered more than 190,000 children as IDPs. According to the Ministry of Social Policy, there were more than 200,000 IDPs .
 Human rights groups believed this number was low, as children who fled without their parents cannot register as IDPs unless another relative files for custody . The process can be a lengthy process .
 The child welfare system continues to rely on long-term residential care for children at social risk or without parental care .
 During the year some 7,500 orphans and other children deprived of parental care lived and studied in various types of boarding schools .
 In recent years the government implemented policies to address the abandonment of children or their reintegration with their biological families .
 As a result the number of children deprived of parental care decreased . The number of kids deprived of parent care decreased.
 Human rights groups and the media reported that the deteriorated economic situation and government inaction created unsafe, inhuman, and sometimes life-threatening conditions in some institutions .
 Authorities evacuated children’s institutions in separatist-controlled territory in 2014 . Authorities evacuated three boarding schools for children with significant disabilities in the region .
UNICEF says facilities relied on donations and volunteer assistance and did not receive necessary supplies . UNICEF: These facilities rely on donations, volunteer assistance .
 As of June the staff of the facility in Krasondon had not been paid in months . The facility had been in operation for six months .
 43 Observers noted the judicial system lacked the expertise to work effectively with minors . The legal process for juveniles emphasized punishment over rehabilitation .
Children in custody or under supervision faced bureaucratic and social barriers to reintegration . Supportive social services were often lacking, and children in custody were often missing .
 Authorities viewed imprisonment as a form of supervision and punishment rather than correction and education . Authorities view imprisonment as an form of punishment and punishment .
 The country is a party to the 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction . The country was part of the United States in 1980 .
 Department of State report on compliance at travel . For information see the Department of state’s report on travel .
 According to census data and international Jewish groups, an estimated 103,600 Jews lived in the country . An estimated 0. percent of the population is Jewish .
 According to the Association of Jewish Organizations and Communities, there were approximately 300,000 persons of Jewish ancestry in the country . The number may be higher .
 Jewish community leaders reported that societal anti-Semitism was low . Authorities took steps to address problems of anti-Semitic when they arose .
Institutional anti-Semitism was rare, VAAD stated that attacks were isolated and individuals were responsible rather than organized groups .
 VAAD claimed that negative attitudes towards Jews and Judaism continued to be low . Some individuals continued to espouse anti-Semitic beliefs .
VAAD believed some attacks were provocations meant to discredit the government . VAAD believed that some attacks are provocations .
 In September the Jewish pilgrimage to the Uman burial site of Rabbi Nachman took place without significant incidents . The pilgrimage took place in September .
 On March 27, attackers severely beat a Jewish physician in Kharkiv in what he said was an assault with anti-Semitic overtones . The physician said he was attacked by attackers who had anti-Semitism.
16 incidents of anti-Semitic vandalism in the first nine months of the year, slightly more than at the same time in 2014 . According to VAAD there were 16 incidents of vandalism in 2015 .
 Vandals in Kremenchuk spray-painted swastikas on the grave of Sarah, daughter of Rabbi Nakhman of Breslov, and attempted to set it on fire .
 Police say vandals smashed 19 headstones at a Jewish cemetery in Uzhhorod . The cemetery is in a Jewish community in the city.
 On August 28, vandals set fire to tires at a Holocaust memorial in Melitopol . The memorial was set on fire at the Holocaust memorial .
 Other Holocaust memorials, monuments, and museums desecrated included ones in Odesa, Nikopol, and Novomoskovsk . Other Holocaust monuments, monuments and museums were also desecrate .
 During the year attackers vandalized the Babyn Yar monument in Kyiv six times . The monument was vandalized six times in 2014 .
 On four occasions vandals spray-painted swastikas on the monument and on one occasion in August doused it with a foul-smelling liquid .
 The government responded by increasing security and posting guards at the site . The government has responded by posting guards and increasing security .
 Senior government officials and politicians from various political parties continued efforts to combat anti-Semitism by speaking out against extremism and social intolerance .
 Pro-Russian separatist leaders made anti-Semitic remarks throughout the year . In eastern Ukraine pro-Russian separatists have been making anti-Russian remarks .
 On February 2, Oleksandr Zakharchenko stated that “miserable Jews’ ran the Ukrainian government . On February 3, the so-called leader of separatists in Donetsk Oblast said that ‘miserably Jews” ran the Ukraine government .
On June 22, Igor Plotnitsky stated that Jews were responsible for the Euromaidan movement and running the Ukrainian government . The so-called leader of separatists in Luhansk Oblast said Jews are responsible.
 The law prohibits discrimination against persons with physical, sensory, intellectual, and mental disabilities in employment, education, air travel, and other transportation .
 The law requires the government to provide access to public venues, and involvement in public, educational, cultural, and sporting activities for persons with disabilities .
 The law also requires employers to take into account the individual needs of employees with disabilities .
 Ministry of Social Policy: 25 percent of persons with disabilities were employed . Ministry of social Policy: Approximately 25 percent were employed.
 Advocacy groups maintained that most public buildings remained inaccessible to persons with disabilities . Most public buildings remain inaccessible to people with disabilities, according to advocates .
 Authorities often did not integrate students with disabilities into the general student population . Authorities often didn't integrate students.
 State employment centers lacked resources to place students with disabilities in appropriate jobs . State employment center lacked resources for students to be placed in appropriate roles, according to reports .
 NGOs noted the government was unable to provide outpatient care to persons with disabilities . They said it was putting the main burden on their families .
 Government policy favored institutionalization of children with disabilities over placement with their families . Government policy favors institutionalizing of children.
 The state cared for more than 70,000 of the country’s estimated 150,000 children with disabilities . It lacked the legal framework and funds to deinstitutionalize them .
 Programs to provide for the basic needs of children with disabilities and inpatient and outpatient therapy programs were underfunded and understaffed . Programs for children with disability were also underfunded.
 The inadequate number of educational and training programs for children with disabilities left many isolated and limited their professional opportunities in adulthood . Many children have been left isolated and unable to reach adulthood .
 Persons with disabilities in separatist controlled territory suffer from a lack of appropriate care . People in separatist territory have disabilities in the separatist territory .
 Patients in mental health facilities remained at risk of abuse, and many psychiatric hospitals continued to use outdated methods and medicines . Many psychiatric hospitals are still using outdated methods, medicines and medications .
 Ukrainian Psychiatric Association says insufficient funding, lack of access to legal counsel and poor enforcement of legal protections deprived patients of their right to adequate medical care .
 Government monitors observed incidents of involuntary seclusion and application of physical restraints to Country Reports on Human Rights Practices . 46 persons with mental disabilities at psychiatric and neuropsychiatric institutions.
 Health-care authorities placed patients in isolated and unequipped premises or even metal cages . Authorities held them for long periods without proper access to sanitation .
 By law employers must set aside 4 percent of employment opportunities for persons with disabilities . By law, employers must also set aside 3 percent of opportunities for people with disabilities.
 NGOs noted that many of those employed to satisfy the requirement received nominal salaries but did not actually work at their companies . Many of the people employed to meet the requirement did not work for their companies.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities Mistreatment of minority groups and harassment of foreigners of non-Slavic appearance remained problems .
 NGOs dedicated to combating racism and hate crimes observed that overall xenophobic incidents declined slightly during the year .
 The law criminalizes deliberate actions to incite hatred or to discriminate based on nationality, race, or religion . It also criminalizes insulting the national honor or dignity of citizens in connection with their religious and political beliefs .
 The law imposes increased penalties for hate crimes . Premeditated killing on grounds of racial, ethnic, or religious hatred carries a 10 to 15-year sentence .
 Penalties for other hate crimes include fines of 3,400 to 8,500 hryvnias or imprisonment for up to five years . Other hate crimes can be punishable by up to 5 years in prison .
 Human rights groups say the requirement to prove actual intent, including proof of premeditation, to secure a conviction made application of the law difficult .
 Authorities did not prosecute any of the criminal proceedings under the laws on racial, national, or religious offences .
 Police and prosecutors continued to prosecute racially motivated crimes under laws against hooliganism or related offenses .
 Authorities registered 49 criminal cases involving racial, national, or religious hatred during the first nine months of the year .
 There were 10 documented violent cases against racial or ethnic minorities, with 17 victims . The Democracy Initiative monitoring report was prepared by International Organization for Migration .
 Victims of the attacks were from Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Jordan, Nigeria, and Syria . Victims were Ukrainian citizens of Tajik, Jewish, and Muslim descent .
 47 incidents occurred in Dnipropetrovsk, Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Odesa . Most of the incidents were reported by the U.S. Department of State .
 There were 18 cases of vandalism, including arson, targeting Jewish and Romani property in Dnipropetrovsk, Cherkassy, and Zakarpattya Oblasts .
 On June 11, 30 young men wearing balaclavas and armed with knives and sticks attacked foreign students in Kharkiv . Four from Jordan were among the attackers .
 Law enforcement officers were present but did not attempt to stop the attackers . The attackers were not stopped by police .
 Five people were detained, charged with hooliganism, attempted murder, and armed assault . Later they detained five persons, charged them with attempted murder .
 Roma continued to face governmental and societal discrimination, although authorities had become more responsive to Romani community concerns .
 Romani rights groups estimated the Romani population to be between 200,000 and 400,000 . The population is estimated to be up to 200,00 to 400,00 .
 The discrepancy in population estimates was due in part to a lack of legal documentation for many Roma people .
 Romani settlements were mainly located in Zakarpattya, Poltava, Cherkasy, Volyn, Dnipropetrovsk.
 Roma experienced significant barriers accessing education, health care, social services, and employment due in part to discriminatory attitudes against them . Roma experience significant barriers to accessing education and health care .
 In 2013 the government adopted a seven-year action plan to implement a strategy for protecting and integrating the Roma into society .
 The European Roma Rights Center reported it had not led to significant improvements for Roma . The plan has been criticized by some as a positive step .
 The ERRC monitored the plan in collaboration with the International Renaissance Foundation . The plan was monitored by the ERRC .
 24 percent of Roma have never had any schooling, according to the Parliamentary Ombudsman for Human Rights . Only 1 percent of Romani population had a university degree .
 More than 60 percent of Roma were unemployed, creating a vicious cycle leading to social exclusion and marginalization, ERRC says . More than 50 percent of the Roma population were unemployed .
 Romani minority. Ombudsman: securing employment was the main problem for the Romani minorities .
 Approximately 49 percent of Roma named it as their most significant challenge . Approximately 49 per cent of Roma said it was their most important challenge .
 Romani women’s foundation Chiricli says local authorities erected a number of barriers to prevent issuing passports to Roma .
 Authorities hampered access to education not only by lack of documents, but also due to segregation of Romani children into special schools .
 During the year many Roma fled settlements in areas controlled by separatists and moved elsewhere in the country .
 Approximately 10,000 Roma fled separatist-controlled territory . They were among the most vulnerable members of the country's IDP community .
 Roma lacked documents, obtaining IDP assistance, medical care, and education was especially difficult . Many Roma lack documents, and many Roma lacked medical care .
 During the year the country updated its labor code to prohibit workplace discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity .
 No law prohibits discrimination on this basis in other areas . No law, however, prohibits discrimination in other places .
 LGBTI groups, along with international and domestic human rights organizations, criticized the lack of such language in the National Human Rights Strategy . The National Human rights Strategy was released on Tuesday .
 LGBTI group Nash Mir says there were both positive and negative developments in the LGBTI community in the country .
 The group reported an improvement in social attitudes towards homosexuality and a decline in homophobic rhetoric from churches and political figures . Some members of the Verkhovna Rada voiced their support for LGBTI rights .
 The group reported that the level of homophobic aggression from right-wing nationalist groups increased . Government agencies consistently avoided any discussion of problems facing the LGBTI community .
 On June 6, several dozen men attacked the Equality March in Kyiv . They beat protesters and police and threw firecrackers laced with shrapnel .
 Kyiv City State Administration had initially discouraged march organizers from holding the event . Law enforcement authorities protected the march, but organizers had initially been discouraged .
 Law enforcement authorities arrested more than a dozen persons on charges of Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 . The U.S. Department of State is accused of 49 hooliganism .
 In July several men attacked two LGBTI activists holding hands in central Kyiv . The men attacked the activists in July .
 Our World stated that violence against LGBTI persons was underreported . Our World said violence against gay people was under reported .
 During the year the group recorded 16 assaults and four killings related to the victims’ sexual orientation . The victims' sexual orientation was the focus of the group .
 Our World indicated that victims and families were reluctant to pursue hate crime charges in these cases due to homophobia . Our World said victims and family were reluctant.
 They reported an additional 52 cases of discrimination and abuse, mostly in the cities of Kyiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Odesa and Zhytomir .
 An assailant killed a man in Odesa on December 12 due to his sexual orientation, according to the Ukrainian Gay Alliance .
 Kharkiv court handed down a sentence of only eight years to a man who murdered another person solely due to his homosexuality .
 According to HRW transgender persons in the country faced discrimination . HRW says transgender persons faced discrimination.
 They must undergo mandatory psychiatric treatment and an examination before a state medical board prior to receiving treatment for sexual reassignment . They must also undergo mandatory mental health treatment .
 Transgender persons found the process humiliating and claimed to have difficulty obtaining official documents reflecting their gender . Transgender persons said they had difficulty getting official documents reflect their gender.
 UNICEF reported that children with HIV/AIDS were at high risk of abandonment, social stigma, and discrimination . Children with HIV and AIDS Social Stigma were also at highrisk of abandonment.
 Authorities prevented many children infected with HIV/AIDS from attending kindergartens or schools . Authorities kept many children isolated from other children .
 The most at-risk adolescents faced higher risk of contracting HIV/AIDs as well as additional barriers to accessing information and access to information . U.S. Department of State has 50 services for its prevention and treatment .
 Persons with HIV/AIDS faced discrimination and, at times, lacked access to treatment . At times, people with HIV and AIDS faced discrimination .
 Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective Bargaining The law provides for the right of most workers to form and join independent unions .
 The labor code requires employers to provide justification for layoffs and firings . There are no laws or legal mechanisms to prevent antiunion discrimination . Union activity is not an acceptable justification .
 Legal recourse is available for reinstatement, back wages, and punitive damages . Observers described court enforcement as arbitrary and unpredictable .
 Labor laws and civil codes that apply to worker organizations are excessively complex and contradictory . Labor laws are excessive and contradictory, according to a report .
 Unions reported significant bureaucratic hurdles in the registration process . The process requires visits to as many as 10 different offices .
 Independent unions reported multiple incidents of harassment by local law enforcement officials while navigating registration process .
 Restrictions on the right to strike include the requirement that a large percentage of a workforce must vote in favor of a strike before it may be called . The requirement is that 50 percent of workers in an enterprise must vote for a strike .
 Poorly defined legal grounds for striking allowed authorities to deny the right to strike due to national security or to protect the health or liberties of citizens .
 The law also prohibits strikes by specific categories of workers, including personnel in the Prosecutor General’s Office, the judiciary, the armed forces, the security services, and law enforcement agencies .
 The law made it difficult for independent unions to take part in tripartite negotiations, participate in social insurance programs, or represent labor at the national and international levels . The law also hindered the ability of smaller independent unions.
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 United States Department of State . Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 51 Authorities did not effectively or consistently enforce labor laws .
 The government generally respected freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining . The Government generally respected the right of association .
 Observers disputed the independence of unions from government or employer control . Observer: "It is not a matter of whether or not the unions are independent"
 Independent trade unions alleged that the country's largest trade union confederation, the FPU, enjoyed a cozy relationship with employers and members of some political parties .
 Authorities further denied unions not affiliated with the FPU a share of disputed trade union assets inherited from Soviet-era unions .
 Management, or union representatives co-opted by management, at times dominated the commissions . Management was often in charge of the commissions, but it was not always in charge .
 There were cases of workers who renounced membership in an FPU-affiliated union and joined a new union . Workers faced loss of pay, undesirable work assignments, and dismissal .
 Natalia Skalska is the head of the primary trade union of All-Ukrainian Trade Unions Zakhyst Spravedlivosti . She filed a complaint with the Confederation of Free trade Unions of Ukraine . She alleges her employer, the National Depository of
 Skalska accused the company’s chairman, Gennadiy Zhurov, of failing to recognize the union and neglecting the rights of its members .
 Employers subsequently fired Skalska and other trade union members from their positions .
 There were several cases of companies, private and state owned, not honoring collective bargaining agreements during bankruptcies .
 Oleksandr Abramov complained in a letter to the NPGU office about alleged violations of the labor law .
 The administration of the “Krasnoarmiiskvugillia’s” company forced workers to conclude fixed-term employment contracts after tentatively dismissing them from their jobs .
 Employers required the workers who took such contracts to do the same amount of work, but without any of the social guarantees provided for by their Country Reports on Human Rights Practices . 52 previous collective bargaining agreement.
 NPGU requested the Ministry of Energy and Coal Industry to help resolve the situation . The NPGu requested the ministry of energy and coal industry to resolve the problem .
 The NPGU wrote to the Ministry of Energy and Coal Industry requesting assistance . On her behalf the NPGu wrote the Ministry and Coal industry requested assistance .
Workers staged protests and strikes while demanding payment of back wages . To force the company to take action, workers staged protests.
 As of October 22, the Lviv Coal Mining Company ceased operations, further complicating the trade union’s claims .
 Labor NGOs operated in the country and focused on compliance with international labor standards and supporting the independent labor movement .
 The International Labor Organization had an office in the Ministry of Social Policy, and the ministry routinely consulted it .
 One NGO, the Solidarity Center, focused on fostering independent unions and provided economic and legal training for union leaders . One NGO is based in New York City, New York .
 Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor The law prohibits all forms of forced or compulsory labor . The law also bans forced or forced labor .
 Resources, inspections, and remediation were inadequate to ensure enforcement, according to a report . Resources and inspections were inadequate.
 Penalties for violations ranged from three to 15 years’ imprisonment . Penalties were sufficiently stringent to deter violations. Penalties ranged from 3-15 years' imprisonment .
 There were reports that criminals trafficked women, men, and children for labor .
 Traffickers subjected some foreign nationals to forced labor in construction, agriculture, manufacturing, and domestic work . The lumber industry, nursing, and nursing, also forced begging .
 The Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report is available at www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/. c.com .
 Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for Employment sets 16 as the minimum age for most employment . The law also sets 16 for most jobs .
 Children who are 15 years of age may perform “light work’ with a parent’s consent, but the law does Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 .
 The law allows children to do some forms of work beginning at age 14 as part of an apprenticeship in the context of vocational training .
 Penalties for violations ranged from small fines for illegitimate employment or other labor law violations to prison sentences for sexual exploitation of a child or involvement in illicit activities .
 The penalty for forcing children to beg is imprisonment for up to three years . The penalty is up to 3 years in prison .
 The most frequent violations of labor law for minors related to their work in hazardous conditions, long workdays, failure to maintain work records, and delayed salary payments . Most frequent violations are related to hazardous conditions and long workday days .
 2012 Office of the Ombudsman for Children’s Rights study on child labor trends found child labor in agriculture, sales activities in kiosks and in the distribution of advertising leaflets .
 The survey was not nationally representative and did not include children in the informal sector . It was not national representative and didn't include children.
 Children from socially disadvantaged families and those in state custody remained at high risk of being trafficked or exploited for begging . Children from social disadvantaged families remain at risk of trafficking or being exploited .
 Most child labor in the informal sector occurred in the agricultural and service sectors . The most child labor was in the agriculture and service sector .
 The State Labor Service did not conduct a single child labor inspection during the year . A complete ban on unplanned inspections and a lack of funding for the state Labor Service .
 Law enforcement bodies in Luhansk Oblast detected one case of child sexual exploitation . One case was under investigation .
During a three-year period from January 2012 to the end of the year, there were 17 cases of child trafficking . Eight involved sexual exploitation, five involved labor exploitation, two involved children being sold, one involved both sexual and labor exploitation .
 The Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at www.dol.gov/ilab/reports/child-labor/findings/. d.
 The Verkhovna Rada passed a sexual minorities’ antidiscrimination amendment to the labor code laws on November 12 to meet requirements of the EU for a visafree regime .
 The government did not effectively enforce the law, and discrimination in employment and occupation reportedly occurred with respect to gender, disability, nationality, race, minority status, sexual orientation or gender identity, and HIVpositive status .
 Women received lower salaries than men did due to limited opportunities for advancement and the types of industries that employed them . Women were paid less than men because of limited opportunities.
 According to the Ombudsman’s Office, men earned on average of 29. percent more than women earned .
 Domestic and international observers noted women held few elected or appointed offices at the national and regional levels . Women held few elections or appointments at national and Regional levels .
 The government based the minimum wage on a set monthly subsistence income level .
 The administration envisaged that such an increase would begin in December . The subsequent budget law passed by the administration envisages that such a increase would start in December.
 There were cases of workers in the informal sector receiving wages below the established minimum .
 The law provides for a maximum 40-hour workweek, a 24-hour period of rest per week, and at least 24 days of paid vacation per year . The law also provides for the maximum workweek of 40 hours per week .
 It provides for double pay for overtime work and regulates the number of overtime hours allowed . It also regulates the amount of overtime work allowed .
 The law requires agreement between employers and the respective local trade union Country Reports on Human Rights Practices . The law sets limits on the number of overtime hours allowed .
Arrears stood at approximately two billion hryvnias as of October, according to the State Statistics Committee .
 Most arrears accumulated in industry but also significantly affected companies in the construction, transportation, communications, real estate, and agricultural sectors . MostArrears accumulate in industry, but also affected companies.
 The law and associated regulations contain occupational safety and health standards . Employers frequently ignored them because of the lack of enforcement mechanisms and the government’s failure to hold employers accountable for unsafe conditions .
 The law provides workers the right to remove themselves from dangerous working conditions without jeopardizing their continued employment .
 Employers in metal and mining industries often violated the rule and retaliated against workers by pressuring them to quit, an NGO says .
 The government did not effectively enforce minimum wage, hours of work, and occupational safety and health standards . The government didn't effectively enforce the minimum wage and hours ofWork .
 The government imposed a moratorium on surprise inspections from July 2014 through the end of the year . The moratorium is purportedly to cut the number of required inspections and certifications .
 The moratorium further constrained the government’s ability to enforce labor laws effectively .
 The State Labor Service and its predecessor, the State Labor Inspectorate, had to go through a lengthy interagency process to obtain permission from the Cabinet of Ministers .
 The labor inspections could also occur on the company's own request or on the formal request of the investigator in the framework of criminal proceedings against the company .
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 United States Department of State . Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 56 Lax safety standards and aging equipment caused many injuries on the job .
 The mining sector proved particularly problematic, with wage arrears, nonpayment of overtime, and operational safety and health complaints common .
 Mineworkers, particularly in the illegal mining sector, faced very serious safety and health problems . The illegal mining industry faces serious health and safety problems .
 Through September there were 13 mining fatalities, or approximately 86 percent fewer than in the same period in 2014 . The same period was in 2014, according to the government .
 Observers attributed the sharp decrease in fatalities and injuries to the fact that many mines in eastern Ukraine were closed, ruined or had suspended operation . Others in areas not under government control did not provide statistics to authorities .
 In the first nine months of the year, there were 3,067 work-related injuries across all employment types . That's 38 percent fewer than during the same period in 2014 .
 Workers face unsafe situations in areas of conflict in Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts . Workers faced unsafe situations.
 Despite armed conflict taking place close to industrial areas in the Donbas region, enterprises largely continued to operate through September .
 Fighting resulted in physical damage to mines and plants by causing loss of power, destroyed transformers, and intentional flooding of mines by separatists .
 Miners are especially vulnerable, as loss of electrical power could strand them underground . Miners were especially vulnerable as power could be lost .
 The loss of electrical power threatened the operability of mine safety equipment that prevented the buildup of explosive gases . Loss of power also threatened the safety of mine equipment .
 Raids by combined Russian-separatist forces made workplaces in Donbas unsafe . Raids made workplaces unsafe, according to reports .
 armed pro-Russian militants took control of the Donetsk office of the mobile phone operator KyivStar in April .
 According to the government, approximately 70 percent of the coalmines in the Donetsk Oblast were ruined, flooded, cut off from electricity .
 In February 2014 Russian forces entered Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula and occupied it militarily .
 In March 2014 Russia announced the peninsula had become part of the Russian Federation following a sham referendum that violated Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 .
 The UN General Assembly adopted Resolution 68/262 on the “Territorial Integrity of Ukraine’s status . It called on states and international organizations not to recognize any change in Crimea's status . The UN also affirmed the commitment to recognize Crimea as part of Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s legislature adopted a law attributing responsibility for human rights violations in Crimea to the Russian Federation as the occupying state . In April 2014 Ukraine's legislature adopted the law .
 The United States does not recognize the attempted “annexation’ of Crimea by the Russian Federation . The U.S. doesn't recognize the attempt by Russia .
 Russian law has de facto applied in Ukraine’s Crimea since the Russian occupation and purported “annexation’ of the peninsula in March 2014 .
 The Russian Federation is one of the largest countries in the world . The country is home to Russia's largest human rights groups .
 Sergey Aksyonov as “prime minister’ of the “state council of the republic of Crimea’s’ administered Occupied Crimea .
 The "state council" was responsible for day-to-day administration and other functions of governing .
In September 2014 Russian occupation authorities held “parliamentary elections’ in which only Russia-based political parties won seats . In September 2014, only Russian-based parties won the seats .
 Authorities closed the election to independent observers . It was not free and fair and was held in contravention of the Ukrainian constitution .
 Russian authorities maintain control over Russian military and security forces deployed in Crimea . Russian authorities maintained control over the Crimea region .
 During the year security services worked to consolidate control over Crimea . The Russian Federation imposed repressive federal laws of the Russian Federation on the Ukrainian territory of Crimea .
 Russian security services engaged in an extensive campaign of intimidation to suppress dissent and opposition to the occupation that employed kidnappings, disappearances, physical abuse, and deportations .
 Russian security forces routinely detained individuals without cause and harassed and intimidated neighbors and family of those who opposed the occupation .
Occupation authorities deprived certain groups, in particular Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars, of fundamental freedoms, particularly regarding expressions Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 .
 Crimea's occupation authorities subjected persons who refused Russian citizenship to discrimination in accessing education, health, and employment . Russian authorities continued to impose Russian citizenship on all residents of Crimea .
 These authorities interfered with the rights to expression and assembly, criminalizing the display of cultural and national symbols . They also restricted access to education in the Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar languages .
 Russian authorities engaged in a widespread campaign to suppress free speech and media in Crimea . Third, Russian authorities engage in a campaign to suppression free speech.
 Crimean media refused to register Crimean media and news organizations, preventing them from operating legally . They refused to sign Crimean media, preventing the media from operating legal .
 Russian authorities deny ATR television and the QHA Crimean News Agency licenses, forcing them to close . In particular, Russian authorities denied ATR TV and QHA news agency licenses .
 Security services detained and abused journalists and threatened them with prosecution for opposing the occupation . Security services also detained and attacked journalists and abused them .
 The Russian-installed authorities took few steps to investigate or prosecute officials or individuals who committed human rights abuses . The Russian authorities took little steps to prosecute or prosecute those who committed abuses .
 Occupation and local “self-defense’s” forces often did not wear insignia and committed abuses with impunity .
 Arbitrary or Unlawful Deprivation of Life Russian occupation authorities did not adequately investigate cases of abductions and killings of Crimeans from 2014 .
 Crimean Tatar activist Reshat Ametov was killed by members of “self-defense’s paramilitaries. For example, in January occupation authorities suspended their investigation of the March 2014 killing.
 His body was later found with signs of Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 United States Department of State . His eyes gouged out, including his eyes gouging out, were found .
 Occupation authorities did not investigate other suspicious deaths and disappearances . Sometimes marking them up as suicide .
 Human rights observers reported that families frequently did not challenge findings in such cases due to fear of retaliation . Families often did not challenges findings due to fears of retaliation.
 There were numerous reports of disappearances and abductions that were attributed to Russian occupation authorities . There were also reports of abductions and disappearances .
 In many cases the whereabouts of individuals were unknown for extended periods of time . The whereabouts of people were unknown.
 Human rights groups report that police often refuse to register reports of disappearances while intimidating and threatening those who try to report a disappearance .
 In March, Fyodor Kostenko disappeared shortly after crossing from Kherson Oblast into Crimea .
Kostenko is the father of Euromaidan activist Oleksandr Kostenko . He was convicted in Crimea in May for protesting against the Yanukovych government in Kyiv .
 The last report concerning Fyodor Kostenko was on March 4, shortly after he crossed into Crimea . He appeared at a press conference in Kyiv, where he protested his son’s detention .
Russian occupation authorities have not investigated his disappearance . Russian occupation authorities are not investigating his disappearance.
 On August 27, men in police uniforms reportedly seized Mekhtar Aislanov, a Crimean Tatar, and threw him into a minivan . There has been no subsequent communication from him .
 Russian authorities opened an investigation into his disappearance on September 3 . He was reported missing in September .
 On December 24, Tatar leader Mustafa Jemilev noted that at least 20 Crimean Tatars have disappeared since the occupation of Crimea began .
There was no information on at least eight individuals reported as abducted and missing in 2014 . There was no known information on the number of people reported missing .
 Russian occupation authorities did not adequately investigate the disappearances . Human rights groups believed Russian security forces kidnapped the individuals by for opposing Crimea’s occupation .
 There were reports that Russian authorities in Crimea abused residents who opposed the Russian occupation .
 Security services reportedly tortured Oleksandr Kostenko prior to his May 15 “conviction” for allegedly injuring a member of the Ukrainian antiriot Berkut force in Kyiv in February 2014 .
 Kostenko accused his captors of beating him, subjecting him to a mock execution . He accused them of depriving him of food and water during his detention .
 Observers noted the conviction was unique because the alleged crime took place outside of both Russia and Crimea and occurred before Russia's occupation of Crimea .
 Tatar leader Tatar Ehnver Krosh was tortured with electric shock, according to Tatar leaders . He was detained and allegedly tortured by FSB officers in December .
 Authorities released him the next day, reportedly after having threatened his family . He was reportedly released after the incident .
 Occupation authorities threatened individuals with violence or imprisonment if they did not testify in court against individuals considered to be in opposition to the occupation . Human rights monitors reported that occupation authorities also threatened people with violence.
 Prison and Detention Center Conditions Prison and detention center conditions reportedly remained harsh and overcrowded .
 OSCE/ODIHR says persons incarcerated during the Russian occupation did not have the opportunity to retain their Ukrainian citizenship .
 Human rights groups reported that prisons suffered from overcrowding and poor conditions .
 Occupation authorities did not permit monitoring of prison or detention center conditions by independent nongovernmental observers or international organizations .
 Authorities arbitrarily detained protesters, activists, and journalists for opposing the Russian occupation .
 Russian occupation authorities applied and enforced Russian law in occupied Crimea . Police and Security Apparatus Russian occupation officials applied and enforce Russian law .
 The FSB conducted security, counterintelligence, and counterterrorism activities . It also combatted organized crime and corruption .
 A ‘national police force’ operated under the aegis of the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs . A “national police Force’s’ operation was called a national police force .
 "self-defense" forces allegedly committed many abuses by Russian forces, according to reports . Former Ukrainian Ministry of Interior officers allegedly linked to local organized crime .
 These forces often acted with impunity in intimidating opponents of the occupation . They were involved in beatings, kidnappings, detentions, and arbitrary confiscation of property .
Members of the "self-defense" forces under the authority of the “national police,” continue to commit abuses . They receive state funding for their activities, such as beachfront property and service medals .
 There were reports Russian-imposed authorities made arbitrary arrests, in particular targeting Crimean Tatars .
 Authorities arrested persons involved in competing protests by pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian groups on February 26, 2014, in Simferopol . Two individuals were killed in the protests, which resulted in the deaths of two individuals .
 Russia did not exercise control over Crimea at the time . Occupation authorities subsequently prosecuted individuals alleged to have participated in the protest .
 Human rights groups say authorities reviewed video of the incident and selectively brought charges against leading Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian individuals who subsequently opposed the occupation .
 The occupation authorities refused to investigate acts of violence committed by proCountry Reports on Human Rights Practices . 62 Russian “protesters,’ some of whom observers believed to have been working for Russian security services .
 Crimean Tatar leader and deputy head of the Mejlis charged with participating in the February 26 Simferopol protests . Akhtem Chiygoz was arrested on January 28 .
 Authorities extended his detention by three months in May .
 Chiygoz was held in solitary confinement, only returning to the normal prisoner population after he began a hunger strike . He was released from prison after he was returned to the prison population .
 In July, authorities extended Chiygoz’s detention to November 19; authorities extended it again until January 29, 2016 . Authorities extended the detention again in July .
 Human rights groups believed that occupation authorities made the arrests to pressure them to testify against Chiygoz .
Police detained Mustafa Asaba, head of the Belgorod regional Mejlis, on April 14 . Asaba is accused of participating in the February 26 Simferopol protests .
 Russian security services planted ammunition in his home during a search in September 2014 . Human rights observers believed that Russian security forces planted ammunition.
 Crimean Tatars protested against the occupation authorities’ forced expulsion of Crimean Tatar leader Mustafa Jemilev . Security services also arrested persons involved in a protest on May 3, 2014 .
 Crimean Tatar leaders Musa Apkerimov, Rustam Abdurakhmanov, Edem Ebulisov, and Tair Smedlyaev were indicted in 2014 for rioting and violating a state border .
 Edem Osmanov, son of Euromaidan activist Mustafa Osmanova, was arrested January 17 . Authorities accused him of using force against the Russian occupation in connection with May 3, 2014 events .
 Apkerimov received a suspended sentence of four years and four months on May 28 . On May 28, Apkerim received a suspension sentence of 4 years and 4 months .
 Edem Ebulisov in exchange for a plea of guilty for assaulting a state official . Authorities fined Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 United States Department of State .
Denial of Fair Public Trial under the Russian occupation regime was neither independent nor impartial . The “judiciary” remained susceptible to political interference .
 The Country Reports on Human Rights for Russia for a description of the relevant Russian laws and procedures that the Russian government applied and enforced in occupied Crimea .
 Occupation authorities also transferred Crimean cases to Russia’s legal system and changed the venue of prosecution for some detainees .
 Russian court sentenced film director Oleh Sentsov and activist Oleksander Kolchenko to 20 and 10 years in prison . They were sentenced on politically motivated charges . The film director and activist were sentenced in August .
 Khaiser Jemilev, son of exiled Crimean Tatar leader, sentenced to five years in prison for manslaughter . He was sentenced to three and a half years, later reduced to 3 and ahalf .
 Occupation authorities had transferred him from Crimea to Russia for trial in 2014 .
 Human rights groups say Russian authorities charged him with murder and transported him to Astrakhan to put pressure on his father, Mustafa Jemilev, who opposed Crimea .
 64 Russian occupation forces regularly conducted paramilitary exercises with the aim of intimidating residents of Crimea . Crimea, especially Crimean Tatars, were targeted .
 Occupation authorities conducted similar searches in Lenino and Fontany . The searches were conducted by Occupation Authorities .
 Armed men in uniform without identification conducted extensive searches of houses without a warrant or pretext . The searches were accompanied by dogs and helicopters .
 There were reports that occupation authorities conducted similar searches in Simferopol . The searches were conducted by occupation authorities .
 Occupation authorities harassed family members of a number of political opponents .
Occupation authorities also indicted Kostenko’s friend, Stabislav Kransov, for ‘inciting hatred or enmity through mass media’ and fled Crimea . Security services frequently visited Kostko’'s mother, who still resided in Crimea .
 Russian officials cut power and natural gas to family members of Crimean Tatar Mejlis in retaliation .
 Human rights monitors reported that occupation authorities harassed family and friends of Crimean Tatar leaders and placed them under surveillance .
 Freedom of Speech and Press Occupation authorities significantly restricted freedom of speech and press . Authorities significantly restricted access to the media and the media .
 Occupation authorities refused to register independent print and broadcast media outlets . They forced them to cease operations .
 Threats and harassment against international and Ukrainian journalists were common, according to Ukrainian journalists .
 individuals could not publicly criticize the Russian occupation without fear of reprisal . Individuals could not criticise Russian occupation in any way .
 The FSB engaged in widespread surveillance of social media, telephones, and electronic communication . Human rights groups reported that the FSB routinely summoned individuals for “discussions’ for voicing or posting opposition to Russian occupation .
 Emir-Usein Kuku, a member of the Contact Group on Human Rights, was detained April 21 . Authorities seized his laptop and mobile phone, allegedly on suspicion that he was involved in inciting ethnic hatred .
 Occupying authorities considered the Ukrainian flag and other Ukrainian symbols to be illegal and arrested and harassed anyone publicly displaying these symbols .
 On August 24, Ukrainian Independence Day, occupation authorities arrested three men in Kerch for flying Ukrainian flag and wearing Ukrainian T-shirts .
Police arrested a small group of Ukrainian activists for laying flowers at a monument to Ukrainian writer Taras Shevchenko . On the same day in Sevastopol, police arrested a group of activists for laid flowers .
 Occupation authorities refused to register most independent media outlets, forcing them to close during the year .
 In 2014 occupation authorities required all Crimean media organizations to register with the Russian state media regulator Roskomnadzor by January 1 .
 The authorities refused to issue licenses to independent news organizations or those that published articles opposing Russia’s occupation of Crimea .
 In February, Roskomnadzor refused to issue a license to QHA Crimean News Agency . QHA ceased operations in Crimea on April 1 and moved to Kyiv .
Roskomnadzor also refused to register the Tatar language outlets 15 Minut and Avdet . RoskomNadzar refused to sign the language outlets.
 Crimean Tatar television station ATR stopped transmitting after occupation authorities refused to issue it a license .
 Moscow law firm ATR submitted four applications between October 2014 and April . occupation authorities refused it each time due to “lack of documents,” despite the fact that an experienced law firm prepared its last two applications .
 Sergei Aksyonov says ATR was an "enemy element" that had no role to play in Crimea . The occupation "prime minister" said ATR is an “enemy element,” he said .
 The CPJ criticized occupation authorities for singling out Crimean Tatar publications for closure . In particular, the CPJ said occupation authorities had singled out Crimea's publications .
Nariman Dzhelyal, first deputy head of the Mejlis, warned not to organize any protest against ATR's closing .
 occupation authorities fined two of them for participating in an unsanctioned public event . The fine is the equivalent of $200 .
 Occupation authorities took steps to replace independent, Tatar-language media with state-controlled alternatives .
 On September 22, the Millet television station began broadcasting in the Crimean Tatar language .
 There were numerous cases of Russian security forces or police harassing independent media and detaining journals in connection with their professional activities .
 Russian security services raided the headquarters of ATR on January 26 . They demanded that it surrender any footage it had of the February 2014 protests .
Security services seized hard drives, video footage, and data during a seven-hour search .
 The occupation authorities threatened to arrest and fine individuals who gathered to protest the search . Authorities threatened to arrests and fine people who gathered.
On March 13, police detained independent journalist Natalya Kokorina for six hours . The mother of Anna Andrievska wrote an article about the Crimea Battalion in December 2014 .
Both were independent journalists affiliated with the Center for Investigative Journalism . Both were independent journalist affiliated with CJJ .
 In separate incidents police also detained independent journalist Anna Shaidurova and former ATR cameraman Eskender Nebiyev .
 Following Russia's occupation of Crimea, journalists resorted to self-censorship to continue reporting .
 Russian occupation authorities banned most Ukrainian and Crimean Tatarlanguage broadcast programming . The content was replaced with Russian programming .
 In September occupation authorities directed media outlets not to mention the word “Mejlis’ in reporting and not mention its leader Refat Chubarov .
 Occupation authorities used national security laws to restrict the work of journalists critical of the Russian occupation .
 Security services routinely monitored and controlled internet activity to suppress contrary opinions . Security services regularly monitored andcontrolled internet activity .
 Russian occupation forces interrogated residents of Crimea for posting pro-Ukrainian opinions on Facebook or on blogs .
Former ATR cameraman Amet Umerov was detained on April 11 . He allegedly posted remarks critical of the Russian occupation leadership on a social network .
 The search came days after Roskomnadzor was granted broad powers to search correspondence on social networking and e-mail systems .
 occupation authorities reportedly cut the town off from internet, telephone, and electrical services . On April 4, during a daylong raid and search of houses in Zhuravki for alleged extremist materials.
 Russian authorities in Crimea engaged in a widespread campaign to suppress the Crimean Tatar language . Academic Freedom and Cultural Events in Crimea were held in Crimea .
 Crimean Tatar is an official language . occupation authorities dramatically reduced instruction in schools . The language was offered only as an optional language at the end of the school day .
 Occupation authorities closed the Crimean Tatar school in Bakhchysarai .
 Crimean Tatars use the Cyrillic, as opposed to the Latin, alphabet . There were reports of authorities pressuring Tatars to use the Latin alphabet .
 After Russian occupation, authorities pressured teachers and parents to discourage Ukrainian language education . Authorities pressured teachers to discourage language education.
 During the year only 1. percent of Crimean residents received Ukrainian language instruction . Only two Ukrainian language schools remained open in Crimea .
 Occupation authorities expunged courses on the history and literature of Ukraine from educational materials in Crimea . Some teachers found using Ukrainian materials and dismissed some .
 Occupation authorities imposed Russian laws regarding “banned books and materials’s” Ukrainian language material from libraries .
In January occupation authorities fined the director of the Feodosia library 2,000 rubles because the library contained 12 books about the Holomodor . The books were deemed to be “extremist materials’ because of its supposedly antiRussian content .
 Vladimir Kazarin is the chair of the Russian and Foreign Literature Department at the Tauride Tauris Academy . He was threatened with dismissal by occupation authorities in September . Kazarin said the arrival of Russia devastated the educational field of Crimea .
 Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association Freedom of Assembly Organizations reported gross and widespread harassment and intimidation by Russian occupation authorities to suppress their ability to assemble peacefully .
 Abuses included arbitrary searches, interrogations, threats of deportation, and unsubstantiated accusations of possessing “extremist’s literature. Abuses include arbitrary searches and interrogations .
 On January 17, approximately 30 titushki or hired thugs attempted to break up a meeting of the Second All-Crimean Conference on Crimean Tatar Rights in Simferopol .
 Police and security officers at the scene did nothing to prevent the disruption .
 On May 18, Russian occupation authorities detained approximately 60 Crimean Tatars commemorating the 71st anniversary of the Soviet deportation of Crimean Country Reports on Human Rights Practices .
 Authorities warned members of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis not to hold such a demonstration .
Occupation authorities detained protesters for more than six hours without access to lawyers and released them without formal charges . The protesters were released without formal charge .
 Occupation authorities criminalized the display of Ukrainian flags and symbols as extremist activity .
 Security services arrested Leonid Kuzmin, Alexander Kravchenko, and Vilidar Shukurdzhiyev in Simferopol . They displayed Ukrainian flags at a celebration of the 201st birthday of Ukrainian poet Taras Shevchenko .
 On March 13, the court found all three guilty of holding an illegal rally and sentenced them to 40 hours of community service . The court found the three guilty.
 Occupation authorities threatened Kuzmin with dismissal from his job as a teacher . Kuz Min was a teacher at the time of the incident .
 Kuzmin was arrested at a memorial to Shevchenko wearing a blue and yellow ribbon . The ribbon is the Ukrainian national colors .
 Occupation authorities later issued Shukurdzhiyev an administrative warning for doing the same .
Two unknown individuals assaulted Kuzmin on April 17, leaving him with a concussion . The incident occurred in the early hours of April 17 .
 Crimean Tatar Flag Day is June 26 . Occupation authorities forbade any assembly marking the day .
 Russian occupation authorities required all social, religious, and media groups to reregister by January 1, 2016 .
 There was concern that occupation authorities would abuse this process to hinder freedom of association by preventing legitimate associations from reregistering .
 Security services repeatedly arrested, detained, and searched members of the Mejlis, the recognized, elected representative body of Crimean Tatars .
Nariman Dzhelyal was subjected to a five-hour search of his home following his election to the Mejlis . The search took place on March 30 after he was elected to the government .
 In September occupation authorities threatened to prohibit Crimean Tatar Mejlis within the Russian Federation . In September, occupation authorities threaten to prohibit the Crimean Tatars .
 The Russian Federation Council’s July 8 proposed a ‘patriotic stop list’ of 12 foreign NGOs operations . The list included the Crimean Human Rights Field Mission, which conducts monitoring of human rights abuses .
 Russian occupation authorities did not respect rights related to freedom of movement and travel . Freedom of Movement, Internally Displaced Persons, Protection of Refugees, and Stateless Persons Russian occupation officials did notrespect rights .
 There were reports that occupation authorities selectively detained and at times abused persons attempting to enter or leave Crimea .
 Russian occupation authorities detained Emine Avamileva for more than two hours at the administrative boundary between Kherson and Crimea . The Crimean Tatar Tatar Mejlis and Kurultai member was detained without cause .
 Eksender Bariyev and Abmedzhyt Suleymanov, members of the Crimean Tatar Rights Committee, were detained January 23 . They were detained as they traveled from Crimea to Kherson Oblast .
 In July occupation authorities prohibited Nariman Dzhelyal and Ilmi Umerov from the Crimean Tatar Mejlis . In July, authorities banned NarimanDzheleyal, IlmiUmerov and Zair Smedlyaev from traveling to Ankara
 Crimean Tatar activist Sinaver Kadyrov was expelled on January 23 . He had not formally refused Russian citizenship and had been compelled to accept it .
 Mustafa Jemilev and Refat Chubarov are members of the Verkhovna Rada . Ismet Yuksel, general director of the Crimean News Agency, remained banned from entering Crimea by Russian occupation authorities .
 In 2014 Russian occupation authorities imposed a Russian citizenship requirement on all residents of Crimea . In 2014 Russia imposed a Russia citizenship requirement.
 Those who refused Russian citizenship became subject to arbitrary expulsion . Those who refuse Russian citizenship are subject to an arbitrary expulsion.
 Authorities announced that it would issue only 5,000 Russian “permanent residence permits’ to Crimean residents during the year .
 Russian citizenship denied access to government employment, education, and health care . Authorities denied those who refused Russian citizenship Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 .
 According to media sources, Russian authorities prosecuted private employers who continued to employ Ukrainians .
 In some cases authorities compelled residents of Crimea to surrender their Ukrainian passports .
 Many countries did not recognize passports issued to them by Russian occupation authorities . Loss of their Ukrainian passports made it potentially difficult for Crimeans to travel internationally .
 All individuals who retained Ukrainian citizenship must register their passports or be subject to fines or imprisonment . As of January 1, 2016, all individuals who retain Ukrainian citizenship will have to register passports .
 Approximately 30,000 residents of Crimea registered with Ukraine’s State Emergency Service as IDPs on the mainland .
 Most IDPs remain unregistered . Local NGOs believe the actual figure could be as high as 50,000 .
 Many fled out of fear occupation authorities would target them for abuse because of their work as political activists or journalists . Many fled from occupation authorities because of fear they would be targeted for abuse .
 Muslims and Evangelical Christians who left Crimea said they feared discrimination due to their religious beliefs . Muslims and Christians left Crimea because of their beliefs, they said .
 Crimean Tatars are concerned about pressure on their community, including arbitrary searches of their homes, surveillance and discrimination .
 Many professionals left Crimea because Russian occupation authorities required them to apply for Russian professional licenses and adapt to Russian procedures in their work .
 Russian occupation authorities prevented residents from voting with other Ukrainian citizens in the October 25 local elections in Crimea . Residents were not allowed to vote with other citizens .
 The Russian-installed “prime minister’s” Sergey Aksyonov stated occupation authorities no longer recognized the Mejlis as an official institution .
Under Ukrainian law the Mejlis is the official, recognized, representative council of Tatars in the country . Under Ukrainian law, the Melis is an official, official, representativeCouncil of Tatar .
 There were no known requirements for Russian occupation authorities or their agents to file, verify, or make public any income or asset disclosure statements .
 There were reports of embezzlement of Russian state funds allocated to support the occupation . There were multiple reports of rampant corruption among Crimean “officials,’s ‘officials'
 Most independent human rights organizations ceased activities in Crimea following Russia’s occupation . Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights .
 Occupation authorities refused to cooperate with independent human rights NGOs . They harassed human rights monitors and threatened them with fines and imprisonment .
 Its June 5 report stated that occupying authorities placed the delegation under surveillance, attempted to prevent the delegation from having meetings, and criticized the delegation when it did so .
 Russian media engaged in a coordinated campaign to discredit the delegation, according to the report .
 From July 6-18, the OSCE conducted a human rights assessment mission on Crimea . The mission was conducted by the European Union .
 Russian occupation authorities refused to meet with the mission and denied the mission entry to Crimea .
 The mission’s report detailed allegations of Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 . The report emphasizes the need for independent human rights monitoring .
 The CHRFM attempted to monitor the human rights situation in Crimea . But authorities sharply curtailed its activities after placing it on a “patriotic stop list’s by the Russian Federation Council .
 Russian authorities find the CHRFM “undesirable’s” members and anyone cooperating or associating with the group would be subjected to fines or imprisonment .
 Russian laws prohibit any group that receives foreign funding and engages in vaguely defined “political activity’s” to register as a “foreign agent.” A term that connotes treason or espionage.
 Discrimination, Societal Abuses, and Trafficking in Persons Occupying Russian forces created an atmosphere of impunity, creating a hostile environment for members of ethnic and religious minorities .
 Under both Ukrainian law and "laws" imposed by Russian occupation authorities, birthplace or parentage determines citizenship . Under both Ukraine law and “laws’s” laws, “law and ‘laws” imposed by Russia’
 Russia’s occupation and purported annexation of Crimea complicated citizenship for children born after February 2014 . It was difficult for parents to register a child as a citizen with Ukrainian authorities .
 Registration in Ukraine requires a hospital certificate, which is retained when a birth certificate is issued . The hospital certificate is retained in Ukraine when a baby is born .
 New parents can only obtain a Russian birth certificate and do not have access to a hospital certificate . Under the occupation regime, new parents could only obtain the birth certificate .
 Ukrainian border guards did not recognize Russian birth certificates, so bringing a newborn child to Ukraine would be difficult . The situation was further complicated because Ukraine border guards didn't recognize Russia's birth certificates .
 There were reports that Russian authorities continued to permit kidnapping orphans in Crimea and transporting them across the border .
 An estimated 15,000 Jews lived in Crimea, primarily in Simferopol, Crimea .
 Since the beginning of Russia’s occupation, authorities singled out Crimean Tatars and Ukrainians for discrimination, abuse, deprivation of religious and economic rights .
 Crimean Tatars are an ethnic group native to Crimea, dating to the Crimean Khanate of the 15th century .
 Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, many surviving Crimean Tatars returned to Crimea .
 Prior to the Russian occupation, there were approximately 300,000 Crimean Tatars living in Crimea .
 Crimean Tatar Mejlis is an elected, representative body of Crimean Tatars that the Ukrainian government legally recognizes . Occupation authorities systematically targeted members of the Crimean Tatari Mejis .
Russian occupation authorities formally banned its leader, Refat Chubarov, from Crimea for five years . Russian occupation authorities have formally banned the leader from Crimea .
 Many of the individuals targeted in the cases regarding February 26 protests in Simferopol were Mejlis members .
 Crimean Tatars were harassed for speaking their language in public and forbid speaking it in the workplace . Occupation authorities harassed Tatars for speaking the language .
Teachers prohibited schoolchildren from speaking Crimean Tatar to one another .
 Crimean Muslims are closely associated with Crimean Tatars . Occupation authorities placed restrictions on the Spiritual Administration of Crimean Muslims .
 Spiritual Administration of Crimean Muslims registered under Russian law . occupation authorities prohibited individual Muslim mosques associated with Crimean Tatars from doing so .
 Authorities routinely demanded information on any meeting held at a mosque outside of regular services . They required that they be informed if an imam changed mosques .
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 United States Department of State . 75 Russian occupation authorities also targeted ethnic Ukrainians . The U.S. State Department also targeted 75 Russians .
 On May 21, a group of ethnic Ukrainians met in public to celebrate “embroidery day’s’ in honor of traditional Ukrainian dress .
 Security forces arrested four persons as well as three journalists from TV Inter . Security forces arrest four persons and three journalists as well.
 Authorities arrested the group for having “prohibited items’ and detained them for five hours . The group was arrested for ‘prohibited goods’
Occupation authorities have not permitted churches linked to ethnic Ukrainians to register under Russian law . The Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kyiv Patriarchate and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church have not been allowed to register .
Occupation authorities harassed and intimidated members of the churches. Occupation authorities harass and intimidated them .
Parishes in Saki, Krasnoperekopsk, and Kerch closed for financial reasons . Authorities threatened the economic interests of business persons who supported the churches .
 Bishop Kliment reported regular and systematic surveillance of UOC-KP churches and parishioners .
 Russian occupation authorities targeted businesses and properties belonging to ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars for expropriation .
 Crimean Tatars affiliated with the Mejlis are prohibited from registering businesses or properties .
 Most of the LGBTI community fled Crimea after the Russian occupation began, activists say .
Russian occupation authorities prohibited any LGBTI groups from holding public events in Crimea . Russian occupation authorities banned LGBTI group from holding any events .
 Russian occupation authorities announced both the labor laws of Ukraine and those of the Russian Federation were to remain in effect until January 1 . The labor laws are to stay in effect.
 Russian occupation authorities imposed labor laws and regulations of the Russian Federation on Crimean workers . They created barriers to freedom of association, collective bargaining, and ability to strike .
Pro-Russian authorities threatened to nationalize property owned by labor unions in Crimea . The NGO Freedom House reported that pro-Russian officials threatened tonationalize property .
 Ukrainians who didn't accept Russian citizenship faced job discrimination . Ukrainians who did not accept Russia's citizenship facedJob discrimination .
 Only Russian passport holders could continue to work in “government’s and municipal positions . Only Russian passports holders could work in government and municipal roles .