 Ukraine has banned most Russian men from entering the country as part of security measures . Moscow’s forces seized three of its ships and their crew in the Sea of Azov .
 He seemed to be referring to pro-Russian protests in spring and summer 2014 that in some places led to demonstrators seizing state buildings .
 Kiev accused Moscow of sending agents and gangs of young men to rallies to foment violence . The eastern Donbas region spiralled into a war that still rumbles on . Kiev accused Russia of sending agent and gangs to such rallies .
 Ukrainian officials say Russians made 1. million trips to the country last year . Moscow’s foreign ministry spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova, called the ban a result of “wild movements by the leadership” in Kiev .
 The latest crisis has deepened Moscow's rift with the West over Ukraine . U.S. president Donald Trump said he had cancelled Saturday's planned talks with Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin .
 Mr Poroshenko tweeted after Mr Trump announced that he would not meet Mr Putin at the G20 summit . German chancellor Angela Merkel plans to discuss Ukraine with the Russian leader .
 Most of the captured crewmen have been transferred from Crimea to prisons in Moscow . They face detention on suspicion of illegally crossing the Russian border . Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 .
 Russian ships fired on and captured their boats after preventing them from sailing through the Kerch Strait from the Black Sea to reach a Ukrainian port . The two states share the Sea of Azov, which they share .
 Kiev calls the incident an act of aggression, while Moscow claims it was the result of a ‘provocation’ to boost the popularity of Mr Poroshenko ahead of elections next March .
 Ukraine imposed martial law on Wednesday in 10 border and maritime regions . Mr Poroshenko called the threat of ‘full-scale war’ with Russia .
 Tension with Moscow is also building as Ukraine moves towards securing independence from the Russian Orthodox Church . The Ecumenical Patriarchate in Istanbul is “first among equals’s in the Orthodox world.
 Agents from Ukraine’s security service raided the residence of a senior pro-Moscow cleric who leads Kiev's oldest monastery . They are investigating the incitement of religious hatred in Ukraine .