 Pro-Kremlin leftists and liberals seem to think Putin’s Russian neoliberal capitalism preferable to Anglo-American and European neoliberal capitalism . Putin's imperialist drive to maintain Russian hegemony if not full control over Ukraine.
 Russia has a degree of independence from governmental regulation, some of the latter can only envy . Such people think that the rapacious and destructive greed of big bankers and corporate owners/managers in Russia is preferable to that of their European and American counterparts .
 No similarity between Putin and his Eurasianists and George W Bush and his Neo-cons . They see no similarity between the two .
 The pro Kremlin leftists do not condemn Putin for turning Russia into a neo-Soviet kleptocratic autocracy or label as imperialist his expansionist wars .
 Since 1991, such leftists have either been silent on or supportive of regimes in China, North Africa, Syria, North Korea, Zimbabwe, the Congo, and most recently, fundamentalist Islamists and fascist Arab Baathists .
 The North Korean government purchase of submarines from Russia for millions of dollars in 1994 during the height of the country’s famine, and the massacres in Rwanda . Such leftists ignored issues like the Chernobyl disaster, the N. Korean government bought submarines from Russian in 1994 .
 Putin’s Russia and neo-Nazi and fascist parties – both EU and Russian. Today to this list one can add Putin's Russia and Nazi parties .
 leftists analyze events in terms of anti-Americanism rather than anti-imperialism . Another explanation for this double standard is that such leftists analyze things in terms.
 This attitude results in condemning Anglo-American and European neoliberal capitalism but not Russian neoliberal capitalism . This attitude has been condemned by many in Russia and the U.S.
 Anti-Americanism is a set of beliefs that classifies imperialism as a singular specific American rather than a global phenomenon .
 Anti-Americanism bears little relation to Lenin's concept of rival imperialist ruling classes divided within and engaged in a struggle with one another .
Anti-Americanists restrict ‘imperialism’ to a single U.S. dominated bloc without fundamental intra-ruling-class differences .
 Some leftists and liberals see the world as a stage for a duel between a capitalist USA and NATO on one side, and capitalist Russia on the other .
 Ukraine must remain Russian, so the U.S. and NATO do not get stronger. On this Manichean stage, Ukraine must stay Russian .
 Middle or working class Ukrainians who see benefit in the EU, the massive support for the Maidan and the support for Maidan have no place on this stage .
 Those who support EU membership for Ukraine are dupes in a fascist plot, according to the script . The script is run by the USA and NATO and its new puppet Kyiv “junta’s” government .
Ukrainian national ambitions and independence are synonymous with what these leftists, liberals and Russian rulers call fascism .
 EU negotiators and Maidan leaders were urging Yanukovych to remain in power and that he fled of his own volition is ignored .
 AngloAmerican corporations are appalled at how they continue to extract resources from former European colonies . Pro-Kremlin leftists and liberals are not appalled by the prospect of the Russian state and its ruling elite continuing to extractresources from its Ukrainian colony .
 These leftists and liberals, contrary to their avowed principles of anti-imperialism and self-determination, pen pro-Kremlin articles . They identify the new Ukrainian government containing Russians and Jews and Georgians and Lithuanians, as a fascist “regime
 These people consider Ukraine in Russia’s ‘sphere of influence’ and that it should stay there .
 The fact that a majority of Ukrainian citizens prefer not to stay there is not considered by any of the Flashpoint authors . Russia's drive for regional hegemony risks starting World War III by breaking international treaties and invading their country, they say .
 James Petras owns Clarity Press which, by its titles, appears to be Progress Publishers . Petras is a pro-Kremlin anti-Ukrainian publicist .
 He makes no analogous assertions about Moscow or Petersburg, their corpse count, or their longstanding policies towards neighboring independent governments . He says he makes no similar assertions.
 There are not known to have ever written any scholarly article on either Ukraine, or Russia . There follow 24 articles by people, who, with the possible exception of perhaps 3 or 4, are not know to have written .
 I will not itemize all the half-truths, myths, omissions, and outright lies that characterize the anti-Ukrainian diatribes .
 The authors’ underlying preconceptions and logic contradict their avowed leftist, liberal, and, in some instances, Marxist principles .
Russian communist leaders were unperturbed by Nazis or fascists as long as they were pro-Russian . When in power, Russian communist leaders had no fear of fascists or Nazis .
 Stalin’s treaties with Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany obliged Stalin to deliver refugee German communists back to Germany .
 Those leftists in Europe who thought state control of the economy amounted to socialism dutifully accommodated themselves to these treaties . Those leftists who think state control is socialism are more than just a form of socialism .
 Hitler invaded in 1941 and made Nazism and Fascism anti-Russian . Stalin and his associates made “anti-fascism’s’ synonymous with pro-Russian.
 Their formula did not distinguish between fascism and Nazism and is parroted today by pro-Kremlin leftists and liberals . Their formula does not distinguishbetween fascism andNazism .
 What is most terrible about Nazis in this formula is less their crimes than their anti-Russian politics. What is the worst about Nazis is not their crimes.
 Non-Russians in the USSR opposed to a Kremlin rule that they identified with Russia . This had profound implications for non-Russian in the Soviet Union .
 Stalin’s new formula permitted his representatives and supporters to label all non-Russian opposition fascist and, implicitly, Nazi .
 This semantic trick discredited such opposition in the eyes of uninformed foreigners . It could have done more effectively than the term ‘anti-Russian’ Could have done by adding a class characteristic to a national issue .
 Lendman even goes so far as to quote the Odessa Chabad Rabbi Wolf, whom he misspells as ‘Wold’ without mentioning that Ukraine’s Chief Rabbi and most Ukrainian Jews have both supported the Maidan and condemned the Chabad Rabbis for
 Lendman does not mention the Jewish Battalion fighting Russian troops in Donbas .
 With the collapse of the USSR, it would have seemed that foreign leftists would no longer support Russia’s neoliberal capitalist government .
 They broke their silence in 2014 when they condemned Ukraine’s Maidan protests . In 2014, they condemned the Maidan demonstrations in Ukraine .
 The pro-Kremlin group does not condemn the Russian government’s annexation of the Crimea . The group also does not support separatist anti-Ukrainian Russian neo-Nazi armed gangs in eastern Ukraine .
 Condemnation of CIA involvement is matched by silence on GRU and FSB subterfuge .
 Today, pro-Kremlin foreign leftists support Russia’s neo-liberal capitalist government and imperial ambitions like earlier they had supported its declared socialist government .
 Flashpoint authors have no interest in any evil they can link to the U.S. government or corporations, nor in any peoples who suffer from such evil .
 Pro-Kremlin leftists and liberals who support the anti-colonial violence of the colonized against various American sponsored dictators all over the world .
 Anyone with elementary knowledge of Marxist theory must wonder why so many leftist authors today apply such double standards . Anyone with an elementary knowledge, that allows nationalism a progressive role at certain times.
 If in Turkish ruled Greece, English ruled Ireland, or Japanese ruled Korea, or any colonized country, it follows that these factors should play a similar role today . If in Turkey, Greek rule was central to independence movement, and a capitalist state provided a better context for development than the
 Throughout Asia, Africa, and even Western Europe, communist parties were all associated with national liberation . The communist parties had broad support and successes because of that .
 Ukraine did not have a successful ‘bourgeois national’ revolution during the last two centuries . Most other countries did, and its indigenous communist party failed to take power in 1919 .
 From a Marxist perspective today, Euromaidan arguably constitutes such a bourgeois-led revolution . The revolution may have been a revolution for the first time in the past .
 Since there was no organized Ukrainian radical left, no other alternative was really open . Ukrainians who consider themselves radical Marxists were few and far from the traditions of historical left-wing Ukrainian social democracy .
 Marxists today could argue that, in 2015, they should not condemn Poroshenko's anti-imperialist government . Ukrainians had no anti-IMperialist national capitalist class in the past to lead a successful liberation struggle .
 The Flashpoint book is not what is happening and nowhere in the book do its avowed leftist authors even speculate in these terms . But this is not the same thing that is happening.
 If all imperialisms and colonialisms are evil, then one should expect all leftists and liberals to condemn the Russian variant together with the American, British and French variants .
 Ukraine is a distinct pro-Kremlin group that supports the Kremlin’s neo-imperialism and neo-colonialism . But, as concerns Ukraine, what we see instead is a separate pro-kremlin group .
 Ukraine's politically Russophile ex-ruling minority, their Kremlin backers and even their neo-Nazi goon squads . Instead of calling attention to the role of the Kremlin in backing a puppet-regime that viciously exploited the majority of the population .
Ukrainians remain silent about Putin's neo-imperialism and the Ukrainian national question . Few bother to distinguish from Nazism .
 Leftists who do criticize Moscow’s authoritarian domestic clampdowns remain silent about the enormous political and economic pressure it exercised on Ukraine . The radicalization of Ukrainian liberal nationalism, thereby provoking the radicalization, they say .
 Thierry Meyssan's concern about French and Ukrainian right-wing extremists does not extend to Russian neo Nazis . He is associated with the official Kremlin journal Odnako .