 Security Service of Ukraine has warned State Security Administration that Yulia Tymoshenko's life is in danger .
 No regular Russian troops would enter Ukraine, says NATO commander . NATO chief says Russia could achieve its goals by stirring up trouble .
 In eastern Ukraine Russian special units are acting familiar to how they acted in Crimea before its annexation, says Breedlove .
 Separatists, aiming to destabilize the situation in Odesa oblast, have been arriving from Crimea, says Dmytro Tymchuk, head of ‘Information Resistance’ group .
Ukrainian intelligence agencies are acting to neutralize these groups of extremists .
 Acting Deputy Head of Presidential Administration Andriy Senchenko doesn't rule out terrorist attacks on May 9th .
 Terrorists are preparing to seize one of the military units in Donetsk .
 A large number of weapons, dating back to Soviet times, are located in the above-mentioned military unit .
 Separatists are engaged in racketeering at the roadblocks in Luhansk oblast . The roadblocks are located in the city of Lhansk in the eastern part of the country .
 Trolling has emerged in the midst of the armed conflict in Ukraine . It infests comment threads on the Guardian and elsewhere, despite best efforts of moderators .
 Readers and reporters alike are concerned that these are from those paid to troll, and to denigrate anyone criticising Russia or President Vladimir Putin .
 Former Moscow correspondent Luke Harding was expelled in 2011 . Harding is in no doubt about the nature of the campaign and how damaging it is .
 At the time no one from the group was prepared to confirm or deny the veracity of the emails, which were sent between November 2010 and December 2011 .
 Harding said that it was obvious the trolling on Ukraine-related issues was organised . He said that certain phrases were used again and again .
 Many of the top people in the new rightwing pro-Nato Guardian are privately educated . Sometimes I wonder how many top people are private educated .
 I imagine that Russian-hater Luke Happyman was but do get some state-educated sxcum as well .
 Guardian moderators, who deal with 40,000 comments a day, believe there is an orchestrated campaign . In fairness there is no conclusive evidence about who is behind the trolling .
 Harding would simply like better systems to deal with it, as would moderation and community teams . Harding, who is inured to the abuse, would like to see better systems and moderation .
 Zealous pro-separatist comments in broken English claiming to be from western counties are very common . There's a list of tropes we've learnt to look out for .
 These posts may be suspicious but it's when the content of them breaks our community standards that we will step in . The content of these posts is suspicious, but we'll step in if they break our standards .
 These accusations do break the community standards and moderators take a hand here .
 We will act against abusive statements at the expense of our writers, of which Luke receives a substantial number . We will also, obviously, act against the abusive statements of our writer .
 Those are more likely to be the reason for us to take action on these threads than those on the social network .
 Ukraine-related stories and the numbers of comments listed and removed for reasons of abuse. Here are three Ukraine- related stories.