 U.S. and Western NGOs were not up to their eyeballs in the whole Maidan Square uprising . Undersecretary of State Victoria Nuland was doing there throughout .
 CIA top guns don’t often appear at ground zero – it does send a message . The CIA's top guns often don't seem to be on ground zero .
 Paul Mantafort was paid big bucks by pro-Russian Ukrainians to hold these views . He was paid to hold the views .
Mantafort heads to jail and anything resembling a pro-Putin stance is now suspect in the United States . Muller, the Steel dossier and anti-Trump mania are now suspect .
 historians in the U.S. during the late 60s-70s argued Harry Truman imposed the Cold War on a purely defensive Russian state under Stalin .
 The revisionist argument, updated to 2018, has much to recommend it. Ironically, the revisionist argues that the new version of the argument has much more to recommend .
 If we end up with a new Cold War, we will have ourselves to blame, says David Cameron . The U.S. has many interests that coincide with ours, he says .
 Nikita Kruschev grew up in the Donbass, the pro-Russian part of the Ukraine . He was born in the region .
 He signed the Crimea over to his friend the Governor for the Ukraine in the USSR in 1954 after an evening of binge drinking . He was the Governor of the Ukraine for the Crimea in 1954 .
 Crimea was only part of Ukraine from 1954-2015 and has an overwhelmingly Russian speaking population who favoured unification . Crimea was therefore only part, and that's where it will stay .
 This article is what you get when you swallow Putin’s propaganda uncritically . This article was published on Sunday night .
 Ukraine followed same procedure for transiting the strait as before . Ukraine followed the same procedure as before.
 Putin, being the pirate he is, blocked it and attacked the Ukrainian ships . Putin is known to be a notorious pirate .
 The seizure of the Nord was a result of the fishing boat’s trespass and was entirely legal . The seizure was the result of a fishing boat.
Only a criminal would protest such an action and that’s why it was simply reported as a minor incident it was. Only a criminalwould protest such a action .
 The Nazi thing is another result of accepting Putin’s lies uncritically. The Nazi things is a result of accepted Putin's lies, he says .
 The Militias that rose to stop Russia’s incursion into the Donbas have long been incorporated into government forces . The Militsias have been incorporated in government forces.
 The commentariat here are the same sort that justified Hitler’s actions in the 30s . The commentaries here are same sort of the same kind of justified Hitler's actions .
 Ukraine and democracy can’t be on the same page, to put it mildly. Unfortunately, the Ukraine anddemocracy can”t be in the same place, to putting it mildly .
 The incident is a strong indication that Ukraine is a ‘budding’ dictatorship . This incident is an indication of Ukraine's 'budding dictatorship'
 He only got a partial declaration of martial lower for a limited period . So, he only got the partial declaration. So, it was a limited time .
 Unless he intends to flee the country he will be in a prison cell shortly after the election, probably of Timoshenko .
 He is liable to become increasingly desperate and therefore increasingly dangerous . He's liable to be increasingly dangerous, especially if he becomes increasingly desperate .
 There are a number of readers that do not understand either what happened or are ignorant of UNCLOS law .
 Military right of ‘innocent passage’ is also in the law, and has been implemented many a time before . Military right to “innocent Passage’s” is also on the law .
 Most important one is domestic politics, says article . As article points out, there are many reasons for domestic politics .
 Zakaria describes Ukraine as illiberal democracy . I do not agree with Zakaria's description of Ukraine .
 Many a Nazi even in this country have rehabilitated themselves by becoming ardent anti-communists . Even when they espoused the ideoligy themselves, they became anti-Communists .
 It is in this climate, where one oart of the country is trying to impose their ideology upon the rest of the nation . The repression stems from the country's attempt to impose its ideology on other countries, he says .
 West has always been comfortable with East European Nazi collaboratirs, as they were fiercely loyal to anticommunism . We would ask people to pay for their own foreign policy and their wars .
 Most of Russia bashing comes from very few, influential circles, and their armies of compliant politicians and media . Most of the Russia bashing is from a small group.
What they do — transform their own likes and dislikes into national concern. What they do is to transform their likes into national concerns. What you do is transform your own likes, and what you like is a concern .
 Ukraine is ignoring the treaty that requires notice of shipping transit. Those who respond that Ukraine is right in this case are ignoring it, says Ukraine .
 There is no question that the Ukrainian government willfully refrained from giving notice in order to create a provocation . The Ukrainian government will not give notice to create provocation.
 Kiev government is illegitimate and illegal. To Russia and to Crimeans as well as Eastern peoples of Donbass, it is illegitimate, says the Kiev government .
 To support it, Western nations have to deny everything that their own soldiers fought for, in that terrible war . To support the war, nations must deny everything they fought for .
This article is more of the same Pro-Putinist BS one sees coming from the Russian media and Putin’s propaganda department . This article is the same as the same pro-Putinists one sees from the media and the Russian government .
 Ukraine has the right to us eth kerch stariat under a treaty Putin himself signed . Putin himself has signed the treaty .
 The Ukrainians notified the Russians they were coming and called for a pilot . The Ukrainians told the Russians to come and call for the pilot .
 Putin’s regime is looking for a way to provoke Ukraine into lashing out so Putin can have the all out invasion he craves .
 No agreement he signs is worth the ink it took for him to sign it, he says . Nothing he says can be trusted can't be trusted, he's also proved .