 He served in various levels of command and in staff positions for nine years in the Armor branch . He then transitioned to the Operations Research and Systems Analysis functional area .
 This is part of a Russian strategy focused on Russia reemerging as a dominant power within the region . This is the first time Russia has been able to reemerge as an dominant power in the region.
 Russia used controlled escalation of military operations to promote its interests and achieve its objectives . When the West threatened Russian interests and Russia viewed the conditions as favorable in terms of being able to achieve its objective .
 Russia conducted military operations in Georgia, Crimea and the Donbass region of Ukraine as a means of reasserting its influence within the region . Russia also sought to reduce the Western influence of the United States, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and the European Union within Russia’s zone
 The paper argues that Russia utilized controlled escalation in their operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region of Ukraine as a means to manage operational cost and risk .
 Russia has sought to maintain influence over buffer and satellite states within its orbit . There are important lessons the U.S. and its allies can draw from the Russian operations in Georgia and Ukraine .
 The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 and a series of revolutions and elections within these states greatly reduced Russian influence within the region and across the globe . The fall and elections in these states have greatly reduced Russia's influence in the region .
 The Russian operations were initial steps as part of its strategy in pursuit of interests to enable Russia to emerge as the dominant state in the region .
 The paper argues that Russia utilized controlled escalation in their operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region of Ukraine as a means to manage operational cost and risk .
 The following paper provides an overview of the Russian interests and objectives it pursued in their military operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass .
 The paper will then compare and contrast the Russian operations to glean insights . The paper is then compared and contrast Russian operations.
 The paper will address implications and considerations for the U.S. and NATO as they look to counter future Russian aggression .
 Thesis This paper uses a qualitative approach to argue that Russia utilized controlled escalation in their operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region of Ukraine .
 The means are the forces, tools, devices generally associated with national power that a state uses . The forces are the tools, tools and devices that are associated with power .
 The ways explain how a state will utilize its means to achieve its identified end states . The ways to achieve the end states include the use of state resources to achieve end states.
 Russia hopes to regain prestige enjoyed under the Soviet Union by reestablishing global influence and reasserting itself as a legitimate global actor .
 Russia feels it must first reassert dominance in the zone of privileged interests or zone of the near abroad which contains the former Soviet Union .
 Russia is attempting to establish a structure placing itself in the center of a new Eurasian order that includes an economic, political, security, and values component . Russia is pursuing this by trying to establish an economic and political structure that includes a political and security component .
 The EEU is a Moscow-led political and economic union that would include Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan . The union would be a Russian-led economic union .
 Moscow's plan would include within its borders Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan . At the extreme, it would include a new political entity.
 Russia does not want the states of the former Soviet Union to seek integration into Western structures, like the EU and especially NATO . Russia doesn't want any new US military bases, nor to host any new military bases .
 Moscow’s agenda is to limit the foreign policy options of the former Soviet republics . It is also to prevent their integration into the EU and NATO .
 Moscow can deny or at least reduce western influence within the Russian near abroad . In doing so, Moscow can also reduce Western influence in Russia .
 The following section provides additional detail on Russian interests, objectives, and background information for both the Ukraine and Georgia . The next section provides more detail on Russia's interests and objectives .
 A string of protest movements developed which led to a heavy handed response from the government . The government responded with a heavy-handed response .
 This led to the removal of the Ukrainian President and the establishment of a pro-Western interim government . This is the first time the interim government has been established .
 The events led to a sudden loss of influence for Russia with an important neighbor and a geopolitical defeat for the Russians . The events occurred in the wake of Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 The Russians had four primary objectives for the operations in the Ukraine . They had four main objectives in Ukraine .
 South Ossetian received support from North Ossetia which lies in the Russian Federation . South Ossenian received the support from the Russian federation .
Tensions rose but a ceasefire initiated a peacekeeping operation that included joint Russia-Ossetian-Georgian patrols . Tensions rose, but the ceasefire was initiated by the Russian government .
Georgia and Russia were locked in a frozen but relatively peaceful conflict from the early 90s to 2004 over South Ossetia . Georgia and Russia have been locked in frozen but peaceful conflict since the 1990s .
 Russian peacekeepers were both South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Georgians did not see the peacekeepers as impartial in their role .
 Tensions between Russia and Georgia increased in 2004 with the election of President Saakashvili as he committed to restoring Georgia’s lost territories of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 Russia developed a symbiotic relationship with both South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Tbilisi saw the Russian’s as pursuing an absorption of South Ossetsia .
Georgia sought closer relations with the west as it pursued membership in NATO and closer ties to the U.S. These events were occurring as Georgia sought closer ties with the West .
Georgia attended the NATO Bucharest Summit in April 2008 . Georgia attended the summit in hopes of taking steps towards NATO membership . In April 2008, Georgia went to the summit to try to gain NATO membership.
 South Ossetia offered Moscow leverage over Ossetian minorities in Russia . It provided a means of diffusing internal problems .
 Russia pursued three primary objectives with their operations in Georgia . Russia pursued these interests and the broader interests mentioned earlier .
 The primary objective for the operation was to heighten Georgia’s strategic vulnerability . Georgia is considered a strategic vulnerability by the military .
 The Russians saw Georgia joining NATO as a threat within their area of privileged interest . Georgia joined NATO as part of a group of countries in the region .
 The third objective was shift the local military balance of power to Abkhaz authorities and away from Tbilisi .
 The fourth objective was to establish military protectorates for the areas of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Russian recognition of statehood for each would quickly be followed by Russian recognition for each .
 The Russian military operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region have been compared to those in Crimea .
 There are many differences and similarities when assessing the operations in Georgia, Crimea, and in the Donbass region of Ukraine .
 Clausewitz highlights that each war and battle is unique as there are different variables and circumstances specific to each war . Clausewitz: Each war is unique and each battle is different.
 There are important insights in how the Russians conducted the operations and how the operations enabled the Russians to achieve objectives that supported their interests . There are key insights in the operations of the Russian military .
 Russian military forces conducted covert operations and performed non-military measures during operations in Georgia, Crimea, and Donbass .
 Military forces are part of the official government and armed forces structure . When openly deployed abroad, it implies an act of interstate war, unless under the auspices of a United Nations Security Council mandate .
 In Russian doctrine, "non-military measures" include change of militarypolitical leadership, actions against opposition forces, economic blockade, and several others .
 Military forces can perform non-military measures, but in some cases it may require the forces to perform the measures covertly or in a capacity in which the state may deny it .
 A state may have their military forces adapt their appearance or operating procedures when performing a non-military measure like civil war in another country so the state may retain plausible deniability .
 Russia utilized both regular forces and SOF for covert and non-military measures in the execution of operations in Georgia, Crimea, and Donbass . Russia used both regular force andSOF in the executions .
 The Russian peacekeepers transitioned from performing a non-military measure to a military measure . They carried out complex measures to reduce tensions in the form of peacekeeping, to waging combat operations .
 Some 9 peacekeepers in Abkhazia participated in a mechanized infantry advance through a UN security zone into undisputed Georgian territory .
 The SOF role on Crimea was small but decisive in the operation. Because of the speed of the operations on Crimea and the absence of engagements, the SOF played a decisive role in the operations .
 The SOF, pretending to be a local “self-defense militia,’s seized control of the Crimean Parliament and raised a Russian flag over the building .
 Sergei Aksenov as new Crimean Prime Minister . The operation supported the non-military measure of change of military-political leadership .
 The Russian SOF and elite forces led the takeover of the Ukrainian military’s headquarters and a number of other hardtarget military compounds on Donbass . The takeover was to disrupt command and control of Ukrainian forces .
 The Russians used conventional forces from the 810th Naval Infantry in armored personnel carriers to seize the city square and support the emplacement of a Russian mayor in Sevastapol .
 This demonstrated the use of conventional forces to perform the non-military measure of forcing a change in political-military leadership . This demonstrated use of traditional forces to do so .
 The use of these regular military forces was the first unambiguous indication that Russia decided to intervene militarily to change the political order on Crimea .
 Russia used SOF for various purposes in Donbass and deployed military forces in significant numbers to conduct operations, they would deny, that were associated with civil war in the region in the Ukraine .
 Russian forces anonymized conventional military force 10 equipment by removing unit markings and number plates on vehicles as they deployed military forces to carry out non-military measures .
 There is no plausible explanation for removal of vehicle markings and removal of distinguishing unit designations . Russian forces deny they were Russian forces .
 The Russians utilized covert operations and/or non-military measures to differing degrees of effectiveness in Georgia, Crimea and Donbass . The Russians used covert operations in Georgia and Crimea .
 In all three operations, the Russians utilized different forces for non-military measures . The Russians used different forces.
 Russia has peacekeepers with combat vehicles in both South Ossetia and Abkhazia . In Georgia, there was a plausible explanation.
 Black Sea Fleet had over 12,000 military personnel stationed in and around Crimea with substantial leeway in bringing additional units in from the mainland . In Crimea, there was also a plausible explanation.
 There was not a plausible explanation for Russian forces in Ukraine so they operated covertly and took great strides to remove identifiable markings from combat vehicles and personnel .
 The Russian use of SOF varied widely between the operations due to the nature of the conflicts .
 Russians used SOF to conduct decisive operations and set conditions to cut the command and control capability in Crimea .
 There were no exchanges of fire on Crimea so the conflict did not require the Russians to use SOF in a more expanded role . No exchanges of fires on Crimea were reported .
 On Donbass, the Russians utilized SOF in direct action, covert action, and training militias . The Russians used SOF to train militias in the region .
 The difference in the operational use rests primarily in the fact that the war in Donbass escalated to battles between the Ukrainians and the Russians . The difference between operational use and operational use is based on the fact the war has escalated to conflicts between Ukrainians and Russians .
 There were no available authoritative sources on the topic so they are not included in the analysis . It is likely the Russians utilized SOF in direct action and possibly special reconnaissance in the war with 11 Georgia .
 The Russians utilized exercises and snap-readiness inspections as a cover for movement and mobilization of forces in Georgia, Crimea, and Donbass .
 The Russian 58th Army, Russia’s main military force in the North Caucasus region, conducted extensive joint force exercise, code named ‘Kavkaz-2008’ just north of the Georgian border .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered an inspection of 150,000 troops from the Western and Central Military District .
 Inspections of this scale had become commonplace since 2013, but the Russians used this one specifically as a diversion and a cover for troop movements .
 Russia deployed up to 90,000 service members from elite and regular units to the east and north of Ukraine in the spring of 2014 .
 In March 2015, President Putin ordered another large-scale surprise inspection in western Russian . The inspection involved 80,000 troops and 12,000 vehicles .
 The exercise, deployments, and snap inspections enabled Russia to accomplish several critical elements of the military strategy . The exercise and deployments, including snap inspections, enabled Russia's military strategy to accomplish key elements .
 Strategically, deployments served to deter Western or other third party intervention .
 The posturing of forces provided Russia with the flexibility to quickly transition to large scale operations should the west attempt to intervene . Russia's posturing gave Russia flexibility to rapidly transition to big scale operations .
 The Ukrainian leadership recalled what occurred in Georgia with the employment of large formations of Russian forces . Operationally, 12 the postured Russian forces served as a deterrent in Crimea and Donbass .
 The exercises and inspections also enabled Russia to establish the infrastructure and logistical support for operations . Russia also established the infrastructure for operations in Russia .
 The availability of large formations of conventional forces provided flexibility to Russian leadership in achieving their objectives . Russian leadership was able to use large formations to achieve objectives .
 Integration of Fires to Support Ground Forces Russia’s effective integration and delivery of fires was driven largely by its willingness to acknowledge the presence of military forces on the ground within the conflict areas .
 Russian maneuver forces combined with massive air and artillery attacks against Georgian forces created a significant shock effect . Russian maneuver force combined with huge air, artillery attacks on Georgian forces create a shock effect.
 On the Crimean peninsula, the deployment of attack helicopters, armored vehicles, and artillery units substantially reinforced lightly armed elite troops .
 The Russians denied the deployment of these combat multipliers for weeks .
 The Russians were able to neutralize Ukrainian armor and operate at night which gave them a great advantage over the Ukrainian forces . The employment of these capabilities enabled the Russians to neutralise Ukrainian armor .
 In an attempt to make conventional forces appear non-military, Russia used air support very sparsely in support of ground force operations .
 Two regiments and ten squadrons of ground-attack aircraft, and one brigade and eight squadsrons of attack helicopter, impeded the suppression of opposing Ukrainian forces . This hampered Russian operations despite the availability of forces .
Regular artillery units supported rebel forces and militia with artillery fire across the border into Ukraine . Regular artillery units support rebel forces, militia and rebels .
 The use of fires, especially that of air delivered fires, were very effective in supporting ground operations in Georgia .
 In Ukraine, Russia attempted to conceal the use of fires assets in support of ground operations . In the Ukraine, fire assets were used to cover ground operations.
 This more restricted use, or in some cases not using the fires assets at all, hindered Russian operations .
 The artillery and attack helicopter use in Crimea enabled the Russian ground forces and, as mentioned in the previous paragraph, enabled support of Russian operations at night . Although limited in scale as compared to the Georgian operations, the artillery and attacked helicopter use was limited in size .
 When openly using their fires assets, the Russians were able to effectively utilize them to enable ground operations .
 Russia utilized controlled escalation in their operations in Georgia, Crimea, and the Donbass region of Ukraine as a means of maintaining the operational initiative and managing the operational cost and risks .
 Russians methodically set conditions and used escalation to covert use of conventional forces to achieve objectives . In order to maintain the operational initiative, the Russian government used covert forces .
This controlled approach enables them to manage the cost and effectively mitigate the risk in achieving their ends especially against a much smaller adversary. This controlled approach allows them to managed the cost of their ends .
 The controlled escalation enabled the Russians to minimize the likelihood of timely western influence or involvement in these operations . Russia's control of escalation enabled them to exploit the blurred lines between war and peace in these Operations .
 Russia's regular forces are conducting operations in Ukraine . This unrest set conditions for 14 escalated use of force by the Russians in the form of their regular forces .
 In Crimea, the SOF seized parliamentary buildings and military headquarters compounds in Crimea . The SOF is based in Crimea, Crimea .
 Crimea became part of the Russian federation after elections in Crimea . The actions set conditions for elections in which Russian backed candidates took office eventually leading to Crimea becoming part of Russia .
 The seizing of the compounds by the Russians disrupted the Ukrainian ability to effectively coordinate operations across the peninsula within a week .
 Use of exercises and surprise inspections helped set the conditions for controlled escalation . The use of exercises, surprise inspections and exercises were used to control escalation .
 The Russians utilized the exercises to posture large formations of regular forces along the respective borders of Georgia, Crimea and Ukraine .
 It masked the movement of forces to particular areas so they could posture for offensive operations . The movement was meant to help the forces posture for operations .
 Russian forces rehearsed large scale joint force operation in Georgia . The exercise served to prepare Russian forces for the operation .
 Crimea is the only case where it seems to have worked, but the speed in which the Russians conducted the operations likely contributed to the lack of action on the Ukrainians part as well .
 The massed formations, as a result of exercises and snap inspections, enabled the Russians to quickly escalate to overt operations with large formation of conventional forces .
 The Russians set the conditions for the operations so as to conduct the rapid escalation with overwhelming combat power to mitigate the risk associated with achieving their objectives .
 Russia was able to annex Crimea and seize Ukrainian bases on the peninsula without any direct casualties and little resistance from Ukrainian forces . This was effective in Crimea in that Russia was unable to take control of the peninsula .
 The seizure of Crimea provided the Russians with naval and force basing in the Black Sea it desired without fear of losing it to NATO or a NATO member . The seizure gave the Russians the chance to seize Crimea without fear.
 Russia asserted itself as the most powerful fleet on the Black Sea . By taking control of the Ukrainian naval 15 assets it wanted and relinquishing those it did not want, Russia asserted its power .
 Having the most powerful fleet on the Black Sea supports its interest of reasserting itself within the region . The fleet postures it to reassert itself globally.
 Russia was able to achieve its other three objectives within Ukraine strategically, but it came at an operational cost . Russia's goal was to achieve three objectives in Ukraine strategically .
 In Donbass, there was a slower transition to the overt use of force which led to less effective fires in support of ground operations .
 Russian forces operating in Donbass were largely unmarked so they were not identifiable . The Russian forces are largely unmarked.
 The Russian forces used the unmarked vehicle technique in an apparent effort to maintain deniability of large scale Russian involvement in the conflict .
 The Russians escalated to the use of regular military forces . The nonstandard use inhibited their ability to quickly achieve their ends in Donbass .
 Russia’s eventual employment of its conventional forces enabled it to gain the upper hand in the conflict . Ukraine authorities were forced to eventually negotiate leading .
 Russia wanted the Donbass region as negotiating leverage to gain control of Ukraine’s strategic orientation . Russia wanted to use the region as leverage for Ukraine's strategic orientation.
 Russia’s desire to use an escalatory approach so as to minimize the cost of the operation created significant operational challenges for the Russian forces as they operated covertly initially . Russia's desire to using escalatory approaches created significant challenges for Russian forces .
 Russia was also able to maintain economic ties and influence in the eastern and southern portions of Ukraine .
 Russia has an opportunity to regain the initiative. If there is a mismatch between the forces Russia has available, means, and the identified objective, it has a chance to regain it .
 The Georgian forces had a small window of initial success before the larger conventional Russian forces arrived in South Ossetia . Despite quick Russian actions in Georgia, the Georgian forces were quick to take advantage .
 In the case of Donbass, Russia avoided utilizing their conventional forces and miscalculated Ukrainian nationalism which served to rally the country against Russia . Russia avoided using its conventional forces.
 As this prolonged, Russia moved to eventually employ its conventional forces . As this continued, Russia continued to employ its traditional forces .
 Russia provided Russia with the means to achieve its objectives . The employment of conventional forces raised the cost both militarily and with scrutiny amongst the international community .
 In Georgia, the Russian’s quickly transitioned to the overt use of conventional forces to achieve their objectives .
 The Russians justified the offensive operations in Georgia by claiming they were protecting their citizens and peacekeepers in South Ossetia .
 The overt use of force included the effective use of fires to enable the ground forces to achieve their objectives . The overt Use of force includes the use of fire to achieve the objectives .
 The combined effects of ground forces, fires, SOF, and militia enabled the Russians to escalate quickly and set conditions for the seizure .
 The Russians established protectorates and quickly moved by Russian recognition of statehood for both South Ossetia and Abkhazia . The Russian statehood was established in the early 1990s .
 The Russian accomplishment of these objectives collectively stood to heighten Georgia’s strategic vulnerability . Georgia's strategic vulnerability was highlighted by the Russian accomplishment .
 Russia is likely to continue to pursue interests within the region utilizing the same tactics as the war and peace . Russia may continue to exploit the blurred line between war andpeace .
 Russia will continue to assert its influence to attain dominance in its near abroad . Russia will remain in control of the world's most powerful countries .
 The blurred area in which these operations sit within the spectrum of peace and war limits the ability of the West, NATO, and the international community to intervene militarily without risking much broader conflict .
 NATO is not likely to offer membership to states with ongoing border disputes . South Ossetia and Abkhazia and the Donbass could spark broader conflict .
 The U.S. must determine its interests as it pertains to the region, the CIS, the Baltics, and the CIS . The United States must develop a consistent and coherent foreign policy .
 The United States must work with its NATO partners to determine an approach to dealing with Russia within the region . The U.S. must also determine its interests and foreign policy for the region.
 NATO membership for these countries or moves by these countries away from Russian interests will prompt action from Russia . Russian operations in 2008 in Georgia and in Ukraine 2014 were demonstrated by the Russian operations .
 NATO's Article 5 defense requirements include an attack on one member of NATO . An attack on a NATO member is an attack against all members, NATO says .
 The continued disputes between Russia and the states of Ukraine and Georgia make NATO membership problematic . It would escalate tensions between NATO and Russia and possibly lead to further conflict .
 NATO should not continue to work with Georgia and Ukraine on prospective membership in the future. This does not mean that NATO shouldn't work with Ukraine on future membership . This doesn't mean thatNAT should not be working with Georgia or Ukraine .
 The U.S. and NATO must weigh the risk and potential costs associated with likely tensions or conflict with Russia over the membership .
 The U.S. and NATO must be prepared to respond if Russia wants to take action pursuant to their interest . Russia must be ready to respond to the situation, the U.N. says .
 The response time for the United States and NATO is extremely narrow . Russia can take in this style of warfare, the U.S. and NATO say .
 Russia can take action quickly to achieve objectives before western forces can move forces into the region . With massed formations for inspections and exercises, Russia can achieve objectives quickly .
 The rapid escalatory measures inhibit the ability for international organizations to respond because of the slower more deliberate bureaucratic processes these organizations require for action . The rapid escalation measures inhibit international organizations.
 The U.S. must develop and wargame potential US and NATO actions to pursue interests or counter Russian escalation within the region . The United States must respond to the narrow response time .
 The situation and circumstances associated with any conflict will be different given the myriad of factors and variables that may exist . Like Clausewitz points out, the situation is different .
 The wargame must be detailed in so far as it identifies the conditions that would likely lead to some combination of power by the United States, NATO, or another ally to pursue interests or counter Russian escalation .
 The utilization of diplomatic, informational, and economic means of power will continue to be the predominant forms used to coerce Russia .
 The United States and its allies must be able to anticipate or recognize escalatory patterns to more effectively provide a timely response against Russian aggression . Russia’s ability to escalate and deescalate quickly, the U.S. and its ally must be ready to respond quickly .
 The proximity to Russia makes military or even clandestine operations more challenging and difficult. Again, it makes military operations more difficult .
 The U.S. could use national assets to determine if there were any patterns and to provide early warning of large formation movements by the Russians . The United States could attempt to utilize national assets.
 The extensive use of Human intelligence, as well as open source intelligence, will be critical in providing early warning as to Russian intentions and movements .
 The most opportune time to counter Russia will be when they are in a period of greatest risk . Russia is at the highest risk, according to experts .
 As identified in the implications section, Russia attempts to achieve its objectives at a lower cost and can be vulnerable in the periods before escalation . Russia is also vulnerable in periods before escalating, according to experts .
 In both Georgia and Ukraine, Russia faced setbacks during these periods . In both Russia and Georgia, both countries faced setbacks .
 The Russian forces were far inferior to the Russian forces, they were not able to exploit the opportunity . Because their forces were too weak, they could not exploit it .
 If the United States or NATO were to take action or want to provide assistance to states in the CIS to counter Russian aggression, these periods would be most opportune .
 Russia will likely see any action to support a state within the CIS by the United States or NATO as provocative . There is risk associated with this action as Russia is likely to see it as provocative.
 The historical use cases in Georgia and Ukraine demonstrate Russia’s willingness to exploit the blurred lines between war and peace and use of rapidly escalatory means to achieve objectives in pursuit of their interests .
 The controlled escalation enables the Russians to gauge risk and balance costs . The west’s decision cycles are also used to gauge risks and balance Costs .
 Understanding how the Russians utilize their military means of power to influence and coerce states within this zone is important in shaping potential options to counter Russian influence .
 The Russians have periods of risk in which there are opportunities to disrupt the momentum of their operations as they take escalatory measures . But the opportunities are fleeting, according to the Russians .
 Understanding these case studies and their implications provide insights to the United States, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the European Union, and the international community in terms of how they might counter Russian military escalation .
 Moscow’s campaign to ‘coerce Georgia to peace’ is called International Affairs 84, no. 1167 .
 The Russian Approach to the Use of Armed Force as Seen in Ukraine is published in the Journal of Slavic Military Studies 29, no. 29 .