 A thesis presented to the Faculty of the United States Army Command and General Staff College in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree MASTER of MILITARY ART and SCIENCE General Studies . Approved for public release.
 Recent conflicts and military operations in the world have shown that hybrid threat is increasingly common . The hybrid threat has become increasingly common.
 United States combat forces can expect to encounter HTs throughout the entire range of military operations . U.S. combat forces will be able to encounterHTs during their operations .
 In recent decades, the U.S. has prepared for and fought mainly in counterinsurgency operations . In recent years, the United States has prepared to fight mainly incounterinsurgencies .
 The U.S. Army’s ABCT to wage war against a hybrid adversary is important. That is why objectively assessing the readiness of the Army's ABCT is important .
 The problem is insufficient assessment of the U.S. Army’s ABCT organization and equipment . The Army needs to learn more, adapt, and change, the Army says .
 The research plan used is a qualitative approach that included analysis of available documents and studying the separate but similar cases of Israel fighting Hezbollah in Lebanon in 2006 and Ukraine fighting pro-Russian separatists in Eastern Ukraine .
 U.S. ABCT, Hybrid Threat, Hezbollah, pro-Russian Separatists 16.
 Recent conflicts and military operations in the world have shown that hybrid threat is increasingly common .
22 Literature that Analyzes the Ukrainian-Russian Conflict in the Donbas Region, Eastern Ukraine . Review the Israeli-Hezbollah War in 2006 .
42 Israeli-Hezbollah War of 2006.45 Brief Historical Overview of the Case. Defining HT. 42 Israeli- hezbollah War Of 2006 .
48.48 Analysis of the HT.50 Doctrine. Explaining why Hezbollah is considered a HT.48 analysis of theHT.50 doctrine .
 Analysis of IDF's Initial Response and Assessment of the Effectiveness of the IDF’s Initial Response . The IDF's initial Response and assessment of the effectiveness of its Initial Response.
 Analysis of IDF's Adjustments to the HT and Assessment of the Effectiveness of the IDF’s Adjustments. Analysis of Israel's Adjustment to theHT and assessment of the effect of the Adjustments on the IDF's adjustments .
74.74 Brief Historical Overview of the Ukrainian-Russian Conflict that started in 2014 . The conflict began in 2014 and ended in 2014.
 The Separatist Forces are considered a HT.77 Analysis of the HT.78 Doctrine . Explaining why the Separatists are considered an HT. 78 Doctrine .
 Analysis of UAF's Initial Response and Assessment of the Effectiveness of the UAF’s Initial Response . The UAF has been in charge of the United States since 2009 .
 Analysis of UAF's Adjustments and Assessment of the Effectiveness of the UAF’s Adjustments to the HT.97 Doctrine .
 The U.S. Army Unit needs to Counter the HT.105 Doctrine. Capabilities that a United States Army unit needs to counter theHT. 105 Doctrine .
 U.S. ABCT Doctrinal Capabilities and IDF's and UAF’s Initial Responses and Adjustments are compared .
 Army forces maintain proficiency in the fundamentals of decisive action and possess capabilities to meet specific geographic combatant command requests . Army forces are trained to respond to specific command requests.
 Regionally aligned forces provide combatant commanders with an Army headquarters tailored to missions from tactical level to joint task force capable .
 The brigade combat team shapes the security environment and wins across the range of military operations . The purpose of the study is to determine whether the United States Armored Brigade Combat Team is organized correctly and equipped appropriately .
 The United States combat forces can expect to encounter HTs throughout the entire range of military operations . From Peace Operations across the spectrum of conflict to Total War, the U.S. combat forces will see HTs across the range of operations .
 Today’s operational environment can be characterized as a composite of regular and irregular, legal and illegal, moral and immoral, and backhanded or deceitful .
 A possible, and probable, enemy also would be a formless and extremely adaptable formation . The United States would be seeking to strike at weaknesses in the forces .
 1 satellites have induced new vulnerabilities, according to the U.S. Defense Department .
 The U.S. Army has improved navigation and targeting systems . The improved systems are susceptible to jamming and deception, which seriously degrades successful mission accomplishment .
 The crux of the issue is that a HT may employ a variety of equipment and methods to influence opponents . A HT may use a number of techniques and equipment to influence the opposition .
 The current fighting in Ukraine is a vivid example of how the Ukrainian Armed Forces fight against an enemy consisting of regular and irregular forces with the inclusion of criminal elements .
 This conflict has seriously stressed the Ukrainian Army and forced the Ukraine Army to make substantial changes in order to be effective . This conflict is seriously stressed by the Ukrainian army .
 In recent decades, the U.S. has prepared for and fought mainly in counterinsurgency operations . In recent years, the United States have prepared for.
 The U.S. Army’s ABCT to wage war against a hybrid adversary is extremely important . That is why objectively assessing the readiness of the ABCT is important .
 The problem is insufficient assessment of the U.S. Army’s ABCT organization and equipment . The Army still needs to leam more, adapt, and change.
 Israel fighting Hezbollah in Lebanon and Ukraine fighting Russia in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine . I intend to answer my research questions by following the qualitative analysis method .
 Lieutenant-General Zabrodskiy is currently Commanding General of Highly Mobile Airborne force of Ukraine . He will analyze the observations of Lt. General Zabroskiy .
 He was the 95th Airborne Brigade commander in 2014 in the UAF during the major operations against the pro-Russian separatists .
 Near future technological innovations will not significantly alter either the HT’s capabilities or the United States Army vulnerabilities .
 Personal Observations” (Historical Lessons Learned Workshop) is sponsored by John Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and United States Army Capabilities Center .
 “violent struggle among state and non-state actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant population. Is a violent struggle for legitimacy, says the author .
 Enemy Combatant as “in general, a person engaged in hostilities against the United States or its coalition partners during an armed conflict’s armed conflict. 14 who do not adhere to conventional doctrine .
 From ancient and recent history, there are many examples of conflicts pitting a HT against a conventional army . There are also examples of conflict between the HT and the army .
With the development of modem technology the concepts and capabilities of a hybrid enemy have evolved and become more dangerous and more difficult to detect . With the passage of time, the concept of a 'hysterical enemy' has evolved, and it is now more dangerous .
Today, libraries and databases have a multiplicity of sources relating to the modern hybrid wars . Today, libraries, databases have more sources than ever before .
 A relatively sufficient quantity of open access information can be found concerning the conflict between Israel and Hezbollah . The conflict between the two sides is a relatively sufficient amount of information .
 There is little information in open sources about the composition of IDF’s brigades .
 Much less information can be found concerning the conflict in eastern Ukraine with the Russians and the Russian proxy organizations .
 This relative lack of information is due primarily to the fact that the conflict started recently and is still ongoing . The conflict has been ongoing for years .
 The sources are classified for internal Ukrainian use only . Much more information can be found in different Ukrainian military sources .
 The U.S. Army TRADOC, Handbook No 1.08, Irregular Forces, 1-6.8, is a study of the U. S. Army . The study was conducted by the Army Department of the Army .
 The study relies solely on doctrinal references . There is a lack of information in open sources in terms of the ABCT’s combat experience and training in the National Training Centers .
 The researcher has direct experience during his army career . Possible Investigator bias due to previous Experience with the Model .
 Before attending the U.S. Command and General Staff College, he served in an infantry unit fighting against a HT in Eastern Ukraine .
 His service in the Ukrainian Army from 2014 to 2016 enabled him to observe and analyze the Russian sponsored HT on a daily and extremely personal perspective . His service from 2014-2016 enabled he to observe his own life in the Ukraine .
 Nevertheless, the use of data based on personal experience will be minimized .
 In order to study the experience of warfare against HTs, two significant case studies will be reviewed . The study will focus on the experience.
 One deal with the conflict between Hezbollah and Israel Defense Forces in Israel and Lebanon . One deals with the Israeli-Leban conflict .
 The second deal with the conflict between Ukraine and Russia in eastern Ukraine . The second deals with the Ukraine conflict between Russia and Ukraine .
 This research is based on unclassified information in order to present an analysis useful to the largest number of 7 people .
 The information and research cutoff date for this research is 1 March 2017 . In order to present the resulting findings, the information will be presented .
 For the last 10 years, the U.S. armed forces have been mainly concentrated on COIN operations . The United States armed forces are mostly concentrated onCOIN operations.
 Recent events in Ukraine demonstrate that the U.S. must prepare to participate in a new type of warfare . So-called hybrid wars include direct combat operations and covert operations carried out by the armed forces .
 Research describes common characteristics of current HT which is also valuable for U.S. officers . This research also describes common characteristic of the current HT .
 The research results could be used to improve military practices and effectiveness of the ABCT . The ABCT could also improve organizational structure and equipment .
 The Russian sponsored HT in Donbas, Ukraine, will conduct a mechanized formation conducting missions against the Russian sponsoredHT .
 This topic will inform me and prepare me effectively for this assignment . Individually this topic will tell me and inform me effectively. Individually, this topic would inform me.
 U.S. has trained to fight and has fought against mainly opponents lacking the sophisticated capabilities that a current HT may use . This problem is important because in the recent past, the United States has training to fight .
 The U.S. Army’s ABCT to wage war against a current, advanced hybrid adversary is important . The ABCT has been tasked with assessing the readiness of the Army's ABCT .
 Understanding the current knowledge on the subject is essential and will be presented in next part of the thesis . Understanding current knowledge is essential.
 Chapter 2 is a review of literature relating to the primary and secondary research questions for this research . The book is based on the work of John Sutter, who has written a book on the subject of research .
 Increasingly, ‘conflict’ will be something more interdisciplinary than having to do with military forces . ‘Conflict” is something moreInterdisciplinary, something moreinterdisciplinary, says the author .
 The purpose of chapter 2 is to summarize and evaluate briefly the extant literature on the topic . The purpose is to summarise and evaluate brief the extant Literature on the subject .
 This part of the study identifies patterns and detects gaps in the current literature . The research will attempt to fill these gaps .
 The first section reviews the United States Army doctrine that considers all aspects relating the HT and the U.S. ABCT characteristics, capabilities, and its employment . The second section looks at all aspects of the Army doctrine .
 The second section recapitulates the literature that defines and describes the HT and hybrid warfare . The third section outlines the strategy, operations, and tactics of the HT .
 Fourth section examines and 10 assesses the literature, which provides data analysis on the Ukrainian-Russian conflict in the Donbas region, Eastern Ukraine . The fourth section examines the literature. 10 assess the literature .
 The Brigade Combat Team TC 7-100 Hybrid Threat TC7-100. ADRP 3-0 Operations Field Manual .
 This publication discusses operations with consideration of foundations, tenets, and doctrine of Unified Fand Operations . It also discusses the primary framework for all operations .
 ADRP 3-0 provides a general view on the nature of warfare and a common guidance for resolving military problems . The Army conducts military operations across numerous domains .
 This manual discusses the tactics and employment of brigade forces during the conduct of decisive action across the range of military operations .
 FM 3-96 focuses on tasks associated with the offense, defense, and stability operations . The program also focuses on stability operations.
 This publication does not outline capabilities and limitations of the different Brigade Combat Teams . This publication doesn't outline capabilities of the Brigade Combat teams .
 The ABCT study will facilitate the analysis of the ABCT capabilities to address the HT across an operational environment .
 Training Circular 7-100 Hybrid Threat describes a category of threats and actions that do not fall under the definition of conventional and unconventional war . The category includes threats that don't fall under definition of unconventional war.
 This publication focuses on HTs that are simultaneous combinations of various types of activities by enemies and adversaries that change and adapt over time .
 The expanded, detailed examples of HT tactics represented in chapter 5 of TC 7-100 . It does not explain how HT utilizes armored units .
 This publication presents a somewhat incomplete view of the HT, presenting it as consisting mainly of light units . Thus, this publication presents an incomplete view.
 Hybrid Threat Force Structure Organization Guide describes the HT for the purpose of training U.S. forces for future combat operations . The HT is designed to train United States forces for potential combat operations.
 This publication focuses on Threat doctrine regarding organization and training-related issues from a U.S. perspective .
 TC 7-100 is a confusing document with an abundance of too detailed, unnecessary, and overwhelming information and a multitude of contradictions .
 For example, the title of publication is Hybrid Threat Force Structure Organization Guide . Later the title used is Threat Force structure Organization Guide , but later the title is Threat force Structure Organization guide .
 This TC outlines what could constitute a HT and, as such, covers the entire spectrum of conventional and irregular capabilities . This TC outline what could be a HT .
 Some capabilities such as naval, airborne, aerial, or space are more suited to conventional forces, not what we typically think as hybrid . Some capabilities like air, sea, and space are not as well suited to traditional forces .
In chapter 2, maneuver brigades and battalions do not have artillery and mortar units . For example, in chapter 2 of the book, maneuver Brigades and Battalions don't have artillery or mortar units.
 The worldwide equipment guide represented in chapter 4 is very poor, lacking completeness and details necessary for understanding . In addition, the guide is also very poor.
 This handbook is complete and comprehensive in terms of understanding Irregular Forces . It is a comprehensive handbook for Irregular forces .
 HTs combine such properties as innovation, adaptability, global interconnectedness, and merger with the local population .
 HTs are able to operate both conventionally and unconventionally, using a combination of traditional, irregular, and criminal tactics . HTs can operate both conventions and unconventionsally, according to the authors .
 Frank Hoffman is a modern military theorist who has worked as a Research Fellow at the Center for Emerging Threats and Opportunities since 2002 . He has written a book about HT and Hybrid Warfare . Hoffman is also a researcher at Center for emerging Threats.
 His primary responsibility is overall direction, conducting analysis, and developing concepts on future challenges and emerging opportunities for the Marine Corps .
 The Rise of Hybrid Wars examines the concept of a hybrid threat and fills the gap between regular and irregular warfare in 25 Department of the Army, TC 7-100, Hybrid Threat, 1-1 .
 This work allows us to understand more deeply the occurrence of changes and their influence on the character of the war . This work lets us understand the influence of changes in the conflict .
 The author outlines possible most dangerous and most likely form of Hybrid Warfare that will challenge the United States conventionally-oriented force and their conception of war .
 The first principle is omni-directionality, according to which a battlefield combines all the traditional domains with politics, economics, culture, and morale factors .
 The second, synchrony, argues that in order to attain the desired end state, actions must be conducted simultaneously and rapidly in different spaces . In order to achieve the desired goal, actions should be conducted in different places .
 The last one, asymmetry, determines that in the unlimited war there is a greater ability to circumvent the rules . In the unlimited War there is an ability to bypass the rules, says the author .
 These principles provide a broader view on the war composition and challenge the U.S. conventional thinking .
 Hoffman studied a variety of different historical examples, such as Irish insurgents of 1919 and 1920, Mujahedeen in Afghanistan in the 1980s . Chechens rebels in their conflict against Russia, Balkans experience, and finally, operations in the Middle East .
 A large portion of his work is in particular focused on Hezbollah-IDF, focusing on defense missions at operational and tactical levels .
 Hoffman concludes that the 2006 Lebanon War is an important case to study that is worth a deep analysis . In terms of Hezbollah, Hoffman says, Hezbollah is a good case for study .
 Hezbollah 27 Hoffman, “Conflicts in the 21st Century,’ 16. Hoffman thinks that Hezbollah 27. Hoffman is a Hezbollah member . Hoffman: ‘Conflict in the21st Century’
 Hezbollah proofed itself as a highly disciplined, well trained, and sophisticated group, capable to fight against a modern conventional force . Hezbollah is well trained and well trained.
 The results of the Hezbollah-Israeli battle in southern Lebanon demonstrate substantial weaknesses of the IDF, the U.S. military planners say .
 Geltzer is worth attention because the authors re-conceptualize an asymmetric strategy in a crucial way . The authors are worth attention for their work .
 The authors describe many ways in which asymmetric strategies are becoming strategies of increasingly strong parties .
 In order to neutralize or mitigate American power, strong 29.9% of the U.S. power is in the world .
 The U.S. is now the dominant world power economically and militarily . Opponents who want to restrain the United States will avoid conventional war . They will be looking for approaches that are more sophisticated .
 They will develop strategies accented to exploit obvious American strengths as factual vulnerabilities . They will also develop strategies to exploit American strengths .
 The authors reject the idea that asymmetric strategies can be used only against the United States . The authors also reject the concept of asymmetrical strategies .
 The U.S. can use them as well and what benefits may result from this, they say .
 The assertion that asymmetric strategies can be strategies of strong states is especially valuable . The assertion is based on the fact that asymmetrical strategies are valuable .
 The research paper of Colonel Leslie F Brown defines HT in the same way as in the previous document . It offers a reasonable explanation of why hybrid warfare will be the prevailing form of warfare in the twenty-first century .
National Military Strategy analyzes the National Military Strategy in terms of HT and Joint and Service hybrid warfare doctrine . The document is based on a study of the U.S. military strategy .
 The author recommends changes in strategy and doctrine that must be implemented in order for 33 percent of the 33% of the author's recommendations .
 The Department of Defense must adopt the term hybrid warfare and develop a strategy that properly addresses the hybrid threats .
 The Department of Defense must completely revise the structure of U.S. forces . U.N. forces must completely change their structure .
 The need to improve and enhance the capabilities of leaders, headquarters, and units at all levels in the conduct of full spectrum operations .
 Special Operations Forces capable of conducting seamless conventional and irregular operations . Increase the size of the Special Operations forces .
 The provisions of this document, in conjunction with the entire literature in this area, help to understand the essence of a hybrid war .
 Brown’s guidance, described above, can help in the formation of the recommendations of this study, which will be presented in chapter five of the study .
 Preparing for Future Conflict’s similar but complementary to the literature discussed above .
 The first resource describes the theory of hybrid conflicts as well as provides an example of the events of the Second World War in Eastern Front . The authors 36 Colonel Leslie F Brown, “Twenty-First Century Warfare Will Be Hybrid’s’ ‘Twenty- first Century Warfare
 This report provides operational approaches to hybrid warfare by analyzing the U.S. experience in Vietnam and in Operation Iraqi Freedom . Also, this report provides an analysis of the American experience.
 Captain Houvinen in his research presented a case study from the Second Lebanon War based on the United States experience gained in Vietnam War .
 works can expand the view of the concept of HT and hybrid warfare via additional case studies of the wars in Vietnam, Iraq, and Second World War .
 Case studies of three wars will not be implemented in this study . However, case studies of these three wars won't be implemented .
 The article of Charles K Bartles “Getting Gerasimov Right’ provides a review of the chief of the Russian General Staff .
 New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying out Combat Operations,’ published in Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kurier newspaper .
Gerasimov's thoughts were published a year before the events in Kiev in the winter of 2014 . Gerasimov’s thoughts were released a year earlier this year .
 Since the beginning of spring 2014, Russia brought to life those provisions, which have been disclosed in this article . The provisions were disclosed in the article .
Gerasimov asserts that the experience of military conflicts, including those associated with the Color Revolutions, is a term that was widely used to describe various related movements that developed in several societies . Gerasimov says that any state in the shortest period may turn into an arena of bitter warfare
Non-military methods to achieve political and strategic objectives have increased . The role of non- military methods has increased in recent years .
 In some cases, these methods in their effectiveness far exceeded the force of arms . Some methods in some cases have far exceeded their effectiveness .
 Methods of confrontation shift toward the wide use of political, economic, information, humanitarian and other non-military measures implemented by taking advantage of the protest potential.
 These methods are complemented by hidden military means, including the implementation of information warfare measures and special operations forces actions .
Gerasimov outlines the characteristics of the operational environment during the conduct of such conflicts . Gerasimov also outlines the operational environment of such conflicts in such conflicts.
 New software control systems allow mobile groups of forces to act on the same intelligence and information space . The use of new software control system features.
 The disappearance of the tactical and operational pauses, which the enemy could use, could be used by the enemy . The pauses are a key part of the military strategy .
New information technologies have reduced gaps in space, time, and information between the troops and authorities through the use of new information technologies .
 At strategic and operational levels, large forces frontal collisions are gradually disappearing to the past . Large forces frontal collision is gradually disappearing.
 achievements of operational and battle objectives are mainly due to remote noncontact action against the enemy .
 The absence of differences between strategic, operational and tactical levels, offensive and defensive actions is a key omission .
 Gerasimov’s views clearly reflect the essence of the Russian campaign in Ukraine, says the Russian leader . Gerasim's views, described in the article, clearly reflect his views on Ukraine .
 The analysis of this paper will facilitate the UkrainianRussian conflict case study of this research . The analysis will facilitate this research, says the author .
 Another article briefly analyzes the modern Russian military doctrine and provides a short overview of Ukrainian events in 2014-2015 . Another article is “A Closer look at Russia’s ‘Hybrid War’’
 Hybrid war is just a tag attributed to Russian actions in Ukraine by the West, says the West .
 The authors emphasize that the term “hybrid’ as a combination of different ways and means across domains is not novel but is as old as warfare itself .
 This term is imprecise and could not be used to describe a new form of warfare . It is not the first time this term has been used in warfare .
 Generally, this article is not detailed and provides a cursory review of 44 pages . Generally, it's not detailed .
 Kofman and Rojansky contribute to the discussion of the meaning of Hybrid war . The pair also contribute to a discussion of how Hybrid war can be described .
 Most of the resources discussed in this section include information about the origin and history of Hezbollah .
 In the analysis of each of the sources special attention is paid to the peculiarities of each. The analysis will contribute to the analysis in this study .
 David E Johnson assesses recent irregular and hybrid conflicts and their implications for the U.S. Army .
 He analyzes the experience of the Israel Defense Force in the last conflicts in Lebanon and Gaza . He argues for balanced Army forces, capable of joint combined arms fire and maneuver, to provide the range of capabilities needed to prevail in future conflicts .
 The author draws a parallel between the IDF and the U.S. Armed Forces . The author is a former IDF officer .
 The U.S. Armed Forces have achieved notable adaptations to its high-end warfighting skills in Iraq and Afghanistan . The land forces have achieved some notable adaptations in response to the irregular war environments .
 U.S. leaders believe they must 47 David E Johnson, Military Capabilities for Hybrid War Insights from the Israel Defense Forces in Lebanon and Gaza . Today, the United States leaders believe that they must.
 The basics of combined arms fire and maneuver are essential for countering hybrid opponents . The basics are important for countering the hybrid opponents.
 During the second intifada, the Israelis showed that they had lost High-Intensity Conflict skills . The Israelis were also shown that they lost high-Intense Conflict skills.
 During the war in Iraq and Afghanistan, the U.S. Army was in a condition similar to that of the Israelis before 2006 .
 The U.S. military was expert at COIN, but was less ready for sophisticated hybrid opponents .
 Johnson's paper could be informative in the analysis of current structure and capabilities of U.S. ABCT .
This is an insightful and comprehensive examination of the 2006 Lebanon War . This is a comprehensive examination. This is an insight into the Lebanon War.
Matthew Matthews argues that no conflict in recent past provides a more enlightening study for the U.S. Armed Forces than the 2006 Hezbollah-Israeli war . Matthews: No conflict in past provides more insight for the United States Armed Forces .
 The biggest mistake for the IDF in this war was a reliance on unclear and debatable Effects-Based Operations and Systemic Operational Design warfighting theories .
 The 2006 Hezbollah-Israeli War (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2006), 2. 23 great reliance on air power . The 2006 Lebanon-Israel war was the most successful war in history .
 During a long period of time, the IDF were involved in COIN operations in the Gaza Strip and West Bank territories .
 The U.S. Armed Forces have been involved in irregular warfare for decades . This issue is of primary importance for the United States Armed Forces .
 The United States Forces continue to execute COIN operations throughout the world . They must maintain the ability to perform major combat operations .
 Michael B. Kim: Lessons from the Israeli Experience in Hybrid Warfare by Michael B Kim .
 The author argues that future conflicts will not be limited by unconventional fighting . Instead, combined-arms warfare will be relevant, he says .
 Michael Kim analyses the role of the main battle tank Ml Abrams in the past and provides his vision about its future role .
 He focuses mostly on the IDF experience during Operation Protective Edge . Lebanon War in 2006 is also under consideration .
 Ml Abrams in 2015 through 2025 will be an effective mobile and survivable precision firepower platform for effective implementation of combined-arms operations against a sophisticated HT .
 Lessons from the Israeli Experience in Hybrid Warfare (Arlington, VA: Association of the United States Army, 2016), 1. 24 environments .
 Michael Kim recommends that the U.S. Army modernize armored platforms with an active armor protection system and improved munitions .
 The results of Kim’s work and his recommendations will be used in the analysis found in this study . The results will be found in the study .
 Hizballah (January 2017) is thorough, complete, and useful; and contains a sufficiently detailed description of all aspects related to Hezbollah . HizBallah is a complete, complete and useful.
 This document reveals in detail the essence of this organization, the strategic objectives, and the principles of fighting . This document also reveals the strategies and objectives of fighting.
 The publication focuses on the sponsorship relationships through which Hezbollah receives funds and weapons . The publication is based in Lebanon and is published in Lebanon .
 The document describes organizational structure and size, weapons, equipment, leadership, recruiting, and locations of active current activities .
 Authors provide timeline of Hezbollah attacks since 1982 . They outline descriptions and sequence of attacks on different military and civilian targets .
This is the only document among all discussed in this literature review which enables a reader to reach such understanding . This is the first document to be discussed in the literature review .
Stephen Biddle and Jeffrey A Friedman presents a detailed study of the Lebanon War in 2006 . The study informs the debate over the nature of future warfare and how the United States should prepare for the future conflict .
 The authors collected information directly from 36 participants of those events who fought on the Israeli side and from captured Hezbollah fighters as well . The work can be considered valuable because the authors collected data directly from those events .
 The monograph outlines the key events of the campaign, characterizes Hezbollah’s tactics, theater operations, strategy, and assesses the Hezbollah's proficiency in fighting .
 The authors summarize lessons learned and provide implications for the U.S. Army and Defense policy .
 The analysis is based on data collected mostly from media reports, Israeli and Arab military thinkers, senior Israeli officers, and experts . The analysis, outlined in Preliminary “Lessons of the Israeli-Hezbollah War, by Anthony H Cordesman.
Army War College: 8.8.9.1, 8.2, 9.3, 8 . 9.5, 7.4, 7 . 8.5.5 .
Experts draw attention to the issues in terms of fighting in civilian areas and the problem of collateral damage .
 The U.S. Armed Forces must do after the analysis of Israeli experience in this war, experts say .
 Israel and its armed forces faced difficulties during the Second Lebanon War . Israel's armed forces confronted the difficulties that they faced during the war .
 Glenn relies on information provided by active and retired IDF officers during the conference in Tel Aviv in March 2007 .
 Glenn proposes an external perspective and lessons for the U.S. military that will assist in preparing for future challenges .
 The Lebanon War in 2006 was a unique and valuable experience for the armed forces of Israel and for the other countries .
 Many thinkers and military officers carried out the study of all aspects of this war . The study was carried out by military officers and thinkers .
 27 more than 10 works will be used in this study . The study is based on the Second Lebanon War .
 Each of the references has its own features but mostly the references repeat what has been described in the previous literature review . The references have their own features, but most of them are similar to the previous reviews .
 Literature that Analyzes the Ukrainian-Russian Conflict in the Donbas Region, Eastern Ukraine . Compared with the war in Lebanon, the Ukrainian conflict is not yet as well studied.
Recent documents released into the world by the U.S. Army War College, Asymmetric Warfare Group, and Dr. Dr. John Sutter. Sutter is the author of the latest documents .
 Phillip A Karber substantially cover the events in the Crimea and Eastern Ukraine .
 The first question asks what the Russian strategy is in their periphery . The first questions include what the Russians are doing in the periphery .
 The second question asks what would be the appropriate U.S. response to the question . The third question asks the appropriate United States response .
 The last question asks what the implications are for the U.S. landpower . The question is the last question about land power .
 War College Analysis refers to the more mundane issues, which will be valuable to this study . Despite the fact that these issues are quite global and concern strategy is a concern strategy in response to these questions .
 The report analyzes Russian Operations in Crimea and Donbas . It provides an analysis of characteristics of Russian Land power .
 Russian forces also changed during this time, but this transformation took place in a special way . Russian forces changed in this time.
 In Crimea and Donbas, the world has seen completely different type of Russian armed forces . In Crimea, the Russian military has seen a completely different kind of military force .
 The Russian Forces learned bitter lessons during past wars and transformed, retaining virtually nothing from the former Soviet time .
 The handbook is concerned with the question of how to defeat such an enemy . The book is also concerned with how to fight such a enemy .
 The United States Armed Forces have not participated in such wars for a long time . The U.S. Armed Forces must change in order to successfully fight and win in complex maneuver conflicts .
 The purpose of this handbook is to provide an analysis of the tactics used by Russia in Ukraine as the military component of the Russian New Generation Warfare doctrine . It also identifies training priorities for the U.S. Army that are not currently a focus area .
 This work describes Russian troop’s capabilities and applications of combat power . In addition, this work also describes Russian troops' capabilities .
 The handbook gives recommendations for U.S. Brigade Combat Teams and battalions in terms of countering these Russian methods of war .
 Dr.Phillip A Karber’s work “Lessons Learned from the Russo-Ukrainian War, Personal Observations’ is a unique paper . It is based mostly on personal observation and interviews with Ukrainian combat officers and Ukrainian troops .
 Karber made 15 trips to the Anti Terrorists Operation zone . Karber systematically interviewed commanders of different level and troops on the ground .
 Karber compared the views of senior North Atlantic Treaty Organization officials and Allied political and military leaders . Karber said military developments in Ukraine were compared with the views.
 Karber examines many issues at the tactical level that will be useful for research . Karber looks at many issues that could be useful to research .
 The author covers some operational issues such as mobilization and deployment, and changing of conventional force structures and organization for combat .
 The Critical Role of Information Operations and Special Operations is a detailed study of a hybrid 67 Karber . “Lessons Learned from the Russo-Ukrainian War,’s 3.3.
 Perry argues that information operations and special operations played the most important role and ultimately paved the way to Russian success in this war .
 Bogdanov concerning the significance of nonmilitary weapons in current and future wars . The Russian government is concerned about the importance of such weapons .
 A new-generation warfare will be dominated by information and psychological warfare . It will seek to achieve superiority in troops and weapons control and depress the opponent's armed forces personnel .
 In the ongoing revolution in information technologies, information and psychological warfare will largely lay the groundwork for • 70 victory .
 The conclusions of Checkinov and Bogdanov are important because the enemy by means of information operations and special operations forces affects the opponent and operational environment at all levels of war .
 The United States ABCT, while operating against similar threats, must have capabilities to resist and defeat these factors . The U.S. ABCT must have capability to resist.
 The Atlantic Council Working Group was written to examine direct Russian military participation in Ukraine .
 Igor Sutyagin’s paper ‘Russian Forces in Ukraine’ is also a relevant addition to the previous document . The paper was published in the summer of 2013 .
 The report provides information about those units of the Russian Armed Forces deployed to Ukraine or were stationed in close proximity to the border .
 The report shows that the number of Russian forces was nearly the same as Ukrainian available forces .
 The two reports provide an opportunity to understand more deeply what the armed forces of Ukraine faced in this war .
 The doctrinal review section considers all aspects relating to the HT and the U.S. ABCT capabilities . The review section includes all aspects related to theHT and the United States ABCT .
 The second section recapitulates the literature that defines and describes the HT and hybrid warfare . The last two sections summarize the studies that were carried out to provide data analysis on the experience of the IDF in fighting against Hezbollah during Lebanon War and lessons learned by the UAF during Ukrainian-Russian
 The literature on Hybrid Warfare does better defining what the HT can be and can do . However, the literature on hybrid warfare does not.
 Most documents focused more on the strategic and operational levels of war . Most documents, with few exceptions, focus more on strategic and Operational levels .
 The study focuses on the tactical level of war and attempts to fill the gap in the literature in terms of the U.S. ABCT ability to address such hybrid threat as Hezbollah or separatists supported by Russian troops .
 The next chapter describes the research methodology used to generate and analyze data in order to answer the primary and secondary research questions . The next page describes the methodology used for the research.
 Chapter 2 summarizes and evaluates the existing literature on the research question . It identifies patterns and finds gaps in the current literature, which this research will attempt to fill .
 The intention of chapter 3 is to describe the research methodology used to answer the primary and secondary research questions . The aim is to explain the methodology used for the research.
 This chapter outlines in detail the specific research method and techniques applied to the problem this study intends to solve . It explains how the research moves, step-by-step, to answer all the research questions .
 Research Methodology. This study begins with the definition of HT in order to avoid any possible confusion and to provide a common understanding .
 The Israeli-Hezbollah conflict of 2006 and the Ukrainian-Russian conflict that started in 2014. Afterward, this study continues with the examination of separate but similar cases of the 2006 and 2014 conflict .
 The 2006 Lebanon War has become an increasingly important case for the U.S. defense debate . The Lebanon War is a key issue for the United States defense.
 Hezbollah is considered to be the world’s premier non-state hybrid force . The group is considered the world's premier Non-state Hybrid Force .
 Study of the capabilities of a hybrid threat using Hezbollah as an example is prudent . This is why the study of the capability of a Hybrid threat is prudent, says author .
 The Ukrainian-Russian conflict is relevant because this conflict has started in the recent past and is still ongoing . The second case study, the Ukrainian- Russian conflict, is also relevant .
 The Russian Federation is considered an exemplar of HT conducted by the Russian Federation . It is also considered an example of HT conduct by the Russia Federation .
Both Hezbollah and pro-Russian separatists initially were a proxy organization that employed guerrilla-style military tactics . First, both Hezbollah and the pro- Russian separatists initially used guerrilla- style tactics .
 Hezbollah and separatists’ troops put great emphasis on holding ground. Second, Hezbollah and the separatists” troops putgreat emphasis on hold ground .
 Third, both groups relied extensively on harassing fires and unattended minefields . Both groups relied on harassing minefields and harassing fires .
 They had excellent fire discipline, mortar marksmanship, and coordination of direct fire support . They had good fire discipline and mortar Marksmanship .
 Fourth, Hezbollah and the separatists’ troops widely used information warfare and UAVs. Fourth and Hezbollah’s troops widely use information warfare.
 Doctrine, Organization, Training, and Materiel factors of DOTMLPF shape the research into major functional categories .
 DOTMLPF is a helpful framework for the analysis of complex issues and breaking them into separate and compliant components . DOTMLP is a useful framework for analysis ofcomplex issues .
 DOTMLPF is a joint term and analysis methodology used by the U.S. Army . The Army is the largest military force in the world .
 The DOTMLPF domain is an area providing a focus for action officers to investigate solutions, products, and services to meet Department of Defense directives .
 This model analyzes future capabilities of potential adversaries, technological breakthroughs, and national posture . It tries to develop concepts and requirements to counter those adversaries and take advantage of technology .
 D—Doctrine: The fundamental principles by which the military forces or military elements guide their actions in support of national objectives .
 Materiel includes ships, tanks, self-propelled weapons, aircraft, related spares, repair parts, and support equipment, but excludes real property, installations, and utilities . The list also includes real property.
 DOTMLPF have to be part of the analysis along with Organization and Materiel to better answer the primary research question . The areas of Doctrine and Training from DOTMLP are to be included .
 This research will be limited to four factors of DOTMLPF that are doctrine, organization, training, and materiel . The research will focus on doctrine and organization .
 Leadership, personnel, and facilities factors are beyond the scope of this study . The study is based on a study by the University of New York .
 A case study will analyze a HT and IDF’s initial response and assesses the effectiveness of the IDF's initial response . Subsequently, a case study is expected to analyze aHT and IDF's—UAF’'s initial Response .
 A case study will analyze the IDF’s adjustments to the HT . The study will assess the effectiveness of the IDF's—UAF’'s adjustments .
 The effectiveness of the initial response is based on the sustainable solutions, says the company . The initial response was based on a sustainable solution .
 If either army used a solution that worked and did not change the solution, then the solution will be determined to be effective . If both army and the army used the same solution, the solution would be determined.
 The effectiveness of the changes is based on the sustainable solutions, according to the authors .
 If either army found a solution that worked and adhered to the solution, then the solution would be determined to be effective . If both army and army find a solution, the solution will be determined .
 In the case study, a HT will be analyzed considering only the capabilities of the HT that could affect or influence the opponent’s armored or mechanized infantry formations .
 The IDF—UAF will be analyzed considering only the capabilities of the IDF’s armored or mechanized infantry formations .
 A case study will show the capabilities a U.S. Army unit needs in order to counter the HT . The analysis will be based on the experiences of the IDF and the UAF .
 Next, the research analyzes the doctrinal United States ABCT in terms of DOTM factors with emphasis upon organization and equipment . The research also looks at the doctrine of the U.S. ABCT .
 This study is mostly focused on analysis of existing information, such as Army and Joint doctrine documents . This study focuses on military papers and publications, articles, newsletters, and research reports .
 Qualitative analysis of narrative data, using a case 39 study method, forms the unifying structure of the thesis .
Analysis of Israel fighting Hezbollah in Lebanon and Ukraine fighting Russia in Eastern Ukraine shows major points of the analysis .
 This case study relies on multiple sources of information to provide as complete picture as possible . Each case uses the same approach as possible to provide a complete picture .
 Lieutenant-General Zabrodskiy, 83, combined with his observations shows the relevance of the study .
 There are potential gaps associated with the analysis of HT, IDF, UAF, and the United States ABCT . There are also potential gaps in the analysis.
 The restricted sources are not used in this study because the purpose was to stay in the unclassified area . The restricted source is not used because it is not in a restricted area .
 The U.S. ABCT capabilities do not meet the requirements to address the current HT . The study presents recommendations for changes in terms of organization, equipment, and training .
 This is a qualitative study designed to develop a response to the primary research question . The study was designed to respond to the main research question.
 He led his forces through the execution of the longest raid in modem military history behind the backs of the enemy in August of 2014 .
 Zabrodskiy's educational background is his educational background . He has been studying for a study at the University of Cambridge .
 40 found in chapter 2 coupled with analysis derived from the research methodology outlined in chapter 3, to answer the primary and secondary questions presented in chapter 1 . Currently he serves as Commanding General of Highly Mobile Airborne force of Ukraine .
The purpose of chapter 4 is to present, explain, analyze, and interpret the evidence produced by the research methodology . The purpose of the chapter is to explain, explain and analyze the evidence .
 The following analysis provides answers to the primary and seven secondary questions determined in chapter 1 of chapter 1 .
 Section 1 defines HT in order to avoid any possible confusion and to provide the reader a common understanding of this term throughout the paper .
 Sections 2 and 3 examine separate but similar cases of the IsraeliHezbollah conflict of 2006, and Ukrainian-Russian conflict that started in 2014 respectively . Sections 1 and 2 examine separate cases of IsraeliHe Hezbollah conflict and Ukraine conflict .
 Section 5 compares the United States ABCT capabilities with the IDE's and UAL’s initial responses and adjustments . Section 5 also compares the U.S. ABCT's initial responses to the initial responses.
 The chapter summary provides a review of the chapter and transitions to the chapter 5 . The chapter 5 presents conclusions and recommendations .
 Defining HT Threats are an attributive part of the operational environment of any operation . DefiningHT Threats is a key part of an operational environment.
 Threats can be comprised of individuals, organized or not organized groups of individuals or military forces, nation-states, or national alliances .
 The concept of ‘HTs’ was applied in order to describe the operations that comprise a multiplicity of players and do not have clearly defined elements of warfare . The concept was applied to describe operations that include a multiplity of players .
 The second does not have any limitations and restraints to the execution of assigned missions . The second has no restraints and restraints on the execution.
 The ability to incorporate regular and irregular forces makes HTs especially effective . HTs convert between them and operations in order to take advantage of weaknesses of the other side .
 To be a hybrid, these forces collaborate in the scope of attaining their 84 Department of the Army, ADRP 3-0, Operations .
 For instance, criminal elements can thieve repair parts for benefit, while concurrently degrading the readiness of the U.S. forces’ combat systems .
 Militia forces can protect their settlements with extraordinary strength as part of a composite defensive network . Militia forces are able to protect settlements withextra strength as well as their own forces .
Some HTs may be the result of a non-state actor’s sponsorship by a state or states . Some HTs are sponsored by state or state actors .
 HT will try to take advantage and superiority through the employment of modern technology and the media .
In addition, they will embed their components in the political, military and social sphere of the opposing side . In addition to the political and military sphere, they'll embed their parts in the social sphere .
 In opposing United States forces, HTs can be highly adaptive and sophisticated . In opposing U.S. forces,HTs can also be very sophisticated .
 To achieve this, they will combine conventional, unconventional, irregular, and criminal tactics in different variations that modify with the lapse of time . They will combine unconventional, unconventional and irregular tactics with different variations .
 HTs will employ insurgency to sow instability and create distrust of their own armed forces . The aim is to create people’s distrust of the armed forces and sow instability .
 HTs often will not have any restrictions or constraints in the use of violence, including weapons of mass destruction .
 The HT is not a modem discovery and is not something unique . It is important to note that the HT is no modem discovery. It is not an unusual discovery .
 They were a constituent element of the military power in most wars and conflicts between traditional forces . They were part of the army's most important military power .
 A significantly weaker opponent uses its relative 89 Department of the Army, TC 7-100, Hybrid Threat, 90 .
 This category also includes the war in Vietnam in 1954 to 1976 when the Viet Cong and the People's Army of Vietnam fought against allied U.S. and French forces .
Israeli conflict of 2006, and Ukrainian-Russian conflict that started in 2014 .
 This militant organization was established in 1982 and conducted operations out of southern Lebanon . This militant group was established by the Lebanese government .
 Hezbollah's main goal was to push the IDF out of Lebanon by implementing mostly terrorist and guerrilla tactics . For 18 years, the main goal of Hezbollah was to get the IDF to leave Lebanon . The main goal is to push out the IDF from Lebanon .
 Hezbollah’s 1985 platform: The conflict with Israel “was not only 92 Department of the Army, TC 7-100, Hybrid Threat, 1-1. However, according to Hezbollah's 1985 platform, the conflict with Israeli was not only92 Department of Army .
 Hezbollah leaders decided to widen their vision and transformed into a political organization with a strong military component . After this event, the leaders of Hezbollah decided to expand their vision .
 The United States recognized Hezbollah as a Foreign Terrorist Organization on October 8, 1997 . The U.S. Department of State recognized Hezbollah in 1997 .
 The European Union applied the terrorist label to Hezbollah as well . Five Israelis and one Bulgarian were killed by explosives to destroy a bus in Bulgaria in 2012 .
 Israel, Gulf Arab countries, and the Arab League designated Hezbollah as a terrorist organization in 2016 . The Arab League named Hezbollah a terrorist group in 2016.
 Israeli believed they could force Hezbollah to disarm and withdraw from southern Lebanon as a result of this campaign . Israeli believed that they could use this campaign.
 Hezbollah launched a heavy rocket fire from southern Lebanon into Israel . However, within 24 hours, Hezbollah launched an attack on Israel .
 Hezbollah’s Katyusha rockets continue to engage the Israeli military targets and the population .
 The situation demonstrated that Israel was not able to quickly and decisively resolve the conflict and the effect-based air campaign did not reach the intended outcome . The situation demonstrates that Israel's air campaign didn't reach its intended outcome.
 Hezbollah provided stiff resistance, which surprised Israeli military and military observers around the world as well .
 For several years, the IDF had been successful in COIN operations against the Palestinians .
 The Israeli ground campaign demonstrated that the IDF were confused by the new EBO doctrine . The ground campaign showed that the army was confused by it .
 Israeli Air Force campaign planner Ron Tira stated that “officers responsible for planning EBOs in the Air Force could not understand the definition of EBO.
 The 2006 Lebanon War ended on August 14, 2006, with a cease-fire agreement . The Lebanon War began in 2006 .
 The IDF suffered a significant defeat and Hezbollah’s victory was absolute and indisputable . The IDF suffers a significant loss and Hezbollah's victory was indisputable.
 Iran and Syria regularly delivered weapons and equipment, provided funding and training for Hezbollah troops .
 Hezbollah's military power has increased significantly and conventional capabilities in terms of anti-tanks, anti-aircraft and anti-ship weapons . Over time, Hezbollah has developed more conventional capabilities .
 Hezbollah leaders concluded that the organization should focus soldiers’ training on unconventional warfare with emphasis on individual and small groups’ tactics . Hezbollah possessed some capabilities associated with conventional military forces .
 Hezbollah's conventional capabilities were supplemented with asymmetric capabilities including criminal and terrorist activities and networks . Hezbollah’s conventional capabilities are supplemented with criminal andterrorist activities and network capabilities .
 Hezbollah attacked different targets such as civilians, political leaders, military forces, airplanes, and embassies of several countries . The attacks included the U.S. and the United States .
 Hezbollah acquired all the necessary attributes of a hybrid organization . As a result, Hezbollah acquired a hybrid group of members .
 Hezbollah executed a global terrorist strategy in Lebanon in the 1980s and early 1990s . In addition to its activities in Lebanon, Hezbollah executed an international terrorist strategy .
 They carried out terrorist attacks against the U.S. and Israeli targets . They focused on South America, Southeast Asia, Jordan, the Persian Gulf and the European continent .
 HT Doctrine Hezbollah uses regular and irregular tactics and techniques that include rocket and artillery attacks, information warfare, suicide bombings, and kidnappings .
 Hezbollah has been trying to inflict as many casualties as possible since the beginning of the organization's existence . Hezbollah's goal has been to inflict more casualties on its members as possible .
 Hezbollah uses a relatively inexpensive and simple means such as vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices .
 Over time, Hezbollah acquired more advanced weapons and the level of training of personnel increased . Over time,. Hezbollah acquiredMore advanced weapons .
 The organization transformed into a more sophisticated threat with a greater breadth of capabilities . The organization turned into a bigger threat with greater breadth and capabilities .
 First, confusing the enemy and obliging its command to call for a constant state of alert, eventually leading to the exhaustion and decline in power . First, confusion leads to exhaustion and declining in power, leading to a decline of power .
 Second, spreading panic among enemy troops with the fear of death persisting after every successful or possible resistance attack . Third, spreadingpanic among enemy soldiers with theFear of death Persisting after each successful attack .
 This served to shake the enemy morale and subsequently affected troop performance . This led to a decrease in troop performance, according to the U.S. Army .
 Hezbollah developed 13 basic principles of warfare. In order to defeat a high-tech enemy, Hezbollah developed the 13 principles .
 The principles worth mentioning are protecting own fighters, keeping the enemy on constant alert, continuous movement and avoiding the formation of a front line .
 Hezbollah pays special attention to the use of media and local population . In addition, Hezbollah paysspecial attention to media use and local populations .
 Hezbollah believes that the media has innumerable guns that need to be used in the battle . The population is a treasure that needs to be nurtured, Hezbollah says .
 At Bint Jubayl, Hezbollah fought a series of battles over a period of four days . Hezbollah fought for four days.
 Merkava tanks received return fire from the tanks but continued to fight and launched 10 more rockets . Furthermore, they received back fire from their tanks but continue to fight .
 Hezbollah used the people of Lebanon as human shields to their advantage, clearly against the rules of the international laws of war .
 Hezbollah leaders used effectively their own broadcast capabilities . The Hezbollah leaders were able to use their own broadcasting capabilities .
 Hezbollah adeptly used social media applications such as Facebook, Twitter, and Youtube to spread messages and inform about activities that were aimed to achieve political and military purposes .
 Hezbollah leaders gave interviews in which they sent messages to people to obtain support . Hezbollah leaders also gave interviews to people who were concerned about their support .
 They sent out messages to their supporters, foes, and the international press . They sent them to their fans, foes and international media .
 Hezbollah spokesmen used information warfare strategies to blame Israel in civilian collateral damages, regardless of who was truly responsible . For example, Hezbollah spokesman used information Warfare strategies.
 There’s a few thousand of you and 50,000 of us. That's how you win when there's a few thousands of you. That‘s how you won when there’t be a lot of you .
 The group pressured journalists and television stations to not demonstrate footage that negatively portrayed the group . They pressured journalists to not show footage negatively portrayed.
 Organization Hezbollah and its actions can be described as a terrorist organization, insurgency, resistance movement, militia, and guerilla forces .
 In Lebanon War, Hezbollah has also demonstrated the ability to utilize conventional tactics . In 2006 Lebanon War.
 The foundation for success and strength of Hezbollah are flexible tactics, availability, and employment of different actors who actively carry out tasks of the organization or provide support .
 The U.S. Department of State says Hezbollah includes thousands of members, several hundred terrorist operatives, and thousands of more supporters .
After defeating Israel, Hezbollah’s popularity increased and thousands of people joined the organization . After defeating Israel.
 Many considered the struggle waged by Hezbollah a national resistance movement . Many considered it to be a national movement .
 Estimates showed that Hezbollah main forces ranged from 2,000 to 3,000 before the fight started . Hezbollah's main forces are estimated to have ranged from 1,000-3,000 .
 Most Hezbollah fighters were locally based and operated near their homes in southern Lebanon . Most of the Hezbollah fighters are based in Lebanon .
 They led a normal life with their families, but reported to their units when called up . They reported to the units when they called up.
 Depending on the area of operations, a unit could have from three to fifteen fighters .
 Hezbollah achieved decentralization that allowed them to be less vulnerable to Israeli interdiction . Thus, Hezbollah achieved decision to be less vulnerable to Israeli interdiction.
 Hezbollah soldiers knew perfectly their area of operations, had widespread support of the local population, and had very effective communications network . In addition, Hezbollah soldiers know perfectly their areas of operations .
 Within this system, the responsibilities were distributed to smaller cells .
 Hezbollah commanders planned to maintain firm operational control over their rocket units while providing more tactical freedom to their ground forces .
 A Study of the Second Lebanon War and Operation Cast Lead (Lort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2009), 17.
 Hezbollah was armed, equipped and trained by Iran and Syria with the involvement of North Korean instructors . Training Hezbollah was equipped and equipped by Iran, Syria and Iran .
 They effectively used advanced weapon systems acquired before the war . They effectively use the advanced weapons acquired before war .
Anti-tank weapons were used skillfully in terms of tactics, such as tactics . For instance, the anti-tank weapon was used skillly in terms.
 Hezbollah fired multiple rounds at the same target indicating that the use of anti-tank weapons was concentrated in anticipated kill zones . Hezbollah fired several rounds at same target .
 When IDF ground troops occupied buildings for protection, Hezbollah used anti-tank weapons against Israelis . Many casualties were caused by the use of the weapons .
 Hezbollah’s veteran military personnel were well prepared to conduct an elaborate antitank ambushes . Hezbollah's military personnel are well prepared for the ambush .
 Hezbollah soldiers and forward observers were trained to integrate mortars and rockets fire . Hezbollah soldiers were also trained to use rockets and mortars .
 Often they predicted possible Israeli avenues of approach and engaged their formations unexpectedly . Often they predict possible Israeli routes of approach .
 In 2000, after Israel withdrew from Lebanon, Hezbollah began preparations for the future war, focusing on defense . Israel withdrew in 2000, and Hezbollah began preparing for the war .
 Hezbollah built a complex and secret military infrastructure throughout southern Lebanon . The complex consisted of underground tunnels, bunkers, and fortified observation posts .
 Hezbollah's bunkers are 40 meters underground, covering an area of two square kilometers . For example, Hezbollah’s bunkers were 40m underground .
 Some of them had double blast doors that allowed protection from destructive overpressure generated by high-explosive munitions . Some of the doors were designed to protect against overpressure from high- Explosives .
 Hezbollah's bunkers had access to planned firing positions where fighters could engage the IDF from secure locations . Hezbollah’s bunkers have access to plans to fire from secure positions .
 All facilities were built from reinforced concrete about three feet thick . All facilities are built from concrete about 3 feet thick.
 Hezbollah used advanced facilities as cache sites, C2 facilities, and defensive positions . Hezbollah used these advanced facilities to create defensive positions.
 Bunkers and tunnel networks allowed the leaders of Hezbollah to have continuous control with their units . Hezbollah has been accused of using tunnels to control its units .
 The IDF fires intended to destroy the enemy command posts were not effective . Israel failed to destroy them, even with knowing the placement of Hezbollah leaders, Israel failed.
 The network of defensive positions allowed Hezbollah to protect personnel and equipment, restrict freedom of movement of the IDF, and control key pieces of terrain .
 Hezbollah used civilian facilities and homes to store weapons and supplies . The group also stored weapons in civilian facilities .
 In fighting Hezbollah also freely used civilian structures, including schools and mosques, for cover .
 IDF soldiers felt that they were battling invisible fighters who had the “magical ability to melt away and reappear. Sometimes, the IDF soldiers feel that they are battling invisibility fighters who have the ability to reappear .
 In 2000, when IDF withdrew from Lebanon, Hezbollah established close relations with Iran and Syria and began arming itself . Materiel in 2000, after IDF withdrew, Hezbollah became armed itself .
 Hezbollah exploited relations with criminal organizations to conduct narco-trafficking and smuggling of gold and diamonds . In addition, Hezbollah exploited relationships with criminal groups to conductNarco-Trafficking .
 Hezbollah preserved every item they needed for war. In the logistics arena, Hezbollah preserved all items they needed .
 supplies were secret and were located in protected bunkers and entrenchments that were able to withstand IDF firepower . The supplies were found in bunkers that were protected by the IDF .
 Hezbollah soldiers relied mostly on stockpiled supplies . Hezbollah soldiers lived near their operating areas .
 They did not have a need to provide transportation or to protect lines of communication . They didn't have a needs to provide transport or to protection lines of communications .
 Currently there is no data about the exact number of Hezbollah mortars, anti-tank weapons or any estimate of the number and percentages of damaged equipment .
 IDF intelligence experts said they could only guess that Hezbollah kept at least several hundred thousand rifles and automatic weapons and up to six million rounds of ammunition .
 These UAVs could not be detected with the normal surveillance radars . They could deliver its load anywhere in Israel and engage a target with a high accuracy of 10. They could be used to target targets in Israel .
 Iran created a Hezbollah command center for targeting and controlling missile fire with advanced C2 assets and links to UAVs . Iran also created the Hezbollah command centre for targeting, controlling and controlling missiles .
 Hezbollah possessed long and medium range rockets and missiles that were a serious threat to Israel . Israel Air Forces dismissed this threat during the first days of the war .
 Hezbollah had more than 10,000 to 16,000 regular and extended range Katyushas, according to Israeli official's estimation .
 Hezbollah obtained electronic warfare capabilities from Iran, some reports say .
 Hezbollah was ready to fight against IDF despite the influence of Israeli electronic warfare . Hezbollah maintained its command network throughout the war .
 The EBO was designed to affect “the cognitive domain of the enemy’s enemy, focusing less on annihilating it . EBO is designed to target the enemy's cognitive domain .
 Israelis thought precision-guided munitions would allow them to destroy specific portions of the enemy with high accuracy . Israelis thought they would be able to destroy certain portions of their enemy .
 The IDF should target key command and control, logistics, radars, transportation, and related capabilities, according to the theory .
 By destroying those, it would make the enemy incapable of employing its military forces and unable to accomplish its military objectives . The enemy would be unable to achieve its military objective .
 A key point of the theory was a benefit of reduction in military casualties and collateral damage . Another key point was the avoidance of extensive ground battles . The theory was also the benefit of reducing military casualties .
 The SOD was a tool intended to help IDF commanders plan their campaigns . It was intended to provide IDF commanders with the aptitude necessary to think critically, systemically and methodologically about war fighting .
 The main problem was the new terminology and methodology as not all IDF officers understood SOD clearly . IDF officers did not understand SOD properly .
 In the first two days of the war, the IAF destroyed most of Hezbollah’s long and medium-range missile launchers and command centers in Beirut .
 Hezbollah still had the capability to use short-range rockets. Regardless, Hezbollah still has the capability of using short range rockets .
 Hezbollah attacks caused serious morale damage to Israeli civilians who lived in that area . These Hezbollah attacks were carried out in the area .
 Israeli political and military leaders understood that the war could not be won solely by IAF but that they needed to involve ground forces as well in order to destroy Hezbollah’s positions along the Israel-Lebanon border .
 The IDF faced a challenge of target intelligence and collateral damage, the IDF says .
 They did not know how to verify targets to be engaged with different weapons and how to avoid civilian collateral damage . They didn't understand how to use different weapons, how to protect civilians .
 IDF ground forces did not execute sweeping armor attacks with overwhelming firepower . The IDF ground force did not attack with overwhelming force .
 Instead, they moved cautiously along a very narrow sector during the attack . The attack was carried out by a small group of people .
 The IDF units were dispersed and there was no effort to conduct a combined arms attack . There was no attempt to conduct an attack .
Because of the threat of improvised explosive devices and mine fields, tanks and IFVs moved forward only if they were led by dismounted infantry conducting clearing operations .
 This slow advance made the IDF's armored vehicles vulnerable to the enemy’s ATGMs . This slow progress made the armored vehicles susceptible to the ATGm .
 The IDF accidentally shot down one of its own helicopter . rotary-winged aircraft were prohibited from going ahead of the line.
 IDFs leaders made a decision to leave the division’s artillery units on the Israeli side of the border .
 Many units left behind their organic mortar assets to reduce weight . In addition, many units leave behind their own mortar assets .
 Units often withdraw to a safe area after achieving their nightly objective . Units often withdrew to asafe area after achieved their nightly objectives .
 The IDF basically ceded the tactical advantage to Hezbollah. In summary, the IDFBasically ceded a tactical advantage.
 Northern Command was responsible for the border between Lebanon and Syria . Northern Command is responsible for Lebanon's border with Syria .
 Central Command was responsible for the West Bank, Jordan border, and Jerusalem . Central Command also responsible for Jordan's West Bank and Jerusalem.
 The IDF were under the command of Chief of the General Staff, Lieutenant General Dan Halutz .
 The IDF eliminated corps formations and planned to abolish divisions as well . With the adoption of new doctrine, the IDF eliminated formations .
 Key military leaders did not see a role for ground formations larger than a brigade . Military leaders didn't see the role for a brigade.
 These brigades were broken down into battalion and company sized teams . The brigades had been broken down by battalion andCompany sized teams.
 During the war, some IDF tanks maneuvered independently, with little support from dismounted infantry, attack helicopters, or fixed-wing close air support .
 The IDF brigades executed missions in a vacuum, with little consideration or understanding of how their attack fit into the overall scheme of maneuver .
 IDF intelligence had some successes against Hezbollah, specifically in collecting data about its rocket forces and their use of tactical UAVs .
 The IDF knew nothing about extended defensive fortifications and positions that Hezbollah created in southern Lebanon .
 IDF intelligence was also unaware of quantities and capabilities of Hezbollah’s anti-tank and anti-ship missiles . Both were employed successfully by Hezbollah .
 distribution of intelligence information down to the lowest level was hindered by internal barriers such as classification issues . Distribution of intelligence info down to lowest level is hindered by classification issues.
 One of the most critical failures in IDF intelligence was their unawareness concerning Hezbollah’s electronic warfare and communications capabilities .
 Hezbollah successfully countered Israeli electronic warfare efforts by using Iranian-supplied communications gear with robust counter-countermeasures . IDF attempted to jam enemy's radio transmissions in the field and strategic communications with Iran and Syria .
 Hezbollah effectively employed their own electronic warfare systems to neutralize IDF radar and communications . Hezbollah also exploited IDF communications, obtaining valuable strategical and tactical information .
 The IDF ground forces had about 125,000 active duty and 330,000 reservists divided among 18 divisions . The IDF had about 250,000 troops in 18 divisions.
 The IAF had about 32,500 active and 54,000 reserve aviators divided among 19 combat squadrons . The I AF had about 30,000 members of the IAF, which had about 31,500 members .
 By 5 August 2006, the IDF had about 10,000 soldiers in southern Lebanon . By 5August 2006, there had been about 8,000 IDF soldiers in Lebanon .
 Israeli Prime Minister decided to send ground troops into Lebanon . Northern Command had two active and three reserve divisions .
 Only five brigades were operationally available for the attack . From these divisions, only five were available .
 The IDF commander did not inform the Israeli government of this shortage, nor did the leadership demand early mobilization of the reserves .
 IDF leadership failed to adapt the military way of operation and its goals to the reality on the ground, according to the IDF .
 Commanders were not given input or control of the joint force . Northern Commander could not call in the air force or navy support, nor did he control their assets .
 When Hezbollah attacked Israel with short-range rockets, the army and the air force debated over which service was responsible for defeating them .
 Relations between the Northern Commander and the Chief of Staff became so spiteful that in the middle of the war his deputy was sent to oversee and coordinate everything with the Northern Command staff .
 IDF ground forces received little training prior to the outbreak of 2006 Lebanon War .
 The reasoning was to neglect the land forces in favor of the air force and make sizable cuts in the reserve ground forces’ budget and equipment . The reasoning is to neglect land forces and make cuts to the reserve air force .
 Many IDF officers, both regular and reserve, did not receive adequate training at all . Many high-ranking IDF officers did not get adequate training .
 IDF brigade generals were under-trained and commanders above brigade level did not command their units in training for years . For example, the IDF brigade commanders were undertrained .
 During the major battles, they were not present with their troops and failed to accomplish simple missions . During the big battles, the soldiers failed to achieve simple missions.
 Once, an entire IDF battalion was in the same area for several days without moving . Once, the entire IDF Battalion was in a similar area without moving.
 The battalion commander was confused and failed to accomplish this task . He was on a mission to move deeper into enemy territory .
 Years of COIN against the Palestinians had a huge impact on the IDF and seriously diminished its conventional capabilities .
 Ground forces demonstrated unsatisfactory skills in the conventional arena as well . Ground forces showed unsatisfactory capabilities in the traditional arena .
 Israeli tank crews failed to use smokescreen systems in the fight at Wadi Al-Saluki .
 Hezbollah proved to be a serious adversary for IDF ground forces . Overall, Hezbollah proved a serious adversaries for Israeli ground forces.
 Hezbollah caused such losses mostly by the sophisticated employment of ATGMs and RPGs . Hezbollah caused most losses by the sophistication of the ATGM and RPGs.
 Israeli tactical leadership also suffered from poor training and performance . Israeli tactical leaders also suffered poor training, performance .
 Mission orders are indefinite and do not have clear timelines for completing tasks . Mission orders were indefinite and did not have a clear timeline for completing task .
 commanders frequently changed orders that resulted in troop confusion and mistrust between commanders and their subordinates . In addition, commanders often changed orders.
 Seven of eight brigade commanders during the war were located at their headquarters instead of leading troops at the front .
Many units were broken up and dispersed among different forces resulting in a lack of overall unit cohesiveness . Many units were also broken up.
 Materiel Logistics issues proved problematic for Israel during the war . Israel's Logistics problems proved problematic during war .
 The IDF were not supplied with proper ammunition or body armor and lacked sufficient food and water to carry out a fight against well-supplied Hezbollah fighters .
 Equipment for reservists that the IDF kept in the depots was missing, obsolete or broken . Equipment for the reservists was missing.
 The goal of this plan was to increase the war fighting ability of the IDF by creating a decisive ground maneuver capability based on modern battle tanks .
 Teffen 2012 envisaged advancements in precision strike capability by the IAF as well as intelligence superiority through all means of gathering and preparedness .
 IDF began taking steps to correct deficiencies such as placing intelligence cells on brigade and battalion staffs and utilizing new missile defense technologies .
 After the end of 2006 Lebanon War, “Jointness’ became the new IDF buzzword . ‘Joints’ was the new Israeli buzzword after the war .
 Commanders from the IAF, Navy, Military Intelligence, and Shin Bet met to create joint target banks . The IAF and Navy, Navy and Military Intelligence worked to create a joint target bank .
 The synergy between arms and branches of the IDF was demonstrated in operation Cast Lead . The synergy was demonstrated by the IDF.
 Israel returned to the former military principles after the end of the war . It also began to treat the training of troops quite differently .
 The IDF armored brigades spent months of training at the Ground Forces Training Center in Negev, Israel .
 401st Armored Brigade that lost eight crews just in Saluki battle in 2006, conducted three months training exercise in which they prepared for urban combat .
 The brigade commander of 401st Armored Brigade stated in an interview that ‘Our advantage is our ability to move fast and our firepower.’
 The IDF reserve forces, particularly tank and artillery soldiers, were reattached to their designated weapons systems and retrained .
 They started to conduct live fire exercises and full-scale division maneuver training . They also began to conduct full- scale division maneuvers .
 The exercises involved both combat and combat support units . For the first time in many years, the exercises brought everyone in the units together .
 reserve officers received professional training in proper schools and conducted exercises with own units under their command . In addition, reserve officers receive professional training.
 Materiel reserve forces started to receive their equipment in full quantities after the war .
 Israel also paid attention to reservists’ training to fight in order to make them able to fight side by side with regular army soldiers .
 IDF procured 10,000 ceramic protection vests, 30,000 helmets, 40,000 combat vests and 60,000-night vision goggles . Also included grenades, small arms ammunition, and magazines .
 reserve soldiers became ready to address classic warfare needs . As a result, reserve soldiers were able to become ready to tackle classic warfare.
 Trophy creates defensive canopy around armored vehicles, tracking and destroying incoming projectiles . Trophy creates a defensive canopy.
 IDF outfitted tanks from the 401st Brigade with the system . By the end of 2009, all newly produced tanks had the Trophy .
 In summary, the performance of the IDF, especially ground forces, in the Second Lebanon War, was inadequate .
 Israel failed to meet any of its stated objectives, including Jointness, individual and collective training, poor intelligence and poor intelligence .
 After the 2006 Lebanon War, Israel corrected perceived deficiencies by implementing Teffen-2012 . The IDF increased war fighting capability, improved precision strike, gained intelligence superiority, and refined sustainment .
 The IDF changed the training approach of the troops in terms of focus from low-intensity conflict to highintensity conflict . The IDF also changed the quality, and quantity of training .
 The assessment is still possible by the results of the operation Cast Lead in Gaza 2008 to 2009 . Israel did not verify the effectiveness of these changes directly in fighting against Hezbollah .
 In this operation, Israeli leaders understood, that standoff attack by air would not create success .
 Israeli troops in operation Cast Lead were highly trained in HIC, specifically in combined arms maneuver . Unlike the troops who opposed Hezbollah, the Israeli troops were trained in the HIC .
 Hamas is not as well trained, sophisticated, disciplined, and equipped as Hezbollah . Hezbollah is not well trained and sophisticated, but equipped as Hamas .
 In the winter of 2014, the Revolution of Dignity occurred in Ukraine . The conflict started in 2014 .
 President Viktor Yanukovych abandoned the country and escaped to Russia . President Yanukovych left the country in November 2013 .
 The so-called "green men" in unmarked Russian uniforms started to appear in Crimea and soon in eastern Ukraine . In March, the Ukrainian people attempted to create a new government .
 During the same month, Russia annexed the Crimea through an illegal and falsified referendum . The referendum was not recognized by international organizations .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin made a statement a year later that Russian Special Forces and other troops executed the Crimean operation . However, only a year after the operation, Putin made the statement .
 Russian media disseminated false information to the whole world that the turmoil in Donbas was a civil war .
 Russian leadership again tried to accomplish the Crimea scenario in the Donbas region . In reality, Russian leadership failed to accomplish a Crimea scenario .
 The proclaimed President of Donetsk People’s Republic was Aleksander Borodai, a Russian political consultant . The proclaimed president of Donetsk was a Russian politician .
 Donetsk People’s Republic Defense Minister was Igor Girkin, known as “Strelkov,” a Federal Security Service Colonel .
 74 leadership, money, and weapons would be enough to start a rebellion in Donbas against Kyiv .
 Girkin asked Moscow for more and more “volunteers’ to organize the rebellion . Girkin: Moscow needs more volunteers to organize rebellion .
 On 25 May 2014, by majority vote Ukrainians elected a new president, Petro Poroshenko . The new president was elected by a majority vote .
 Russian-sponsored authorities in Donetsk and Luhansk region held their own illegal referendums and declared independence from Ukraine for these regions .
Ukrainian President Poroshenko initiated the military operation to defend Ukraine . Ukraine's military operation was launched to defend the country .
 In June, the UAF started to take back territory, including Slovyansk and Kramatorsk .
 Russia sent more sophisticated equipment, including artillery systems, tanks, tanks and anti-aircraft missiles, such as “Buk’s” and other weapons .
 The supply of this equipment did not impede Ukraine’s operation through August . The supply was not hindered by the lack of equipment .
 Neither did the employment of artillery units from Russian territory against UAF stop Ukrainian advance . UAF did not stop the Ukrainian advance against Ukraine .
 Kyiv forces were about to encircle separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk regions . By mid-August, Kyiv troops were aboutto encirle separatists.
 At that moment, Putin decided to send to Donbas approximately four thousand regular forces .
 The parties participating in conflict signed an agreement in Minsk that led to a ceasefire . Soon, on 5 September 2014, the parties participated in the conflict.
 Russians renewed offensive actions in order to seize a railway hub in Debaltseve .
 New fighting in this area led to a second Minsk ceasefire on 15 February 2015 . New fighting led to the second ceasefire on February 15 2015 .
 The fighting calmed down and the Kremlin used this time to move more arms into Donbas . After that, the Kremlin moved more arms in Donbas.
 Forces that oppose the UAF are a combination of irregular pro-Russian separatist forces, regular Russian Forces, and regional criminal elements unified to achieve mutually benefitting effects .
 President Vladimir Putin denies Russian involvement in the conflict . But there is a lot of evidence that leads to the opposite, he says .
 satellite images of starting positions of artillery and other units in the territory of Russia and Ukraine . Images also show the transfer of military personnel and equipment from Russia to Ukraine, and employment of surface-to-air missile systems .
 Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 was shot down from the Russian-controlled territory in Ukraine by mistake .
 Separatists try to take advantage and superiority through the employment of modern technology and the media . Separatist groups try to use modern technology as a weapon against the media.
 In addition, separatists try to embed their components in the political, military and social sphere of the Ukraine .
 Separatists seek from Ukraine the recognition of individual Donetsk and Luhansk republics with a special status with the preservation of a common political, economic, and cultural space . Separatist want from Ukraine to recognize individual Donetsk, Luhans and Donetsk republics.
 Former and current criminals released from the colonies, jail, and prison constitute a significant portion of separatists’ forces .
 separatists are also combined with robbery, looting, and violence, according to the report .
 combat operations of militant units are accompanied by looting and different violence . Often, combat operations are accompanied with looting and other violence .
 The tactics of separatist troops in the east of Ukraine are multifaceted. Analysis of the HT Doctrine shows that the tactics of the separatist troops are multifactored .
 Further analysis reveals the main principles of pro-Russian troops’ actions in Donbas .
 The tactics of the subversive and reconnaissance groups were taken by the Russians from the Chechens .
 Separatists conducted point attacks, passed between enemy positions, mined roads, ambushed convoys, and unexpectedly attacked individual positions, according to reports . Separatist groups attacked convoys and mined roads.
 The use of this tactic was justified because part of the local population, propagandized by the Kremlin TV, sympathized with the green men .
 The UAF did not always orient well on the terrain outside the main roads . UAF didn't always Orient well on terrain outside main roads.
 Ukraine has created a solid front line, built an echeloned defense, and controls the entire front-line territory . Now, this tactic has lost its effectiveness because Ukraine has built a strong front line and control the entire territory .
 The UAF began to help the UAF with providing information about suspicious people with weapons . In addition, the local population began to provide information about people with suspicious weapons .
 Another foundation of modern Russian tactics learned in Chechnya is coverage by the local population .
 The Russians noticed in Chechnya that when they used civilians and civilian infrastructure as shields the Chechens did not open a fire on Russian troops .
 The Russians placed firing positions in cemeteries, courtyards of schools, kindergartens, hospitals, and multi-storied houses .
 The Russian Federation did not consider these types of positions, if occupied by Chechen fighters, as constraints . However, the armed forces of the Russian Federation themselves did not.
 The Russians willingly opened fire on Chechen positions intermixed with the civilian population during operations despite the resulting collateral damage . Instead, the Russians willingly open fire on civilian positions .
 Chechens disseminate information about the crimes of the Russian army against civilians . The Russians saw how effectively, especially in Western countries, they disseminated information .
 The UAF, in spite of the Russian artillery firing from the residential districts, did not return fire for fear of killing civilians . The Russian artillery fired from residential districts .
 Russian political and military elite lie to the entire world to cover themselves with innocence with peaceful population, while committing other war crimes . Russian political, military elite lies to the whole world to hide themselves with innocent people .
After every new agreement, the Russians immediately begin to violate the agreement . After every new deal, the Russian government immediately begins to violate it .
 For example, using a truce, they can capture a territory or objects in a zone that is not under their control . They pretend as though nothing happened, while they pretend that nothing happened .
 Another principle of pro-Russian troops’ actions is use of Horde tactics of isolation. Another principle is use.
 The enemy who has a way to retreat, will move relaxed along the corridor provided, where the Horde can conveniently destroy the enemy .
During the isolation of Illovaisk, the Russians promised a “green corridor’s” for the Ukrainians .
Only those who broke out of the environment in a completely different place survived . Only those who escaped from the environment were able to survive .
During the battle for Debaltsevo, the separatists pulled the troops from other sectors of the front . For example, during the battle, the troops were pulled from the front.
In defensive and offensive operations, separatists use two echelons . In defensive and defensive operations, the separatists use the two echeons .
 In the first, there are militia units from the First and Second Army Corps, in which mercenaries serve . In the second and third Army Corps.
 The regular army of the Russian Federation operates in the second echelon . The Russian Federation is the second largest army in the world .
 The troops of the militia serve as a “cannon fodder’ for the first strike against the Ukrainian troops .
 servicemen from the 5th Armored Brigade of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation. For example, in February 2015, this role was performed by servicemen.
 There is no need to pay a large amount of money from the state budget to combatants who suffer casualties as a result of fighting .
 The separatists did not even try to take the bodies of their victims from the battlefield . For example, in the battles for Shyrokino, the separatists didn't even attempt to take their bodies from battlefield .
 The war in Donbas would not have been possible without a grand media campaign, unprecedented in the history of mankind, to misinform the population, and inflict psychological terror against citizens .
 separatists conducted a radio-electronic war in Donbas to achieve four main objectives . The separatists conducted the radio-Electronic war.
 The first objective was to destroy the UAF C2 nodes by massive rocket and artillery fire . The first objectives were to destroy them by massive rockets and artillery.
 The separatists detected and engaged any sources of electromagnetic radiation whose characteristics could be determined by the UAVs or any electronic surveillance means . The separatists have not been identified by the separatists .
 The second objective was to block any electromagnetic UAF’s means of communication . UAF is not allowed to use electromagnetic Uaf’S.
 The third was to suppress Ukrainian UAVs by obstructing their control or passing GPS signals . The third is to suppress the Ukrainian Uavs by blocking them or passing them with GPS signals.
 The final objective was to hamper the use of UAF’s artillery and mortars by pre-detonation of artillery or mortar shells with electronic detonators .
 Separatist forces intensively used massive rocket and artillery shelling . Separatists used huge amounts of artillery and rocket shelling .
 Increased effectiveness of aerial surveillance systems based on UAVs coupled with massive artillery shelling and MFRS employment led to a new level of intensity of modern traditional combat .
 The separatists successfully used a combination of enhanced action of conventional ammunition, remote mining, cluster munitions, and a thermobaric weapon that has devastating effects when used during massive fire strikes .
 The results of the conflict in Donbas show that rocket and artillery fire was the cause of approximately 80 percent of all losses . The results show that the conflict was caused by rocket and military fire .
 Separatist forces widely used UAVs for intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance . They determined target grids to specify the massive rocket and artillery strikes .
 The combination of small size of UAVs, their limited radar profile, and their limited Radar profile makes it difficult to detect them visually . The use of the missile systems class surface-to-air against them is ineffective and costly .
 separatists provided a significant role to heavy armor on the battlefield . The separatists provided an important role in the fight against the Russian army .
 The separatists used tanks as part of battalion and company tactical groups . The separatists also used tanks to fight against the government .
 In offensive operations under the artillery support tanks tried to cut the line of defense of the Ukrainians and wedged into defensive positions to great depth .
 In defensive operations in open terrain, tanks supported the infantry in defeating the enemy's offensive and conducted counterattacks .
 In urban operations, tanks were used as a powerful firepower for infantry support . In the urban operations.
 Sometimes, the separatists used single tanks to conduct a troublesome fire on Ukrainian positions . Sometimes, they also used one tank to conduct troublesome fire.
 Ukrainian forces strike on Ukrainian positions using indirect tank fire from distances up to 10 kilometers . They strike on Ukraine positions with indirect tank fires from distances of 10 kilometers.
 separatists’ forces set up the densest network of mobile defense at the Donbas .
 The combination of self-propelled and man-portable air defense systems dislodged the Ukrainian aircraft in their own sky .
 Ukraine is facing the most critical challenge-superiority in the air by adequate suppression and destruction of enemy air defense systems and their secure bases and positions .
 The Russian military organizers and representatives of the special services of the Russian Federation established a number of separatist gangs on the temporarily occupied Donbas .
 Following military actions, smuggling, looting and criminal rules of life came to Donbas . Donbas is a city in the eastern part of the country .
Only the Russian and Caucasian ‘authorities’ with more stringent “rules of the game’ came to replace the Donetsk criminals . Now the situation is the same, only the Russian, Caucasian “authorities.’s’
 Ukrainian prisoners of war are used as a labor force in Ukraine . They take away the business, deal with the racket, conduct human trafficking, transfer of drugs and weapons . They use Ukrainians as labor force .
 If a citizen of Donbas does not want to give up his business, in the best case he can be keep in custody for a long time until he rewrites all his property to bandits .
 separatists captured more than 10 prisons on the territory of the Donbas . The separatists captured over 10 prisons.
 First and Second Army Corps were formed with direct cooperation of the Russian Federation .
 The units are equipped with so-called “militiamen’s and volunteers from the Russian Federation . These units areequipped with ‘militaimen” and volunteers .
 The recruitment of mercenaries occurs through the Russian military commissariats . At the same time, the recruitment of mercenary mercenaries occurs in Russia .
 Professional Russian Armed Forces troops are an integral part of separatists’ forces . Professional Russian armed forces troops are part of the Russian army .
 They are represented with mechanized, tank, artillery, and radio-electronic warfare units . The units are represented by mechanized and tank, tank and artillery units .
Militants units are organized into separate brigades, separate battalions, battalions of territorial defense, regiments, and some other units . The militants units are called "militants"
 The typical structure of infantry separatists’ brigades follows the Russian model . It includes all the classical components of the infantry brigade .
The recruitment of brigades to their authorized strength is still ongoing . The recruitment of Brigades is ongoing .
 One motorized brigade usually has 10 to 20 tanks, 40 to 50 armored combat vehicles . A battery of self-propelled howitzers, a battery of multiple launch rocket systems, and a number of other vehicles for personnel transportation .
 Experts estimate that in March 2015, about 12 thousand Russian military personnel were present in Eastern Ukraine . About 50,000 Russian troops were located in camps along the Russian-Ukrainian border .
 Russia deployed to the Donbas eight battalion tactical groups of the Russian Federation Armed Forces, totaling more than 4,000 . For example, on the night of 25 August 2014, Russia deploys to theDonbas eight tactical groups .
 The company tactical group consisted of three motorized rifle platoons, tank platoon, mortar battery, howitzer self-propelled artillery battery, grenade launchers platoon, engineering sapper platoon, medical squad, and an evacuation group .
 A battalion tactical group usually consisted of three mechanized companies, tank company, mortar battery, 1-3 howitzer self-propelled artillery battery, grenade launchers platoon, medical platoon, electronic warfare platoon, sniper platoon, and flamethrowers platoon .
 Russian soldiers mobilized from the far reaches of the country to cross into Ukraine . They serve as the collecting points for Russian military equipment transported into Ukraine and for Russian soldiers .
 The camps house thousands of Russian soldiers and pieces of military equipment that appear in Ukraine . The camps are located in Ukraine.
 Representatives of Russian Armed Forces and current employees of the Russian special services serve as curators and military instructors for separatists .
 Training of militants is carried out in such disciplines as weapons firing, sabotage, carrying out terrorist acts, survival in the field and camouflaging .
 Materiel Separatists’ forces significantly rely on Russian military assistance .
 Russia has provided substantial amounts of heavy weaponry and equipment to them . Russia has also provided substantial amount of heavy weapons and equipment .
 The most important upgrade is an advanced computerized fire control system with improved optics and modern night and all-weather vision devices . The most significant upgrade is a new computerized Fire Control system .
 Russia has developed modular advanced protection systems for the T-80, T-72, and T-64 tanks . Russia has also developed a modular protection system .
 Pro-Russian troops widely used UAVs both for reconnaissance and for a strike of high-value targets during the conflict .
 They employed no less than 13 different fixed wing drone designs and at least one quad-copter design over the Donbas . The drones were designed by a team of 13 different drone designers .
 The initial response of UAF demonstrated that at the beginning of the conflict, the Ukrainian military specialists did not have a consensus on the role of mechanized and armored units in fighting against such hybrid threat .
 The Ukrainian doctrine, unfortunately, did not give clear answers to this question as well . It did not answer the question .
 mechanized and armored units were used only for conducting positional defense . In most cases, mechanized units were only used to conduct defense .
 In rare cases, airborne troops were effective with units of highly mobile airborne troops . In rare case, they were effective.
 The use of tanks during the raid operations as the main striking force demonstrated its effectiveness . Use of tanks in the raid shows its effectiveness.
 The use of armored units to destroy some well-fortified enemy firing points was effective in the release of Sloviansk and during the relief of Lugansk airport .
 mechanized and tank units during combat operations in eastern Ukraine did not use full capacity, strength, and capabilities .
 Organization Tank and mechanized units were used as part of a battalion or company tactical group during the conflict .
 The battalion tactical group included a mechanized battalion in full composition with a tank company, an artillery battery or battalion, and a subunit of flamethrowers and snipers .
 Ukrainian command sometimes used tactical groups that included units from different brigades instead of using the entire brigade .
It also complicated the control, interaction, and sustainment of units . It also complicated control and interaction of units, it said .
 Their employment was effective in the capture and destruction of enemy checkpoints . They were also effective in capturing and destroying enemy checkpoints.
 mechanized and tank units, although with more powerful weapons, were often used in the second echelon . The highly mobile airborne troops were used at the first stage .
 The UAF personnel had poor training at the beginning of the conflict, says the UAF . UAF staff were trained at the start of the war .
Most mechanized and armored units before the conflict were in the reduced state . Most mechanized, armored units in the state were in a reduced state.
 Officers responsible for combat training were doing mostly life support activities . The officers were doing most life support Activities .
 With a transfer to the state of war, these officers failed to organize effective training of personnel that was called for by mobilization . The officers were called for a mobilization.
 Keeping units in a shortened composition did not give an opportunity to complete the effective training of troops . Half of the personnel were continuously involved in duties .
 In such circumstances, a generation of officers have never conducted live fire exercises with their units .
There were instances when a brigade did not have any specialists to conduct training of mobilized personnel . There were instances where a brigade didn't have any specialist training for mobilized personnel.
 A large number of officer positions remained vacant and were staffed during or after the accomplishment of the unit’s training .
 The principle of “every commander trains his subordinates’ was not respected. Because of this, this is not respected, he says . “Every commander train his subordinates,’ he says.
 During the training of mechanized and armored units, the experience gained by the armed forces of many countries in modem military conflicts was neglected .
 The soldiers were not trained even in basic techniques and methods of survival in the difficult conditions of modem military conflicts .
 The interaction between mechanized, tank, and artillery units was poor . The interaction was poor, according to the report .
 Often mechanized and tank units performed assigned tasks together with other services such as special operations forces .
 Often, mechanized and tank units did not comply with basic standards of tactical movement, deployments on the ground, and allocation of command posts . Often, tank units didn't comply withbasic standards ofTactical movement, deployment on ground and allocation.
 This led to a reduction of maneuver capabilities, difficulties with unit’s control, and to a significant reduction in security personnel and equipment to enemy fire exposure . The reduction in maneuver capabilities led to the reduction of maneuvers and control, according to the report .
 Elementary ignorance of tactical and technical characteristics and combat capabilities led to “finding new techniques and methods of firing weapons,’ which gave a false impression of the effectiveness of fire .
 This led to information leaks about plans and actions that caused unnecessary losses, according to a report . This lead to information leaked about plans, actions and plans that led to losses .
 Brigade’s and higher staffs were not proficient in planning and controlling the units during the fight . Brigade's and lower staffs weren't proficient with planning and control the units .
 Time for producing the orders was often exaggerated, which made it impossible for battalions and companies to conduct qualitative planning and preparation for the mission accomplishment .
 The effectiveness of units, manned with this personnel, was low. Because of that, the effectiveness of these units was low, it was low .
 There were cases when the enemy captured groups of drunken Ukrainian soldiers .
Sometimes mobilized soldiers had sufficient motivation to perform tasks, but their training was bad . Sometimes mobilized soldiers did not have enough motivation to do tasks .
 They had a lack of combat experience and were uncertain in their own abilities and weapons . They had no combat experience. They were unsure of their own weapons and abilities .
 There were cases when soldiers tried to leave occupied positions after the first minor attacks of the enemy .
 commanders sometimes threatened officers with personal weapons to prevent their leaving .
 There was no emphasis on morale and psychological support aimed at forming and maintaining the morale and fighting qualities needed for successful combat missions .
The latest development of Ukrainian gunsmiths appeared in UAF rarely and in limited quantities . The latest development is the latest in a long line of UAF guns .
 Physical aging, low maintenance and storage conditions, as well as spare parts understaffing, led to this situation . Physical aging and low maintenance led to the situation .
Most combat training units spent on restoring and preparing combat vehicles, weapons, and equipment for combat use . The majority of time during combat training was spent on restore and prepare combat vehicles .
 Communications and reconnaissance assets were in the most critical condition . Communications and researchers are in most critical condition .
 In addition, exploitation of military equipment was carried out with major violations that led to a significant reduction in their reliability .
 Light armored combat vehicles, such as infantry fighting vehicles, were vulnerable to anti-tank weapons, automatic medium-caliber guns, artillery cassettes, and thermobaric ammunition . Heavy armored vehicles, including armored personnel carriers, had priority over survivability .
 When hit, crews of infantry fighting vehicles generally suffered significant losses . When hit they generally suffered major losses, were killed or seriously wounded .
 The presence of advanced protection systems could improve the situation in the UK . It could also improve the security of the country .
 Battalions’ air defense teams in most cases were not able to destroy enemy’s UAVs .
 The logistics supply of the units was also poor due to inadequate funding of the Armed Forces of Ukraine . The logistics supplies of the military units were also poor .
 UAF's Adjustments and Assessment of the Effectiveness of the UAF’s Adjustments to the HT Doctrine . In connection with the peace agreements and a certain clear line of demarcation, the belligerents were forced to conduct a linear defense .
 Ukrainian command understands that positional defense is not effective and should be avoided . All Ukrainian troops conduct this type of defense .
 In the conditions of the extended defense of mechanized and tank brigades, the platoon and company strong points were enlarged in size .
 The anti-tank reserve and hide positions for armored vehicles were prepared . In the rear of the strong points, the supplementary positions of the anti- tank reserve were prepared.
 Combat vehicles were placed out in the field where the enemy could easily see them . They were masked from aerial observation .
 In order to avoid this, personnel lived in dugouts adapted to long comfortable stays . The dugouts were designed to be more comfortable for personnel .
Due to the lack of tanks or Boevaya Mashina Pehoty -Soviet produced Infantry Fighting Vehicles, “armored teams’ were employed .
Two methods allowed maintaining a high rate of fire during suppression of enemy for a long time . These two methods allowed the fire to be maintained during suppression for long time.
 Tank Carousel is based on continuous firing from tanks at the enemy during a certain period of time or until the target is destroyed . The tank carousel is used to show how tanks are being fired at a target .
 Two tanks occupy SBF-1, open fire between TRP1 and TRP2, suppress the enemy on Obj Bob .
 tanks hi SBF-1 is about to finish, tanks hi hiding position start movement to SBf-1 . When ammunition of the tanks hiSBF- 1 is aboutto finish, it starts movement to the tank .
 Two tanks that initially were at SBF-1 start movement to the hiding position . When all four tanks are located at SBf-1, two tanks that originally were atSBF- 1 start moving to the hide position .
 The Fire Carousel is based on continuous firing from tanks and artillery at the enemy during a certain period of time or until the target is destroyed .
 artillery units opened fire on the target until the tanks were ready to shoot 99 again . After expending all ammunition or when the tanks must move, the tanks began to fire again .
 Once mortar batteiy is ready to open the fire from the second position, company team moves to ATK2 . ATK2 is the company team that moves to the second place .
Tank units and MLRS units were formed in highly mobile airborne troops . Tank units andMLRS units are formed in high-flying troops .
 A UAVs platoon was organized in a Battery of Control and Artillery Reconnaissance of Brigade Artillery Group . The platoon was part of the Brigade Art artillery group .
 As a result, the effectiveness of artillery units significantly increased . The effectiveness of the artillery units has increased .
 Training from March 2015, experience and training of UAF personnel grew . UAF staff were trained by the UAF in March 2015 .
 The interaction between combined arms units and other armed services that perform tasks in one area of operation significantly improved . The interaction was significantly improved between the two armed services .
 Information exchange, fire support, and comprehensive support improved as well . Information exchange and fire support also improved .
 The number of training activities including brigade and battalion tactical exercises increased, but the quality of this training, especially live firing exercises, remains poor .
 Mechanized and armored units continue to use linear tactics in training . The use of linear tactics continues to be used in training for armored units .
 Higher Command focuses on the conduct of demonstration training and exercises . Higher Command focus on conduct of demonstrations and exercises.
 Mobile defense, urban operations, and offensive operations are not practiced . Mobile defense is not practiced, and urban operations are also not practiced.
Most importantly, personnel has sufficient motivation to protect the state . Most importantly, the state has enough motivation to defend itself .
 Materiel Russian intervention changed the situation in the matter of equipping Ukrainian forces with the newest weapons and equipment, especially armored vehicles . The situation has been changed in the past few months .
 Combat units started to receive new tanks, armored personnel carriers, and armored cars . Donbas went to Donbas for real combat testing, which immediately went to the ground .
 In particular, the new Ukrainian tank T-64BM “Bulat’s” worked very well in Donbas . The new tank is the latest in a long line of tank tanks in Ukraine .
 Bulat's main gun and ammunition were able to destroy the separatist's tanks . Bulat’s main weapon and ammunition are able to destroyed the separatist’'s tanks.
 T-64BM’s armor enabled effective protection against enemy antitank weapons . The armor was designed to protect against enemy weapons .
 The T-64BM was used to defeat separatists’ armor in tank duels . It was also used to beat separatists' armor in the battle .
 These missiles proved to be very able to destroy Russian tanks in Donbas . The missiles were used to destroy tanks in the region .
 The new Ukrainian ATGM “Stugna-P’ was effective in the defense of Donetsk and Lugansk airport and other locations . The new ATGM is the latest in a long line of ATGM operations in Ukraine .
 Personal protective equipment, such as helmets and vests, and military clothing, met international standards . Personal protective gear, including vests and helmets, met International standards .
 Some communication assets, such as old soviet radio stations, were replaced with relatively modem equipment . Some of the old radio stations R-159, R-148 and R-162 were replaced by relatively modem technology .
 Ukrainian Army units do not receive any sophisticated equipment specifically designed to counter the HT, fight against enemy’s informational operations .
 During the active fighting in 2014 and 2015, armored and mechanized units were involved in executing tasks that shaped the environment for the Ukrainian's highly mobile forces .
 The factors mentioned above did not allow armored and mechanized units to employ all potential capabilities against pro-Russian forces such as maneuver, fire, intelligence, and intelligence .
 UAF started to implement improvements in terms of organization, training, and materiel . The UAF has also started to improve its training, organization and training facilities .
 Third, Ukrainian brigades created organic UAVs units, but they are not yet fully fielded . Uavs themselves are still not fully fielded.
 Fourth, training of the UAF personnel improved, but the quality of this training still remains insufficient . The quality of training remains insufficient.
 UAF became better, but improvements have not arrived in necessary quantities to the troops . New weapons, equipment, and armored vehicles have not been arrived .
 The UAF conduct only defensive operations against separatist forces . Currently, the UAF conducts only defense operations against separatists .
 In such conditions, the assessing of the effectiveness of the UAF’s adjustments is impossible . In such circumstances, the assessment of the adjustments is difficult .
Active fighting must occur in order to set conditions for evaluation of the adjustments . Active fighting must be held before the fight begins .
 The experience of Israel demonstrated that the years of COIN operations negatively affected the conventional capabilities of the forces .
 The IDF ground forces demonstrated poor performance and unsatisfactory skills in the conventional arena . The IDF showed poor performance.
 The evidence indicates that in order to defeat a HT, doctrine needs to be focused on employment of the conventional capabilities of the unit .
 The IDF failed to execute sweeping armor attacks with overwhelming firepower . The IDF didn't execute sweeping Armor attacks.
 The UAF did not use full capacity and strength of armored and mechanized units . UAF didn't use the full capacity of armored units .
 The IDF and UAF units were dispersed and did not demonstrate effort to conduct a combined arms attack . The IDF, UAF and IDF units are dispersed and do not demonstrate efforts to conduct an attack .
 Ground formations were deprived of aviation and artillery support . In addition, ground formations were also deprived of air and military support .
Ground units must be supported by attack helicopters, fixed wing aviation, artillery, and if situation allows, naval forces . Ground units must also support attack helicopters and fixed wing aircraft .
 IDF’s intelligence was relatively successful in collecting data about Hezbollah . Distribution of information down to the lowest level was hindered .
 The information distribution mechanisms must ensure timely and high-quality data transfer. Therefore, the information distribution mechanism must be more effective .
 Organization Hezbollah and the separatist forces widely used UAVs for collecting information and targeting the opposing forces .
 Both IDF and UAF did not possess capabilities to neutralize or destroy enemy’s UAVs. Both, the IDF and the UAF didn't possess capabilities.
In order to fight with enemy’s UAVs and other aerial targets, a brigade must have an organic air defense capability .
 The IDF and the UAF operated in the environment where the enemy used manmade obstacles to hinder the mobility . The UAF and the IDF operated in an environment where manmade barriers were used to hinder mobility .
 Hezbollah influenced the IDF’s movement by employment of improvised explosive devices, antipersonnel, and anti-tank mines . In 2006 Lebanon War Hezbollah successfully influenced the Israeli army's movement .
 The same effect was achieved by separatist forces during Ukrainian conflict . The same result was achieved during the conflict .
 A brigade must have an organic engineer capability to provide mobility and counter mobility . This leads to the fact that a brigade must be able to provide Mobility and countermobility . A brigade can provide mobility, counter mobility.
 Hezbollah and separatist forces successfully neutralized the IDF's and UAF’s radars and communications and obtained valuable strategic and tactical information .
 Ukrainian conflict demonstrates that the primary means of destruction is artillery fires .
 During extended defense, Ukrainian armored or mechanized brigades had difficulties carrying out the assigned tasks in full . The Ukrainian armored brigades were possessing four organic artillery battalions .
 This evidence indicates that a brigade must have an organic artillery with counter artillery radars. This evidence suggests that a Brigade must have a brigade with counter-army radars .
 A brigade could be supported by the self-propelled howitzers battalion and the MLRS battalion . A brigade commander could be a brigade commander's asset .
 The 2006 Lebanon War and Ukrainian conflict proved the effectiveness of UAVs both for collecting information about the enemy and for targeting the enemy .
 Both case studies demonstrated that intelligence superiority is paramount .
This indicates that a brigade must have an organic reconnaissance unit and an intelligence cell in staffs . This indicates that the brigade must also have anorganic reconnaissance unit . The brigade must be able to use the intelligence cell of staffs as a source .
 Separatist forces were able to inflict mass casualties to the UAF by employing heavy artillery fire . Separatists used heavy artilleryFire to inflict casualties on UAF troops .
 A brigade must have a redundancy in command and control capabilities to enable fast reconstitution when C2 nodes are destroyed . Thus, a brigade must be able to replace C2 node.
 The 2006 Lebanon War and the Ukrainian conflict demonstrate that one of the most significant problems that the IDF and the UAF faced was poor training of personnel .
 A brigade's individual training of personnel must be proficient. Based on the IDF and UAF experience, a brigade’s individual training is needed .
 Training must focus on conventional warfare, particularly conducting offensive, defensive, and stability operations . Training must also focus on offensive and defensive operations .
 Collective training must include full-scale division and brigade maneuvers . The training must also include brigade maneuvers and brigade maneuvers .
 Commanders and staffs must be trained to make fast and sound decisions . Commanders, staffs and officers must be prepared to make quick and sound decision decisions .
 Staff must operate with minimum or no reliance on computers. Staff must be able to operate withminimum or no use of computers .
 During 2006 Lebanon War and Ukrainian conflict, Israeli and Ukrainian troops were not trained in using smoke for obscuration . Israeli and Ukraine troops were also not trained to use smoke during the conflict .
 Hezbollah and separatists could easily engage their opponents’ combat vehicles with ATGMs . As a result, Hezbollah and separatist fighters could easily use ATGM vehicles .
 A brigade must possess the ability to use smoke through all means of delivery available and codes during communication instead of an opened text . Thus, a brigade must be able to use Smoke through all ways of delivery and codes .
 Personnel must know how to use the equipment and weapons of the entire unit . Personnel must use equipment, weapons and equipment.
 Personnel must be trained to execute tasks in limited visibility, at night, and when communication is hacked and-or degraded . The training must also be used to help prevent communication being hacked or degraded .
 Personnel must be trained to call for aviation and artillery support, to fight in open and urban terrain, to navigate with minimum or no GPS .
 A brigade must be trained in counter ambush, counter ambush and counter improvised explosive device activities, fight in isolation, fight under the mass artillery fire, and mass casualties scenarios .
 In training, a brigade should understand that the enemy maintains continuous surveillance over it through UAVs or other means .
A brigade must be ready to fight under conditions where the enemy is mixed with civilians . A brigade must also be prepared to fight against the enemy in such conditions .
 Personnel must be resilient to sustain a constant state of alert, exhaustion, and enemy informational operations . Personnel need to be resilient. Personnel must also be resilient in the battle of the war .
 A brigade must achieve synergy with other arms, services, and branches. Finally, a brigade must achieved synergy.
The unit must have night-vision devices both for combat vehicles and for personnel . The unit must also have night vision devices for personnel. The unit has to have nightvision devices.
 The ABCT has several roles in combat . It has been called DOTM Doctrine in terms of the U.S. ABCT analysis .
 ABCT operates to close with the enemy using fire and movement, to destroy or capture enemy forces, to repel enemy attacks by fire . ABCT also operates to counterattack the enemy to control land areas and resources .
 For a specific mission, higher commanders can augment the ABCT with aviation, armor, field artillery, air defense, military police, civil affairs, military information support operations elements, engineers, CBRN, and additional information systems assets .
 Combined arms battalions execute combined arms operations within their area of operations to support the ABCT commander . The ABCT Commander is the commander of the Australian Army .
 The main purpose of the cavalry squadron is to perform reconnaissance and surveillance tasks and conduct security operations . The squadron's main purpose is to conduct reconnaissance and Surveillance tasks .
 The conduct of security operations by the squadron provides an economy of force and allows the ABCT commander to preserve combat power for engagements where he desires .
 ABCT field artillery battalion supports ABCT operations by providing massing fires on single or multiple targets with precision, near precision, and area fires .
Field artillery battalion has two AN/TPQ-53 counter fire radars and four AN/ TPQ-50 lightweight counter mortar radars for target acquisition .
 The BSB plans, prepares, executes, and assesses replenishment operations to support ABCT operations . The B SB plans to prepare, execute and assess the replenishment operation .
 The brigade special troops battalion provides control and sustainment to the organic engineer company, signal company, military intelligence company, and the CBRN reconnaissance platoon . Other units attached to the ABCT include the CB RN reconnaissance platoon as well as other units .
 The U.S. military has made significant changes in training in order to adapt to nonstate, irregular threats represented in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The United States enemy in these two theaters did not use effective standoff weapons, such as Man-Portable Air Defense System and ATGMs in large numbers .
 If militants used such weapons, this could be a significant problem for the U.S. Armed Forces .
 The U.S. military could face the same challenge as the IDF did in 2006 Lebanon War in fighting against Hezbollah . The IDF fought against Hezbollah in Lebanon War .
 The U.S. ABCT requires different skills from those that were obtained through conducting COIN operations .
 The ABCT commander plans and conducts training based on the units’ mission essential task list and priorities of effort .
 He establishes the conditions in which to conduct training according to the determined standards . He establishes conditions for training. The standards are determined by the coach .
 The U.S. unit should have an OPFOR that realistically challenges the ability of the United States unit to accomplish its tasks . These conditions should include an OPF that realistically challenge the ability to accomplish their tasks .
 The United States combat training centers should be focused on training troops for the full range of military operations . HT OPFOR should be included into training exercises with the inclusion of HTOPFOR .
 The BSB distributes Class I, Class II, Class III (petroleum, oil, and lubricants), Class IV, Class V, and Class IX materials . The B SB distributes the BSB.
 The BSB provides food services, as well as field maintenance and limited recovery . Roles 1 and 2 of the Army Health System provide food services .
 ABCT conducts sustained operations for a limited period of time due to the BSB’s materiel-carrying capability . The ABCT carries out sustained operations.
 Designated distribution managers coordinate and synchronize logistics flow according to the commander’s priorities .
 Distribution managers have asset and in-transit visibility to optimize the distribution system within their area of operations . Distribution managers are able to optimize distribution systems within their areas .
 Advanced information systems such as movement tracking systems, battle command sustainment support systems, and advanced planning and optimization decision support tools provide this capability .
 The ABCT Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence capabilities assist in maneuver, command, and control of the BCT units . TheABCT Command and Control, Control and Communications capabilities help in maneuver and control .
 These systems are fielded down to the company level and each combat platform . Each combat platform has a different system that can be used to combat .
 They provide maximal SA enabling quicker C2 and maneuver of the forces . They provide maximum SA enabling faster C2. They provide greater maneuvering ability .
 All ABCT’s weapons platform systems contribute to the combined arms effort . The ABCT's weapons platform system contributes to the effort .
 They provide infantry, armor, reconnaissance, engineer, and fire support elements with firepower, armor protection, and battlefield agility . They provide the infantry, Armor, and reconnaissance elements.
 The ABCT’s main weapons platform systems are M1A1 Abrams main battle tank, M2 Infantry Fighting Vehicle, and the M3 Cavalry Fighting Vehicle .
 The current fielded models of the M1A1 Abrams main battle tank are M1 a1 . The current fielding models are M 1A1, M1a1 HA, M2A1 AIM program, AIM ED, and M1M1A2 SEP
 The M1A1 AIM program adds various upgrades and extends the life of the aging fleet . The program adds several upgrades to the fleet .
 M1A1 AIM SA adds to the M1 aIM AIM system . Blue force tracker Force XXI command and control system is added to the system .
 This system allows the crew to communicate digitally with a wider spectrum of Army vehicles . The system is designed to allow the crew of the Army to communicate with the vehicles .
 M1A1 AIM SA has the First Generation Forward Looking, Infrared radiant thermal sighting system that gives the tank commander and gunner the ability to detect, identify, and engage targets more accurately at a greater range .
 The next system is a position navigation system, which gives the crew the ability to use ‘far-target locate’ to calculate grids to targets for accurate digital calls for fire .
 The DVE is a real-time thermal-imaging system that improves the driver’s SA during limited visibility operations . The system also improves driver's SA duringlimited visibility operations.
 The M1A2 SEP tank system is designed to accommodate new and upgraded components required for the continually expanding performance requirements and to facilitate ease of maintenance . The tank system has been designed to be able to accommodate the constantly expanding performance demands .
 CITV allows tank commander to acquire targets independently from the gunner and then designate gunner to those targets . The tank commander can then designate those targets as targets .
 The TUSK includes such components as add-on explosive reactive armor and a slat armor . 32 dischargers for 66-mm defensive grenades, which loaded with a combination of smoke and anti-personnel grenades . A transparent shielding around vehicle commander’s 12.7
 The TUSK also has a thermal weapon sight for a shielded loader’s 7.62-mm machine gun that allows him to locate targets and fire from his machine gun at night . Additional remotely controlled 12.7-mm gun over the main gun that is fitted with a
 The TUSK includes a 7.62-mm coaxial machine gun, a 360degree camera for a vehicle commander, and an infantry phone that allows the nearby infantry to communicate with the tank commander and coordinate their actions in combat .
 The models of Bradley Fighting Vehicle are the M2 Infantry Fighting Vehicle and the M3 Cavalry Fighting Vehicle . The models are both M3 and M2 infantry vehicles .
 M2A2 ODS upgrades include the eye safe laser range finder which is a part of the vehicle’s Integrated Sight Unit . M3A2ODS upgrades also include the Eye safe laser finder .
 The information about BFV hull and turret azimuths, location, directions, directions and distance to way points, and steer-to data shows up .
 M2A2 ODS and M3A2ODS also have the DVE which is an uncooled, FLIR night-vision device . The DVE also has the FLIR device which can be used on the same device .
 The last improvement is the Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below that provides to A2 ODS and A3 crews SA and real-time command and control . The last improved is the force XXIBattle Command Brigade.
 M2A3 and M3A3 BFV have the Turret Drive System that moves the weapon and stabilizes the A3 weapon systems . improved sights and the commander’s tactical display give the A 3 commander a level of SA never before possible .
 It gives more information about the location of each vehicle in the unit . It also gives more details about the vehicle's location .
 It allows the commander to send and receive orders and mission updates and respond to an expanding area of operations . It also gives operational graphics, and it allows the commanders to send orders and receive mission updates .
 M2A3 and M3 A3 BFV have the A3’s fire control system that allows the crew to independently search, track, and conduct target hand-off .
 The system also allows the commander to override the gunner and abort a fired missile . The system is also able to abort a missile .
 Next improvement is the integrated communication, command, and control digital battle command information system . SA offers real-time C2 information to A3 crews and squads .
 M2A3 and M3 A3 BFV have the A3’s subsystem position navigation . The A3 has improved CBRN Protection and improved CB RN Protection .
 Bradley Fighting Vehicles can also be fitted with Urban Survivability Kit . The vehicles can also have Urban Survivable Kit .
 The Bradley Urban Survivability Kit incorporates four modifications . It includes a blast-proof fuel cell, blast-resistant driver seat, a turret survivability system, and emergency ramp release .
 BUSK includes high-powered spotlight, sight protection, and non-conductive “dome tent’s” structure . BUSK is designed to protect turret and crew from low-hanging power lines .
 The ABCT’s capabilities are based on what the U.S. Army doctrinal publications explain the ABCT can do, not on any actual assessment of ABCT performance .
 The U.S. ABCT Doctrinal Capabilities and the IDF’s and UAF's Initial Responses and Adjustments based on the previous analysis . The following table compare the United States ABCT doctrinal capabilities with the IDF's and U AF's initial responses and
 The IDF put armored and use UAVs for target assets . The emphasis is planned to and strength of The UAF . The IDF stated to use all available abolish divisions .
 The U.S. ABCT tentatively includes capabilities that were available and effective in the IDF and UAF . Those capabilities were lacking in Israeli and Ukrainian Armies with exception of organic EW and antiUAV capabilities .
 The analysis, outlined in this chapter, provides the answers to seven secondary questions . The answers are determined in chapter 1 of this chapter .
 The HT described the result of examination of cases of the Israeli-Hezbollah conflict of 2006 and the Ukrainian-Russian conflict of 2014 .
 chapter 4 analyzed the United States ABCT and compared the U.S. ABCT capabilities with the IDF's and UAF’s initial responses and adjustments . Chapter 4 analyzed ABCT's capabilities and adjustments with IDF's initial responses .
 Chapter 5 answers the primary research question, states the discoveries that emerged from the interpretation of the research evidence . Chapter 5 makes recommendations for further inquiry .
 The research used the qualitative analysis method and focused on analyzing available documents while studying the separate but similar cases of Israel fighting Hezbollah in Lebanon and Ukraine fighting Russia in Ukraine .
 This chapter will summarize the ABCT’s current capabilities that allow addressing the current HT effectively . It will outline the recommended changes that ABCT need to make in order to be more effective .
 The chapter will then provide recommendations for future research followed by the chapter conclusion . The chapter ends with the chapter's conclusion .
 The ABCT, as doctrinally organized and equipped, maintains significant conventional capabilities . Heavy forces based on tanks and infantry fighting vehicles are key elements that could fight hybrid enemies .
 Combined arms battalions could operate under responsive and adequate artillery and UAVs support . Combined arms Battalions could be able to operate underresponsive and adequate military support .
 The ABCT personnel, when trained to doctrinal standards, will have high individual and collective skills, including urban warfare . They will be trained to be able to compete with each other in urban warfare.
 These capabilities are superior to near-peer competitors, but survivability improvements are a valid area for development, says the author .
 Another distinctive doctrinal capability is digitization and enhanced SA down to the squad level . Another distinctive technological capability is digitization .
 ABCT has night vision capabilities for both combat platforms and personnel . In addition, the ABCT is also equipped with night vision capability .
 The IDF experience indicates that in order to defeat a HT, doctrine needs to be focused on employment of the conventional capabilities of the unit .
 The Ukrainian conflict demonstrates that HT can inflict severe destruction and casualties that could lead to losing command and control over a unit . The conflict shows that HT could inflict severe damage and casualties .
 The recommendation is to create reconstitution teams within the ABCT to re-establish C2 in the case when main command post gets destroyed during mission execution .
 Sometimes even that amount of artillery units was not enough to counter the enemy . Sometimes even even that number of artillery troops wasn't enough .
 One recommendation is to have more than one organic FA battalion in ABCT including MLRS battalion as well . Another recommendation is for MLRS Battalion as well.
 UAF artillery units were not able to organize their own security in an environment where the enemy could be everywhere . The UAF was unable to organize its own security.
 Brigade commanders attached mechanized units to each artillery battalion . Brigade commanders attach mechanized troops to each battalion .
 As a result, some mechanized units were not at full strength for combat mission . Some mechanized troops were not in full strength.
Recommendation is to create a security unit organic to FA battalion . The recommendation is to make the unit organic.
 The UAVs were a significant force multiplier, according to the study . The study shows that the UAV's were a major force multiplier .
ABCT should have short-range air defense capabilities effective against UAVs, helicopters, and close air support aircrafts . ABCT should be able to protect against helicopters, helicopters and air support planes .
 The ABCT should have greater UAV capability to gain situational awareness, according to the ABCT . At company level, ABCT may have greater capability to gained situational awareness .
 The ABCT personnel training is high, but there may be some areas for improvement .
 Commanders must be trained to be more independent and rely less on staff . Commanders need to be less dependent on staff and more independent .
 Leaders must be able to make their own decisions in a short period of time . Leaders must make their decisions in short time, say experts .
 Personnel must be trained to operate without computers during training at company, battalion, and brigade level . Personnel must also be trained in company, brigade, and battalion training .
During training personnel must also understand that they are under a continuous enemy observation . During training personnel should also understand they are also under an enemy observation.
 Personnel must pay significant attention to camouflage, concealment, and deception. Personnel must also pay attention to concealment and deception .
 Personnel must train to interact effectively with other services and allied forces . Personnel must also train to engage with other forces and allies .
 Personnel within the ABCT must know how to use and must be trained in using all ABCT's available weapons .
All personnel must be able to navigate without GPS using a map and compass . All personnel must operate without radio communication .
 A brigade must train how to equip shelters for personnel using improvised means and trench charges . In the conditions when enemy possesses significant fires capability, a brigade must training how to equipped shelters .
 The ABCT tanks and Infantry Fighting Vehicles are relatively survivable, development and installation of advanced protection systems such as Israeli “Trophy’s” will significantly improve protection of combat vehicles .
 The U.S. ABCT can better prepare for the fight against the HT by implementing some improvements in terms of doctrine, organization, training, and materiel .
 Research was conducted by analyzing information from unclassified sources . The research was conducted on behalf of the University of Cambridge .
 Some ABCT capabilities, for example electronic warfare capabilities, were therefore studied superficially . SomeABCT capabilities were also studied superfically .
ABCT training was not deeply analyzed as well for the same reason . ABCT training wasn't deeply analyzed for same reasons .
 recommendations in this area for improvement were developed solely based on the IDF and UAF experience .
 The recommendation for further research is to include analysis of the restricted resources that enable more accurate assessment of the ABCT capabilities . The recommendation is to be included in the analysis of restricted resources .
 ABCT need to be objectively assessed against an HT OPFOR at joint or national training center conducting live iterations across all aspects of conventional operations . ABCT needs to be evaluated against anHT OPFOR, which is conducting live iteration across all parts of conventional Operations .
 The second recommendation for further research is to conduct an interview with an Israeli officer or another credible person knowledgeable in this area .
 Information on the mentioned above aspects will make the analysis more valuable . The analysis of the above aspect will make it more valuable.
 The recommendation is to include a study of unconventional capabilities of all three parties . The recommendation will also include the study of the unconventional capabilities.
 The Army War College is the largest military college in the U.S. Army .
 Cordesman, Anthony H Preliminary “Lessons of the Israeli-Hezbollah War’s ‘Lessons’ of the Israel-He Hezbollah War. Cordesmen: The war is a war between Israel and Hezbollah .
 Research, Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, Arlington, VA, December 2007 . The study was published in 2007 .
 Military Capabilities for Hybrid War Insights from the Israel Defense Forces in Lebanon and Gaza . The Israeli Defense Forces are also in Gaza .
 Historical Lessons Learned Workshop Sponsored by John Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and United States Army Capabilities Center .
 Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC, 1 April 2015 . The center is based in Washington, D.C.
 A Study of the Second Lebanon War and Operation Cast Lead, edited by Lieutenant Colonel Scott C Farquhar, 5-44 .
 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine, Fort Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office .
 Interview of Ukrainian Colonel Victor Shydluh, Deputy Commander, Sector “M’s, Eastern Ukraine, 2014-2015 . He is the Deputy Commander of the Sector ‘M”, the Ukrainian Army’