 The future of global political power is a zero-sum contest, says CNN's John Sutter . U.S. is a heavily armed petroleum state, he says .
 competitor appears to be relenting as it looks to shrink its global military footprint and loses interest in maintaining alliances that hold you in check .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin understands global affairs. A zero-sum game may not be the best way to understand global affairs, but it is how Putin understands it .
 The West's loss is his gain, or at least, something to show the Russian people in order to discredit democracy . The West’s loss is the loss of his gain.
 Several experts who closely track Russian military and diplomatic maneuverings have offered their view of what Putin may try to pull in 2019 .
 The situation between Russia and Ukraine will worsen, they predict . They predict that the situation between the two countries will worsen .
 Some expect an imminent attack against Ukraine after a prolonged military tank buildup on the border .
 Others were more conservative in the estimates of when and how large new hostilities would flare . Others were also more conservative.
 Both Russian and Ukrainian officials have been forecasting an increase in hostility in 2019 . Both are preemptively blaming the other for the increase .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said Russia believes Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko was preparing some sort of “provocation” near the end of the month .
 Russian statements about the possibility of Ukrainian use of chemical weapons . They note in particular recent Russian statements on the possibility.
 The Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, Gen. Gen. Vladimir Putin, is the chief of the armed forces of the Ukraine .
 Viktor Muzhenko has said that the Russian military poses its greatest threat to Ukraine since 2014 . He has also said that Russia poses its biggest threat to the country .
 Muzhenko pointed to satellite imagery of a new military base near Kamensk-Shakhtinsky, close to the Ukrainian border . At a recent press conference, Muzchenko pointed to the new base .
 The photos show hundreds of T-64 and T-62 tanks, plus trucks and artillery . The photos are of hundreds of tanks and trucks .
 ISW concludes that the tank build-up heralds an increased likelihood of an offensive . ISW concluded that the Tank build- up heralds a more likely offensive .
 Kofman is unconvinced since neither the Russian military, nor the irregular “separatist’s” forces that they support, use T-62 and T-64 tanks . The Russian military uses T-60s, T-63s, and T
 The forces fighting in Ukraine are trained on more modern T-64BV and T-72B1 tanks . There is little overlap, he says, with little overlap .
 Experts also pointed to the possibility that Russian forces could launch a land grab operation from the illegally annexed peninsula .
 The Black Sea Fleet has its headquarters in the Black Sea. The Russians recently deployed the S-400 anti-aircraft radar and missile battery to the peninsula .
 The most important factor in the future of Crimea is the acute shortage of water . The situation is going to get much worse by 2040, according to experts .
 Crimea derives 86 percent of its water from the Dnieper-Crimea canal in Ukraine . The canal is located in Ukraine's Crimea.
 In 2014, Ukraine cut off water to the annexed peninsula, exacerbating the shortage . The government of Ukraine cut the water supply to the peninsula in 2014 .
 Russia has been building infrastructure to connect Crimea to Russia, such as a large bridge . There is no easy or cheap replacement for water coming from Ukraine .
 Former deputy assistant defense secretary Michael Carpenter says Dnieper Crimea canal could be Putin's prime target in Ukraine in 2019 .
Without this water, Crimea's agriculture sector can't survive, says senior director of Penn Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement .
 Experts were split on whether that represented ideal timing for such an assault or terrible timing . Poroshenko government in Kyiv could provide a justification for postponing the elections .
 Polish President Andrzej Duda has been pushing President Donald Trump for a U.S. military base in Poland . Duda is also pushing for the United States President Trump to be given the base .
 Putin will push hard for a countering base in Belarus, an ally of Russia, says Carpenter . Carpenter predicts that if Trump submits to that wish, Putin will try to counter that wish .
 Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko “has skillfully resisted until now,’ says Carpenter . It’s something that Belarusian president Alexander Lukahenko ‘has skillly resisted’ until now .
 Russia will back Republika Srpska’s secession from Bosnia, he says . If Kosovo and Serbia reach a deal on a land-swap and mutual diplomatic recognition, it could lead to renewed conflict .
 U.S. withdrawal will make Moscow “even more of a regional powerbroker,’ says Carpenter . It will also saddle the Kremlin with the cost of propping up the Assad regime, he says .
 The Russians could also initiate a limited military operation in Libya to lend a hand to Libyan Gen. Gen. Gaddafi .
 Khalifa Haftar, who has taken over a large part of the country, visits Moscow frequently . He has been in charge of the Russian government for more than a decade .
 Putin is poised to gain from the U.S. pullout from Afghanistan as well, Carpenter predicts . Meanwhile, Putin is set to gain the United States pullout as well .
 The Taliban will almost certainly gain in strength after the U.S. drawdown, he says . "The Taliban will probably gain instrength," he says.
 Russia will look to field new long-range missiles that would have been prohibited under the crumbling INF treaty . Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu said recently .
 He also projected that Russia would conduct no fewer than 4,000 exercises in 2019 . He also predicted that Russia will conduct no less than 3,000 exercise exercises in 2018 .
 The number of exercises Russia partakes in has been going up every year since 2008, says Aki Heikkinen, curator of site Russiamilitarywatch.com .
 Heikkinen says he's on the lookout for at least one involving the Strategic Missile Corps and one in the Southern Military District . The nearest one to Crimea and the Black Sea is the Southern military district .
 Aleksandr Dvornikov is “very capable and has rapidly upped combat capabilities with innovative training,’ he says .
 Russia will continue to invest and rapidly upgrade electronic and cyber weapons, he says . Many new systems are coming online, with many new systems coming online .
Commanders will emphasize new electronic warfare and counter electronic warfare training across the branches . Commanders will also focus on counter electronic Warfare training .
 Putin has lofty ambitions but lacks the discretionary budget of China nor the tech sector of the U.S. "There is a stark realization in Russia that it has to invest in developing advanced digital technologies," he says .
 President Putin stated that if Russia does not make a concerted effort in that field, the country “won’t even be able to jump on the last car of the fast-moving technological progress train,’ said Bendett .
 The Russian Ministry of Defense and the Academy of Science are working on an AI development roadmap . In March, they announced they would begin working on a roadmap to guide the future of AI in conflict and military affairs .
 Vladimir Putin will be able to achieve any of his aims will depend on the West’s willingness to exact economic and other penalties on Russia for his behavior .