 Discrimination along ethnic and linguistic lines, xenophobia and racial extremism. Discrimination along Ethnic and linguistic Lines, xenophobic and racial extremists .
 The study covers the period from the end of November 2013 to March 2014 . It deals with the situation with human rights and the rule of law that emerged in Ukraine as a result of a violent seizure of power and unconstitutional coup .
 As a factual basis, a careful monitoring of Ukrainian, Russian and some Western media reports was conducted, covering statements and announcements made by the “new government of Ukraine and their supporters, including those posted on the Internet .
 The basic international documents on human rights have been violated in Ukraine during the indicated period precede each section of this study .
 The list of the most flagrant violations of human rights and the rule of law committed in this country, by ultranationalist, neo-Nazi, and extremist forces . The Euromaidan protests are far from being exhaustive, says the list .
 The history of the twentieth century has given tragic lessons which would be irresponsible and also at times unlawful to ignore .
 Those who cynically, in pursuit of their own selfish interests and under the guise of good intentions and pseudo-democratic demagogy, are plunging a multimillion multi-ethnic Ukrainian population into extremism .
 The onslaught of racism, xenophobia, ethnic intolerance should be brought to a speedy end through the united efforts of the Ukrainian people and the international community . The Nazis and their Banderite sycophants should be removed from the world, says the writer .
 The alternative is fraught with so devastating consequences for peace, stability, and democratic development in Europe, that it is absolutely necessary to prevent further escalation of this situation, says the European Union .
 No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those imposed in conformity with the law . No restrictions are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, public order and public order .
 All persons are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protection of the law . All people are entitled to equal protection to the same rights as the law.
 No one shall be deprived of his life intentionally save in the execution of a sentence of a court following his conviction of a crime for which this penalty is provided by law. No one will be deprived.
 Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted in contravention of this article when it results from the use of force which is no more than absolutely necessary . In action lawfully taken for the purpose of quelling a riot or insurrection, says the judge .
 The first clashes between the police and demonstrators occurred in Kiev . The clashes were the first in Kiev.
Opponents tried to break into the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine building’s territory and block the passage for government vehicles .
 The police retaliated, using tear gas to stop the protestors’ aggression . The police also used tear gas on the protestors .
 Activists from several right-wing groups, including the Stepan Bandera All-Ukrainian Organization Trizub movement, the Socio­National Assembly/Patriot of Ukraine . The Ukrainian National Assembly party, the Bilyi Molot group, as well as football
Radical nationalist activists were further mobilized to participate in the Euromaidan rebellion . Under this brand, radical nationalist activists participated in violent confrontations.
 Right-wing activists primarily associated with Pravyi Sektor organized trainings on tactics for violent confrontation with law enforcement officials . The activists used available tools as melee weapons .
 During a mass demonstration in Kiev, activists of radical nationalist groups, joined by football hooligans, some radical activists in AUU Svoboda, carried out a series of illegal actions .
Activists of right-wing groups attempted to vandalize the monument to Lenin on Shevchenko Boulevard . Members of AUU Svoboda, including members of the Special Forces, clashed with Special Forces .
 extremists demolished and destroyed the monument to Lenin on Shevchenko Boulevard in Kiev .
 AUU Svoboda, which is represented in the Parliament, claimed responsibility for the vandalism .
 Opponents of the current government put up a fierce resistance to law enforcement officers who were trying to comply with the decision of the Shevchenko district court of Kiev .
 Euromaidan supporters barricaded themselves inside the Kiev state administration building . They deliberately provoked the police to use force by throwing stones from the windows at law enforcement and pouring water over them using fire hoses .
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine was forced to withdraw the Special Forces from the captured building .
 Euromaidan protestors set up barricades around the perimeter of Maidan and Khreschatyk Boulevard . They announced the resumption of picketing the government quarter .
 Militants engaged in violent clashes with security forces on Grushevski St. Pravyi Sektor . The clashes took place in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Brody State Administration in Lviv Oblast was violently taken over by AUU Svoboda forces . AUU's forces took over the state administration .
 AUU Svoboda forces violently took over Lviv, Ternopil and Rivne Regional State Administrations . The forces were violently taken over by AU U.S. forces .
 In the Ukraine regions, the formation of the so-called 'People's Self-Defense groups' began under the supervision of AUU Svoboda .
 Preparations began for carrying out the rebellion and seizure of power in Kiev . There is also a stockpile of ammunition for rioters on Maidan .
 Forcible takeovers of the regional administration buildings in Sumy, Zhytomyr, Poltava, Zaporozhye, Dnepropetrovsk, Uzhgorod were attempted . Forcible takesovers were attempted.
 Activists of the radical movement Obschee Delo attempted to seize Ministry of Energy and Coal Industry of Ukraine premises .
 Activists of the radical movement Obshee Delo seized the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine .
 The opponents of the current government seized the buildings of regional administrations in all areas of Western Ukraine, except for the Transcarpathian region . The current government took the buildings in all parts of the country .
 One was forcibly locked in the basement, hit by a 'Molotov cocktail' and died of suffocation and burns .
 The other's head was smashed in and he was thrown down a flight of stairs . The other’s head was also smashed in .
 Females who were present in the building were stripped half-naked, their backs were painted with symbols and slogans, and then they were kicked out into the street .
 Supporters of Euromaidan attempted to capture the Interior Ministry and Security Service of Ukraine buildings in Ternopil and IvanoFrankivsk regions . Supporters tried to capture buildings in order to appropriate weapons .
 Large-scale street riots in Kiev resumed, which resulted in the killing of 77 people . More than a thousand people were injured in the violence .
 A group of radicals seized the building of the Lviv regional state administration overnight .
 Riots were staged in the Lviv region Ministry of Internal Affairs building . Riots also took place in Lviv oblast District Attorney’s Office, Lviv Region Office of Security Services .
After riots at MIA and USBU buildings, law enforcement officers were stripped of their epaulets, disrobed of their uniforms . All of which was thrown into a bonfire that was started near the building’s entrance .
 Buildings of Military Unit N9 4114 of Interior Troops of Ukraine in Lviv were burned down . The buildings were destroyed .
 As a result, the officers and soldiers of the unit completely lost their uniforms, ammunition, weapons, and place to sleep .
 The so-called 'People’s Self-Defense' activists established roadblocks at the state and regional level, as well as at entrances to the major cities of Western Ukraine .
 He was handcuffed to the local Euromaidan stage and asked to sign a 'voluntary' resignation . He had been handcuffed to a stage and was handcuffed.
 He was thrown on his knees, which caused him to smash his forehead on the ground . After refusing, he was thrown onto his knees and smashed his forehead .
 Five liters of water were poured on him, and then he was cuffed to the stage again . He was then cuffed again .
 Euromaidan activists sent a group of thugs to his house to intimidate his family members . When that did not work, the activists took the governor away in an unknown direction .
 Several buses with passengers were returning to Crimea from protests against European integration at St. St. Petersburg .
 flags of the UPA, the Udar party and AUU Svoboda were flying at Michael’s Square .
 The people, both men and women, were dragged out of the buses through a 'corridor' of militants who beat them with bats and entrenching shovels .
 The passengers were knocked down in a heap on the roadside, doused with gasoline, and threatened to be set on fire . Then the passengers were thrown down in the heap on a roadside .
 Many Crimeans were forced to take off their shoes for the needs of Maidan soldiers . They were driven around the buses like cattle and forced to pick up the broken glass .
 People’s Self-Defense activists fired at a bus with Belarusian tourists who were traveling to Western Ukraine .
Bus driver, a Russian citizen, was hospitalized with a gunshot wound . The bus driver was hospitalized in Russia with a wound .
 A representative of the so-called 'Maidan Self-Defense' V Parasyuk said he and the rest of the Self­Defense members were not satisfied with a document that agreed on gradual political reforms .
Self-Defense was going to storm the Presidential Administration and the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine . He demanded the immediate resignation of President Viktor Yanukovych .
 He called the agreement ‘another attempt to pull the wool over the people’s eyes’ and refused to implement it . He called it a ‘tempting attempt to pulled the wool’
 Euromaidan supporters in 18 Ukrainian cities demolished monuments to Lenin . 18 cities destroyed monuments to the Russian leader .
 The mayor was looking for documents and the mayor himself, who managed to escape .
 A monument to a Soviet soldier was removed in the city of Stri in the Lviv oblast .
 Euromaidan activists succeed in capturing the government district, which was abandoned by police officers . They issued a number of new demands, including the resignation of President Yanukovych .
 O Turchynov was elected the new Speaker of the Ukrainian parliament . He is the new speaker of the Ukraine's parliament .
 Udar party leader V Klichko appealed not to lynch Shufrich . Only the intervention of the Udar leader, who appealed to him, saved him .
Eyewitnesses say he had needles pushed under fingernails, his right lung pierced, three ribs, nose, and facial bones broken .
 R Vasilko was taken to hospital, where the threats continued . He was treated for severe torture .
 Vasilko had to flee Ukraine with the help of his relatives . Eventually, he had to leave Ukraine with his relatives.
 The regional and city offices in Volyn and Lutsk and many other party premises were taken over by illegal armed groups . Many other party offices in the city were also taken over.
 Local nationalists forced Ukrainian Interior Ministry to 'get on knees and beg for forgiveness' for participating in actions against Euromaidan in Kiev .
 The decision was made in the Verkhovna Rada to appoint Speaker O Turchynov as interim President of Ukraine .
 Viktor Yanukovych was forced to leave the country because of threats to his life and the lives of his family . He said he was still the legitimate head of the Ukrainian state, elected by the free will of its citizens .
Local activists tied the regional administration head of customs S Harchenko to a pole in front of administration building . The incident occurred in Uzhgorod, Transcarpathian region .
 The activists threatened him with violence, and he was forced to resign . He was forced by the activists to resign after they threatened him .
 Volyn region district attorney staff turned to acting Prosecutor General of Ukraine with a request for protection . Pravyi Sekyor militants forced them to resign from their posts, and in the case of disagreement, they were threatened with firearms .
 The Resolution was provided for the early termination of office and dismissal, due to 'breach of oath' of five Constitutional Court judges .
Deputies of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine held a political amnesty on two occasions . 28 people were jailed on the suspicion of committing a crime or who had already been found guilty of committing one .
 It is indicative that not all the amnestied individuals, who were presented to the public as 'political prisoners' were involved in any political action . It's indicative that all the people who were present as political prisoners were involved.
 Sergey and Dmitry Pavlychenko were criminated for murdering a judge and subsequently convicted . For example, they were convicted of murdering the judge .
Igor Gannenko was leader of neo-Nazi gang, which committed crimes motivated by ethnic, racial, and religious hatred, including anti-Semitism . Another amnestied was Igor GANNenko, the leader of a neo-Nazis gang .
 Some amnestied radical nationalists rushed to take on the romantic aura of 'martyrdom' Some radical nationalists are now taking on the political life of the country .
 Vindicated by their imprisonment, they manipulated young adults and teenagers, casting themselves and those of their kind as heroes . Vindication by their incarceration, they cast themselves as heroes.
 This primarily regards the group of leaders of the 'Patriot of Ukraine' movement . This primarily relates to the group's leaders of the Patriot of Ukraine .
 Between 2006 and 2011 this group was the most serious neo-Nazi organization in Ukraine . The group was most serious group in Ukraine.
 Oleg Odnorozhenko accused of organizing beatings of political opponents by the 'Patriot of Ukraine' militants . He was accused of participating in these beatings .
 The most famous of the amnestied 'Patriot of Ukraine' activists were the so-called 'Vasilkovsky terrorists' Igor Moseichuk, Sergei Bevz, and Vladimir Shpara .
 They were radical nationalists from Vasylkov, the Kiev region . They were convicted of preparing a terrorist act in January 2014 .
Amnestied leaders became involved in the political life of Ukraine under the Pravyi Sektor banner . Just a few days after their release, the amnesties were released .
 leaders of right-wing groups in Ukraine issued a statement calling for the 'punishment' of Crimeans for their openly expressed civil position .
 Igor Moseychuk was convicted for terrorism and amnestied by the new government . He publicly proposed to arrange 'trains of friendship' consisting of right-wing nationalist militants to punish inhabitants of the peninsula .
 He was taken out to the crowd and forced to kneel and ask for forgiveness . He was then taken out of the crowd to the ground and taken to the floor .
 As a result of the massive attack, civilians who voluntarily defended the administrative building were killed .
 A video surfaced on the Internet showing the coordinator of the Pravyi Sektor in Western Ukraine . A Muzychko publicly beat and humiliated employee of Rivne prosecutor’s office A Targoniya at his workplace .
 Crimean self-defense forces managed to prevent a major terrorist attack on the peninsula . Crimea's self-defence forces were able to stop a terrorist attack .
 Regional investigating authorities of Kherson still have not given any legal assessment to the facts .
 The illegal armed groups seized the Dovzhenko Film Studio administrative building . The building is located in the city's central square .
The aggressors demanded access to the shop that housed weapons and pyrotechnics . The aggressors also demanded access.
 Crimean people ordered not to participate in peaceful demonstrations opposing the Maidan movement . The Crimean people were ordered under the threat of physical violence, not to take part in demonstrations .
 Crimean activists, including Tatar religious figures, and their relatives, received threatening messages on their phones . The messages were sent to relatives and children .
 Nationalist groups organized pickets outside the Russian Consulate General in Lviv . The pickets were organized by nationalist groups .
 In the evening, protesters attempted to block the main vehicle entrance gate using their personal vehicles .
 Pravyi Sektor gunmen carried out a series of arson attacks on nonresidential premises and private vehicles .
 The Ukranian Parliamaent is ready to introduce a bill that calls for a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years for Ukrainian citizens who apply for a second citizenship . It was reported that the Ukranians are ready to introduced a bill .
 The document was submitted to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine in the beginning of February 2014 by deputies from the Batkivshchyna faction .
 The bill's authors still do not consider it necessary to withdraw the bill . The bill’s authors still don't consider it needed to withdraw it .
 A recording of a telephone conversation between the Estonian Foreign Minister U Paet and EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton surfaced on the Internet .
 Chief Maidan doctor O Bogomolets referred to information about snipers who had shot people during the protests .
 All evidence points to the fact that both protesters and law enforcement officers were killed by the same snipers .
 The snipers were not hired by Yanukovych, but by someone from the new coalition, he said . He said that the new Coalition is unwilling to investigate the exact circumstances of the incident .
Paet noted that in Ukraine, there is very strong pressure on members of parliament . Paet also noted that there is also strong pressure.
 He said that journalists saw armed men beat a deputy in broad daylight in front of the Verkhovna Rada . He said the incident happened in broad broad daylight .
 Euromaidan supporters in Sevastopol carried out an assault at a collection point for humanitarian aid .
 Pavel Gubarev had been detained the same day by the Security Service of Ukraine . He was being tortured, according to reports on the Ukrainian forum antifashist. com .
 P Gubarev is being held in SBU prison in Kiev . He was severely beaten several times and eventually fell into a coma .
 Prison physicians didn't have enough medical opportunities to attend to P Gubarev in jail . The Security Service did not want to make the incident public .
 Vremya Novosti had information that P Gubarev had been beaten but also tortured in order to force him to confess that he was on a mission .
 Self-Defense Forces in Simferopol, Crimea, detained two nationalradicals, natives of Rivne, who had been convicted .
 Ukrainian activists of right-wing organizations located in the Crimea shouted extremist slogans during the celebration of the 200th anniversary of Taras Shevchenko .
 In Kharkov, about 10 radical nationalists attacked the activists . The activists were returning from a rally against the current Kiev authorities .
 As a result, several activists were injured, and one was subsequently hospitalized . One of them was later hospitalized .
 E Slonevsky, a local businessman, was gunned down at a cafe in Kharkov in March .
 Crimea peninsula residents’ passports by provocateurs were documented . Cases of destruction of Crimea peninsula’s passports were documented.
 The said provocateurs visited houses under the guise of Crimean law enforcement officials and representatives of electoral commissions . Once having received their passports, they tore them, making them invalid .
 A Pravyi Sektor activist was neutralized and sent to the hospital . He was trying to break through the Crimean Self-Defense forces checkpoint .
 A resident of Ivano-Frankivsk who arrived in Sevastopol brought down fire on Ephraim St. St. The fire broke out in the early hours of the morning .
After his arrest, he said that in Kiev, he acquired the weapons and was assigned a task to stage a provocation . He said that he was assigned to stage the provocation after his arrest .
 Thirty masked men with wooden sticks entered the Sviatoshynskyi district prosecutor’s office in Kiev .
 Senior prosecutor and family members threatened to inflict physical harm on senior prosecutor and his family members . They demanded that he write a letter of resignation from the prosecutor .
 peaceful demonstrators who took to the streets to express their opposition to the new Ukrainian authorities were attacked by non-lethal weapons and bats . Right-wing militant groups began to arrive to Donetsk the night before from other regions of Ukraine .
 About 20 armed men in masks and camouflage uniforms broke into the office of UkrBusinessBank in Kiev . They disarmed the guards, and tried to enter the cash vault .
 At the police station they called themselves 'soldiers of Narnia' They claimed to be part of the Maidan Self-Defense group .
Radical nationalists stormed the prosecutors’ office in the Sviatoshynskyi district of Kiev . A detachment of the radical nationalists in camouflage uniforms and flak jackets.
 All prosecutors were forced out of the office rooms into the corridor . Seven insurgents attacked one of the prosecutors, Valentine Bryantsev, beating him with bats .
 The attackers demanded to close a pending Sviatoshynskyi District Court criminal case against one of their accomplices .
 A group of young men in masks with Pravyi Sektor armbands and machine guns attacked three local residents in Kiev .
 About ten individuals shot off automatic rifle fire into the air . One tenant hit one of the tenants on the head with a metal bar .
 Professor N Kulik demanded that the rector of the university, Professor N. Kulik, write a letter of resignation . They demanded that he write a resignation letter of resigning .
 The scientist was saved from punishment only by the police who rushed to the scene .
 N Naumenko refused to give Pravyi Sektor militants files with refugee cases . He was beaten and stabbed in the face .
 According to media reports, numerous armed groups generated by the Ukrainian Euromaidan movement were financially poor after the coup and resorted to robbery and racketeering .
 The new leadership of the MIA of Ukraine turns a blind eye on this fact . The new leadership of the new MIA turns a Blind eye on the fact .
 Praviy Sektor interrupted work of the Sberbank-Ukraine branch office in Vinnitsa . The bank's branch office is located in the city of Vinnita .
About ten militants barricaded the door of the bank, stacked tires in front of it . Neither customers nor employees were allowed to enter .
 In the same way, they promised to starve out the other offices of Russian banks .
Unconfirmed reports. One such sticker costs from 10 to 25 thousand dollars .
 A group of unidentified men demanded owners of a restaurant in the Podgortsi, Kiev region, to transfer their business to the property of the people .
 The men called themselves members of the Maidan Self-Defense movement . They threatened to destroy the property using 'Molotov cocktails' They demanded the owners transfer business ownership over to the people .
 At the Kiev Borispol airport, over 30 Sevastopol sailors returning from long voyage became victims of looting and robbery committed by unknown persons .
 The airport management chose not to advertise this fact . Turning to the police resulted in no action .
 The building of Bessarabian market in Kiev was set ablaze on March 14, 2014 .
 Eyewitnesses claim that a few dozen Maidan Self-Defense militants in camouflage uniforms with batons exited the building after the fire .
 Pravyi Sektor militants staged a massacre in Kharkov, during which two people were killed and four wounded .
 Journalists contend that the militants were led by Andrew Beletskyi, one of Pravyi Sektor's leaders .
 The voiced assumption was that he, along with other rebel leaders, was released by the police . The voiced assumptions were that he was released.
 Representatives of law enforcement agencies arrived at an apartment in the Dnieper district of Kiev to detent the landlord for illegal possession of drugs .
 Another group of people, calling themselves members of the Maidan Self-Defense, arrived on the scene . However, almost immediately another group, calling itself members of Maidan self-defense, arrived .
 Police officers tied and immobilized police officers and the prosecutor, took their identification cards from them . They told the officers that their IDs would be passed on to the Assistant Minister of the Interior .
 Former Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk called on the 'powers in Kiev' to give their attention to the fact that looting has already begun in Ukraine . Kravuk's own house is being looted, too, as is his own house .
 Ukraine's first president says he is forced to shoot to protect himself . Ukraine's president says authorities promise to restore order, but he is "forced to shoot"
 Russia announced an international search for the leader of the ultranationalist Pravyi Sektor organization D Yarosh . The group threatened to cut off the supply of Russian gas to the EU through Ukraine’s territory .
 D Yarosh also urged the Ukrainian government to order the formation of guerrilla and sabotage groups .
 Twenty unidentified Euromaidan activists armed with Kalashnikov machine guns and pistols seized the residential house belonging to Ukrkomplekt Plus company, in Kobtsy village .
 The house was under protection of the State Security Service of the Vasilkovskaja police department . The house is under protection from the State security Service of Vasilovskaja Police .
SBU staff, and following them, the task force of Vasilkovskaja police department, arrived on call . The SBU staff and following the police department arrived on calls .
 SBU and police forces consume spirits stolen from the house . They also consume spirits from the property .
 In the morning, law enforcement officers left without taking any measures, without any measures .
 The written appeal from the owners of the home to the Vasilkovskaja police department brought no response . The police department has no response.
 As the young people remained silent in response, the extremists have beaten them severely .
 Members of Pravyi Sektor refused to surrender their weapons and join the National Guard of Ukraine . Members of the National Guards of Ukraine have been detained by the Ukrainian government .
 There are about 10,000 Pravyi Sektor members in Ukraine, according to the organization's leader D Yarosh .
 A Crimean self-defender and a Ukrainian soldier were shot dead in Simferopol, Ukraine .
Two more people, a Crimean self-defender and a Ukrainian soldier, were wounded . Two more people were wounded.
 The Ministry of Defense of Ukraine passed the order to the Armed Forces of Ukraine stationed in the Crimea . The order allows the use of weapons .
 30 alleged ultra-right activists who planned provocation during Crimea people referendum were arrested in Sevastopol and deported .
 The night after the referendum, a signal from the Euromaidan leaders calling for the retreat from the peninsula was intercepted, says S Tutuev . The signal was intercepted by the leaders.
 Posing as an anti-corruption committee staff, they tried to seize folders with archive documents . They tried to seized folders with archives .
 A house belonging to the leader of the movement Ukrainskyi Vybor V Medvedchuk was burned down .
 Russian citizens who submitted Russian passports were forced to hand over their money and jewelry .
 Attempts by the victims to submit a report to the local police were in vain .
Radical nationalists from the Pravyi Sektor extremist movement created a party under the same name on the basis of the Ukrainian National Assembly political party . The party was created under the name of the Ukraine National Assembly party .
 The members of the party included other nationalist groups who support the Pravyi Sektor movement . The party includes members of a nationalist group that supports the movement .
 Its elected leader D Yarosh was nominated as a candidate for the presidential elections in Ukraine .
 Property and funds of 23 children’s health camps handed over to Pravyi Sektor leader D Yarosh .
 The Pravyi Sektor youth wing consists of juvenile football ultras and supporters of Ukrainian nationalism . The youth wing is based in Ukraine and is called the Pravy Sektor.
Militants from the nationalist youth wing will teach the basics of military affairs, subversive struggle, unarmed combat, and mine blasting in the children's health camps .
 National Guard recruitment is being carried out by the territorial command recruitment services of the National Guard . National Guard is being used to recruit young men and women .
Members of the so-called '11th self-defense sotnya' group made an attempt to seize a building that houses the Russian Center of Science and Culture and the representative office of Rossotrudnichestvo .
 All attempts of the head of the representative office and his deputy to make the self-defense forces to listen to reason failed .
 The attackers hijacked a car which belonged to Rossotrudnichestvo . The attackers took keys from the guards and hijacked the car .
 Security Service of Ukraine to attract private military company Greystone Limited to work on suppression of dissent in the Russian-speaking eastern regions of the country .
 Ukrainian law prohibits foreign citizens to take part in work of Ukrainian private security companies . It is significant that the practice of attracting foreign private military companies violates the Ukrainian law .
 These detachments were impeding the pre-election work of party members in the current presidential campaign . The detachments are impeding party members' work in the campaign .
 Activists of the social movement 'Avtodozor' picketed the offices of banks with Russian stock . They want the closing and nationalization of all their branch offices in Ukraine .
 The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine adopted the draft law on restoring confidence in the judicial system of Ukraine . It implies the introduction of lustration of the judiciary in the country .
 Another draft law, which deals with the lustration of persons holding public positions, was proposed to the Parliament on March 26, 2014 .
 Lustration requirements were announced in February during the Maidan protests .
 Member of the European Parliament Jacek Saryusz-Wolski announced from the rostrum of the Maidan that Russia was allegedly interfering with the European choice of Ukrainian people .
 MEP urges Ukrainian government to stop the 'provocations' and release the arrested protesters from prisons . Also urges the government to release protesters from prison and stop using force against the demonstrators .
 Chairman of European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs Elmar Brok asked the sovereign authorities of Ukraine to change their decision and release Yulia Tymoshenko .
 The Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs at the U.S. Department of State Victoria Nuland visited the Maidan . The Maidan is a city of Maidan.
 V Nuland participated in the selection of the current Ukrainian government, according to testimonies . This is proven by a recording of her telephone conversation with the United States ambassador in Kiev Geoffrey Payette .
 Euromaidan was directed by the U.S. State Department through government-controlled NGOs and private foundations, according to analysts .
 The site of Ron Paul Institute for Peace and Prosperity published a study of the American political scientist Steve Wiseman .
 According to him, the planning of events in Ukraine started in advance . He says he was planning events in Kiev in the past .
 A group of several dozen Ukrainian opposition organizations was created . They received funds from the Soros Foundation and the Pact Inc organization, working for the United States Agency for International Development .
 Steve Wiseman cites a number of examples of how protests against the government of Viktor Yanukovych were held, using American technologies and new developments in propaganda and mass communications .
 The main coordinators in the U.S. State Department for the organization of the coup in Kiev were the Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Victoria Nuland and the United States ambassador in Kiev .
 The study of Steve Wiseman contains information referring to specific financial indicators . The study contains information about financial indicators such as financial indicators.
Under the patronage of Jeffrey Payette, this channel was to receive about 30,000 USD from the Soros Foundation and about 95,000 dollars from the Netherlands Embassy in Kiev .
 The newly created channel began to broadcast one day after the President of Ukraine suspended the signing of the Association Agreement with the EU on November 21, 2013 until analysis of its economic consegnences is finalized .
 Two U.S. senators, Democrat Chris Murphy and Republican John McCain, made speeches at the 'Euromaidan' in Kiev .
 Both U.S. politicians stated that the United States supported the desire of the participants of Euromaidan to join Europe .
 A delegation of the Lithuanian Seimas, headed by the Vice­Speaker Petras Austrevicius, spoke from the rostrum of the Euromaidan in Kiev .
 Earlier, in his speech at the Maidan on February 22, 2014, he also condemned the 'illegitimate' use of force by the government of Ukraine .
Elmar Brok openly sided with the opposition, calling on President Viktor Yanukovych to fulfill the demands of the opposition . The meeting was held at the Opera Hotel .
 The European Union gave up its obligations as a guarantor of the execution of the agreement between the President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych and the opposition leaders, signed on February 21, 2014, under the mediation of foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland .
 The EU supported and accepted the illegitimate rise of the opposition to power in Kiev, and directly contributed to the attack against the constitutional order in Ukraine .
 The United States announced the removal of the legitimately elected President of Ukraine as a 'fait accompli' Shortly after the coup in Kiev, the United States recognized the self-proclaimed authorities .
 John Kerry arrived in Kiev on March 4, 2014, to pay his respects and show his support . The Secretary of State was in Kiev to show support for the President .
 The political agreement on the EU-Ukraine Association was signed as part of the European Council meeting . The agreement is part of a political agreement.
On behalf of Ukraine, the document was signed by Arseniy Yatsenyuk, appointed as the Prime Minister .
 The EU recognized de jure the current illegitimate government of Ukraine and officially confirmed their willingness to work with it . Under the Constitution of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych is still the official head of the state .
 Residents of Kiev reported that the office building in the city center was regularly approached by cars with diplomatic plates and people unloaded massive bags and shrouded objects . The office building houses one of the headquarters of the 'Pravyi Sektor'
 Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted in contravention of this article when it results from the use of force, which is no more than absolutely necessary .
 No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or punishment . No one will be subject to torture, no one will have to be tortured or to degrading treatment .
 The Euromaidan is a project on human rights violations in Ukraine . The project is being carried out by the NGO Fund to research problems of democracy .
 This group was characterized by a high level of provisions with firearms and cold arms, various special gear and radio communication equipment, personal protective equipment . The group also had a high-level of provisions.
 Witnesses also reported the high skills of protesters who knew how to use irritant poisonous substances, including gases of unknown origin, and smoke bombs .
 The respirators and equipment of law enforcement officers did not prove to be of much help against these respirators . The respirator and equipment was not much help.
 According to witnesses, this group was the only one constantly present and most actively operating at the Euromaidan .
 All interviewed witnesses point out the good equipment and training of the militants . All interviewed witness points out good equipment.
 At the beginning of these events, homemade protective equipment was used — sports and construction equipment, bicycle helmets, arm and shin guards were used . It is noted that at the start of the events, home-made protective gear was used .
 Witnesses noted the characteristics of the militants’ homemade weapons . They were upgraded to increase their striking effect by means of welding iron spikes onto them .
 Widely used were traumatic weapons, air rifles with optical sights, converted pistols, and converted pistols . Widely use was traumatic weapons and air rifles.
 Special chemical components were added, which by their properties were almost like napalm .
 We observed some people who were walking and showing them some signals . They were coordinating things, we observed .
 Violations of the right for freedom of thought and belief, including political beliefs, are violations of right to express them . The U.S. Supreme Court has issued a new ruling on the right to free speech .
 This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers . This right also includes freedom to have opinions and receive information without interference .
 In Kiev, the ultra-radical Pravyi Sektor activists prevented leftist activists to enter the 'Euromaidan' with their slogans . They snatching posters from their hands and forcing them to leave.
 About 30 Pravyi Sektor activists attacked a women’s rights campaign in Kiev . They used tear gas canisters to attack the campaign .
 In Kiev, a few dozen right-wing radicals attacked the Levin brothers . They were handing out campaign materials on Khreshchatyk Street .
 Denis Levin suffered from the use of tear gas . Levin's ribs were broken, he got a broken nose and a dissected cheekbone .
 KVPU’s property was destroyed; the attackers slashed the tent, broke the sound-amplifying equipment and stole the generator . In addition, the attackers cut the tent and cut the generator.
 Activists of All-Ukrainian Union Svoboda expelled journalist Viktor Gatsenko from the captured building of Kiev Administration . They used physical force and threatened him with death because of his political views .
 There were identified, among those who had expelled the journalist, as the deputy head of the Kiev branch of AUU Svoboda, Ruslan Andreiko, and one of the leaders of the party's student organization, Artem Ruban .
 Masked men with bats and guns attacked Vyacheslav Veremiy and his colleague Alexey Lymarenko as they were returning home by taxi .
 A Lymarenko had his face disfigured and Veremiy was wounded to the chest . He soon died from the injury .
 The Union of Journalists announced that such media worker rights violations during the 'revolutionary events' were unprecedented . The union of Journalists said the violations were unprecedented.
 The presence of a press certificate or the inscription 'press' on the clothing did not save reporters from attacks and destruction of their professional equipment .
 He was presented with threats of dismissal under the 'gross violation of labor discipline' article . He was then forced to do it, presented with threatened dismissal .
 P Prudyakov forced to resign from the university at extraordinary meeting of the department . The scientist is one of the world's leading experts in his field .
 Ukrainian News Agency GolosUA asked the existing power structures of Ukraine to prevent the possible seizure of the agency office and to protect journalists from attacks by extremist organizations .
 Ukrainian News Agency GolosUA office was captured by Pravyi Sektor militants in March 2014 .
 Most of the staff were forced to go on leave with no pay, the remaining staff members moved to another place . The location of these premises is kept secret .
 The news agency was accused by the ultra-nationalists of 'misrepresentation of the people’s revolution'
 V Syumar was appointed deputy secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine . Syumar is a Ukrainian television anchorperson . He was appointed Deputy Secretary of the NSC.
 She immediately initiated her activities in her new position by putting crass pressure on Ukraine’s state television channels . She immediately started her activities.
 UTR was informed of the necessity of switching to a 'counterpropaganda' mode in the form of an ultimatum .
 UTR was reoriented towards English language broadcasts involving anti-Russian speakers . As a result, UTR has been reorientated towards Englishlanguage broadcasts .
 similar processes are characteristic to the editorship of Ukraine’s national radio . Similar processes are similar to that of Ukraine's national radio station .
 radicals seized reporter S Rulev of the Navigator Information Agency . He had come to the square to shoot footage of an anti-war demonstration . He was dragged into a tent set up opposite the Trade Unions House .
 The journalist was severely beaten and his documents, telephone, and camera were taken . His documents, phone, camera, and phone were taken.
 The reason for the assault was that S Rulev had prepared reportage on Berkut employees . The reason was that the company had prepared the reportage .
 Pavel Gubarev was elected people’s governor of the Donetsk region at a popular assembly on 1 March 2014 . He stood for not recognizing the new authorities in Kiev that had come to power as a result of the coup d’état .
 He had been campaigning for the federalization of Ukraine and recognition of Russian as an official state language . He had campaigned for the state of Ukraine to become an official language .
 The beating occurred in the office of V Guslavsky, the chief of the General Directorate of the Internal Affairs of Ukraine in the Lugansk Region .
 Klinchaev was forbidden to participate in pro-Russian demonstrations or to express his opinions and position . Threatened with reprisals, he was banned from taking part in demonstrations .
 Klinchaev was arrested by Ukrainian Security Service forces and sent to Kiev . The same day, he was arrested.
 Russian television channels Vesti, Russia 24, Channel One, RTR Planet, and NTV World by sevenm. The National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council of Ukraine was taken over by the new authorities .
 A court in Kiev placed the former head of the Kharkov Regional State Administration, M Dobkin, under house arrest .
 M Dobkin resigned in February 2014 to take part in the May 25th presidential elections . In late February 2014 M Dobkins resigned in order to be in charge of the election .
 As the region’s governor, he had harshly criticized Euromaidan supporters . He had been criticized for the region's support for the country .
 Interset had cut off the NTV and RTR channels, and from Kharkov, where the Channel One, Russia, and NTV channels were disabled . Similar complaints were received from the city of Gorlovka in the Donetsk region, where NTV was cut off .
 A Kiev court placed the Mayor of Kharkov, G Kernes, under house arrest . A court placed him on house arrest.
 He had repeatedly expressed his disagreement with the political events taking place in Ukraine . He had previously expressed his disagreements with the events in the country .
 The editorship does not rule out the total cessation of its work in relation to the threat of seizure of its Kiev office .
 For many years, the paper has published materials critical of politicians who currently find themselves in power .
 The Ukraine Press, the largest printing office in Kiev, announced that it would review its contract with the editorship of «2000» unilaterally .
 The rates were artificially inflated to several times higher than market rates . Those that had been negotiated in the previous contract were also inflated .
 The fighters from the so-called Maidan Self-Defense Force blockaded the building of the Ukrainian television channel. They demanded its management be replaced because of the channel’s information policy .
 Threats continued to be made against the television channel’s management, its journalists, and its anchorpersons .
 Pressure on Inter’s leadership increased after arrest of its primary shareholder, D Firtash . Inter's leadership increased especially after arrest.
 A Davidchenko, one of the leaders of the protest movement in Odessa and the leader of People's Alternative, was detained .
 Unidentified people in black uniforms lacking any insignia grabbed the social activist . They threw him into an automobile with transit numbers and drove off with him .
 A Davidchenko’s comrades think that SBU employees carried out the operation and that the leader of People's Alternative was taken to Kiev . The group think thatSBU employees carry out the attack .
 Panteleymonov, later commenting on the incident on air, stated that the deputies had a 'long and officious conversation' with him .
 MPs beat O Panteleymonov on the face and head. Footage posted on the Internet bear witness to the fact that the MPs beat him .
 O Panteleymonov called NTU a 'moskal' and constantly reminded him that NTU was 'disseminating lies' about Maidan .
 Alexey Khudyakov, a journalist from the online publication Segodnya.ru, was abducted .
 He had been in Donetsk since February 28th carrying out the work assigned to him by the editors .
 While on his trip, he prepared and published five articles and news items for them that were critical of the radical pro­Nazi groups and the new government in Kiev .
 A tinted van pulled up next to A Khudyakov and without any explanation people in masks jumped out and then shoved him into the car . The van had no explanation for the incident .
 One of the kidnappers was an SBU employee, but he refused to produce any identification . The kidnappers were not identified .
 Security Service of Ukraine forced him to read an unknown text in Ukrainian into a video camera . He was forced to sign documents stating he was prepared to work for the security service of Ukraine .
 The malefactors threatened violence to him and his relatives should the fact of his abduction be made known . He was abducted by a group of men and his family members .
 Ukrainian SIM cards and phone memory cards were confiscated . The photo and video materials and telephone book in his phone were destroyed .
 The journalist was driven to a border post on the border with Russia and handed over to the border guards to be deported .
 A Buzoladze, S Yeliseyeva, S Zavidova, and M Isakova were detained in Donetsk . The journalists are from the Russia-1 TV channel.
 The Russians’ documents were seized and taken to the checkpoint, where they were held for several hours without explanation . They were expelled from Ukrainian territory .
 The so-called Maidan Self-Defense Force demanded that the director general of the regional television channel, M Aksenova, write a resignation letter, threatening physical violence .
Lyashko had organized a hunt for members of the Lugansk Guard and was persecuting activists and members of their families . Lyashko, a former member of the Guard, had organized the hunt for the Guard .
 Euromaidan activists besieged the Office of the Public Prosecutor in Odessa . They carried on a conversation in raised voices with the regional prosecutor .
 The main demand of the activists was to 'deal toughly' and 'take measures' in relation to the camp and leaders of the social movement Kulikovo Pole . The movement advocates the recognition of Russian as a state language .
 The Security Service of Ukraine detained one of the leaders of the protest movement . M Chumachenko was detained under suspicion of violating the territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 The Directorate of the Security Service of Ukraine in the Transcarpathian region opened criminal proceedings for  infringement upon the territorial integrity and inviolability of Ukraine .
 Putin, to recognize and create a republic called Transcarpathian Ruthenia, served as the basis for this . The republic was created by Putin to recognize, create and create the republic .
 Euromaidan fighters attacked the Lugansk Guard activists’ tent in Lugansk city . Eurom Maidan fighters attack the Lugans' tent in the city .
 The opponents of the new Kiev government were beaten with bats and their tents were slashed and torn down . The opponents were attacked with bats, their tents and their tents were slashed .
 Some of the victims from among the tent camp activists were hospitalized with significant head and limb injuries . Some of them were hospitalized in hospital with serious head injuries .
 It is indicative that police patrols located near the scene of the incident preferred not to interfere with the incident . It's indicative that the police patrols near the incident would not interfere .
 Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by law .
 Any discrimination based on belonging to a national minority shall be prohibited . In this respect, any discrimination based upon belonging to the national minority is prohibited .
 An inverted Satanic cross was painted on the memorial plaque in indelible black spray .
 demonstration commemorated the 105th anniversary of the birth of Stepan Bandera . Stepan was an ideologue and founder of Ukrainian ultranationalism, and a collaborator with the German Nazis .
 The torchlight procession was led by the Svoboda party . Around 10,000 participants took part .
 In Kiev extremists attacked H Wertheimer, a 26-year-old Israeli citizen who is a teacher in the Rosenberg synagogue .
 Dov Ber Glickman, 33, was beaten up after leaving a synagogue . He was a Russian citizen and congregant studying at the yeshiva .
 The attackers had blades installed in the toes of their shoes, which left deep wounds . His attackers hit him with their hands and feet .
 V Yavorivsky, a member of the Batkivshchyna faction, introduced in Ukraine’s Verkhovna Rada draft legislation . The legislation proposes that standards of accountability for expressing personal opinions on Fascist crimes be abolished .
 Ukraine’s Verkhovna Rada declared the repeal of the Law on the Principles of the State Language Policy of July 3, 2012 . The law granted the status of regional language to Russian and other languages of national minorities .
 Oleksandr Muzychko, coordinator of the Pravyi Sektor in Western Ukraine, recorded and broadcast on the Internet a video address . He called on people to cleanse Ukraine and Crimea of its Russian-speaking inhabitants .
Unidentified culprits used Molotov cocktails to burn a Jewish commemorative plaque erected in 2012 next to a cemetery in which the graves of Hasidic elders were found .
 In 2011, the Svoboda party claimed responsibility for defiling a Hungarian memorial in the Verecke Pass . The Svobododa party also claimed responsibility.
 An ad hoc task force in Kiev began working on writing the draft legislation on the Development and Use of Languages in Ukraine .
 Ruslan Koshulinsky, deputy speaker of the Verkhovna Rada, was named the committee chairman .
 Farion introduced draft legislation calling for a criminal penalty for speaking Russian in government offices and public places in Ukraine .
 A group of neo-Nazis followed a Hasidic husband and wife who were on their way to synagogue in Ukraine . The couple had been going to synagogue .
 At the last minute, the couple managed to jump into a taxi, which the assailants hurled stones at .
 Ukrainian border guards on Transnistrian territory on the Moldova-Ukraine border forbade passage to men from Russia .
 Reports of Banderist patrols in Dnepropetrovsk have become commonplace . Reports of such patrols in the city have been commonplace .
 The crimes frequently occur in front of the police, but officials try not to get involved . The crimes often occur in the front of police .
 Y Perebiynis, head of the Information Policy Department of Ukraine’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said Russians are not an indigenous people of Ukraine . He said Russians do not have the right to selfdetermination on Ukrainian territory .
 Dmitry N from Kharkiv witnessed a beating by nationalist radicals of a young woman on the street for speaking Russian on her mobile phone .
 Ukrainian nationalists attacked Hungarian schoolchildren visiting Transcarpathia from Miskolc, Hungary .
 Armed extremists stormed a meeting of the Hungarian community council in the city of Beregovo in Transcarpathian province and beat its participants .
 Russians living in Ukraine started to complain en masse to the Consulate General of Russia in Kharkiv about pressure from Ukrainian authorities . Ukrainian authorities are harshly demanding that they formalize their renunciation of Russian citizenship .
 A recording appeared on the Internet of a telephone conversation between Y Tymoshenko and N Shufrich . The former deputy secretary of the National Security Council of Ukraine is the current presidential candidate . The recording is of a phone conversation between the former Ukrainian prime minister and the former
 In it, Tymoshenko makes a series of Russophobic comments and statements . In it. In it she makes aseries of Russophobia comments and comments .
 H Koschyk, German commissioner for matters related to ethnic German re-settlers and national minorities, said that people in Germany are concerned about the situation of ethnic Germans and other national minorities in Ukraine .
 He said that the central government in Kiev needs to clearly demonstrate its readiness to protect their rights . He said the centralgovernment in Kiev must clearly demonstrate it is ready to protect its rights .
 Representatives of the Kiev Patriarchate threatened the forcible seizure of Kiev Pechersk Lavra . The Patriarchate is unrecognized in the Orthodox world .
 Kiev Pechersk Lavra's representatives propagated false information about the removal of the church valuables from Ukraine . The church's representatives were responsible for the church's removal of its valuaries .
 A group of representatives from the so-called Maidan Self­Defense Force went to Lavra, Lavra .
 In the end, the situation was stabilized, but the anxious mood did not abate for a long time . The anxious mood didn't abate.
 In fact, this was an illegal blockade of the entrances to a monastic cloister . The cloister was a monastery .
 Moscow Patriarchate was transferred into the ownership of representatives of the Kiev Patriarchate .
 The transfer was carried out on the basis of a court decision made under pressure from the nationalist party Svoboda .
 In 2006, the church abbot had given the building to representatives of the Kiev Patriarchate secretly, without the knowledge of church management .
 The court decided in favor of the UPC of the Moscow Patriarchate after lengthy proceedings in April 2013 .
Members provoked clashes with UPC priests and parishioners . However the schismatics appealed the legal decision just before the decision .
 The church was shut down for renovation by the authorities after Euromaidan victory in February 2014 . The schismatics won their appeal after the church was closed for renovation .
 Information surfaced about preparations being made for an attempt to capture the Pochaev Lavra spiritual center .
 Orthodox believers started gathering at Lavra, blocked the main entrance to the monastery, and created a solid living wall in front of the Holy Gates .
Group of nationalist radicals and schismatics arrived at Lavra in six buses . Conditions made it impossible for the group to carry out their original plan .
 A group of aggressively disposed people accompanied by journalists from the 1 + 1 television channel entered the administrative building of Sumy Eparchy .
 Karpenko categorically demanded that Archbishop Eulogius conduct joint services with the schismatic Archbishop Methodius in the Holy Transfiguration Cathedral in Sumy .
 He blamed the priesthood of the canonical Church of unwillingness to pray for those killed at Maidan . He then blamed the church's priesthood of unwillingness.
 Parishioners found pamphlets of a provocative nature on the windows and doors of 13 Orthodox churches in Kovel in the Volyn district .
 The UOC priests contained crude insults directed at the priests in addition to their photographs . The priests' photographs were also published in the UOC .
 Father Oleg Trofimov was archpriest of the UPC of the Moscow Patriarchate . He was subjected to persecution and threats on the part of the authorities and activists of the local Euromaidan .
 He was transferred to serve in a distant rural parish forty kilometers from home . He is now serving in a rural parish 40 kilometers from his home .
 investigations imposed on archpriest in relation to questions surrounding appropriateness of his official behaviour . The investigations are based on groundless accusations of the misuse of funds donated by parishioners .
 The mass media, which is controlled by extremists, has been harassing the priest . The priest is a member of the Catholic Church .
 His home address and telephone number are constantly being published on the Internet accompanied by calls to violence . His phone number and address are also being published.
 If A Shirokov did not cease his 'pro-Moscow and anti-constitutional enemy agitation' on internet social networking sites, the same party would change its relationship to him .
 The facts set forth above clearly demonstrate that under the influence of extremists from ultranationalistic and neo-Nazi forces, the protests in Ukraine rapidly escalated into a coercive rebellion and, in the end, the forceful seizure of power and an unconstitutional coup d’etat.
 These dramatic events were accompanied by widespread and gross violations of human rights and freedoms on the part of the self-proclaimed government and its supporters .
 As a result, manifestations of extremist, ultranationalist, and neo-Nazistic sentiments, religious intolerance, xenophobia, and blatant blackmail, threats, pressure placed by the Maidan leaders on their opponents .
 In all of Ukraine’s regions, but especially in the southeastern part of the country, the country's southeastern region .
 Ukrainian radical nationalists are ramping up pressure on Russian-speaking citizens who do not want to lose the centuries-old ties that bind them to Russia and Russian culture .
 Ukraine's Maidan-style affairs are being conducted by the use of threats, intimidation, physical violence, and heinous attempts to obliterate Russian culture and identity .
 All of the gross human rights violations and violations of the rule of law that have been committed remain unpunished .
 Euromaidan bandits committed atrocities against the legal authorities and citizens . They have been amnestied by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine .
 If the lawlessness in Ukraine continues, the situation may erupt into a serious threat to regional peace and security . The situation may lead to further escalation of international and interethnic contradicions and conflicts in Ukraine and Europe .
 The Germans fought against the moskals, the Germans, and struggled with kikes and mischief-makers . They wanted to take the Ukrainian lands from us .
 On November 21, 2013 in Kiev, protests under the 'Euromaidan' title began . The protests began under the title .
 Government of Ukraine suspends the signing of the Association Agreement with the European Union . Opposition parties were organized by a number of opposition parties that disagreed with the decision .
 Since November 21, 2013, the project is conducting surveys of witnesses and monitoring human rights violations in Ukraine .
 The survey of Euromaidan supporters was conducted in the period from November 21, 2013 to February 22, 2014 . The survey was conducted primarily at the Maidan and in the seized buildings .
 A number of law enforcement officers were poisoned by gases of unknown origin . The officers required hospi­tal treatment and required treatment .
 A finger was broken and a tendon was ruptured, January 19, 2014, Grushevsky Street . A finger is broken and the tendon is ruptured .
 Moskal’ — derived from Moscow, it is a humiliating and insulting labeling of Muscovites in particular and all Russians in general, widely used in Ukraine .