 The Russian military threat to Europe has manifested itself in Ukraine, says Co-Chairman Smith . He says the threat has been manifested in Ukraine .
 Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine has been the most shocking development in Europe since the end of the Cold War and collapse of the Soviet Union . From the perspective of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act, Russia's military aggression has been most shocking.
 The Russian seizure of Crimea in March 2014, followed by its illegal annexation, violated fundamental principles of the Final Act . The seizure of the Crimea in April 2014 was followed by the annexation of Crimea .
 The commitment of participating states to respect each other’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence . Those principles include the commitment to refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity of any state .
 The principles also include the principle that borders can be changed only by peaceful means and agreement .
 Russia military and security service personnel have been deeply engaged in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine since April 2014 . Fighting has claimed some 10,000 lives in the region since the start of the conflict . Russia's military has been involved in the conflict in eastern Ukraine for years .
 Russian involvement in the Donbas has included the provision of leadership, financing, ammunition, heavy weapons, supplies and in some cases, regular units of the Russian army to support armed separatism against the Ukrainian government . Russia has also in violation of Russia's Final Act commitments .
Despite efforts of Germany and France, the conflict in Donbas shows no sign of settlement . Despite efforts of the leaders of both countries, there are no signs of a settlement .
 There is little evidence that Russia and separatist forces under its control want to end the conflict .
 The Kremlin appears to see value in maintaining a simmering conflict as a means to put pressure on and destabilize the government in Kyiv . The Kremlin wants Ukraine to get on with domestic reforms and implement its association agreement with the European Union .
 The U.S. and the West support Ukraine and stand up to Russia. It is important for European security that the United States and the west support Ukraine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Kremlin leadership have chosen a different course in recent years . In recent years, it has become clear that Putin and Putin have chosen different course .
 The European security order that developed in the aftermath of the Cold War disadvantages Russian interests. They appear to have concluded that the European security orders that developed after the Cold war disadvantages Russian interest .
 Russia has sought to undermine that order and define Russia in opposition to the U.S. and the West . They have sought to define Russia as an opponent to the United States and West .
 The Kremlin seeks a Russian sphere of influence, or a “sphere of privileged interests,’ as then-President Dmitry Medvedev called it in 2008 . The Baltic States are the possible exception of the Baltic States .
 Mr Putin does not seek to recreate the Soviet Union, as the Russian economy is not prepared to subsidize the economies of the other former Soviet states .
 The Russian leadership wants to defer to Moscow on issues that the Kremlin defines as key to Russian interests .
 Russia's commitment under the Final Act to respect the right of other states to choose to belong to international organizations and to be party to treaties of alliance . This includes relationships between those states and institutions such as the European Union and NATO .
 Second, Moscow seeks to weaken the European Union and NATO, which it believes act as checks on Russian power . Second, it believes the EU and NATO are checks on Russia .
 He asserts that the Alliance began enlarging in the early 1990s in order to take advantage of Russian weakness .
 His narrative ignores NATO’s efforts to engage Russia in a cooperative manner . He also ignores the commitments undertaken by the Alliance with regard to the non-stationing of nuclear and conventional forces .
 The Kremlin regards the European Union and its enlargement as a threat . The Kremlin also regards the EU and the EU as athreat .
 Then-President Victor Yanukovych had renounced the goal of securing a NATO membership action plan . Key Alliance members such as Germany and France had made clear that they did not support putting Ukraine on a membership track .
 Russia has increased pressure on Ukraine to reach an association agreement with the European Union . The prospect that Ukraine might conclude an association deal with the EU was the reason for Russia's pressure .
 The Kremlin seeks a seat at the table when major questions regarding Europe are decided . Third, the Kremlin seeks to answer major questions about Europe .
 Russia does not belong to the European Union and NATO. This explains in part Russia’s opposition to the EU and NATO . This explains the opposition to those institutions .
 Russia has devalued the status of the OSCE over the past two decades . OSCE has called into question its mission and, at times, even its legitimacy .
 Russia’s more assertive and belligerent stance in Europe over the past five years has been abetted by the modernization of Russian military forces, both nuclear and conventional . Russia's moreassertive and aggressive stance in the past 5 years has also been ab
 Russian strategic nuclear forces appear to be replacing old weapons systems with new versions . In some cases, systems might have replaced years ago had it then had the finances .
 The overall strategic modernization program appears sized to fit within the limits of the 2010 New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty .
 Russia’s deployment of a new ground-launched intermediate-range cruise missile in violation of the 1987 Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty . Russia's modernization of an array of other non-strategic nuclear weapons, and its apparent “escalate to de-escalate�
 Russian doctrine suggests Russia would resort to use of nuclear weapons in the event of a conventional attack on Russia or an ally .
 There have been suggestions that Moscow might use nuclear weapons to “de-escalate’s’ conventional conflict . It is not a conventional conflict that did not involve an attack on Russian territory .
 The Russian military aims to enhance its ability to conduct offensive operations outside of Russian territory . Russian forces in Georgia-Russia conflict in 2008 were mediocre in 2008 .
 Over the past three years, it appears that Russia has deployed and operated a number of its new conventional weapons systems in Ukraine .
 Domestic political factors constitute major drivers of Russian policy toward Ukraine . The Ukraine crisis is a major factor in Russia's stance on Ukraine .
 During his first two terms as president in 2000-2008, Mr Putin based regime legitimacy on economics . Mr Putin's regime was growing at a rate of about seven percent per year .
 Russia faced a grim economic situation when he prepared to return to the presidency in 2011 . However, when he returned to Russia in 2011, Russia faced an economic crisis .
 Mr Putin included heavy elements of nationalism, Russia’s return as a great power, and anti-Americanism in his campaign .
 Mr Putin's campaign for reelection in March 2018 is likely to feature in his reelection campaign . Those themes now appear to be the basis for regime legitimacy .
 Moscow's foreign policy themes drive aspects of Moscow’s foreign policy, and they play in particular with regard to Ukraine . Those themes in turn drive parts of Moscow.
 From 1654 until 1991, Ukraine was a part of the Russian Empire and then the Soviet Union . Of all the republics that Moscow lost, Ukraine’s loss pains Russians the most .
 Mr Putin referred to Russians and Ukrainians as one people. Many Ukrainians felt that he denied their history, language and culture .
 Mr Putin appears to fear that a successful Ukraine could affect the attitudes of the Russian people .
 If Ukraine succeeds in building a stable, modern, democratic state with a robust market economy, Russians may begin to wonder why they cannot have a more democratic form of governance in place of the increasingly authoritarian power structure in Russia .
 The Kremlin does not want a successful Ukrainian neighbor and is prepared to go to great lengths to hinder that success, including the use of military force .
 Rada vote to appoint acting president and acting prime minister caught Moscow by surprise . In February 2014, the violent end of the Maydan Revolution, Mr Yanukovych’s decision to flee Kyiv.
 Mr Putin told a Russian documentary a year later that he decided early on the morning of February 23 to activate a plan to seize the Crimean peninsula .
The soldiers were clearly professional military, as evidenced by how they handled their weapons and themselves . Shortly thereafter, soldiers in Russian-style combat fatigues were seen to occupy key installations and crossroads .
 Russian combat fatigues can be found in military surplus stores across the former Soviet Union .
 Mr Putin congratulated Russian military officers on their conduct of the Crimean operation on March 28 . On March 28, however, Mr Putin congratulates Russia's military officers.
 In a May 18 telethon, he admitted that the “little green men’s had been Russian soldiers .
 The Ministry of Defense issued a medallion commemorating the Russian military’s role in the “return of Crimea,” an operation . The medallion dated as running from February 20 through March 18 .
 Russia's swift seizure of Crimea was aided particularly by two factors . Russia’s swift seizure was aidedparticularly by the Crimea seizure . Russia's quick seizure of the Crimea was helped particularly by the Russian military action .
There are already substantial Russian military forces and infrastructure on the peninsula . There are also substantial Russian forces, infrastructure and facilities on the Peninsula .
 Ukrainian forces stayed in garrison and did not challenge the Russians, reportedly in part due to urgings from Washington that Ukraine do nothing to provoke Russian escalation . Second, Ukrainian military forces remained in garrison.
 As many soldiers in the Ukrainian units were from Crimea, commanders likely had questions about their reliability .
 Russian forces had control of all major locations in Crimea, had blocked Ukrainian forces in their bases . Russian forces laid a minefield to cordon off the peninsula from the Ukrainian mainland .
 Crimean parliament voted to join Russia and to schedule a referendum . Under the leadership of a newly appointed prime minister who reportedly was once known as the ‘Goblin’ in local organized crime circles, the Crimean parliament votes for joining Russia .
 Crimean authorities reported that 83 percent of eligible voters took part in the referendum . Nearly 97 percent voting to join Russia .
 There were numerous reports of irregularities, armed personnel near voting stations, and journalists with Russian passports allowed to vote .
 Other estimates indicated a much smaller voter turnout than that reported by Crimean and Russian officials .
 Crimean representatives and Russian officials concluded a treaty on Crimea joining Russia two days later . In any event, Crimean officials and Crimean representatives concluded the treaty .
 The annexation of Crimea proved very popular with the Russian public . It gave a boost to Mr Putin’s approval rating .
 The 2018 presidential election in Russia has been scheduled for March 18, 2018 . It's the fourth anniversary of the treaty on Crimea joining Russia .
 The United States and European Union responded to Crimea's illegal annexation by applying visa and financial sanctions on individuals connected to the seizure .
 The leaders of the United States, Canada, France, France and Germany agreed to exclude Russia from the G8 and revert to the G7 . The U.S. and Canada also agreed to remove Russia from G8 .
 President Barack Obama signed an executive order to enable broader sanctions against the energy, financial and defense sectors of the Russian economy . President Obama signed the executive order.
 In early April 2014, “little green men’s’ appeared along with armed local separatists in several major cities in eastern Ukraine . The Donbas region of Donetsk and Luhansk is in the Donbas area .
 Ukrainian security forces resisted, and fighting broke out in several locations in Crimea . In contrast to Crimea, this time this time Ukrainian security force resisted .
 The U.S., Russian and Ukrainian foreign ministers met in Geneva on April 17 . They agreed on a settlement that called for an end to the violence, the disarming of illegal armed groups, and the evacuation of occupied public buildings .
 Separatist leaders in Donbas immediately indicated that they would not observe Geneva terms . Separatists in the region have said they will not observe the Geneva terms.
 separatist forces gaining control of more of the Donbas . The fighting continued and spread, with the fighting continuing and spread .
 Russia provided leadership, financing, ammunition, heavy weapons and other supplies . Russia also provided leadership and financing, financing and ammunition .
 “political tourists’ began arriving from Russia to swell the ranks of the separatist fighters . In addition, ‘political tourists' began arriving to swell ranks of separatists .
 The separatists at first claimed they got their heavy weapons by seizing them from Ukrainian forces . But equipment showed up in their ranks that had never been in the Ukrainian military's inventory .
 The United States began to impose additional sanctions on Russia as fighting in the Donbas continued and spread further . The U.S. has imposed additional sanctions as fighting continues to spread .
 Ukrainian forces began to gain the upper hand during the early summer . Ukrainian forces have been fighting on the battlefield since the summer .
 Russia responded by accelerating the flow of tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, advanced anti-aircraft systems and “volunteers’ to assist the separatists. Russia responded.
 separatist leader almost immediately claimed credit for downing a Ukrainian military transport plane at the same time and location of the Malaysia Airlines shootdown .
 separatist forces fired on civilian airliner by mistake, it appears . It appears that the separatists fired on the civilian airliner .
 Reports and photos that were issued later tracked the Buk missile launcher through territory occupied by the separatists . The transport of the launcher was also tracked back in the direction of Russia .
 The U.S. and European Union adopted substantial new sanctions against Russia in the aftermath of the shooting .
 sanctions aimed at the financial, energy, high tech and defense sectors . The sanctions included the financial and energy sectors .
 By mid-August, Russia had greatly reduced the amount of territory under Russian/separatist control . The Donbas appeared on the verge of regaining control of all of the Donbas .
 Regular units of the Russian army, supported by heavy artillery and rocket strikes, entered Ukrainian territory on August 23 .
 The Russian/separatist attack recovered much of the territory that had been lost in the two previous months .
 Ukrainian representatives met with officials of the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk ‘people’s republics’ in Minsk on September 5 . They worked out a ceasefire in the presence of Russian and OSCE officials .
 The ceasefire never took full hold, with particularly sharp fighting continuing around the Donetsk airport and in areas east of Mariupol .
 After a December lull, fighting accelerated again in January and early February 2015 .
 NATO officials believed that Russian personnel also operated the more sophisticated Russian military equipment . NATO officials believe that Russia also operated more sophisticated military equipment.
 NATO did not believe that Russia had regular military units in Ukraine . Some 50,000 Russian troops had been deployed on the Russian side of the Ukraine-Russia border .
 Ukrainian forces faced a total of 36,000 Russian troops and separatist fighters in the Donbas .
 Of that total, the Ukrainians believed that 5,000-10,000 were Russian soldiers . The bulk of the separatist fighters were Ukrainian citizens .
 In February 2015, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Francois Hollande brokered a settlement agreement between Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and Mr Putin .
 The Minsk II accord provided for a ceasefire, withdrawal of heavy weapons from the line of contact . OSCE monitors were able to confirm the ceasefire and withdrawal .
 Minsk II also contained a number of additional measures designed to resolve the conflict and restore Ukrainian sovereignty over the Donbas . It included withdrawal of all foreign forces, passage of a constitutional amendment on decentralization of political authority, an election law for the occupied region, and restoration of Ukrainian control
 The terms of Minsk II are less favorable to Ukraine than the terms worked out in Minsk I in September 2014 . The terms are a reward to the Kremlin for not observing the Minsk agreement .
 Russian and separatist forces launched a major assault on Ukrainian units in the Debaltsevo salient between the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The Minsk II ceasefire never really took hold, despite numerous attempts to negotiate a sustainable ceasefire . They ratcheted down the fighting after capturing the territory .
 Both sides committed ceasefire violations, observers have attributed primary responsibility for violations to Russian/separatist forces .
 Putin and Kremlin deny there are any Russian military personnel in the Donbas . OSCE observers and Russian television of soldiers in Russian uniforms with Russian insignia .
 The Kremlin instead implausibly claims that all the separatist fighters are locals or “volunteers’ from Russia . The Kremlin says all the separatists are local or ‘volunteer’
 NATO believes that the command structure for Russian/separatist forces in the occupied Donbas continues to consist of Russian military officers . irregulars form the bulk of the armed personnel, though they have been and can be augmented by regular Russian army units if needed .
 The Ukrainian military and security service continue to believe that a larger portion of the fighters in the Donbas are active-duty Russian military personnel . Some are in organized Russia units, the Ukrainian military says .
 Shelling and fighting continue along the line of contact in the Donbas .
 On most days, Ukrainian military reports suffering killed and/or wounded in action . The Ukrainian military says it is suffering from injuries and deaths .
 The line of contact between Ukraine and the occupied part of the Donbas appears to be hardening . Ukraine's border with Ukraine appears to have been hardening.
 The two statelets use the Russian ruble as their currency and have begun issuing passports . The Russian government recognizes the ruble, which the statelets recognize .
 Ukraine has imposed a trade embargo on occupied Donbas and cut off the supply of electricity to the occupied part of Luhansk . On the other side, Ukraine has also imposed atrade embargo on Donbas . The trade embargo has also cut off electricity to occupied parts of
 This hardening of the line of contact will make it more difficult to achieve an eventual settlement . This hardens of the lines of contact could make it harder to achieve a settlement .
 The U.S. and European Union have regularly renewed sanctions on Russia . They have maintained a common line with Russia .
 Chancellor Merkel has repeatedly stated that full implementation of Minsk II is the prerequisite for easing sanctions . Obama administration officials have echoed that position in its first months .
 The Kremlin is not implementing the Minsk II agreement and, at this point in time, apparently calculates that a simmering conflict in the Donbas better serves its interests . By all appearances, the Kremlin isn't implementing the agreement .
 Kyiv government in Kyiv is struggling to pursue political and economic reforms . Such a conflict makes it more difficult for the government to pursue needed reforms or to implement the EU agreement .
 Ukraine is trying to keep it out of a Russian sphere of influence . It makes it harder for Ukraine to become a successful state and deepen links with Russia .
 Moscow is unhappy about Western economic sanctions, yet it has eschewed steps that would lead to their easing . Moscow is clearly unhappy about the sanctions, but it has opted to avoid them .
 The Kremlin has control over Russian/separatist forces in the Donbas . For example, it would not be difficult for the Kremlin to enforce a real ceasefire .
 It could also implement a withdrawal of heavy weapons away from the line of contact . The move could also be implemented by the government .
 If the Ukrainian military might try to take advantage of the situation, they could visibly position additional Russian military units along the Russia-Ukraine border as a deterrent .
 OSCE monitors could then be invited to travel freely around the occupied part of the Donbas . The ceasefire and withdrawal steps have been implemented .
 The focus for implementation of Minsk II would shift to Kyiv, the Kremlin says . The focus would be on implementation of the new law .
 Political and public attitudes have hardened over the past two years due to the continued fighting and casualties . Political attitudes have understandably hardened due to continued fighting.
 The Ukrainian government could well find that it would have a difficult time implementing certain Minsk II provisions, such as an election law for the Donbas .
 Moscow to make bid for easing of sanctions on Russia. If Ukraine could not deliver on those provisions, Moscow would make a bid for the easing . If Ukraine cannot deliver on that provisions, the stage would be set for Moscow .
 A settlement of the Donbas conflict at this point does not appear to be a Kremlin objective . A settlement does not seem to be an objective .
 The Russian leadership sees advantages to maintaining a simmering conflict that it can use to put pressure on and destabilize the government in Kyiv . The Russian leaders see advantages to maintain the conflict, rather than destabilizing it .
 The Russian leadership may have other reasons for holding to its present course . The Russian leader may have also been holding to the present course.
 Germany holds its elections in September . Moscow was disappointed by election outcomes earlier this year in the Netherlands and France .
 Merkel is running for reelection for a fourth term at a time when many Western voters seek change . Merkel remains the most popular politician, and her victory appears increasingly likely .
 Merkel has provided the linchpin for European Union policy toward Russia and Ukraine . The Russians no doubt would welcome her departure from office .
 OSCE has played an important role in trying to resolve the conflict in the Donbas . OSCE's role has played a key role in resolving the conflict .
 The Trilateral Contact Group is headed by a special representative of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office . The group is based in the U.S. and has been in contact with Russia since 2007 .
 OSCE, representatives of Ukraine and Russia are the other formal participants . Representatives of the Russian/separatist-occupied parts of Donetsk and Luhansk often take part .
 The Trilateral Contact Group has four working groups, which address political, security, humanitarian and economic questions . The group is based in New York City .
 It has several times attempted to work out a true ceasefire, but with little success . It has been tried several times but has failed to find a real ceasefire .
 OSCE also provides a special monitoring mission, which is a civilian, unarmed mission that operates throughout Ukraine .
 The mission has been tasked with observing and reporting on the implementation of the Minsk II provisions on a ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy weapons from the line of contact . Many of them are deployed in eastern Ukraine, where they are deployed .
 Reports all too often document where Minsk II provisions are not observed. Unfortunately, the reports are not often documented .
 The OSCE mission is important for the credibility of its observations, when there are often conflicting reports as to developments on the ground . Still, the OSCE missions are important for its credibility .
Russian and separatist forces can cross freely without being observed by OSCE or other monitors on the ground . While that presence allows reporting of what crosses from Russia into Ukraine at those two locations, there are other border crossing points .
 Minsk II could expand its work and observe how additional provisions were being implemented . The special monitoring mission could also observe how extra provisions were implemented .
 OSCE also maintains a project coordinator in Kyiv to synchronize various OSCE activities . OSCE is promoting a variety of programs, including in the areas of constitutional, legal, human rights, media freedom, election and governance reforms .
 The OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna provides a venue for the member states to exchange views on the Ukraine-Russia conflict and the situations in the Donbas and Crimea .
 Russia or separatists have violated Minsk II or OSCE commitments, such as to respect human rights . Western delegations frequently use that forum to highlight where Russia or the separatists have violation of the commitments .
 Moscow's reluctance to implement Minsk II serves to spotlight where the problem lies . Such naming and shaming may not suffice to overcome Moscow’s reluctance to implementation .
 OSCE has not been able to play a larger role in forcing a settlement to the ongoing conflict in the Donbas or the unsettled status of Crimea . OSCE hasn't played a bigger role in pushing a settlement.
 Russia can block any OSCE effort with which it disagrees. That reflects the limitations of an organization that operates by consensus, in which Russia cannot block it .
 Ukrainian government has in the past suggested that an armed police force might help stabilize the Donbas . The proposal has little chance of being developed given Russian opposition .
 One of the fundamental purposes of the organization is to promote a more peaceful, stable and secure Europe . The European Union aims to promote more peaceful and stable Europe .
 Moscow’s seizure of Crimea and actions in the Donbas undercut OSCE's goal . OSCE appears less effective as an organization, says Peter Bergen .
 The United States and the West should continue to provide political support to Kyiv, the U.S. says . Kyiv should also provide economic reforms and anti-corruption measures, according to the West .
 It is also important that the U.S. continue to provide military assistance . The United States continues to provide assistance to the military .
 Ukrainian military should be able to deal with the influx of Russian armor into the Donbas . This should include certain types of lethal assistance for the Ukrainian military, in particular man-portable anti-armor weapons .
 The purpose of such assistance is not to give the Ukrainian military the ability to retake the Donbas . The Ukrainian military is not giving the military the chance to retake Donbas.
 The military leadership in Kyiv understands that they cannot defeat the Russian army . The Russian army understands that it can't defeat the military .
 The purpose of such assistance is to help Ukrainians deny the Russian/separatist forces the ability to make easy gains, and to encourage the Kremlin to pursue a political settlement .
 U.S. and Western policy should aim to press Moscow to change its course in Ukraine, he says . "As a matter of priority, work for a reasonable settlement in the Donbas," he adds .
 That is necessary to stop the fighting that has claimed some 10,000 lives. That is needed to stop it, says the British Foreign Minister .
 The United States, European Union and other Western countries should continue to put political and economic pressure on the Kremlin . The U.S., European Union, other Western nations should put political pressure on Russia, Russia .
 Mr Putin observed the military parade in Red Square at Russia’s VE Day commemoration on May 9 . Only foreign leader to join him was the president of Moldova .
 The Russian people have a sense of political isolation brought about by the Kremlin’s policies . That conveys to the Russian people a sense. of the political isolation.
 Mr Putin clearly would like some normalization of the relationship with Washington .
 The Trump administration should make clear that Russia’s aggression against Ukraine poses a major obstacle to such normalization .
 Russia continues to put pressure on the Kremlin . The current economic and other sanctions that have been applied against Russia are still being applied .
 The West should consider increased economic sanctions as well as an expansion of Russian individuals targeted for visa bans and asset freezes . broadening visa bans to apply to family members could dramatically increase their impact .
 Some member states wish to return to business as usual with Moscow . But finding agreement on such steps could be difficult with the European Union .
 It is unclear if the Trump administration would favor additional sanctions . It is also unclear if they would favor more sanctions .
 The administration and NATO continue the steps agreed at last year’s NATO summit in Warsaw . It is important to enhance the Alliance's conventional deterrence and defense capabilities.
 Such steps will lead to more secure European allies who will be more confident in supporting Ukraine . Such steps would lead to a more secure EU allies who are more confident.
 The U.S. should also continue to support the German and French efforts to promote a solution to the Ukraine-Russia conflict . The United States should also support the Germans and French effort to promote the solution .
 It is difficult to see Minsk II being implemented, in large part due to Moscow’s demonstrated disinterest . It is very difficult to seeing MinskII being implemented.
 Minsk II remains the only settlement process on the table . Washington should encourage Kyiv to continue to engage in the settlement process .
 If Minsk II collapses, it should be clear that Russia and the separatists bear full responsibility for it . If it collapses, some might say when it collapses.
 Ukraine needs a settlement that has Russian buy-in. At the end of the day, Ukraine needs to find a settlement .
 Moscow has too many levers that it can use to make life difficult for Kyiv and deny Ukraine a return to normalcy . Otherwise, Moscow hastoo many levers to make it difficult for Ukraine .
 It is all but impossible to imagine Mr Putin or any future Russian leader agreeing to Crimea's return to Ukraine .
 Kyiv lacks the political, economic and military leverage to change that . At present, Kyiv has no political and economic leverage.
 Ukraine should continue policy of non-recognition of Crimea’s illegal annexation and continue sanctions related to the peninsula until such time as Ukrainian sovereignty is restored or Ukraine reaches some other settlement with Russia .
 Russia has employed military force to seize Crimea, and instigate and sustain a bloody armed conflict in the Donbas in pursuit of the Kremlin's goal of asserting a sphere of influence in the post-Soviet space .
 The Kremlin might be tempted to use force elsewhere in Europe, they say . Also, they raise concern that the Kremlin might use force in Europe .
 The U.S. should work with its European partners to respond in a serious way, says CNN's John Sutter . The United States should work to respond to European concerns, he says .
 Russia should continue to provide Ukraine with political, economic and military support, says Peter Bergen . Russia should keep open channels of communication for a settlement if Moscow alters its policy, Bergen says .
 Europe was envisaged when the Final Act was signed in 1975 . That is essential if we wish to realize the kind of Europe that was envisaging when the final Act wassigned in 1975.