 The United States Army War College educates and develops leaders for service at the strategic level while advancing knowledge in the global application of Landpower . The U.S. Army War college also provides advice on how to Leverage Landpower to Maintain the Peace Douglas Mastriano Project Leader
 The purpose of the U.S. Army War College is to produce graduates who are skilled critical thinkers and complex problem solvers .
 The U.S. Army has a duty to act as a "think factory" for commanders and civilian leaders at the strategic level .
 The Strategic Studies Institute publishes national security and strategic research and analysis to influence policy debate and bridge the gap between military and academia .
 The Center for Strategic Leadership and Development provides solutions to strategic Army issues affecting the national security community .
 The Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute provides subject matter expertise, technical review, and writing expertise to agencies that develop stability concepts and doctrines .
 S Army War College develops strategic leaders by providing a strong foundation of wisdom grounded in mastery of the profession of arms . The School of Strategic Landpower is a crucible for educating future leaders .
 The Strategic Studies Institute is part of the United States Army War College . It is the strategic-level study agent for issues related to national security and military strategy with emphasis on geostrategic analysis . The U.S Army Heritage and Education Center acquires, conserves
 Studies produced by civilian and military analysts concern topics having strategic implications for the Army, the Department of Defense, and the larger national security community .
 SSI publishes special reports on topics of special or immediate interest . In addition to its studies, SSI also publishes reports on special topics .
 These include edited proceedings of conferences and topically oriented roundtables, expanded trip reports and quick-reaction responses to senior Army leaders .
 The Institute provides a valuable analytical capability within the Army to address strategic and other issues in support of Army participation .
 Authors of Strategic Studies Institute and United States Army War College Press publications enjoy full academic freedom . They do not disclose classified information, jeopardize operations security, or misrepresent official U.S. policy .
 Academic freedom empowers them to offer new and sometimes controversial perspectives in the interest of furthering debate on key issues . Such academic freedom allows them to provide new and often controversial perspectives .
 Each newsletter also provides strategic commentary by one of our research analysts . Each newsletter provides a strategic commentary.
 Project 1721 would not be possible without the support and advice of numerous experts from around the world .
 Rasa Jukneviciene is the former Minister of Defense of Lithuania . She has given her advice on this project .
 Colonel Dalius Polekauskas, Chief of Staff of the Lithuanian Army, Lieutenant Colonel Arturas Jasinskas, Major Eugenius Lastauskas, and Major Tomas Balkus are all in charge of Lithuania's Army .
 Estonian Lieutenant Colonel Vahur Murulaid for his research for the chapter addressing national security questions raised in the U.S.
Mr Jonas Ohman for his exceptional insight on Ukraine . Thank you also to Mr Jonas Oh man for his special insight .
 The U.S. Army Europe G2 has been praised for their support, especially Mr Steven Boltz . Mr Boltz is a member of the United States Army Europe.
 Colonel Tarn Warren is the Chair of the Department of Military Strategy, Planning, and Operations . He provided excellent analysis and support .
 Lieutenant Colonel Mike Adelberg, USAWC, SSI, was a vital part of Project 1721, providing the final review.
 Project 1721 would not be possible without the editorial and formatting skills of Ms. Ms. Cevallos . The project would also not be able to use her editorial skills .
 America's Commitment to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Alliance . America's commitment to the N.A. Alliance is a key part of the alliance .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the New Russian Strategic Environment. The NorthAtlantic Treaty Organization . The New Russian strategic Environment .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization and its Concept of Collective Defense are among the group's key concepts .
 A New North Atlantic Treaty Organization Approach: The Very High Readiness Task Force .83 Deterrence, Provocation, or Assurance.85 Chapter 7: Adapting Policy to the New Russia .
Ill Chapter 9: The Way Ahead and Recommendations. Answering the Hard Questions Facing the Baltics .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization can Deter the "Goliath" Russian threat to the Baltics .
 The positive response to Project 1704 across NATO and the U.S. made it one of those rare assessments used to inform and shape strategy . The positive reaction to the project was one of the rare assessments of the project .
 Project 1704 is still relevant in its view of the emerging Russian strategy toward NATO . The environment has changed, but much of it remains relevant in the Russian strategy .
 Russian aircraft aggressively buzzed a U.S. Navy vessel in the Baltic Sea, and Putin's political proxies threatened NATO members with nuclear war .
 There are points of light in the darkness. Although many trends are disconcerting, there are many trends that are not surprising .
 Putin's aggressive tone and approach is forging a greater unity among NATO members since the 1980s . Putin's approach has been seen to forge greater unity with NATO members.
 Many in NATO are facing divergent dangers (i.e., immigration/refugee influx) Moscow poses an existential threat to much of Europe .
Only 5 of 28 NATO members are spending 2% of Gross Domestic Product on defense . Only 5 of the 28 are spending the pledged 2% on defense.
 Another by-product of Putin's aggressive and hostile strategy in Ukraine is evident in Ukraine . Putin has a history of aggressive tactics in Ukraine.
 Ukraine has a rich history, with much in common with Russia economically, culturally, and religiously . Ukraine has been a major part of Russia's economic and cultural development .
 Putin's war against a once stalwart friend is working against him, says Putin's friend . Putin has been working against Putin for years, but is now fighting against him .
 A truly Ukrainian identity is emerging from this, something not evident since before the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 . A true Ukrainian identity has been emerging from the past .
 The increasingly bombastic rhetoric and actions of the Kremlin is disconcerting and is placing European peace in a precarious situation . One misstep by Moscow or Washington, D.C. could plunge the world into a costly war.
 The world experimented with appeasement when faced with another nationalistic leader in the form of Adolf Hitler . Hitler was the leader of the Nazi regime .
 Project 1721 offers a way to preserve the peace in these turbulent and uncertain times .
 LTC Vahur Karus Estonian Defence Forces COL Kevin Copsey British LTC Algimantas Misiunas Lithuanian Land Forces COL Peter Nieuwenhuis Royal Netherlands Army COL Markus Kreitmayr COL Postrybailo Volodymyr
 The U.S. Army War College is hosting the CNN iReporters' weekly series on CNN.com and CNN iReport.com .
 It is a riddle wrapped in a mystery wrapped in an enigma . But perhaps there is a key to the mystery .
 The Great Northern War began in 1700 after Russian Czar Peter forged an alliance with Denmark and Poland to contest the supremacy of Sweden in the Baltic region .
 Russia's victory was a remarkable reversal of Russia's fortune and put it on the path to becoming a European power . The victory was the most significant reversal of the country's fortune .
 Czar Peter on horseback is depicted as trying to stop his army from committing atrocities against the people of Narva in 1704 . Narva was seized from the Swedes.
 The Great Northern War lasted until 1721, with various Swedish and Russian victories and defeats .
 The war ended in 1721 with the Treaty of Nystad where Sweden gave up its Baltic territories to Russia . The war was ended in the 1721 treaty.
 The 1721 Treaty of Nystad made Russia a European power, placing it in a position to influence not just the Baltics, but also Scandinavia and Eastern and Central Europe .
 Czar Peter moved his capital from Moscow to St. Peter's St. Petersburg . The move was part of a plan to create a new strategic environment for Moscow .
 Petersburg as his capital was a pivotal moment that symbolically declared that Russia was looking toward Europe . Petersburg was the capital of Russia's most powerful city .
 The Russian capital was moved back to Moscow after the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917 .
 The subsequent 84 years of atheistic Soviet rule unleashed one of the bloodiest epochs in human history, with genocide, ideological purges of those who disagreed with the government .
 The Baltic nations felt the brutality of this period in unimaginable ways . The Baltic countries felt the brutal treatment of each other in the past .
 Latvia typified the Baltic experience of living under Soviet rule . Latvia suffered mass executions, imprisonment for anyone perceived as a threat to the regime . One-third of its people were deported to Siberia .
 The deportation of ethnic Latvians dovetailed with a sinister Soviet policy of resettling ethnic Russians to the Baltic region .
 There was an economic incentive to this policy, but it also had an ethno-political design . The policy was designed to make it more politically acceptable .
 The 20th-century Russian dark ages ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 A decade of cooperation and collaboration between Moscow, Europe, and the U.S. ensued, bringing hope that the century of Russian hostility was at long last over .
 Russia was viewed as a partner, and there was even serious discussion about it being offered North Atlantic Treaty Organization membership . Russia was seen as a potential partner, but it was also considered as a possible partner .
 For them, the 1990s was when their country was "on its knees" with a shrinking economy, declining life expectancy, rampant social chaos and a president who was not respected abroad . For them.
 The rise of Vladimir Putin, viewed in the West as the beginning of a period of revanchist and reactionary ethno-centric nationalism, is considered in Russia as the start of its regaining respect and great power status .
 The U.S. and European powers were slow to adapt to the new strategic reality of growing Russian hostility toward the West . The United States and the major European powers are slow to adapting to the Russian hostility .
After the 2007 cyberattacks against Estonia, and the 2008 war against Georgia, there were hopes of a reset of relations with Russia .
 Many NATO officers began their careers facing a powerful Russian-led Soviet threat . This rings true today for many of the senior officers still on active service .
 NATO nations have divergent views of how to contend with the aggressive Russian approach . Russia has been aggressive in recent years in the past.
 The nations near Russia seek assurance and deterrence measures, while those further away often call for moderation .
 The notion that accommodation will reduce the threat is viewed more in hope than reality . Yet, the notion of accommodation is seen as more in hopes than reality.
 Project 1721 offers a way for the United States and NATO to preserve the peace without sacrificing the Baltic Nations to the territorial ambitions of Vladimir Putin and an expansionist Russia .
 A successful strategy must be accompanied with an approach that leverages not just the military instrument of power . A successful Strategy must be followed by a successful strategy, says the author .
 It must also include the "Joint Force" of air, land, sea, cyber, and space . It must include the participation and support of NATO allies and partners .
 The focus of Project 1721 is what contributions Strategic Landpower can provide to maintain the peace in the Baltic region . The focus is what contributes Strategic Land power can provide .
 Any Landpower decision must be integrated in the NATO approach to the region. Any Land power decision must also be integrated into NATO approach .
 NATO has never been stronger or better positioned to maintain the peace XVII and stability in Europe . NATO has proved itself in the Balkans and demonstrated resolve in Afghanistan, Afghanistan .
 The U.S. must integrate its strategy and operational approach with that of NATO to ensure continuity and consistency . The United States must integrate the strategy and operations of NATO with the NATO .
 The U.S. Army War College is the largest military college in the United States . The college is the first in the country to hold a military college .
 Winston S Churchill Soldiers from across NATO during exercise Iron Sword 2014, in Pabrade, Lithuania .
 World War I witnessed the transformation of Europe, the Middle East, and Africa at an appalling price in blood and treasure .
 The United States made a decisive contribution to the Allied victory . Although entering the war late, the U.S. made a significant contribution to Allied victory.
 The failure of the Allies to accept unified command under one supreme leader was due in large part to emerging technologies .
 It took 4 years for the western nations to finally embrace the idea of a Supreme Allied Commander in the person of French Marshal Ferdinand Foch . It took four years for Western nations to embrace the concept .
 After World War I, nations met at Versailles to discuss how to prevent another war .
 The United States led the discussion of forming international organizations and institutions as a way to prevent another calamity . The U.S. led the talk of forming organizations and organizations to prevent a calamity.
 The League of Nations was born to serve as an international forum to peacefully resolve disputes . It was born as a forum to resolve disputes.
 In Europe the recovery from the horrors of World War I was daunting . In Europe, recovery from WWII was daunting.
 The rapid withdrawal of the United States from Europe weakened the fledgling League of Nations . Entire generations of men had perished and the withdrawal of U.S. from Europe had weakened the league .
 Europe was besieged by hostile ideologies ranging from Bolshevism to Socialist Fascism . Europe also faced hostile ideologies including Bolshevistism and Socialist Fascist .
 The Russian-led Soviet Union was the first to threaten the post-World War I peace by invading its neighbors in the Baltics and Poland .
Fascist governments emerged in Spain, Italy, and Germany . Although the Poles beat the Soviets back, peace would not endure for long .
 The resolve of the Allies and the League of Nations was put to the test throughout the 1930s . The Allies and League of nations were put to a test throughout 1930s.
 This included the Spanish Civil War, Mussolini's invasion of Abyssinia, and others . This included Spain's civil war, Abyssinia's invasion, and other things .
 The greatest challenge to peace came with the rise of Adolf Hitler . Hitler's rise was the greatest challenge of peace .
 Hitler defied the mandates of Versailles and the resolve of the League of Nations and Allies . He defied the mandate of Vers ailles .
 The first challenge was the rearmament of Germany, which was forbidden by the Versailles Treaty . The rearmment of Germany was forbidden.
 The League and Allies took no action, emboldening Hitler to annex Austria in the 1938 Anschluss . Despite these flagrant violations, the League and allies did not act .
 This was followed by a demand to control the border of Czechoslovakia so that Hitler could "protect" ethnic Germans living there . This was also followed by demand for control of the border.
 Hitler granted Hitler his demand without consulting the Czechoslovakians in exchange for peace . In the now infamous Munich Conference, the Allies, led by British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain.
 The ""peace" lasted less than 6 months, ending with the Nazi invasion of Czechoslovakia . The "peace" ended with the invasion of the country .
 Hitler continued his expansionist agenda with the invasion of Poland on September 1, 1939 . Hitler saw nothing but weakness within the Allies .
 At long last, the Allies declared war, but did nothing until Hitler unleashed his machines of war against the Low Countries and France in the spring of 1940 .
 The United States entered the fray in 1941 and worked closely with the Allies to defeat the Nazi and Fascist forces . The U.S. entered the war in 1941.
 General Dwight D Eisenhower seemed to have adopted the strategy and approach of Ferdinand Foch in winning World War II . Foch showed the value of learning from the past, he says .
 The United States was eager to demobilize its Armed Forces after World War II . It appeared that once again it would withdraw from the world scene .
 The United States altered its strategy to keep a robust military presence in Europe . The danger of a Soviet invasion of Central and Western Europe was rising, and the United States changed its strategy .
 The XX NATO Alliance remains Article 5, which declares that an attack upon one member shall be considered an attack on all . The key tenant of the XX NATO alliance is Article 5 .
 The United States provided an unprecedented era of peace across Europe not experienced since the Roman Empire . Although greatly outnumbered by Soviet forces throughout the Cold War, the United States acted with its allies .
 As deliberation continued on the future of NATO, instability exploded in the Balkans as Yugoslavia fragmented along ethnic lines .
Horrific scenes of genocide were broadcast around the world to the dismay of modern viewers . The scenes were broadcast to dismay ofmodern viewers .
 The United Nations endeavored to bring peace through negotiations through negotiations and by deploying inadequately armed forces to the region . Yet, the atrocities continued .
 The bloodshed only ended when NATO deployed to the region with the power and might of its members' armed forces . In the end, the bloodshed only end when NATO deploys to the area .
 Even then, commentators predicted that the Balkans would prove the end of the Alliance .
 NATO emerged from the Balkan crisis stronger and unified . They were proven wrong, and NATO emerges from the crisis stronger .
 The world changed suddenly when the U.S. was attacked on September 11, 2001 .
 Article 5 was adapted in 1949, believing it would be invoked when the Soviets attacked Europe . It is ironic that Article 5 would have been invoked during the Soviets attack .
 Article 5 was used to come to the support and defense of the U.S. Yet, Article 5 is still used to support the United States .
 The forecasts of NATO's demise endured throughout its 13-year commitment to helping the U.S. in Afghanistan . NATO's mission to help the United States.
 Afghanistan was labeled by some commentators as "the graveyard of empires" The ISAF mission would put NATO to a difficult test .
 The Taliban believed NATO was vulnerable and commenced their counteroffensive in 2006 . Even the Taliban believed that NATO was vulnerability .
Early in 2006, the United States began to transition the southern portion of Afghanistan to the ISAF mission . The U.S. began the transition in 2006 .
 It would be a strategic blow to the Alliance if a nation retreated from Afghanistan in the face of high casualties .
 The fighting in 2006 was the worst since the end of the 2001-2002 American-led invasion .
 During the initial push, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld decided to restrict the number of ground forces deploying to Afghanistan .
 The Taliban leadership was able to flee to safe havens in Pakistan . Due to this, the Taliban leaders were able to escape to Pakistan .
 The spring campaign kicked off with ferocity in April 2006, with Canadian forces receiving the brunt of the attacks .
 Canada, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Denmark, and the United States and their Afghan partners prevailed . In the end, the combined forces of Canada and the Netherlands prevailed .
 The Taliban failed to drive a NATO nation out of the ISAF mission, and the Alliance came out of Afghanistan stronger . The Taliban didn't get a NATO mission out of ISAF .
 As the ISAF mission ended, a new challenge arose threatening both the security of Europe and North America . Putin's Russia.
 The Russian annexation of Crimea, its war against Georgia and Ukraine, and its cyberattack against Estonia threaten peace and stability so hard won .
 NATO is gradually taking measures to deter Russian aggression from being directed against eastern member states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania .
 It is at this point in geo-political discourse that the question of America's commitment is being debated . The question of U.S. commitment to the world is being discussed .
 Many in Europe and Canada have taken advantage of the security umbrella provided by the U.S. to slash their defense spending to create societies rife with government benefits .
 The specXXII ter of tiny military expenditure is amplified by short workweeks and long vacations by those nations reaping the benefits of the U.S.
 This misuse of American good will end and every nation must do more . This misuse should end and the U.S. should end, says President Obama .
 NATO allies made incredible sacrifices fighting America's wars in Afghanistan and Iraq . What is not mentioned is that the NATO allies make incredible sacrifices .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania would be hard to justify their soldiers being deployed to Afghanistan from an economic or other perspective .
 The United States was attacked, Article 5 was invoked, and they came to our aid . The simple fact is that the U.S. was attacked and the United States came to its aid .
 Of the 3,407 soldiers killed in Afghanistan during ISAL and Operation Enduring Lreedom, 1,136 were from NATO or partner nations . Of the 2,000 soldiers killed during the operation, 3, 407 were killed in the country .
 This does not include the tens of thousands wounded allied and partner-nation soldiers . This doesn't include the thousands wounded. This does also include the wounded.
 Most NATO nations also deployed their soldiers to Iraq, which was not a NATO mission . Most of the NATO nations were also deployed to Iraq .
 Many died to honor their commitment to the U.S. in friendship and in fulfillment for the ideas for which it stands . They came, and many died, to honor the United States.
 The outcome of the Cold War, the Balkans, the ISAL mission, and the deterrence effect on an aggressive Vladimir Putin demonstrates that the Alliance is more relevant than ever and central to maintaining peace .
 It took two horrific world wars for Europe and the U.S. to realize the need for a viable military alliance .
 It would be a costly and irreversible mistake to undercut and weaken the one military alliance in world history that has so long held back death and destruction from a continent so familiar with war .
 It has been the greatest guarantor of democracy and defender of capitalism . It has also been a great guarantor. It is also the greatest defender of democracy .
 NATO has made it possible for both Europe and the U.S. to enjoy unprecedented prosperity and security . NATO has also made it Possible for both countries to enjoy unparalleled prosperity .
 What Russia hears from the U.S. could be catastrophic and may result in a risky gambit by Putin to try to seize the Baltic region .
 This would not be some far-away war, but something that would result in a conflict that would cause the collapse of the U.S. economy and in the end, lead to another world war .
 NATO has immense value and enduring worth to Europe, Canada, and the U.S. NATO has great value and value to Europe and Canada .
 The Alliance has come out of difficult missions in the Cold War, the Balkans, and Afghanistan stronger . The Alliance is based in the United States .
 America's strength can be undone by doubts of America's commitment to it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 All 28 nations must do more from a defense perspective, but such negotiations should be conducted behind closed doors . All 28 countries must do much more from the defense perspective.
 Too much is at stake to telegraph lack of resolve and could result in a war of unimaginable proportions . Too much of the world is at risk, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 peace is the condition under which mankind was meant to flourish . We know that peace is a condition that mankind was intended to flourish.
 It depends on us, on our courage to build it and guard it and pass it on to future xxiii generations . We need to be courageous and pass on it to future generations .
 George Washington's words may seem hard and cold today, hut history has proven him right again and again . George Washington is right again.
 NATO is a bulwark of strength to avert war only as long as the commitment of its members to honor Article 5 exists . NATO's commitment to honor the Article 5 is not enough to prevent war .
Salacgriva VORUMAA Smiltene Saulkrasti Tukums 1 Lubana Base 802569 1-99 Estonia Railroad Expressway Road Road International boundary . Tallinn is the capital of Har/umee Maakond .
 The USAWC, at the request of the former Army Chief of Staff, General Raymond Odierno, published Project 1704 . It discussed the changing strategic environment in Europe spawned by Russian aggression against Ukraine .
 The positive reception of Project 1704 across NATO and the U.S. has made it one of those rare assessments used to inform and shape strategy . It has been used to help shape and inform NATO strategy .
 Project 1704 is still relevant in its view of the emerging Russian strategy toward NATO, the United States, and the European Union . The geo-strategic environment has changed significantly .
 Putin announced the modernization of the Russian armed forces and deployed forces to Syria . Turkey shot down a Russian aircraft after it violated its airspace . Putin's political proxies threatened NATO members with nuclear war .
Despite slow response in material action by NATO members, there are trends working against Putin's expansionist designs .
 One of the startling developments is in Finland and Sweden, two traditionally neutral nations in Baltic region .
 Moscow's aggression against Ukraine and in the Baltic Sea is pushing these two nations closer to NATO and the U.S. Moscow is pushing the two countries closer to each other .
 A realignment of one or both of these countries into the NATO camp would dramatically alter the strategic environment and give the West considerable leverage to prevent Russian aggression . Arealignment of both countries would dramatically change the strategic environments of NATO .
 Moscow or Washington, D.C. could plunge the world into a costly war . The increasingly bombastic rhetoric and actions of the Kremlin is disconcerting .
 Richard Westall's 1812 painting depicts a sword hovering over Damocles, held in place by a single horse hair .
 The saga represents impending doom or not knowing of when the sword will fall . The saga is the not knowing when it will fall.
 The ancient Roman philosopher, Cicero, told a story of how King Dionysius answered a courtier, Damocles, who thought ruling a realm was merely pleasure and leisure .
 King Dionysius offered Damocles to switch places with him . In response to this naive view, King Dionyius offered him a switch place with him.
 King Dionysius had a large sword suspended above Damocles' head, suspended by a mere hair from a horse's tail . However, the sword was not suspended above the head of the king .
 Damocles gave up his envy of King Dionysius and happily remained a courtier .
 The moral of the story is that imminent danger often often "hangs by a thread" and a simple misstep or miscalculation could let the sword fall and unleash death .
 XXVI. XXVI was the case a century ago when a complex web of alliances maintained the European balance of power . XXVI is the case of a century-old alliance between the two countries .
 Gavrilo Princip shattered this delicate balance of power after he murdered the Austro-Hungarian Archduke Ferdinand and his wife, Sophie .
 In just over a month, World War I would engulf Europe. So precarious was the complex system of alliances that, in just over one month, would engulf the world .
 The irony was that the very system that was created to guarantee peace ended in bringing war. The irony is that the system was set up to guarantee war ended in war .
Sign of weakness by NATO or a misstep by Russia could let the Sword of Damocles fall . Such a precarious situation is developing in the Baltic region .
 A 1914 German postcard depicting the precarious European Balance of Power that led to World War I . The idea of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania being under a looming danger by a Russian ""Sword of Damocles"
 The Kremlin's increasingly harsh rhetoric toward NATO, the aggressive and often reckless behavior of Russian military aircraft in the Baltics, and the increase in scale and tempo of Russia's military exercises in the region . The indicators of this growing peril are manifested in the Kremlin's rhetoric toward
 The "Sword of Damocles" hangs over the NATO nations of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania . These events make it appear that indeed a 'Sword ofDamocles' hangs over NATO nations .
 XXVll A Russian SU 24 buzzes the USS Donald Cook in the Baltic Sea on April 13, 2016 .
 Vladimir Putin's grand strategy is to reassert Russian influence in the region and to make it a dominant player in international affairs . Putin wants Russia to be dominant player.
 Putin needs to diminish the credibility of NATO, especially in the Baltic nations . To achieve this end, Putin must end the relationship with NATO, he says .
 A direct attack on Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania would be a high-risk move that could only come if American leadership is weak and NATO's commitment to its Baltic allies diminished .
 Once the land route is cut, Russian anti-aircraft and anti-shipping assets would make it too risky for U.S. and other NATO forces to arrive to expel the invaders .
 The second option for the Kremlin is to use ambiguity . The second, and more likely, option is to go for ambiguity .
This would take the form of fomenting a "local" ethnic Russian separatist movement similar to what was witnessed in Ukraine . This would take place in the same way as what was seen in Ukraine.
 The separatists would appear as civilians seeking independence for the ""discrimination" that they suffer from Estonians or Latvians . They would appear to be Russian Special Porces .
 Moscow's goal would be to destabilize the region in a way where no direct connection between the Kremlin was evident . Moscow's aim is to destabilise the region .
 The purpose of this ambiguity is not just to provide Putin plausible deniability, but, more importantly, to cause the NATO Alliance to dither and delay on taking action .
 NATO, not known for quick action, would act slowly to determine if the crisis was foreign or domestic .
 Pro-Russian protestors violently took to the streets after a decision was made to move the Soviet era statue . A massive Russian cyberattack that debilitated the nation was followed by a massive cyberattack .
 As NATO dithers, debates and delays a decision, the opportunity for a low risk move to destroy the Alliance would begin . The opportunity for an Alliance move would begin.
 Moscow would order a large force along the borders of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania to intimidate the Alliance and provide covert support to their separatist movement .
 Putin would announce a humanitarian mission to end the distress of the local population . As security deteriorates and local population suffers depravations, Putin would say it would end the crisis .
 Moscow would pledge that the army would be withdrawn from the disputed area once security is restored . Of course, Moscow would also pledge to withdraw the army.
 The Russian troops are leaving the country. There would be a referendum with the ethnic Russian population appealing to Putin to remain .
 Putin could merely deny any involvement and wait for another opportunity to try such an action when and where the environment was more favorable . The brilliance of this strategy of ambiguity is that, should NATO respond in uncharacteristic rapidity, Putin could simply deny any involved .
 NATO, and specifically the United States, can take steps to prevent either of the dangerous actions from coming to fruition . There are concerted steps that NATO and the U.S. can take.
 XXIX The Armed Forces of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania must be capable, survivable, and maneuverable. XXIX the Armed Forces.
 This is why acquiring midto long-range weapons could make these nations less appetizing to Moscow . This could make them less appetized to Moscow.
 If attacked, these offensive weapon systems could wreak havoc to Russian command and control nodes and transportation hubs .
 The goal is to have units rapidly fly soldiers into the region to use U.S. equipment already staged in Germany .
 This reduces the arrival time of "over the horizon" forces considerably . This reduces arrival time in the world .
 NATO forces are permanently stationing American and NATO forces in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania . Another key to forward defense of NATO includes permanently Stationing U.S. forces in Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia .
 The 2016 NATO Summit made a historic announcement, with the UK deploying a battalion to Estonia . The Canadians deploying to Latvia, Germany committing a similar force to Lithuania, and the Americans doing the same for Poland .
 This is a good start to deterring a possible Russian invasion of the "eastern flank" NATO nations, but more should be done. This is the first time NATO nations have taken action against Russia .
 The multinational force deployed in the Baltic region should be increased to a three-brigade element, one in each nation .
 The brigade in Lithuania should be a multinational NATO force permanently stationed in the Suwalki Gap . The brigade is based in Lithuania .
 This three-brigade model for the Baltic nations borrows from the Berlin Brigade concept from the Cold War .
 The U.S. and British Brigades stationed in West Berlin could not stop a Soviet invasion . They served as a guarantee that, if there was an attack, three powerful nations would fight to defend Germany .
 These brigades would have made the Soviet invasion bloody and difficult to accomplish . Additionally, these brigade would have been difficult to achieve .
 Cost/benefit analysis would be too high for Moscow to try a violent seizure of West Berlin . The cost of the seizure is too high, according to the Russian government .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania make an attack on them too risky for Moscow to contemplate . This is the same end desired for the Baltic nations of Latvia, Latvia and Lithuania .
 NATO should also assist Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia in developing a robust unconventional warfare capability . The strategy is to deter Russia from threatening the Baltics .
 If deterrence fails and Russian forces overpower NATO forces stationed there, waging unconventional war could be key . The U.S. military is stationed in Afghanistan .
 XXX Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia have a robust capability to wage unconventional war against an occupying force . The Forest Brotherhood waged an insurgency against Soviet occupation forces from 1944-1956 .
 This movement killed over 15,000 Soviet military and security forces and significantly hindered Moscow's ability to establish control over the Baltics . The movement killed more than 15,00 Soviet military, security forces .
 The question is if NATO will act quickly enough to deter aggression in the Baltics . The Baltics have a high ethnic Russian population .
 The lack of an adequate forward force makes such an eventuality feasible, says the author .
 The calculus for a Russian ambiguous attack on Narva, Estonia, changes the strategic calculus . The U.S. and NATO embrace the three-brigade concept for the region .
 NATO would already be there to deter Russian aggression . This would not be a replay of 1940, as NATO would be there .
 U.S. soldiers and other NATO ground soldiers deployed permanently in the Baltic region . This is the power of a modest forward presence of American soldiers and others .
 It changes everything from a strategic point of view and in the end will save lives and money . It is the first time a person has taken a decision to make a decision in the future .
 There are voices in Western Europe and North America warning against doing anything to provoke Putin .
Baltics often suggest forward positioning forces in the Baltics will cross a Kremlin redline . These often suggest that forward positioning force will cross the Kremlin red line .
 Much is spoken of the Russian fear of invasion and that it should be given a buffer to demonstrate good will . The Russian government should give it a buffer.
 The French and British approached the demands of Adolf Hitler in the 1930s . The recklessness of such a view was demonstrated by how the French and Brits approached Adolf Hitler .
 Western European leadership did all it could to accommodate and appease Hitler . With the horrors of World War I in their thoughts, the Western European leaders did all they could to appease Hitler.
 Had the Allies exercised strength earlier in this epoch, perhaps the horror and devastation of World War II could have been averted .
 In 1990, Saddam Hussein sought an excuse to invade Kuwait to ameliorate his economic and financial woes .
 Emir of Kuwait ordered his forces to stand down as a gesture of goodwill . He was confronted by a massive buildup of Iraqi forces on his border .
 Iraqi Republican Guards rapidly seized the nation on August 2,1990 . Saddam Hussein called off his invasion of Kuwait in 1990 .
 The idea that Russia should be given buffer states to make it feel more secure is not unique in history . The idea is notunique in history, it's not unique.
 The Japanese Empire's strategy in the 1930's was to establish a Co-Prosperity Sphere . The Japanese empire's strategy was to set up a Co.Prosperities Sphere .
This was to serve as an economic zone dominated by Tokyo, but also a buffer zone to protect Japan militarily . This was to not only serve as a economic zone, but to protect the country's sovereignty .
Life for the people in those nations included in this economic and military buffer zone was abysmal . But life for those in those countries included in the buffer zone is abysmous .
The idea of allowing Russia economic XXXI and military domination over any region is contrary to American strategy and ideals . The idea of letting Russia economic XXI andMilitary domination over the region was contrary to U.S. strategy.
 Rasa Jukneviciene, a Member of Parliament and former Lithuanian Minister of Defense, brilliantly stated, that Putin's biggest provocation for Putin is empty security promises .
 In 1940, Stalin demanded that Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania open their borders to the Red Army . They did, in an endeavor not to provoke or antagonize Moscow .
 The invasion and occupation of these lands within a year would suffer unimaginable horror and depravations at the hands of Moscow . This weakness resulted in the invasion and invasion of the lands, according to the author .
 The idea that inaction and weakness is a reasonable course of action for the U.S. and NATO is a hazardous and dangerous approach that historically has only resulted in costly and bloody wars . The idea of inaction is a dangerous and dangerous way for the United States and NATO.
 The emerging Russian "strategy of ambiguity" is a direct threat to the NATO Alliance . The emerging Russian strategy of ambiguity is a directthreat to the alliance .
 American Forces in the region can be deterred now with resolve and a modest forward deployment of American Forces .
 The U.S. can avert a perilous move by Russia with a simple commitment of a brigade in the Baltic region . The United States can change the calculus.
 There is a Russian "Sword of Damocles" hanging over the Baltic region . But the impending doom can be blunted by the physical commitment of NATO landpower to Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania .
 The military parade will take place on Red Square in 2016 . It will be the first time the military parade has been held in New York .
 Russia launched a crippling cyberattack on Estonia in 2007 . The changing face of Russia's operational approach began in 2007 when it launched a cyberattack .
 Moscow opposed the Estonian decision to move a Soviet era Red Army monument . This was in retaliation for an Estonian move to move the monument . Moscow opposed it .
 In 2014, the world witnessed the Russian annexation of Crimea using soldiers in unmarked uniforms . The Crimea annexation took place in 2014 .
 The annexation of Crimea was rapidly followed by a Russian inspired and led subversive war in Eastern Ukraine . The annexation was quickly followed by the Russian-inspired war in Ukraine .
 A common thread among Russian operations is its use of ambiguity to confound and confuse decision makers in the West .
 The 2008 invasion of Georgia and the ongoing intervention in Ukraine demonstrates Russia's reliance on the military and security services as instruments of its grand strategy . The 2008 invaded Georgia and Ukraine's ongoing intervention shows Russia's dependence on the security services .
 The application of the Russian military instrument of power has taken various forms over recent history . Russian military instruments have been used in various ways over the past decade .
 The Russian operation in Georgia was largely conventional . For instance, the Russian operation was mostly conventional .
 The 2014 Russian operation in Crimea diverged from the conventional approach by manipulating a sympathetic population and using a robust security infrastructure built up for the Sochi Olympics . The 2014 Russia operation was designed to manipulate the population by manipulating the population .
 Moscow inspired and is leading a separatist movement in Eastern Ukraine . The movement is backed by the powerful capabilities of its army .
 These operations exhibit common features of Russia's use of military force, such as the use of its military force .
Russia depends on Landpower to achieve its strategic military objectives . Russia depends on land power for its strategic objectives .
 This Landpower-centric approach is part of a broader Russian strategy to roll back Western influence from the former Soviet republics . This Land power approach is also part of the Russian strategy, says CNN .
 Russia has adjusted the use of its army to conduct hybrid, irregular warfare as the primary means of warfare against its neighbors . Russia has not provoked a decisive response from either the United States or other European nations .
 Information Operations and cyber-capabilities have emerged as key components of Russian military operations . Information Operations, cyber- Capabilities are among the key components.
 The importance of modernization is an ongoing concern for Moscow and its armed forces . Moscow's armed forces are in need of modernization, says the Russian government .
 These reforms are directed to developing a capability that can act decisively in the region . The reforms are designed to develop a capability capable of anything from small special purpose forces missions to largescale conventional operations .
 It is the ability to tailor forces across the range of operations that makes it uniquely adaptive and capable . It is this ability to adjust forces across a range of ops that makes the device uniquely adaptive .
 Russia is concentrating resources on small number of elite units, primarily airborne and special operations forces . To do this, Russia is focusing on its emerging Rapid Reaction Force .
 Putin believes that employing conventional forces is too risky . He resorts to using unconventional forces, scaled and adapted to the strategic environment .
 Putin denied that the "little green men" were his soldiers until after he annexed the region . This "strategy of ambiguity" was used to great effect in Crimea, says Putin .
 He operated inside the decision-making cycle of NATO and thus retained the strategic initiative . By doing this, he operated in the decision making cycle of the NATO .
 Putin's adaptable approach encompasses two phases, comprised of eleven factors . Putin's adapted approach includes two phases and 11 factors .
 The goal of Phase 1 is to shape an environment favorable to Russian strategic interests . The goal is to create an environment that is favorable to Russia's strategic interests.
 Phase 2 exploits cleavages in the NATO Alliance created during Phase 1 and attempts to alter the strategic environment through an ambiguous/hybrid intervention . The NATO Alliance was created during the first phase of Phase 1 .
 Phase I: Shaping a strategic environment favorable to Russian interests . Phase II: Shaped a strategic environments favorable to Russia's interests .
 Consolidate political power and use nationalism to maintain domestic support . Use nationalism to keep domestic support, consolidate political power .
 At the core of the strategy of ambiguity is the maintenance of Putin's powerbase . Putin's need for popular support is his need for support, says Putin .
 Putin secures his base by casting the West as the enemy of Russia and thus fuels the engine of nationalism . The West is seen as a threat to Russia and the West is an enemy of the West .
 The modernization of Russia's already massive nuclear arsenal is a threat to regional stability . Russia's nuclear arsenal could be a problem for regional stability, according to experts .
 The Kremlin has threatened to use nuclear weapons against any European nation that challenges its national interests .
 Moscow threatened Denmark with nuclear targeting should it join NATO's missile defense shield . Such a threat was demonstrated when Moscow threatened to target Denmark if it did not join the defense shield.
 The use and threat of nuclear strikes is part of Russia's emerging strategic/operational approach to bully and intimidate nations to submit to its desires .
 The May Victory Parade in Moscow showcased Russia's intent to replace its fleet of armored vehicles with modern systems . The May victory parade in Moscow featured Russia's plans to replace the fleet with modern technology .
 The Western Military District will benefit from this boost to conventional land force capability and capacity . Although facing economic challenges, it seems that the region will benefit.
When completed, this will alter the strategic dynamics of the continent . When completed, it will change the strategic dynamic of the region .
 Apply economic incentives and blackmail to pressure neighboring countries' economic well-being . apply economic incentives to pressure neighbors' economies . Apply economic incentive and blackmail. Apply economicincentives and blackmail for neighboring countries .
 Ukraine has been using a tactic against Ukraine against other European nations . But the dynamics of doing this against other nations is a bit more complex than Ukraine .
 NATO members are not willing to take a hard stand against Russian expansionist activities in the east . Germany and other NATO members rely on Russian energy .
 IO campaign includes highquality Russian cable and television, radio programming, hockey clubs, youth camps, and the internet . The tools of the IO campaign include high quality Russian cable, television, and radio programming .
 These export Moscow's strategic message across Europe, specifically targeting the Russian Diaspora . These export Russia's strategic messages across Europe .
 This brilliant campaign barrages the viewers/listeners with an unrelenting one-sided view of the world .
 With a continuous IO campaign brewing in the background, the groundwork is laid to manipulate disgruntled ethnic Russians where Putin chooses .
 As in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, these movements start as peaceful protests, but ultimately lead to taking over government buildings and armed insurrections .
 Once engaged in low-level combat, the rebels proclaim their right to self-determination . The rebels eventually appeal to Moscow for aid .
 The Kremlin does not need popular support in the Russian Diaspora to achieve its strategic ends . However convenient it is to have local support in an uprising, the Kremlin says .
 Moscow can simply export a separatist movement from Russia to provide the pretext for an intervention as in evidence in Eastern Ukraine . If the local populace not support an uprising, Moscow can just export an uprising from Russia .
 Move a large conventional force along the borders to dissuade action against the subversives . Move a big conventional force in the region to dissuaded action against subversive .
 Moscow responded to the instability by deploying a large conventional force along the border with Ukraine .
 Ukraine hesitated out of fear of provoking a response from Moscow . The real reason was to intimidate Ukraine, which hesitated to provoke a response .
 Putin uses these tools to sow ambiguity and thus obscure his strategy . Deception and disinformation are the key ingredients of this approach, says Putin .
 The Kremlin quickly adapts its actions to keep the Alliance off balance . The Kremlin remains a step ahead of NATO's decision-making process .
 Ukrainian Army launched offensive to subdue rebels in Eastern Ukraine . Russian Army poised to provide support to their comrades .
 The Kremlin equivocated about its intentions and denied involvement in the conflict . Meanwhile, the Kremlin denied involvement.
 Putin could have withdrawn support from the separatists, denied complicity in the violence, and waited for a more opportune time to try again .
 The security of a targeted region collapses, and the international response is mired in debate . Russian forces are set to intervene if the security of the region collapses .
 The forces would arrive with aid, food, and provide security to the embattled people of the region .
 This intervention would be characterized as a temporary effort to ameliorate the humanitarian crisis Moscow created . It would be called a temporary attempt to amaliorate Moscow's humanitarian crisis .
 Russia can attain limited strategic objectives with minimal risk. By doing this, Russia can achieve limited strategic goals with minimal risks .
 The ultimate goal of this would be to discredit NATO by seizing a piece of a member state's territory . The ultimate aim of this is to discredit the NATO.
 Kremlin would threaten to use nuclear weapons against any nation acting against its interests . Russian forces move to bite off a piece of territory for "humanitarian reasons," Kremlin says .
 The threat might just work and trigger a period of appeasement and surrender, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 This two-phased, eleven-part plan demonstrates an adaptive strategic approach . The plan was designed to be more flexible and adaptable .
 Putin's two-phase and multi-faceted approach to impose his influence in the region . But concerted action now can preserve European security, according to the Kremlin .
 The only way to do this, however, is through decisive and comprehensive action, according to the U.S. Attorney General .
 There are advantages that Russian strategic Landpower enjoys in the region, says Russian official .
 Russia conducts unannounced "snap exercises" close to NATO's eastern borders . This makes the so called unannounced exercises a serious concern .
 Russian strategic Landpower is the traditional, and at times extended, presence it has had across broad areas of the region . Another factor working in favor of Russian strategic landpower is its traditional presence .
 Russian domination over Estonia began in 1704, with the defeat of the Swedish Army in Narva .
 Independence was finally secured in 1920; but this would end with another Soviet occupation in 1940 . Independence was secured in 1940; this would be the first time it had been secured .
 During the Cold War, the region was a key location for the Soviet Armed Forces . Russian troops remained in the country until 1994 .
 Putin, in part, is so belligerent toward the Baltic integration into NATO, he says . This is why Article 5 of the Washington Treaty is integral to their security, he adds .
 Russian strategic Landpower retains the application of a hybrid mix of forces to befuddle and confuse Western decision making . However, the greatest advantage that Russian strategic landpower retains is the use of hybrid forces .
 As the West prevaricates during a crisis, Russian troops move toward achieving their objective, which can be rapid, as in the case of Crimea, or slower and messier, in the Ukraine crisis .
 The appearance of Russian intelligence and Special Forces in Eastern Ukraine pretending to be a local independence movement would be laughable if it did not so brilliantly confuse and baffle Western politicians, who continue to lack unanimity and resolve .
 Influence Russian Diaspora Phase I Shape the Strategic Environment to Favor Russian National Interests 6.6.5.5 .
 Maiatau Political Power Phasen 1 ‘Invade’ with Irregular Forces Masquerading as Local Separatists 3 .
 NATO should figure out a way to deter or mitigate the hybrid application of Russian forces, says U.S. Army War College .
 In the background remains the real threat of its conventional attack, which is poised to support cross border hybrid operations . The real threat is the threat of a conventional attack.
 hybrid war morphing into a conventional effort should the strategic environment prove opportune . Another outcome, often viewed unthinkable but not out of the realm of the impossible, is the hybrid war morphs into a traditional effort .
 This could even start off as a conventional fight if the U.S. becomes weak internationally . The fight could also start off if the United States is weak internationally.
 Putin's announcement to modernize and expand Russia's nuclear arsenal and armed forces may be in the back of Putin's mind . It may be just this that is just that is in his mind with his stunning announcement .
 Moscow will have both a modernized conventional ground force and a large nuclear arsenal . In just a few years, Moscow will be able to use both a conventional and unconventional force .
 Kaliningrad appears as a wedge partially thrust between Poland and Lithuania, and therefore, between Central Europe and the Baltic region .
 The emerging hybrid cat and mouse application of its military force makes it complicated for the West to come up with a coherent response to any Moscow inspired aggression . The West has not responded to any Russian inspired aggression.
 The hybrid approach is a capable conventional force that enjoys interior lines of communication . The benefits of operating on familiar terrain are the promise of being provided with modern equipment .
 Any future Kremlin operation against Eastern Europe will be backed by a real threat of a nuclear strike against any nation acting contrary to Moscow's interests. We can safely assume that any future Kremlin attack against Eastern European nations will be supported by the real threat .
 Russian Landpower remains the centerpiece of any actions it takes in the future to expand its influence across the region .
 This is an increasingly capable and adaptive force, which has come a long way since its invasion of Georgia . This is a new force that has come to an end, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Russian Military Parade was held in Red Square, Moscow, in 2016 .
 The European security environment has changed dramatically, according to U.S. Army Lieutenant Colonel Chris Briand .
 The question of collective security and the core purpose of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is priority topics with European allies . Moscow's annexation of Crimea, the invasion of Ukraine, and militarization of the High North are priority topics .
 Russia's destabilization of Ukraine has triggered detrimental effects both politically and economically in the region . Russia's instability in Ukraine has also triggered detrimental effect on the region's economy .
 Russia has created fear among its neighbors that Russia will continue its "land grab" and take measures to weaken their independence and territorial sovereignty . This has created fears among Russia's neighbors that this has created a fear among them .
 State policy in the sphere of the safeguarding of national security and the socioeconomic development of the Russian Federation contributes to the implementation of the strategic national priorities and the effective protection of national interests . State policy is a key part of Russia's national security strategy .
 These opposing ends could lead to a clash should diplomatic or other missteps transpire . The two sides could be at odds over the future of the world .
 Moscow has long viewed this regional geographic area as part of their Eurasian empire . Moscow has seen it as a part of its Eurasian Empire .
 This would create the potential for other nations to gravitate toward an open democracy . It might even encourage Russians to advocate for a similar system .
 Kiev's Western orientation creates a political instability to their vision of managed democracy in the former Soviet space . Kiev's attempt to align themselves with the EU creates, in the view of the Russian Government .
 Putin's statement that it is his duty to defend ethnic Russians wherever they live is more ominous for the Baltic States .
 Ukraine poses several strategic concerns for Russia, one being the reliance on Ukraine's aerospace and defense industry . Ukraine is one of Ukraine's most important countries in the world .
 Russia's biggest strategic concern would be if Ukraine joined NATO, which would challenge Russia as a Eurasian Power . Russia's largest strategic concern is if Ukraine joins NATO .
 There are long-term implications for the west centered on security, stability, arms control, and trade in relation to Russia .
 The EU is dependent on energy from Russia and exports agricultural products to it . Russia is also dependent on agricultural products from the EU .
 EU did not want to impose new set of sanctions on Russia until it was forced to do so after MH-17 was shot down .
 Putin is faced with more pushback and a downturn in the economy, he may face discontent . Politically, as Putin is facing more push back and the economic downturn .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin's rule is hinged on 14 providing economic growth and social stability for the Russian people . This is because his rule is based on 14 provided economic growth, social stability .
 These are key to Putin's legitimacy, which in turn can be undermined by the sanctions and the downturn in the oil price . The sanctions and downturn in oil price can also be undermined, says the author .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is using his patriotism to survive the economic challenge to his regime . He is using it to fight foreign threats against his regime.
 Russia's leader will continue to appeal to Russian nationalism and intensify military confrontation with Ukraine, if not the Baltic States . Based on his character and previous actions, he will continue his campaign to secure his position as Russia's president .
 Vladimir Putin did not consider the economic implications of his actions in Ukraine . Putin's actions were not considered to have economic implications .
 Crimea is now an economic strain on the Russian economy . Crimea had been a major source of tourism and farming under Ukraine .
 In 2014, the Ruble lost half its value due to financial concerns, but also geopolitical concerns . The Ruble has been hit by a new offensive against separatists backed by Russia .
 Inflation is rising as the sanctions on food imports from the west aggravate the situation .
 Many European countries are facing declining exports and industrial output because of the sanctions . The sanctions are affecting many European countries .
 As the Russian economy slows as a result of lower energy prices and sanctions, business and wealthy individuals have begun sending money overseas .
 A downturn in defense spending will add to the pressure on Putin at home and abroad . The economic situation is projected, and these economic hardships are projected .
 Suggestions that the U.S. is pulling back in Europe are causing unease in Europe, especially in light of the inability to formulate a common foreign policy .
 The United States maintains approximately 67,000 U.S. Armed Forces in Europe . Many on a rotational basis in Poland and the Baltic nations .
 This was recently bolstered by the deployment of military equipment in Eastern Europe . This was recent bolstered by military equipment deployment in Eastern European countries .
 NATO military members have significant capability gaps that they rely on the U.S. to address . Yet, NATO members have major capability gaps.
 These gaps in strategic air and sealift, as well as aerial refueling, intelligence surveillance, and reconnaissance require more U.S. resources .
 The Washington Treaty was signed in 1949 establishing the concept of collective security . However, things are not as "simple" as they were when it was signed .
 The economic concerns compound an already tenuous strategic environment and could force Putin to act in a manner that could threaten European peace . The economic fears compound an Already tenuous Strategic environment .
 Russia's intervention in Ukraine threatens security and stability in Europe and U.S. national security interests .
 The end of this crisis will have lasting implications concerning stability in Europe and U.S. interests in the region . Europe and the United States.
 The Ukraine crisis provides an opportunity to demonstrate solidarity, cooperation, and resolve against a re-emergent regional threat . The crisis provides a chance to demonstrate the post-Cold War relevancy of these organizations, authors say .
 The crisis in Ukraine continues to smolder and flare up on occasion . Much of the world's attention has shifted, but the crisis continues to grow .
 During 2016, Ukraine was the target of a significant and sophisticated cyberattack against its power grid . Ukraine was targeted by a sophisticated cyber attack against its electricity grid .
 OSCE observer movement is being restricted in areas not controlled by the Ukraine Government 44 and cease fire agreements have largely failed to take hold .
 The European Union and United States sanctions were extended through the end of January 2017 . As a result of Russia's unwillingness to fully support the implementation of the Minsk II peace deals, the EU and U.S. sanctions have been extended through 2017 .
 A stronger, broader, and more unified approach is required, says the author of the book . The author says the need for a stronger approach is needed .
 Russia's recently published national security strategy names NATO as a threat. Clearly, there is a reason that Russia's recent national security policy names NATO a threat .
 NATO is preventing Russia from bullying its way back into former Warsaw Pact states . Russia is now a member of the Alliance .
 All 28 NATO members also belong to the OSCE, so do Russia and Ukraine . The most prominent member of the organization is Russia .
 The OSCE is a forum for political dialogue on a wide range of security issues . It is a platform for joint action to improve the lives of individuals and communities .
 55 make the OSCE an invaluable part of any solution in Ukraine. This "whole of government" approach to regional affairs, coupled with both the resources and the necessary political backing of the nations that have direct interests in the Ukraine crisis, makes it invaluable .
 Most visible missions are the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and the Observer Mission at the Russian Checkpoints of Gukovo and Donetsk . But the OSCE is doing considerably more .
 Additional efforts include facilitating high-level diplomatic and multilateral dialogue . Activities to strengthen Ukraine's democratic institutions and practices .
 The OSCE has the usual criticisms of any large international organization . It's taking too long to respond, the OSCE says .
 Both NATO and OSCE are important in achieving U.S. national security interests . Russia's actions in Ukraine are particularly relevant given the threat to these interests posed by Russia's action .
 NATO and the OSCE have a long-standing tradition of cooperation, having worked alongside one another in the Balkans and Afghanistan . It is also evident that NATO has worked with one another, more recently in Afghanistan .
 U.S. should encourage NATO and OSCE leaders to find ways to deepen their cooperation in areas where their goals overlap, writes John Sutter .
 Ukraine is certainly one of those areas, and remarks by leaders from each organization reinforce that notion . Ukraine is one of many areas where leaders from both organizations are involved .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg recently thanked OSCE for "renewing dialogue and strengthening the OSCE's instruments and discussion forums" He called for increased information sharing between the two to increase transparency on military activities in Europe .
 OSCE chairman Frank-Walter Steinmeier said solving the Ukrainian crisis was one of his top priorities . Steinmeier also said solving Ukraine's crisis was his top priority .
 The Ukraine crisis has prompted increased cooperation in the Ukraine crisis . The U.S. Embassy in Ukraine says it is working on a common goal to help Ukraine .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine threaten European security and stability, as well as directly and indirectly threaten U.S. national security interests in the region . Russia's action in Ukraine threatens European security, stability, and threatens the United States .
 NATO and the OSCE are each conducting independent activities and missions in response to the Ukraine crisis . Both Europe and the U.S. can benefit from deeper cooperation between the two .
 Recent statements from leaders in both organizations indicate that they also share this belief . Fortunately, recent statements from both organizations show that they share this.
 The U.S. would advance this concept from a mutually held idea to a common goal . The United States, a member of both organizations and a respected global leader, would advance the concept .
 Alexander III, our emperor, once said that Russia has just two allies, the army and the navy .
 Vladimir Putin, April 2015 The Revolution of 2014 was a turning point in Ukraine's history .
 For the first time since independence, the country seized the opportunity to join European civilization and determine its own destiny on the basis of freedom and democracy .
 Ukraine's aspirations were not acceptable to Russia because they contradicted its imperial ambitions and geopolitical objectives . However, Ukraine's ambitions were notacceptable to Russia .
 Russia has utilized all instruments of national power in an endeavor to keep Ukraine under its sphere of influence . As a result, Russia has used all instruments.
 Neither political, nor economic, nor informational pressure has achieved the Kremlin's objective . However, neither political, or economic, or informational pressure have achieved the objective .
 Russia occupied Crimea and launched military aggression in Eastern Ukraine . As a last resort, Russia violated fundamental principles of international law and bilateral agreements .
 Ukraine revised its approach to national security and defense . In this frustrating strategic environment, Ukraine has changed its approach .
 Ukraine has developed a new National Security Strategy and Military Doctrine . Ukraine also reevaluated its operating doctrines .
 This resulted in a series of ambitious reforms of its armed forces based on lessons from the annexation of Crimea and anti-terrorist operations in Eastern Ukraine .
 This is characterized by the insurgent's disregard of humanitarian law, moral principles, human rights, and the needs of the civilian population . This is described by the insurgents' disregard of human rights and humanitarian law .
 There are cases where insurgents forcibly embroiled the local population in military actions, using them as human shields .
 They use mining, sniper, and radio-electronic and informational warfare . They also use large-scale sabotage warfare, including mining and sniper warfare .
There was an absence of a continuous, clearly defined front line, with heavy fighting in urban areas . Quite often there was an missing front line.
 During the summer of 2015, Russia developed a powerful ground force in Eastern Ukraine . Russia has developed a strong ground force.
 This force consisted of two army corps totaling up to 35,000 troops . It was supported by a reserve component of 21 tactical battle groups of regular Russian troops .
 Russia mustered another 53 tactical battle groups numbering over 50,000 people . In addition, along the Ukrainian eastern border, Russia musters another 53 Tactical battle groups .
 In such conditions, Ukraine needed to double its armed forces strength, which currently is about 250,000 personnel . In such circumstances, Ukraine's armed forces need to double their strength .
 There is a critical requirement for a highly qualified, trained, and motivated reserve component .
 During 2014-2015, the UAF managed to increase its combat strength and capabilities through six waves of partial mobilization . The UAF has been in action for six years .
Up to three brigades simultaneously being deployed in the AO . This approach provided a sufficient amount of troops in the aO .
 Ukraine will keep a mixed manning system of military professionals and conscripts . Ukraine will have a mixed menning system, says Ukraine's chief minister .
 Analyzing the conflict from the domains perspective, it can be concluded that they are being mostly conducted in land and cyber .
 The airspace is being used for medevac and transportation purposes only . Ukrainian Air Force and Army aviation combat losses have led to air-defense capabilities .
 This is 24 another lesson, which is reflected in a number of UAF conceptual documents . This is another lesson from the UAF.
 The UAF lost the majority of their naval assets and capabilities due to the annexation of Crimea .
 A new Maritime Doctrine was developed to ensure the revival of Ukrainian Navy .
The UAF does not have any space capabilities, but the space domain is definitely being used by Russia for intelligence and communication purposes . The UAF has no space capabilities .
 At the beginning of the conflict there was a shortage of digitally encrypted communication systems . At the start of the war, there were no digital communication systems available .
 C2 at all levels was mainly accomplished through analog Soviet-origin communication systems and often via commercial cell phones . C2 was mostly accomplished through Analog Soviet- origin communication systems .
 The breach of one of the fundamental principles of C2 —concealment. Not surprisingly, such communications were frequently eavesdropped upon by adversaries .
 UAF did not have enough weapons and equipment to recover losses and activate reserve units . After 3 to 4 months of intensive combat engagement, the UAF didn't have enough equipment and weapons .
 The existing battle dress uniform was of low functionality and poor quality . It was of poor quality and low functionality, according to a report .
There was a lack of modern helmets and a limited amount of bulletproof jackets . There was a limited number of modern helmet helmets and bulletproof jacket .
 civilian volunteers from all over the country helped improve the UAF logistic and medical support . However, due to unprecedented support by civilian volunteers, numerous NGOs, and enormous efforts made by the state defense industrial complex, it became possible.
 airborne troops have proved to be the most mission capable combat arm of the UAF Army . The UAF is the most mobile airborne troops.
 Early combat engagements revealed a shortage of their firepower .
Airmobile brigades were transformed into air assault brigades . Taking into account this lesson, airmobile brigade were transformed to air assault brigade .
 A typical airmobile brigade is now reinforced by a tank company, self-propelled howitzer battalion, missile artillery battalion, and air defense artillery battalion . A typical Airmobile brigade has now been reinforced by the tank company .
 At the beginning of the conflict the adversary had superiority over the UAF in cyber and informational warfare . The UAF had superiority in cyber warfare and information warfare .
 Pro-Russian separatists supported by Russian armed forces made many efforts to demoralize Ukrainian soldiers and officers . Many of the separatists' family members were killed by the separatists .
 Massive mail outs of text messages to cell phones and e-mail inboxes of the UAF military personnel and their dependents are just one example of such informational influence .
 The importance of strengthening the psychological fortitude of military personnel became another vital lesson learned . Military personnel should strengthen their mental fortitude.
 battle training is now fully integrated into the combat training system . As a result, battle mind training has been integrated into combat training .
 The UAF has a unique advantage in the UAF. There is a great potential to capitalize on UAF's unique advantages, according to UAF .
 UAF morale and patriotism are very high. We defend our motherland against separatists and external aggressors . We are supported by the vast majority of the Ukrainian population and the international community .
 The UAF developed an effective and efficient system of civilian-military cooperation . It did not exist at all prior to the conflict .
 All joint civil-mil activities harmonized and improved support of Ukrainian troops by the local population . Increased situational awareness allowed for the receipt of valuable intelligence information .
 The best proof of the benefits of NATO-Ukraine military cooperation is provided by those UAF units that participated in NATO-led exercises, initiatives, and programs such as Planning and Reviewing Process and Operational Capability Concept .
 The 95th airmobile brigade and 30th mechanized brigade were the most organized and capable of executing their missions . They suffered fewer casualties compared to other military units and formations .
This positive experience at the tactical level has to be shared, promoted, and brought to the operational and strategic levels . This positive experience should be shared and promoted, according to the British Army .
 Ukraine was among the ten largest exporters of major weapons in 2010-2014 . The Stockholm Peace Research Institute says Ukraine was one of the ten biggest exporters.
 The signing of the "Roadmap of Military-Technical Cooperation between Ukraine and NATO" on December 18, 2015, is the first promising step on this path .
 The conflict has already revealed many gaps in Ukrainian doctrines and concepts . The UAF had utilized the best practices and experience of the NATO countries' Armies prior to the conflict .
 Ukraine's Army is now one of the five strongest in Europe . It has high readiness, high readiness and enhanced operational capabilities . It is one of five strongest armies in Europe.
 It is willing to share this experience with NATO countries, which would doubtlessly be mutually beneficial . NATO countries are willing to shared this experience .
New National Security Strategy expenditure on security and defense totaling 5% of the country's GDP will drive continued progress of the UAF's development . The UAF is developing a new national security strategy .
 Any country's neglect of defense capabilities in the contemporary world is unacceptable, says U.S. expert . Despite a number of regional and global security systems, the neglect is unacceptable .
 Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaite watches a battle demonstration with Lithuanian Chief of Defense Major General Jonas Vytautas Zukas and Lithuanian Land Forces commander .
 Major General Almantas Leika took part in the final day of Saber Strike 2015 at the Great Lithuanian Hetman Jonusas Radvila Training Regiment .
Lieutenant Colonel Algimantas Misiunas, Lithuanian Army . There are three distinctive strands of Russian revanchist policy .
 One is directed toward the former Soviet republics that were not able to end Russian influence . One is aimed toward the West, and one is aimed at the ex-Soviet republics .
 The Kremlin views the latter two categories as the "near abroad" 84 and employs all instruments of national power to communicate this to the West . The Kremlin sees the latter as the ""near abroad"" 84 and uses all instruments to communicate with the West.
 The wars in Georgia and Ukraine demonstrate that President Putin follows this policy, and also demonstrates that Europe has been waiting for his next step in pursuing this .
After the Russo-Georgian war and the annexation of Crimea, Western observers and policymakers have expressed worries that Moscow's next step will be the Baltic States .
 Russia is likely to employ a hybrid war strategy because the U.S. and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization have no effective strategy to counter it . The United States and North Atlantic treaty Organization are likely to use hybrid war strategies .
 Former NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen says if Russia intervenes in Baltics it will be crossing a red line . NATO will respond, Rasmussen says .
 Determining whether it is worth it to Russia to attack the Baltic States, and what Putin's real intentions are, is difficult to discern . Determinating whether it's worth it is to Russia is hard to discern.
 Since the Russo-Chechen wars, Russia has been restored to global power with unlimited access to the oceans . Russia's former status as a global power has been the goal for President Vladimir Putin .
 In the late 1990s, the Warsaw Pact countries and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics had disintegrated into independent countries . Each had divergent national strategic interests and objectives .
 Russia had been thrown back to its 17th-century borders, with limited access to the Black 86 and the Baltic Seas .
The collapse of the Soviet Union has changed the balance of power in the world . The collapse of Soviet Union changed the world's balance of powers .
Military bases can be easily cut off from the mainland's support, from the military perspective . But those bases can also be cut off.
 The Black Sea remains a top priority for Putin and was a driving factor guiding Russia's strategy in its incursions into the territories of Ukraine .
 Moscow has prepared plans to reestablish lost access to the Baltic Sea . The strategic importance of Kaliningrad is almost the same, and there is no doubt that Moscow has plans to build a land bridge .
 Russian revanchist political ideologists argue that Russia has to evoke its imperial ambitions and undermine U.S. influence .
 The Russian National Security Strategy and Military Doctrine describe NATO as a threat . The dissolution of NATO would be a great political-strategic victory for Putin, they say .
There is a strong possibility that NATO would fail to respond to possible Russian aggression against the Baltic States . Given the complexity of the NATO decision making process and the versatility of the members of NATO, the possibility is strong .
 There is no doubt that NATO would collapse if it failed to respond to armed aggression against one of its members .
 The document asserts that an entire spectrum of political, financial, economic, and informational instruments could be applied to gain influence in the international arena . Russia will only use force when other options to protect its national interests fail, it says .
 Russia's 2014 military doctrine considers the expansion of NATO military infrastructure toward Russia's border as a military danger . Russia's military doctrine also considers NATO's expansion of its military infrastructure to the border a military risk .
 Large-scale military exercises in Russia's neighborhood are described as threats . NATO and the U.S. conduct to deter Russia .
 Russia perceives a need to defend what it sees as its vital sphere of interests . An important nuance in the doctrine is that Russia wants to defend its sphere of interest .
 Russia does not outline the perimeter of its sphere of vital interests . It does not explicitly name the states in the sphere .
 Non-military measures would be applied in order to disrupt the opponent's political decision-making processes . It would also weaken the unity of military and political alliances .
 Military measures such as unconventional and covert actions could be initiated in the opponent's territory before the beginning of military conflict . Military measures could be conducted in the opponents' territory .
Local protests and the opposition would actively be exploited during the crisis. Moreover, local protests and opposition would be actively exploited .
 When the crisis escalates into an open military conflict, it is planned to launch unexpected and rapid operations in the territory of the adversary . The aim is to destroy its critical civil and military infrastructure, to break the political or social will to resist .
 In addition, simultaneous information operations and cyberattacks would be applied extensively . In addition to cyberattacks, simultaneous attacks would also be applied .
 Russia's "end-state" has always been maintaining the role of a superpower in Eurasia . Russia has always maintained its role as a superpower.
 The ways have focused on using all the instruments of national power to intimidate and intimidate . The ways are to use the strategy of ambiguity to disrupt the opponent's political decision-making processes .
 Russia will either maintain counterinsurgency warfare or will enjoy a quick and incredible victory . Later, depending on how internal and external audiences react to this action, Russia will be able to achieve a quick, incredible victory.
 The separation of the three Baltic States had left Russia with limited access to the Baltic Sea .
 Former Tsarist Russian and Soviet leaders had occupied in the 19th and 20th centuries . Russia again lost territories, which former Tsarist leaders had occupy in the 20th century .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union and the rise of NATO has changed the balance of power and damaged Russian imperial ambitions . The rise of the NATO has also damaged Russia's imperial ambitions, says the author .
 Putin's main objectives are to ensure permanent control in the Baltic Sea region . If the situation permits, reestablish former power and influence over Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia .
 Analysis of the Russian wars against Georgia and Ukraine, the published Russian strategies, and "Gerasimov's" doctrine indicates that a Russian occupation of the Baltic States would be executed by employing a combination of non-military and military measures .
 Any military or non-military actions will be supported by the employment of all the instruments of national power . simultaneous information operations and cyberattacks will also be supported .
 The Kremlin will use ambiguity, deception, and disinformation to prevent a quick response from the Western Community .
 The Russian campaign could turn quickly into another frozen conflict, which allows Putin to achieve his main objectives . The Baltic countries have very small defense forces, which could turn into a frozen conflict .
 The fall of the Soviet Union and the subsequent independence among the republics ushered in an era that many believed spelled the end of tensions between Russia and the West .
 Unfortunately, this ship of dreams shattered on the rocky shoals of reality .
 Russia has a new tide of nationalistic fervor, casting its old nemesis, the United States, as the raison d'etre for nationalistic security concerns . Russia cites the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as a prominent example of United States encroachment .
 Over the last decade, Russia has increasingly tested the resolve of Europe and the West, inciting and then intervening in manufactured crises in Georgia and Ukraine .
 Latvia could survive this storm by understanding how Russia uses information warfare in combination with economic pressure and energy dependence to create tension . It is possible for Latvia to survive the storm.
 Russia could change its approach to undermine Latvian independence due to Latvia's NATO membership . It is important to recognize how Russia could be changing its approach.
 Latvia can counter destabilizing forces and strengthen its position with regard to its Russian neighbor to the East . By implementing a few specific strategic initiatives, Latvia can improve its position .
 A study of the events leading up to the 2014 Russian incursion into Ukraine provides insight into Russian strategy and understanding of what can happen without an effective counterplan .
 Ukrainian President Yanukovich was ousted after taking steps that would distance the country from the West and realign it with Russia .
 Russia sent plainclothes soldiers across the border into Ukraine to seize key locations and act as instigators among the local ethnic Russian population . Using disinformation as part of a hybrid warfare strategy to destabilize Ukraine, Russia manufactured unrest further .
After annexing Crimea and as tensions rose, Russia used the unrest as a pretext to invade . Russia claimed an obligation to protect ethnic Russians .
 Russia continues to provide thinly veiled support to separatists in the Eastern region of the country . The struggle has no clear end in sight.
 Russia has redefined the use of information as a key component of its hybrid warfare strategy . In a controversial 2014 study of Russian strategy, authors Michael Weiss and Peter Pomerantsev describe how Russia redefined use of data .
 Russia long ago abandoned the Cold War method of releasing information to counter the message of the West . The authors say Russia has now abandoned the method of release information .
 Russia now exploits the freedom of speech its former republics enjoy to implement an intricate blend of disinformation using television, social media, and nongovernmental 37 organizations . Russia now uses television and social media to spread disinformation .
 Using every medium available, Russia creates confusion, sows discord between ethnic Russians and other ethnicities, undermines political initiatives, and infuses doubt about the intentions of state governments while extolling Russian pride .
 Russia used these techniques leading up to the 2014 incursion into Ukraine, and many of them are evident in Russia's strategy with other states today . Russia's 2014 incursions into Ukraine have been seen as a key strategy .
Recent internet campaign calling for independence in the Eastern Latvian region of Latgale . 2007 riots and cyberattacks in Estonia and cyber attacks in Estonia .
 Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia are European Union and NATO members . There is growing concern they are the newest targets for Russian expansionism .
 Latvia represents an especially lucrative objective. Due to its geographic location, Latvia represents a particularly lucrative objective .
 Reestablishment of Russian dominance in Latvia would isolate Estonia and bring Kaliningrad closer to the Russian mainland .
 Lithuania's shared border with Poland would provide contiguous connectivity with other NATO nations . Lithuania's position would be tenuous, but it would offer contiguous connectivity .
 Estonia would become a veritable fortress, and economic benefits the country may enjoy otherwise would be consumed with military expenditures to defend the state . Estonia would also enjoy economic benefits from military expenditures .
 Latvia's social makeup provides fertile soil for Russian information operations . Latvian social makeup gives fertile soil to Russian information operation .
 The Baltic States spent most of the last century consumed by competing world powers .
 Ethnic division carries with it social division. Ethnic division creates enclaves of predominantly ethnic Russian people .
 Latvia took measures to establish their national identity that added to ethnic tensions . After independence, Latvia took steps to establish its national identity .
 To gain citizenship in Latvia, ethnic Russians must pass an exam that tests their knowledge of Latvian history and their proficiency in the Latvia language .
 Many ethnic Russians have neither the desire nor the skills to pass the exam . Many ethnic Russian have neither a desire or skills toPass the exam.
 The Latvian Government rebuffed efforts in 2012 to establish Russian as the country's second language . It removed the Russian language from the classroom throughout the education system .
 Latvian efforts designed to distinguish the country and its people as unique from Russia resulted in a large disaffected ethnic Russian population without citizenship .
Many ethnic Russians in Latvia view these initiatives as discriminatory . Many ethnic Russians view these Initiatives as discriminatory.
 Russian news media, easily accessed via the internet and satellite television, pounced on the internet .
 The Russian news message 38 resonates well with many of the Russian diaspora in the region .
 Russian news stations portray state policies as an attempt to diminish Russian ethnicity . Russian leaders like Putin are portrayed as protectors of Russian citizens and their rights .
 Ethnic Russians even third-generation Latvian-born ethnic Russians can acquire Russian citizenship, Russian passports, and retire on Russian pension years earlier than Latvians .
 The effects of these efforts are tangible, as demonstrated by the opinion polls of ethnic Russians in the Baltic States . The effects are tangible.
 The preponderance of ethnic Russians view Moscow's actions in Ukraine as acceptable to protect Russian citizens . They view sanctions by the West against Russia for actions in the Ukraine as unacceptable .
 The rise of social activist groups and nongovernmental organizations promoting Russian views provides another venue for Russian information to flow . Social activist groups are promoting Russia's views .
 Lueled by Russian money and acting as spokespersons for Russian initiatives in the Baltics, groups like the Lund for the Support and Defense of Compatriots Abroad act as proponents of Russian policy .
 Many organizations in Latvia take advantage of the hard-won freedoms of fledgling democracies to undermine unity and exacerbate differences among ethnic groups . Many of these organizations are Kremlin-funded, many are funded by the Kremlin .
 Information is not, however, a unilateral approach in Russia's strategy, but is used in conjunction with other instruments of power . It is not the first time information has been used by Russia's government .
 Moscow reacted by emplacing an embargo on foodstuffs imported from the EU . The action put a strain on the economies of the Baltic States and their political leadership .
 Baltic States recognized as key to future security after Russian actions in Ukraine is increased independence from Russia in the energy exchange market . Another issue the Baltic States recognize as important as future security .
 Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia recognize the need to bolster their ability to provide for their collective security . In all of these efforts, Latvia, Estonia, and Latvia, and Lithuania, are working together to provide security .
 The Baltic States share a common concern of Russian incursion and violation of sovereignty . cooperation has been slow in developing, but cooperation is slow .
 The Baltic States are concerned with the validity of NATO promises to respond if threatened by Russia . The Baltic states are also concerned with NATO promises if threatened .
 Georgia and Ukraine were NATO members . Russia's strategy of instigation and misinformation never rose to the level that would have triggered a NATO collective defense response until it was too late .
 Russia pulled the levers of national power to manipulate events until intervention seemed to carry too much risk for the West . Under the distracted eye of the world, Russia pulled out of power.
 Latvia recognizes the need to provide better security, but economic strain hinders the state's ability to enact change . Latvia recognizes a need for a better security .
 Latvia's 2015 defense budget measured a paltry 1% of Gross Domestic Product —it since has increased to 1.7% . The 2% threshold is expected to be achieved in 2018 .
 Russia is poised at Latvia's doorstep and proclaiming its obligation to protect ethnic Russians . The U.S. and NATO must decide if intervention and possible escalation is worth the cost .
 There is still time to create an effective response to this threat, but serious steps must be taken soon . The threat is still a threat to the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Latvia must find a way to close the gap of ethnic division in the country. First, Latvia needs to find a solution to its ethnic divide .
 ethnic Russians will only feel animosity and disassociation with the country until they are embraced as part of the social makeup of a united Latvia . Regardless of the country's dark history over the last century, ethnic Russians are not likely to feel animosity .
 ethnic Russians gaining citizenship could empower pro-Russian political parties . There is danger in making this move too quickly, because ethnic Russians gain citizenship quickly .
 A final course of action must include progress in energy independence throughout the Baltics . The Baltics are the region of Russia and the EU .
 A plan for continued development must include more energy sharing with EU partners . 40 further integrating Baltic economies with Western move threats to energy resources as a way for Russia to States .
 Following Russian aggression against Ukraine in 2014, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization rushed to secure and reassure its vulnerable Eastern flank . The Baltic States of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were among the countries to be reassured .
 The three states have been the focus of debates in NATO, the European Union and the U.S. Since then, these three states has been the topic of debates .
 Most of the discussion has centered on what NATO, the EU, and the U.S. will do to protect their interests in the Baltics .
 There are specific steps these countries can take to better prepare for potential future Russian aggression .
 To recognize the way ahead, it is important to understand the current composition of the armed forces of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, as well as the planned development of those three armed forces .
Russian tactics in the region are critically important, given Russian tactics. Second, given Russia's tactics, correctly analyzing what capabilities these countries need to effectively counter conventional Russian forces is critically important .
 Some recommendations are provided for the future forces of the Baltic States . Finally, some recommendations are given for the Baltic states .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania each have small populations and limited land area . Each has freedom of choice in every aspect of statehood . Lithuania, Estonia and Estonia each have limited land areas .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are together smaller than all of the other neighboring states . With 1.2,2.0, and 2.1 million inhabitants respectively, Estonia, Latvia, Latvia and Lithuania have more than 2 million inhabitants .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are members of NATO and the EU and greatly emphasize bilateral relations with the U.S. The three countries are part of the European Union and NATO .
 These factors have impacted how these countries organize their armed forces. Consequently, these factors have affected how they organize their forces .
 All three countries' armed forces heavily emphasize land forces (while naval and air forces have only niche capabilities) All three rely on NATO to cover the essential gaps in each country's military limitations .
 The land forces of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are built around the Infantry Brigade concept . They are supported by a volunteer defense organization .
 All three countries have different principles of manning, equipping, and organizing their brigades . All three have different Principles of Manning and equipping .
 Estonia relies heavily on the reserve army concept with mandatory military service . The reserve army is the primary system for producing wartime units for the brigades .
 Estonian brigades are combined arms formations with all-around capability for independent operations . Estonia's brigades have all-round capability forindependent operations .
 Estonia has two infantry brigades — one mechanized and one light infantry brigade — and territorial defense units provided by the volunteer Defense League . Estonia has one mechanization brigade and onelight infantry brigade .
 The Estonian Navy specializes in counter-mine operations, consisting of three mine countermeasure vessels and auxiliary ships .
 The Air Force consists of Amari Air Base and Air Surveillance Wing . It contributes to the NATO Integrated Air and Missile Defense System with robust early warning and air defense mission command .
 The Latvian Brigade's capability was greatly enhanced with the procurement of Combat Vehicle Reconnaissance —or CVR —light armored vehicles from the United Kingdom . Previously, Latvia only had light infantry units .
Latvian Naval and Air Forces only possess niche capabilities like their Estonian counterparts . Latvian Navy and Air Force only possesses niche capabilities .
 Budget cuts during the recent economic recession impacted the Latvian Armed Forces .
 Russian occupation of Crimea has changed following the Crimea occupation .
 The Latvian Government has announced that the defense budget will reach 2% of GDP by 2018 . Latvia is heading in the right direction, the government says .
 Latvia's GDP is too small to provide for the purchase of new capabilities or to expand its force structure . Estonia's GDP isn't enough to provide new capabilities to expand their force structure.
 Latvia's standing professional army will likely eat up defense spending, leaving little for operations and maintenance . The high personnel costs are likely to eat up Latvia's defense spending .
 Currently, Lithuanian land forces consist of an "Iron Wolf" mechanized brigade manned with professional soldiers . The brigade is equipped with M113 armored personnel carriers .
 The development of a second infantry brigade is on the way . When ready, when ready, will primarily be a reserve formation with a professional cadre .
 Lithuania relies on its volunteer defense organization of roughly six light infantry battalions . For territorial defense, Lithuania, like Estonia and Latvia, relies on volunteer defense organizations .
 The Lithuanian Air Force has more rotaryand fixed-wing aircraft than either Latvia or Estonia . They possess niche capabilities like MCM vessels and air surveillance .
 Lithuania will reach 2% of GDP defense budget by the year 2020 . It will purchase infantry fighting vehicles, anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons .
 Lithuania's recent purchase of a new self-propelled artillery system from Germany in 2015 . This program is already under way, with Lithuania's recently purchase of the system .
 Latvia and Lithuania need to recruit well educated personnel for defense and pay salaries . The problem stems from the need for more resources and resources to develop new capabilities .
Small military budgets are failing to purchase all-around capabilities such as air defense, electronic warfare, and an integrated fire support system . Small military budgets can't purchase the necessary all-round capabilities for self-defense .
 Baltic countries rely on their ground forces for their defense . The Baltic countries primarily rely on the ground forces .
Air forces and navies, with all their technical capabilities, are too expensive for small states to maintain . This is partly due to the historical legacy of starting the build-up of armed forces from scratch .
 The economic recession at the end of the last decade drove most countries toward a reduction of their defense budgets . Many by at least one-third of the country's defense budgets were cut .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania led by NATO for deployable units, led to the development of a light infantry capability . This fact, combined with pressure from NATO for deployment, led Estonia to focus on light infantry .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania pushed for the development of mechanized forces . Each state will have a mobile brigade with some level of protection .
 The acquisition of Javelin anti-tank missiles in 2015 improved the short-range defensive capabilities against Russia's mechanized forces .
 All three countries have a very short range air defense systems capability . Some form of fire support system, and their maneuvers are supported by combat engineers .
 land forces are missing a multilayered air-defense, self-propelled fire support capability, and the means to deploy scatterable minefields with fire support means .
 There are no coastal defense systems to protect the vulnerable coastline of these states . In addition, there are no coast defense systems for these states.
All three would benefit by withdrawing from the treaty as long as there were no penalty for doing so . The combination of the tactical effectiveness of landmines in canalizing and delaying an adversary's movements combined with its cost-effectiveness would benefit .
 With the scarcity of forces available to counter possible Russian aggression, mines could prove critical in neutralizing Russian advantages .
 All three countries should purchase medium range anti-tank systems to maximize their range of employment . To multiply the effectiveness of mines, all three countries must purchase medium-range anti- tank systems .
 Baltic countries do not possess air assets to guard their air space . Baltic countries must build up a layered, integrated air defense to counter Russia's air advantage .
 VSHORAD is effective against low and slow flying assets like helicopters and satisfies the needs of maneuver units . Baltic States need medium range and long range air defense systems .
Multi-layered air defense will have the added benefit of further facilitating air defense in support of the brigade's maneuver on the ground . Also, a multi-layering air defense would have the benefit of supporting air defense .
 Fire support systems are yet another area which all three countries must build upon . All three countries need both fire support and counter fire assets .
 Lithuania's purchase of PzH 2000 is a step in the right direction, but Estonia is still relying on towed systems . Latvia does not possess any fire support assets which can tactically support the maneuver brigade .
 All three countries must acquire artillery tracking systems, which will enable them to conduct counter-battery missions . In purchasing new artillery systems, all three countries also must acquire new artillery system .
 All three Baltic countries have small navies, they need to have a means to defend their coastlines against Russian Navy .
Smart use of coastal artillery will help all three states to minimize the risk of envelopment from the sea . Modern mobile coastal artillery or missile systems will give pause to an opposing navy, diverting additional resources away from enemy capabilities .
 The Baltic region must consider pursuing —effective electronic warfare and electronic countermeasures . This leads to an additional capability the Baltic region should consider pursuing .
 lessons learned from Russian aggression in Ukraine demonstrate that all the Baltic countries must develop and acquire electronic warfare systems to assist in countering enemy's C2, unmanned aerial vehicles, and certain weapon systems . Russia is currently actively using some of the systems, which Russia is actively using .
 Using drones or certain ammunitions for delivery will greatly enhance the effect achieved by non-lethal means . Using drones will greatly increase the effect of non- lethal means .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania need to continue to build mechanized forces . Russia's mechanized force is the only means to delay Russia's machine forces .
Foreign military sales to Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania will be impossible if defense budgets doubled . However, acquiring and maintaining the aforementioned capabilities, even if Defense budgets doubled, will be difficult .
 Even if obtained, the challenge of manning these new capabilities still exists, says CNN's John Sutter .
 NATO troops must be viewed more from the perspective of special capabilities than from maneuver forces . NATO troops continue to be deployed, but must be seen as more of a special force than maneuver forces.
 The Baltic States will focus on the mechanization and development of maneuver formations . NATO forces will fill the gap of some of the technical shortfalls .
Defending European security architecture has always been the task of NATO . NATO is measured in the sum of all alliance members' capabilities .
 The Baltic States need help from other NATO countries to secure their part of the collective responsibility . The security situation has not changed this, and the Baltic States needs help from others . The Baltic states need to take responsibility for the security situation .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania must concentrate their scarce resources to develop conventional capabilities that will act as a deterrent and, if need be, to counter Russia's conventional forces until the whole of NATO can mobilize.
 The alliance must agree to provide specific capabilities until the Baltic countries are able to acquire and apply these capabilities themselves . This includes ballistic missile defense and subsequent air defense layers along with allied air forces .
 The development of mobile fire support systems together with coastal artillery will be part of developing brigades as main maneuver forces . They must be accompanied by the passive means of fire support to execute effective counter-battery or counter-asset missions .
 Access to special munitions like scatterable minefields for their counter-mobility advantage against armor and tanks will help brigades.
Electronic warfare and electronic counter-measures capabilities will further multiply the effect of fires . Electronic warfare and counter- Measures capabilities will continue to multiply the effects of fires.
 The current Latvian force posture of territorial defense and only one maneuver brigade leaves them vulnerable against a Russian conventional attack . The currentLatvian forces are vulnerable against Russian conventional attacks .
 Latvia would benefit by reestablishing mandatory service, thereby creating one additional maneuver brigade in the region . Latvia would also benefit by creating one more maneuver brigade .
 Lurthermore, mandatory military service would help Latvia to integrate their Russian minorities into Latvian society . L furthermore would help the Russian minorities integrate into Latvia's society and possibly undermine the threat of hybrid warfare .
 Estonia and Lithuania already have mandatory service and are well ahead in this regard in effectively applying more manpower toward their defense forces . All three countries require the assistance of the remainder of the alliance to effectively convert the Baltics into a reliable NATO bastion .
 The NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION and the NEW RUSSIAN STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENT NATO Exercise Anakonda . The new R USSIANSTRATEGic ENvironment is NATO's "Exercise An
 In the decades following NATO's formation, the global environment changed drastically from that established after the 1945 Potsdam Agreement .
 The Cold War ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Modern globalization allowed the U.S. economy to grow beyond transatlantic-markets of trade and commerce .
Terrorism and unconventional warfare became the modus-operandi of transnational threats attempting to abolish world order .
 Some argued that NATO was no longer relevant, or even needed by the U.S. for the advancement of its national interests .
 The world has become more volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The United States could befall the same fate as ancient Athens during the Peloponnesian War . It is highly probable that the U.S. because of its longstanding political, military, and economic commitment to NATO, may befall its fate .
History predicts the United States will enter into a conflict, not of its choosing, or in support of its national interests, but because of its obligations to its allies in a continuously changing and unknowable global environment .
From a U.S. economic and military perspective, this risk does not outweigh the benefits NATO provides the United States. From a United States economic andMilitary perspective, the risk is not outweighing the benefits of NATO .
 NATO alliance is a means to balance the expenditure of finite United States national resources against U.S. national interests . The alliance is also promoting global, international order .
 The NATO alliance remains not only relevant, but an essential component to the protection and advancement of U.S. national interests in Europe, with ancillary effects globally . In view of this changing geopolitical environment, and an increasingly aggressive Russia, the alliance remains relevant .
 This paper acknowledges NATO's outdated mandate, which does not account for the complexities of the global security environment or the modern-day character of war . It will address these concerns through specific recommendations for the mitigation of these issues .
 NATO has a direct effect not only on U.S. policy, but also on a variety of United States national interests .
 The U.S. will influence its national, diplomatic, and economic destiny. By continuing to invest in the success and growth of the alliance, the United States will influence the success of the relationship .
 The United States guarantees continued access and influence in Europe and the around the world . By strengthening NATO, the U.S. guarantee continued access to Europe, the United States.
 From a United States perspective, NATO is not exclusively about mutual defense . From a U.S. perspective, it is not only about defense .
 The alliance is arguably more focused on international access, stability and economic prosperity created from U.S. involvement in Europe, and legitimacy .
 The NATO alliance has been at the center of U.S. foreign policy and power projection, while concurrently maintaining the backbone of the European security apparatus . The alliance has also been in charge of the NATO alliance.
 The United States profits from a free, democratic, and peaceful Europe . The U.S. profits from the free and democratic Europe, the United States says .
 The United States contributes more than 70% of the total defense expenditures of the alliance's 28 members . Europe benefits from the security umbrella NATO affords its members .
 A military attack against any is an attack against them all, according to the European Union's collective defense principle . This security has correlated directly into the political and environmental stability of Europe .
 The U.S. NSS continues to be a key foundational principle of United States NSS . NSS is a vital source of continuing influence overseas .
 NATO provides a significant strategic advantage with respect to U.S. influence and global reach .
 Ramstein Airbase in Germany remains a vital logistical supply hub for both personnel and equipment entering those theaters of operation for more than a decade .
 A military presence facilitates the U.S. ability to assure its allies, cultivate new partners, and maintain a stabilizing presence globally . In this respect, a military presence helps assure its friends and allies .
 This enables the U.S. to protect Europe's populace and borders through security collaboration . The United States will be able to provide security assistance to Europe's population .
This understanding highlights that NATO is, first and foremost, a political organization . This understanding highlights the importance of NATO as a political group .
 NATO offers the U.S. international legitimacy to act, within the framework of international law and norms, inside the global security system to protect and advance its national interests and its allies .
 The combined and voluntary will of 28 of the world's strongest, sovereign democracies is an extremely powerful source of political legitimacy . It is a very powerful source.
 Something that unilateral action or coalitions of the willing simply cannot enjoy. Something that unilaterally action or Coalitions of a willing cannot enjoy .
 It attracts partners whose political support and military contributions add to our broader international legitimacy . It attracts partner's political support, military contributions, it attracts partners .
 The 21st-century global security environment is complex, unpredictable, fiscally constrained, and comprised of multiple weak and failing states . Some of which maintain the ability to violently alter the geopolitical/strategic landscape within their own nations and in other various regions .
 focus must be on evolving the fidelity of the international system itself, a structure of moral global citizens that endorse and advance United States core values, and the UN Charter .
 In order to advance security and prosperity in the 21st century, we must maintain and even enhance our military strength . We must maintain, even enhance the military strength, says David Cameron .
 The U.S. must place even greater emphasis on building the security capabilities of others . But the United States must also place even more strategic emphasis on security capabilities .
 The U.S. promotes the ability to shape the global security environment, while enhancing the collective ability of NATO to respond and defeat any source of regional instability .
 NATO is a vital component of U.S. strategy and foreign policy with respect to the protection and advancement of United States national interests in Europe and the international community .
 NATO's mandate may be dated, but it allows the alliance to endure, despite the current complexities of the global security environment . NATO's foundational philosophy is to safeguard freedom, common heritage, civilization, and principles (democracy, individual liberty, and rule of law)
 NATO maintained the peace in Europe throughout the 20th century . For it to remain pertinent and effective, it needs to adapt to threats of the 21st century .
 The United States must continue to lead, through financial investment, and political commitment and mentorship . The U.S. must influence the following evolution and ratification of NATO's mandate and strategy to shape the global security environment .
 If implemented, the alliance will focus on collective defense, cooperative security, and crisis management . The alliance's three core tasks are to focus on the vision for collective defense and cooperative security .
 NATO should foster a comparable interface and collaboration with the rest of the international community . NATO should continue to encourage political dialogue and diplomacy between its members and its members .
 The United States remains the preeminent power but the gap between the United States and the rest is narrowing . The U.S. remains the world's most powerful power .
 In literal or factual terms, the alliance is a viable mechanism for political discourse among a multitude of diverse nations .
 NATO's ability to assimilate and synergize the varied cultural beliefs of its members is one of its greatest strengths . The ability of NATO to integrate and integrate is a key part of the organization's success .
 The character of the global security environment continues to evolve, and international relationships remain a diplomatic endeavor .
 NATO must enhance its ability to deter, and if required, defeat regional sources of instability, not just the military prowess of a common enemy . NATO must also defeat regional instability.
 NATO no longer faces a single communist threat embodied by the Soviet Union . Unlike the Cold War, NATO is not facing a communist threat .
 The alliance confronts modern dangers such as terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, cyberwarfare, piracy, narco-trafficking, hybrid warfare, and mass immigration .
 regional sources of instability that severely influence global security, economic prosperity, and international order . These problem-sets exemplify an assortment of regional Sources of instability .
 This entails the ability to compel or coerce the will of a state or nonstate actor, typically through the threat, or actual use, of forceful action . This includes the ability of the state to compel, coerce, or force, a state to take action .
 NATO needs to foster domestic stability among its members, says NATO chief . NATO must foster domestic governmental stability among members .
 NATO's profile has transformed, especially with the incorporation of former Warsaw Pact countries into the alliance following the collapse of the Soviet Union . The alliance was formed after the fall of the USSR .
 NATO enlargement propelled multiple transitional, and somewhat weak and fragile, newly democratic states into a very mature and demanding political/military arena . The West perceived this enlargement as a mechanism to provide greater stability to all of Europe .
 Since the end of the Cold War, the proliferation of weak and failing states has been the principal source of regional instability and conflict . Since the last two decades, there have been a number of countries that have been in trouble .
 When these conditions become severe, the state's legitimacy erodes and it can even vanish .
 NATO's founding members should work closely with new and emerging allies to ensure sustainability of membership criteria . NATO draws strength and legitimacy from its partnerships, the alliance says . The alliance's founding member members should ensure the sustainability of its membership criteria.
 NATO provides an assembly of legitimate governing bodies, dedicated to the global advancement of security, freedom, prosperity, and order for the international community to emulate .
 This is essential to equip leaders, both political and military, at all levels, with the comprehension and forethought to make decisions, mitigate risk, and account for 2nd/3rd order effects . This is crucial for leaders and military to be prepared at alllevels .
 The United States has operated as part of NATO for over 65 years . NATO interoperability remains far from perfect, however, and the U.S. is not yet perfect .
 It reflects outdated, linear practices and a conventional Cold War mindset . The current global security environment is categorized as complex, asymmetric and hybrid .
 For example, alliance members must understand the standard forms of operational employment, mission command and signal/communication capabilities, and overall logistical/sustainment capacity .
 NATO must recognize that many of the allies and partners operate under national caveats restricting their acts while deployed . NATO must also recognize that some of its allies and partner partners operate with national caveats .
 Alliance members may also preserve historically engrained frictions, shaped by common and sometimes contested national histories, which may impede operational participation and cooperation .
 NATO members' understanding is vital for NATO members, as it relates directly to planning considerations, collaboration, and the ability of the alliance to interoperate during its missions . This multinational understanding is important for the alliance, says NATO spokesman .
The ability to communicate this knowledge is as important as this detailed multinational understanding between nations . The ability to understand each other is important for nations to understand .
 The alliance itself is an integral requirement for success, according to the alliance . The alliance is based on various operating systems/procedures and language barriers .
 The North Atlantic Council empowers its members by increasing situational 58 understanding . The council also facilitates the resolution of possible misconceptions of allies or partners .
 This enables informed decision-making to support the desired political end state, but more notably, builds greater trust in the alliance . This allows informed decision making to support a political endState, but also builds greaterTrust in the Alliance .
 NATO is demanding a shared collective multinational understanding in NATO . Building trust between its members is even more challenging .
 When operating in conjunction with NATO allies and other joint, interagency, intragovernmental, and multinational partners, diversity is the modus-operandi .
 These dissimilarities can lead to biases, creating fissures in alliance solidarity, and hindering NATO collaboration, integration, and unity of effort . These dissidentities can also lead to bias, hindering alliance collaboration, unity and unity .
 It is crucial that all NATO members place these preconceived biases aside . All NATO members should place these parochial preconceptions aside .
Successful implementation will allow better incorporation of the distinctive capabilities and capacities of each NATO ally and JIIM partner . interoperability is not about achieving congruency, rather, it is about compatibility and understanding how to integrate each contributing nation .
 The cultivation of trust allows NATO to operate more effectively and efficiently, achieving synergistic effects, according to NATO . NATO's success is based on strategic, operational, and tactical success .
 Once established, trust becomes the foremost advantage binding contrasting units or organizations together, empowering the many to act as one, and forging a unity of effort .
 NATO requires adequate resources from its members to operate effectively in the global security environment . The alliance requires financial investment, political support, and military/non-military capabilities .
 NATO must continually reorganize itself to have the necessary conventional/unconventional and select "niche" capabilities available . NATO must also prepare for and respond to the wide-range and varied contingencies currently confronting the alliance .
 The dangers range from the complex, multidimensional hybrid warfare employed by Russia in Ukraine, to the cost-efficient, yet potentially devastating threat of cyberwarfare by any capable actor .
 More than 70% of European land forces do not have the means to deploy equipment or personnel significant distances or to sustain them . This is primarily shouldered by the United States .
Only Estonia, Greece, Poland, the UK, and the United States achieved in 2015 . This investment equates to a 2% of GDP benchmark for defense spending, of which only Estonia and Greece achieved this .
 As allies, we must all accept our fair share of security responsibility to each. As allies we all must choose to invest in, develop, and field new capabilities now and in the future .
 NATO must modernize its response capabilities while developing new and improved technologies, says NATO . This emphasizes for NATO that, to effectively address the challenges and threats of the 21st century, it must be modernizing its response capability .
 NATO members must increase their national defense spending to at least 2% GDP benchmark . NATO members have agreed to increase their defense spending at previous NATO summits .
 NATO has invested in a multilateral, transatlantic approach to cooperative security . The investments will provide NATO the political strength and military capability to defend its members and share the cost .
 The blunt reality is that there will be dwindling appetite and patience in the U.S. Congress, says John Sutter . Sutter: Congress is trying to expend increasingly precious funds on behalf of nations .
 The U.S. should continue to invest politically, militarily, and financially in the alliance, he says . For this reason alone, the United States should continue.
 NATO provides the United States with the benefits of geopolitical/ strategic access, burden/cost sharing, and legitimacy . The United States military remains the world's most resourced and accomplished fighting force, capable of sustained unilateral action virtually anywhere in the world .
 NATO operations have been the United States' preferred manner of applying military power toward its goals of protection and advancement of core U.S. national interests . For more than seven decades, NATO operations has been the U. S. preferred manner for more than 7 decades .
 The United States is committed to leading the world through a shifting security landscape toward a more durable peace and new prosperity . In today's global security environment, the United States requires the assistance of its strategic allies .
 NATO's multilateral capacities enable it to face the current challenges of the 21st century, but also those yet to surface . The crucial multilateral capacity contained in NATO enables it to be able to cope with the challenges .
 The German Army faces enormous challenges both in our Eastern and our Southern neighborhoods .
 People across the Alliance are understandably worried about their security . The Alliance is concerned about their safety .
 We must be fully committed to doing collective defence and crisis management both at the same time . We must do collective defence. We must also do crisis management. We need to do it both at same time, says former boss .
 Stoltenberg said he was resolved to "keep NATO strong" as a political and military alliance .
 It should implement a revolutionary approach that builds on the lessons of the previous 65 years . Proactively 63 addresses the challenges of the emerging strategic environment .
 NATO's successful adaptations during and after the Cold War suggest that the Alliance's two distinct, but revolutionary, approaches helped it to overcome a direct confrontation with the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact . The Alliance took on contemporary security challenges.
 NATO's strategic adaptation at the outset of the 21st century was an important step that preserved the Alliance's relevance . To remain relevant, NATO must adapt more comprehensively in the immediate future.
 This has spelled the end of NATO's goal of a "true strategic partnership" with Russia, at least for the mid-term . This has also spelled theEnd of NATO.
 A major conventional attack on NATO territory seems unlikely, but the risk of escalation has increased . The threat of a limited hybrid aggression including military means against the Baltic States has increased.
 Russia's application of a revised strategic approach. This reality indicates Russia'sApplication of a new strategic approach, says the author .
 The Alliance's deliberations in Wales resulted in several decisions with regards to Russia . It also built the starting point for a comprehensive review of NATO's future tasks and goals .
 The Wales Summit was one of the most important summits in NATO's history . There are differences in the evaluations of the outcome of the summit .
 Critics argue NATO is incapable to act as a whole within the breadth of crisis management and collective defense missions .
 The reason is a flawed policy of financial cuts and military reductions paired with political unwillingness to use the military instrument of power . Europe is under-resourced and weak Europe with insufficient military capacity and capabilities .
 A cosmetic patchwork of loosely connected activities has been launched in Wales . As such, initiatives seem to be a patchwork.
 NATO's reaction to Russia's aggression in Wales indicated great consensus and comprehension of a flexible framework of political and military activities . Others argue that decisions made in Wales are of particular significance .
 NATO needs a balanced approach to collective defense, crisis management, and cooperative security that integrates regional and global perspectives . NATO needs to be able to deal with the rapidly changing and complex security environment .
 His speech at the German Marshall Fund stressed that NATO does "not have the luxury to choose challenges" He said NATO cannot focus on one pillar of its threefold set of tasks .
 The Secretary General recognized the need for NATO's adaptation since its strategic approach does not address the breadth of challenges in the emerging security environment .
 Stoltenberg must strive for "Establishing A Sense Of Urgency" among NATO officials and its member nations' policymakers to enable NATO to adapt in the ever changing international security environment .
Several members are satisfied with the initiatives agreed on in Wales and do not envisage a comprehensive overhaul of NATO's strategic concept . This lack of urgency suggests that several members are happy with the measures agreed on .
 Warsaw Summit would have commissioned a new concept to be developed for the 2016 Warsaw Summit .
 Stoltenberg's team should include secretaries of state and defense from the United States, United Kingdom, France, and Germany . This strategic leadership team should encompass Stoltonberg, U.S. and France .
 A group would demonstrate cohesion through a collaborative transatlantic approach . Such a group would show cohesion through the collaborative trans Atlantic approach, says the group .
Based on its history in NATO and its geostrategic location, Germany could play a major role, in particular, in terms of collective defense . Germany could also play a key role in the defense of its own country .
 It entered NATO when the country was divided and benefitted from NATO's solidarity and cohesion during the Cold War . The country's unification in 1989 resulted in the unification of NATO .
 Europe is whole, free, and at peace in a stable world, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: In the 21st-century globalized security environment, the former is not achievable without developments in the Middle East, North Africa and Asia-Pacific .
 All of this must be based on NATO's enduring principles of cohesion, consensus, and collectiveness . All of these must bebased on the principles of unity, cohesion and consensus .
 The Alliance should determine follow-on activities of the Alliance, says Kotter . "NATO Common Collective Security Identity and Culture" is a step-by-step development .
 NATO has to adopt a 21st-century version of its Flexible Response strategy linked to the idea of deterrence and detente . NATO has been in the Cold War era, and based on its Cold War experience .
 Russia already chose this path and initiated the new confrontation, according to Russian media . However, such a view indicates a lack of urgency, since Russia already chosen this path, says Russian media.
 Russia will seek to deter a further escalation, while aiming to overcome tensions by guiding both sides out of a security dilemma . The recommended approach will be understood by Russia .
 RAP's approach should incorporate not only conventional activities based on the RAP, but also elements that reinforce a broader approach to collective defense . This approach should include countermeasures against Russian IO, cyberattacks, and landpower centric, hybrid aggression .
Both organizations should review their "Berlin Plus" arrangement and develop it into a mutually supporting agreement . Both organizations should also review their ""Berlin plus" arrangement .
 Germany could be the framework nation to comprehensively enhance NATO's collective defense based on its existing commitments, military cooperation programs, and its landpower centric armed forces .
 NATO's nuclear strategy, including its nuclear posture, is inevitable to provide a flexible, survivable, reliable, and accurate nuclear deterrence against the already existing threat posed by Russia .
 With the United States in the lead for this component of deterrence and defense, a "rock 69 solid" transatlantic bond and the cohesion of the Alliance would be shown .
 NATO should consider another round of enlargement for those countries already in the process . Georgia and Ukraine should also be considered .
 NATO must not allow Russia to undermine this process by threat or use of force to prevent membership, says NATO . Russia must not be allowed to undermine the process by threatening or using force .
 Germany's acceptance during the Cold War provides evidence that their flexible and prudent application can improve Euro-Atlantic security in the long-run . The standards for all members must be the same.
 NATO must come to terms with acceptable security guarantees to potential new members during their application process . NATO must also come to Terms withacceptable security guarantees during the process .
 EU could be an essential partner based on its own interests, articulated ambitions, and available soft power capabilities . EU could also be an important partner in crisis management.
 2010 Strategic Concept's aim is to "fully strengthen the strategic partnership" of both organizations . This would reinforce the 2010 Strategic Concepts aim to ""fully strengthen" the partnership .
 NATO has to reframe its partnership concepts, aiming to offer interested global democracies a formal way of cooperation based on the experience of the ISAF mission .
 NATO must leverage its historical strength and has to go back to the business of adaptation . NATO must use its history to leverage its historic strength and have to adapt .
 Thereby, it has to develop and implement a third revolutionary approach that builds on the lessons and success of the previous 65 years . Thereby has to address the challenges of the emerging strategic environment in the 21st century .
 The Alliance has to strengthen its credibility through enhanced effectiveness built on the foundation and modern interpretation of collective defense . To preserve its relevance, the Alliance must strengthen its relevance .
 NATO's success still is the "winning combination" for NATO, says Stoltenberg . "Working together in a strong NATO" is the winning combination, he says .
 This combination rests on the Alliance's enduring principles of cohesion, consensus, and collectiveness . The Alliance has a long history of cohesion and consensus .
 NATO has taken responsibility for the Euro-Atlantic order. NATO must adapt successfully again . NATO must take responsibility for its role in Euro- Atlantic security .
No contradiction between increasing the strength of NATO and engaging with Russia, says Nieuwenhuis .
 The crisis in Ukraine is a low point in its relationship with the Russian Federation . It is clear that the crisis is a high point in Ukraine's relationship with Russia .
 The "pivot to Asia" by the United States and the decrease of its Armed Forces' budget raises questions about America's commitment to the Alliance .
 NATO members in the eastern part of the Alliance's territory fear a shrinking U.S. commitment . This apprehension is particularly felt by those on the Russian border .
 NATO should reconsider its policies and approaches for Europe in light of the current strategic environment for Europe . NATO should consider its policies, approaches and approaches to the continent .
 The question is whether NATO's founding principles, procedures, and processes are suitable and strong enough to persuade members to invest in the organization .
 The basis of the U.N. Charter was Article 51 of the United Nations Charter . It gives independent states the right for individual or collective defense .
 Ukraine is not a NATO member, but the subsequent NATO initiatives remain significant . The U.S. is the leading United States role .
 The U.S. took the lead to reassure East European allies and moved to strengthen the Alliance cohesion .
 NATO invited Montenegro to start accession talks to become 29th member of the Alliance . The relationship with Russia has been at a low point since NATO's December 2015 decision .
 Ukraine is not a NATO member, but there is a close relationship between the country and the Alliance . Ukraine has not been a member of the alliance .
 Implementation of the RAP is not only challenging, but demonstrates NATO's credibility . The RAP may influence its future .
 The question remains, however, if all member states are willing to make the RAP a success .
 RAP requires a long lasting commitment and that all member states understand and accept each other's point of view or even a different approach to solving issues . RAP needs a long-term commitment, says RAP .
 It needs an analysis of the financial process and the military structures to answer this question . The military structures need to be analyzed to answer the question .
 The transatlantic NATO link between the U.S. and Europe has been one of its strongest points . The organization was founded in 1949 .
 NATO appears to be a strong and cohesive Alliance, but under the surface, sometimes emotions run high .
Disagreements about participation in the war in Iraq in 2003 and the disproportional contribution of the U.S. to NATO are chief concerns .
 The question is if member states are willing to solve these issues at all . It is not clear if they will be willing to do so .
 After the Soviet Union collapsed, the U.S. was the undisputed victor and world leader . The United States was the world leader after the USSR collapsed .
 An illustration of its power at that time was the first Gulf War in 1991 . The Gulf War is the first of its kind .
 With its political and economic power, the U.S. was able to create an impressive multinational coalition . The United States is now the world's largest economy .
 The United States' strong military power enabled the U.S. to turn its words into deeds at any particular moment .
 A focused information campaign supported its efforts to influence the domestic and international powerbrokers . The campaign was launched by a group of international and domestic power brokers .
 It even felt strong enough to use the UN to provide the legal authority to take military action . The UN has been in charge of the military since 2003 .
 Its strength and confidence ensured a positive result in the UN Security Council with its normally annoying VETO rule . It is the first time the council has been able to use the rule.
 There is a rise of new and strong political, economic, and military powers in the form of China and Russia .
 New alliances like BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) are important. New alliances such as Brazil, Russia and India are important for BRICS .
 Non-state actors, without Westphalian structures, are starting to gain global influence . Non- state actors are gaining global influence.
 More interstate and intrastate conflicts arising throughout the globe, such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant issue, the Ukraine crisis, tension in the South China Sea, transnational terrorism, the Russian application of ambiguity, and non-traditional war, have transformed the global environment .
 It seems there is less political and economic appetite in the U.S. to project global power, and the decreasing defense budget supports this policy . It seems that the United States is less interested in global power.
 The U.S. still wants to lead, building and empowering alliances is one of the solutions to set priorities and share the burden .
 Europe continues to take advantage of the U.S. security umbrella by skimping on their own defense spending .
 NATO Soldiers during the opening ceremony of Exercise Saber Strike 2015 . NATO Soldiers were present at the ceremony .
 Some Europeans view their relationship with Russia as of strategic importance for bilateral relations, especially trade . Some Europeans see their relationship as a strategic importance.
 It is easier for the U.S. to impose sanctions against Russia. Therefore, it is harder for the United States.
 These opposing opinions collide behind the scenes of the most important transatlantic organization . The transatlantic group is one of the largest in the world .
 The U.S. and Europe are in a complex and stormy love-hate relationship . The United States and Europe have a complex relationship .
 NATO is projecting a strong counterweight policy against a rising Russia . NATO's leading role in the region is a decrease of the financial burden to NATO to more equality .
 The U.S. and Europe's interests become clear in analyzing the interests of the two countries . The United States and Europe have different interests .
 To keep NATO relevant, both entities must show willingness to change and to invest politically, financially, and also mentally . Both countries must show willing to change. Both must be willing to invest financially, financially and mentally .
 To stay a global leader, the U.S. must accept that it has to share power with other power centers . The United States has to accept that its power is shared with others .
 It must be prepared to accept to sometimes "agree to disagree" with European partners . Finally, it must be ready to accept that it must also accept to disagree with other partners .
 They need to take responsibility for their security as they do for their economic development . They should be responsible for their own security, they say .
 NATO needs increased political dialogue and public diplomacy. Article 4 of the North Atlantic Treaty provides a perfect basis for this . NATO needs more political dialogue.
 NATO can support national interests both in the U.S. and in European NATO countries . NATO can also support the United States and Europe's national interests .
 There seems to be dissatisfaction about the consensus decision76 making policy and questions about its ability to respond with military quickly .
 The Supreme Allied Commander Europe's role and budgets are questioned by scholars . NATO covers its military missions and operations .
 The U.S. seems to be less commitment for enhanced engagement and participation, according to the United States . The United States is also less committed to NATO's European members .
 There has been commotion in Europe since the U.S. "pivot to Asia" declaration .
 NATO is situated in a political impasse with no visible incentive from countries to change . It looks like NATO is sitting in a Political impasse.
 The sudden deterioration of the relationship with Russia makes conditions even more difficult . The annexation of Crimea and its interference in Ukraine makes conditions more difficult.
 European NATO members say stable relationship with Russia is essential . This is especially true for them, because for them it is essential for them to be stable .
 NATO is able to take control of the situation, one wonders if it can take control .
 The relationship between NATO and Russia is essential for NATO's future . The relationship is still central to defining the EuropeanTransatlantic regional and global security configuration .
 NATO needs adjustments not only in the military domain, but also in the political, financial, and cultural domains . To achieve this, NATO needs to make changes in its military and financial domains .
 NATO should reconsider some of its internal affairs . NATO should increase readiness, responsiveness, and commitment to contribute to contribute, NATO says .
 A better way to share the financial burden for missions and operations amongst all member states needs a review of the financial process . A review of financial process needs to be carried out .
 Probably more "common funding" in those cases will increase into a willingness to contribute .
 NATO should consider empowering the role and authority of SACEUR in the military process. Without the loss of civilian decision power, NATO should be able to empower the role of SaceUR in military process .
 The NATO Response Force should be able to execute an alert-exercise once a year or start a planning process without North Atlantic Council approval . For example, they could execute an Alert-Exercise for the NATO Response force once ayear .
 NATO, together with its member states, must start the discussion about quicker national approval processes for force employment and the use of force . NATO and member states must also start the conversation about quicker approval processes .
 A national NRF/VJTF contribution does not mean a complete transfer of authority to NATO without any restrictions . It is understandable that a national NRf/V JTF contribution doesn't mean a full transfer of power to NATO .
 These processes need to be streamlined and better aligned with the current readiness and environmental requirements . However, these processes must be streamlined to be better aligned.
 NATO should make clear to all member countries that its survival depends on their willingness to make it a success . NATO should also make clear that all member nations must be willing to make a success.
 The organization seems stymied due to transatlantic political differences and disagreements . The organization is based in the U.S.
 Both the U.S. and Europe should understand the vital importance of this transatlantic link . Both the United States and Europe must act and contribute accordingly .
 For the United States, this means accepting Europe's different view and the importance of including Russia in future solutions . For the U.S. this means accept Europe's views and the need for Russia to be included .
 Europe should show that they can cope with some issues themselves, and show 77 their willingness to commit . Europe should be able to cope with their issues, and should show they can commit .
 That makes it possible for the United States to decrease its disproportionate contribution to the U.S. It's possible to reduce its contribution, but it's also possible to lower its contribution.
All European defense budgets will be increased to at least 2% Gross Domestic Product as soon as possible, as was pledged during the Wales Summit in 2014 .
 NATO can be an even more significant actor than it was before. Together, with the continuing United States commitment and its unique capabilities, NATO not only stays relevant, but can be a significant actor .
 The principle of collective defense is at the heart of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's founding treaty .
 NATO invoked Article 5 for the first time in its history after the 9/11 terrorist attacks against the United States . NATO has also taken collective defense measures on several occasions without invoking Article 5 .
 The attacks or incursions were conventional from one state to another state. What is similar in all of these instances is that the attacks orincursions were normal .
 The question is if NATO will invoke Article 5 for a cyberattack, and what constitutes such an attack . It is not clear what constitutes an attack, but what constitutes it .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg told a key alliance planning summit in mid-March of 2015 that "cyber is now a central part of virtually all crisis and conflicts"
 Some view Stoltenberg's comments as bravado in invoking Article 5 over cyberattacks . Some view the comments as "b bravado"
 Defining Nation State Cyber-Espionage; Defining National State Cyberattacks; and Development of Defense Strategies .
 NATO nations and international bodies abroad have their own definitions, but none have narrowed it down to a single consensus . Many NATO nations, international bodies have own definitions.
 Factors like the extent and nature of the damage caused by the attack, the identity of the attack and how the stolen information is used all influence the perception of cyber .
 The Tallinn Manual attempts to provide definitions, procedures, and rules governing international cyber-operations .
 The Tallinn Manual definition is appropriate and provides the basis to build upon and be ratified under International Tribunal . For the purposes of International Law, the Tallinn manual definition isappropriate .
 nation-states now face legal and political obstacles to defend themselves against cyberattacks . The obstacles facing nation- states now are legal andpolitical ones, which are making it difficult for nation-States to defend itself .
 Cyberattackers are exploiting legal and political loopholes to conduct attacks against weaker nation-states 79 without consequence . Cyberattacks are being carried out without consequence.
 The Tallinn Manual definition needs to be updated to allow victim states to take appropriate countermeasures for even the slightest cyber-intrusion .
 This will assist in providing a definition to the difference between a host nation and individual cyberattack . This will help provide a definition of the difference. This will also help in providing an understanding of what cyberattack is against a host country .
 In science fiction movies, cyber is used to conduct physical harm to a nation-state . In reality, 99% of cyberattacks are not physical and deal with loss of service, information, or communication .
 It is hard to ascertain in many instances where and who exactly conducted the attack .
Distributed Denial of Service is mainly used to disrupt a nation-state's communication systems . There are several types of attacks; one type of these is Distributed Denials of Service .
 DDoS is favored as it requires little resources against a larger, more powerful victim . DDoS was favored because it required little resources to attack a larger victim .
 Another type of attack encompasses using malware, such as viruses, worms, Trojan horses, etc., for disrupting or destroying information, collecting information, or disrupting normal operations . Other types of attack include viruses, Worms and Trojan horses .
 Another type of cyberattack uses "logic" bombs, which lie dormant until a specific time or are triggered by an event . The bombs disguise themselves to access private information without the users consent .
 The final type of cyberattack is the manipulation of video/ audio technology to listen in on conversations or watch operations in real time . The final kind of cyber attack is the use of video and audio technology.
 The Stuxnet virus was discovered in 2010 . It is the most famous cyberattack in recent years .
 Stuxnet allegedly targeted Iranian nuclear facilities and was unique because it was first major cyberattack that could inflict damage on the physical world as well as the digital world .
 In 2008, before Russia sent troops into Georgia, it used DDoS to shut-down communication systems . Georgia was cut off from the outside world by the DDoS .
 In 2014, Russia used DDoS to disable Ukraine's mobile phone communications network before employing traditional battlefield methods . In 2013, Russia also used a DDoS in Ukraine to disable its mobile phone network .
 Cyber-espionage and cyberattacks do not take place in the realm of warfare, says CNN's John Sutter .
 NATO needs to take aim at making all cyber-intrusions illegal and look for countermeasures to prevent attacks . They may be seen as criminally based, but they need to be more proactive .
Deterrence is a useful counter-cyber/espionage strategy for NATO and its nationstates . It is provided under Article 5, as long as they garner the authority and the resources to carry it out .
 Deterrence in reference to cyber is when a nation or NATO convinces its enemy that it is willing and able to respond to cyber-intrusions using military force .
 The purpose for most nation-states is to use NATO's might, under Article 5, to scare other nations from committing cyberattacks in the first place and thus preventing the need for retaliation .
 Russia's use of cyber technology is an active defense in the case of cyber attacks, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia has been accused of using cyber attacks in the past to gain access to information .
 According to Article 5, defensive force must be "necessary and proportionate" to the attack that gave rise to the right .
 An active defensive network with counter-attack capabilities could provide a deterrence for Russia, if NATO responded quid pro quo .
 The response does not always need to be large-scale to be 80 successful. The response to a successful response is not always needed to be big-scale .
 Estonia responded to Russia's DDoS attack simply by suspending certain services to computers with Russian Internet Protocol addresses . In 2007, Estonia suspended certain sites to Russian Internet addresses .
 This simple defensive measure completely stopped all Russian cyber-incursions . It is the first time this has been done by Russian authorities .
 NATO must first clearly define cyber-espionage/ activity and have Jeffits definitions written into International Law . For NATO to invoke Article 5 of the Washington Treaty due to a cyberattack, it must clearly define the cyberattack .
 International Law. Second, they need to clearly articulate what constitutes an attack as defined by International Law .
 NATO countries need to develop a playbook of defensive and offensive strategies to protect NATO countries from cyber-threats . Article 5 is a last resort, with the invocation of Article 5 being a last resorts .
 NATO has a way to go, especially just to catch up with the technology of modern times .
 Cyber has become an inherent form of warfare that nation-states are actively using and will into the future .
 Understanding this medium of warfare is inherent to establish International Law to prosecute individuals and hold nation-states accountable for transgressions .
 NATO will be able to invoke Article 5 against a hostile nation . Getting all of NATO on a grand strategy will be the first step in being able to invoking Article 5 .
 Lithuanian Soldiers at the 7th Army's Joint Multinational Training Command's Hohenfels Training Area . A new NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION .
 NATO is facing a complexity of security challenges that threatens the alliance and the security of those countries who contribute to its collective defense .
 NATO has once again returned to its core task, Article 5 — the ability to unite 28 countries if a member is attacked . Russia's interest in Ukraine altered the security landscape in Eastern Europe .
 Europe's security environment is more complex and more unpredictable than for a generation . Today, the security environment has become more complex, more unpredictable, than ever .
 We face a more assertive Russia which is destabilising the European security order. We face moreassertive Russia, says David Cameron .
 The rise in global tension led NATO to develop a strategy to realign the Alliance with the challenges stated by Secretary General .
 The United Kingdom has declared it will contribute 3,000 personnel to the VJTF when it assumes the lead of the Task Force in 2017 . The U.S. will contribute to the task force in 2017.
 The VJTF, and the increase in rotational forces, are designed to deter Russia .
 The creation of the VJTF is a result of NATO's adaptation to Russia's aggressive, authoritarian, and nationalistic activity . It is a strategic level of assurance to those states that are susceptible to Russia.
 The AMF was based around a land component of Brigade strength . Although designed as a Joint force, the AMF is based on land component .
 It had the ability to deploy rapidly to Norway or Turkey to swiftly deter any Russian aggression . It was able to deploy quickly to Turkey or Norway to quickly deter any aggression .
 The AMF was a political tool to demonstrate Alliance solidarity . Like the VJTF, the AMF is a political weapon to demonstrate solidarity .
 The VJTF is a modified concept of the AMF, designed to counter the security challenges in the North . The AMF was designed to combat the North's growing security challenges .
 The VJTF is an important statement of political unity that is part of a larger and more capable force that can deter or intervene in a crisis .
 The VJTF is the lead brigade in one of three multinational brigades within the NRF construct . Each one rotating annually into the high-readiness role .
 Once deployed, it will operate under a NATO Joint Force Headquarters at Brunssum or Naples . It will be able to conduct three distinct roles .
 VJTF is to provide an immediate collective defense response capability prior to NATO ordering a full mobilization . The VJ TF is to be able to provide a full defense response.
 The VJTF is a deliberate show of force and deterrent aimed directly at the Russian Government . The V JTF is aimed at Russia's government .
 The Task Force provides assurance to those smaller NATO countries in Eastern Europe that are most concerned about Russia's stance in international affairs . The task force is also providing assurance to the smaller NATO nations in Eastern European countries .
 If crisis continues to escalate, then it would no longer be political symbolism, but warfighting, where the capability and not the nationality of the force will count . If a crisis continues, then the NRF would not have to deploy .
 The VJTF and NRF are tools to ensure escalation dominance, and implicit deterrence, similar to those used during the Cold War . The V JTF andNRF are used to ensureescalation dominance, as well as implicit deterrence .
 The VJTF is but one activity 87 within a larger NATO demonstration of solidarity . These notable initiatives are not part of a long-term strategy .
 The crisis has been debated amongst the NAC, but there is little political appetite for NATO to become embroiled with European Union domestic concerns .
 NATO has been expanding without identifying the capabilities needed to defend its new Alliance partners . Until now, NATO has not been able to identify the capabilities required to defend partners .
 The Wales Summit in September 2012 focused on avoiding an unprovoked Russian military attack against a NATO member . The Wales summit was held in Wales in 2012 .
 NATO has yet to refine how it will address the advent of hybrid threats . NATO has not been able to address hybrid threats.
 The EU is able to focus on a crisis where the state is threatened and extremist fighting continues .
 NATO is expanding to include intelligence, early warning, increased cyber-defenses, and an efficient decision-making process . The reinvigorated NATO that emerged from the 2014 Wales Summit is already expanding .
 These developments will complement any EU initiative that is designed to counter a hybrid threat . These developments would complement any initiative designed to combat hybrid threat, say experts .
 The deployment of the VJTF will reduce pressure on a host government, theoretically allowing 89 government to concentrate on non-military aspects of the threat it faces .
 VJTF could bolster domestic police forces to maintain internal security, provide improved border defenses, SOF, or humanitarian support . Russia, such as Russia, the pretense it needs to protect the Russian diaspora .
 NATO needs to refine the VJTF and RAP strategy to counter the hybrid threats in the north and south . NATO has been criticised for its approach to the North and South .
 The Alliance should also seek to broaden its perspective and cooperate with civilian organizations and be less militarized in its thinking .
 NATO must not try to replicate those civilian capabilities and tasks that the EU is able to implement to counter a hybrid threat . NATO must also not attempt to replicate the civilian capabilities.
 VJTF/NRF is a well-thought-out, and legitimate. Such concern is warranted, hence the need to ensure any decision is swift, well- thought-out and legitimate .
 VJTF Analysts question if the 2-7 days to deploy the V JTF is quick enough . It took only 30 hours for Russia to seize its operational and strategic objectives in Crimea .
 Russia's operational agility is too long to decide if NATO should deploy to reinforce a member of the Alliance . Russia has demonstrated its operational agility in recent weeks .
 NATO must find a way to speed up its decision-making process, NATO says . NATO has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The decision to deploy the VJTF lies with the NAC, a 28-nation political decisionmaking organization based in Brussels, Belgium .
 The VJTF consists of many countries, with each one providing a vital capability that is interdependent on the other . The JTF is based in the U.S.
 The Alliance VJTF is so integrated that should an Alliance member veto the mission, the deployment of the Task Force is stopped in its tracks .
 SACEUR has been granted authority to "alert, stage, and prepare" forces prior to seeking NAC approval . The NAC is aware of this challenge, and as a result, SACEur has been given the authority to 'alert and stage'
 The NAC would then assume political control of the escalating situation . It would then give direction on the deployment of the remaining NRF brigades .
 This move does not compress the lengthy decisionmaking process . Although encouraging, this move doesn't compress the long process .
 One option is to delegate the deployment of the VJTF to the Secretary General . The Secretary General is currently in charge of the JTF .
This would be a variation to the 1999 Kosovo crisis where the Secretary General was delegated the authority to expand the target lists . This would be the same as the Kosovo crisis in 1999 where the secretary of general was delegated authority.
NATO took less than a day to agree on an Article 5 response following 9/11 . Despite the challenges, there are reasons to be optimistic .
 The Alliance may slow any appropriate military response against a quicker adversary . However, should the Alliance be faced with less stark aggression, the need for consensus may slow the response .
 Article 5 of the Washington Treaty is supported by Article 51 of the UN Charter — the right of individual or collective selfdefense in the event of armed attack . Article 51 supports the right to self defense in an armed attack.
 Any NATO sub-Article 5 deployment must be kept away from the UN where Russia could use its veto against military activity . Russia could also use its vetoed against military action .
 The absence of UN legitimacy to deploy may concern some European NATO members .
 A rapidly deployable intervention force is needed to project NATO's power quickly . A rapid deployment of a rapid intervention force will be needed to help NATO's mission .
 The VJTF is a good start, but the follow-on forces are just as critical as the first .
 The initial force package must have the ability to be self-sustainable for a period before it requires replenishment . Like other expeditionary operations, the initial force packages must be able to beSelf-sustainable .
 The arrival of a larger follow-on force will only increase the demand on NATO's logistical apparatus, as well as stretch the patience and capability of whichever NATO country Task Force is deployed .
Eight new NATO Force Integration Units have been established in Eastern European countries to support planning, training, and reinforcements . This issue has been partially resolved through the generation of eight new NATO force Integration Units .
 Multinational Corps North East, a revitalized NATO headquarters based in Szczecin, Poland, is coordinating NFIC implementation .
 NATO learned during the Cold War, the pre-positioning of stock can hamper the allies since it determines an area of deployment and a key node .
 The force must have the ability to swiftly deploy once the NAC gives authorization . In addition to pre-positioning stock, the force must be able to quickly deploy .
 The United States currently does not provide forces for the VJTF (these are European only) The Pentagon has pledged to deploy the Task Force using American strategic airlift if required .
 The strategic movement of the AMF was a significant weakness — one that was never resolved . The AMF's strategic movement was a major weakness —one that was not resolved .
 The AMF did not have troops rotating through the commitment . Some NATO countries designated them, with each one operating in nationally defined areas of operation .
 The VJTF consists of multinational forces that rotate every year with little or no consistency in the capabilities being offered . Conversely, the VJ TF consists of a multinational force that rotate each year .
Being multinational, the force must deploy from various countries and come together as a coherent force . Also, being multinational, must deploy. Also, be multinational, is the force.
 The VJTF is necessary to face NATO's uncertain security dilemmas . There are concerns, but there are also concerns, about the future of NATO's security .
 The VJTF demonstrates Alliance cohesion and resolve at a time when NATO may be deemed irrelevant .
 Any such armed attack and all measures taken as a result thereof shall be reported to the Security Council . All measures taken by such an attack will be reported.
 Such measures shall be terminated when the Security Council has taken the measures necessary to restore and maintain international peace and security . Such measures will be terminated if they are needed to restore international peace, security .
 Russia has ably demonstrated in Ukraine, it is able to create an ""inner decay" of a victim country . It negates the need for a conventional Russian incursion, says the author .
 NATO should end the distinction between the two Articles, not in legal and decisionmaking terms, but in the ways and means to fulfill its strategic objectives . NATO should be able to fulfill the strategic objectives of the NATO alliance .
 NATO should move away from the pure military style of deployment and seek a more whole-of-society approach . NATO should seek greater interaction and coordination with the EU, which is better suited to work alongside NATO .
 A more robust and adaptable VJTF is needed to tackle the kaleidoscope of security challenges the Alliance now faces . As a result, the Alliance is now facing more challenges than ever before .
 The role of the United States — politically and militarily — in NATO is vital for the existence of the Alliance . The United States is politically, militarily and politically and politically important to the alliance .
 These capabilities are already based in Europe and would be re-assigned from the United States European Command as part of a larger military investment in Europe .
 NATO's new posture coincides with a recent announcement by the U.S. Secretary of Defense, Ash Carter, that the Pentagon will provide $3. billion of funding for forces stationed and training in Europe .
 The SACEUR is also the commander of the U.S. European Command . The SaceUR is a member of the United States European Command.
 He 93 has the requisite legal authorities to reduce readiness and commence deployment of U.S. Army Europe elements . The commander would be augmented by NRF elements as they deploy .
 NATO members have demonstrated their commitment to the Alliance by contributing significantly to the NATO mission in Afghanistan . The VJTF and the NFIUs have also contributed significantly to NATO's mission .
 NATO countries such as Turkey, Italy, Greece, and Spain have all deployed significant assets to stem the consequences of the conflicts in Syria, Iraq, and Libya . Elsewhere, other NATO countries like Turkey and Italy have deployed significant resources .
 NATO's European states are distracted by the migrant and Eurozone crisis. It is important the U.S. plays an active role in the strategic deterrence of Russia .
 The rewards of peace and stability in Europe is worth it, according to the European Union . But maintaining such a presence is expensive.
 The deployment of the VJTF and its exercises in Eastern Europe will lead to a direct increase in the NATO military footprint . Russia is a particular sore spot for the NATO forces .
 Some European countries worry that Russia will see the RAP as a provocative measure that will only escalate the already high tension in the region .
 NATO has abandoned the Conventional Forces Europe Treaty, which states that forces would not be based alongside Russia's border . The Russian claim that, ever since the re-unification of Germany, NATO has Abandoned the agreements .
 The NRF/VJTF and other NATO initiatives are, as Moscow sees it, as a breach of trust . TheNRF/ VJTF is a NATO initiative .
 NATO's eastern flank is playing to Putin's mindset of being right . The expansion of NATO members and recent U.S. announcement to increase rotational deployments along the eastern flank are playing to the Putin mindset .
 Russia deployed 100,000 across the Russian border with Europe over the same period . Over the same time, Russia had deployed 100k across the border .
 An unknown number based in Crimea and subversively operating in Eastern Ukraine . Added to this impressive figure is an unknown number of people based in Ukraine .
 Russian military operating along Europe's border include significant numbers of unmotivated, non-paid or scarcely trained conscripts . It is assessed that a considerable force, it is assessed.
 NATO's RAP sends a strong message of assurance to newer members of NATO such as the Baltic States and Poland . The RAP, which includes the VJTF, also includes the Baltic states and Poland.
 Putin does not see the RAP as a reason to de-escalate in the region, hence the Russian military transformation . The RAP is not a reason for de- escalation in the Russian region, however .
 NATO must continue to engage in a transparent manner and maintain a balance between being "convincing" and "provoking" Russia . NATO must maintain a "balance between being convinced without provoking Russia"
 The RAP must not be abolished because of Russia's sensitivities. Clearly, the RAP is not to be abolished .
 To do so would demonstrate a sign of weakness amongst the Alliance, a fracture that Putin would exploit . To so would show the weakness of the Alliance.
 The ultimate goal, however, would be to discredit NATO, thereby threatening the security of the Baltic States . The ultimate aim is to discredit the NATO, which is based in the Baltic states .
 NATO has been involved in costly adventures in Afghanistan, Libya, and the Balkans . The Alliance has now returned to its original core role of Article 5 of the Washington treaty .
 VJTF/NRF commitment is the most significant initiative by NATO in adapting to its security challenges . VJ TF/NRf commitment is a significant initiative in adapting.
 NATO must recognize that most risk occurs at the Article 4 level through hybrid activity . NATO must prepare for the Article 5 contingency .
 To make the VJTF credible, more work is required to mobilize the full diplomatic, military, economic, finance, and law enforcement capabilities of NATO, says the U.S. ambassador .
 NATO has continually adapted over its 65-year history . The challenges of command, control, and logistics of a diverse multinational force are formidable .
 Russia-NATO relations at their lowest point since the Cold War . The Alliance reiterates the intentions of the NRF to ensure no Russian backlash .
 NATO has proven itself in the most demanding of operational environments . NATO has already proven itself to be in most demanding environments .
 The Alliance brought peace and stability to the Balkans and Kosovo . It came out of the Afghan International Security Assistance Force mission stronger and refined by fire .
 The new NATO members proved their military capability and political resolve as dedicated supporters of the Alliance .
 The Russian Military Parade will take place at Red Square in 2016 . The parade will be held at the Red Square.
 Former President Obama instituted a new approach toward Russia in 2009 .
 President Medvedev and President Obama seemingly advanced this so-called reset and promoted a foreign policy that appeared somewhat neoliberal . Yet, Medvedeva and Obama seemed to appear to be promoting a neoliberal foreign policy .
 These forced the United States to reevaluate its foreign policy toward Russia . The U.S. has been in the process of re-evaluating its policy toward the country .
 Two actions conducted by Russia's military have validated Vladimir Putin's agenda as well as provided some insight into his grand strategy .
 Russian governing elite's intervention in Georgia generated a massive outflow of capital from the Russian market . Russia's governing elite generated a huge drop of indexes on the Moscow Stock Exchange and depreciation of the Russian ruble .
 The outflow reached about $130 billion at the end of 2008 and Russian attempts to stabilize ruble largely failed . The outflows reached about £130 billion.
Tactical and operational planning was poor and inflexible, as was leadership . Tactical and operational plans were poor, as were leadership .
 The policy completely collapsed with the annexation of Crimea and the ongoing Russian-led war in Eastern Ukraine . The policy was completely collapsed in the Crimea annexation.
 The encroachment of Eastern Ukraine was the next step in Mr Putin's grand strategy for an expansionist, revanchist agenda . The encroaching of eastern Ukraine was a step in the Putin's plan to expand .
 A recent study looked at the population of ethnic Russians now living in Ukraine . To gain insight as to why Vladimir Putin is pursuing this agenda, it is helpful to consider a recent study .
 Most people living in the eastern part of the country hardly knew any Ukrainian and preferred to speak Russian .
 In an instant 25 million Russian people found themselves beyond the borders of the Russian state . But they were living within the Soviet Union .
 All of a sudden, they turned out to be outside the borders of the country .
 The Russian president is using the diaspora to exploit a vulnerability in the region via a proxy separatist movement .
Non-military measures are occurring at a rate of 4:1 over military operations, he says . He makes the important comment that non- military measures are happening at a rates of 4.1 .
 This is an important point, and one that encourages the use of surrogates . This is a point that encourages surrogates to use surrogates, according to the author .
 Covert operations, to include information warfare measures and special operations forces, accompany such methods . Covert Operations, to be carried out with special operations, include special forces .
 The strategy is not new, it brilliantly exploits ethnic divides to create a line of buffer zones around Russia's borders .
 The West is overdue for a viable policy and strategy, says John Sutter . Sutter: Understanding this expansionist agenda, in light of the insolvent U.S. reset policy, demonstrates that the West is not ready to change its policies .
 This reevaluation is necessary not only because of the war in Ukraine and the occupation of Crimea, but also Russia's continued violation of treaties and agreements . This is necessary because of Ukraine and Crimea, and Russia's continuing violation of treaty agreements .
 The U.S. must act swiftly to counter this assertive Russian policy, the U.N. says .
 The U.S. needs to act to get its own house in order . The United States needs to find its own home in order to get it done .
 Budget Control Act of 2011 encapsulated by sequestration or better known as budget control Act . Budget control Act is also known as Budget Control act of 2011 .
 If a follow-on budget does not pass, then the constraints listed in the BCA of 2011 will reduce the Department of Defense's ability to accomplish United States objectives .
 This will affect modernization and training and trigger additional reductions in force structure, says the U.S. State Department . This is a potential adversary to challenge the United States.
 Russia has withdrawn from the treaty that it suspended back in 2007 . In this manner, Russia has pulled out of the treaty in this manner .
 The two interests listed in the QDR and the NMS, "the security, confidence, and reliability of our allies" are vital to the United States . The U.S. government says "the preservation and extension of universal values" is "vital"
 BPC is the U.S. military working with allies and partners to provide for the defense of their interests while protecting the sovereignty of their homeland .
 The United States enables this capability through exercises and training designed to assist in raising the level of proficiency for these militaries . The U.S. enables these capabilities through exercises, training and training .
 In reviewing these three separate policies, it is clear how each can have a direct or indirect impact on the overall U.S. foreign policy toward Russia .
 All the elements of national power (diplomatic, informational, military, and economic instruments) have proven ineffective in addressing Russia's aggression, says author .
 President Putin has shown a nuanced interpretation for every violation of a treaty, violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity, and disregard for human rights . Putin has continually shown a nuance of his interpretation of the treaty, according to CNN .
 In each of these, the diplomatic element of power, whether it is the U.S. President, Secretary of State, or Secretary of Defense, produced nothing and actually strengthened the image and popularity of Vladimir Putin .
 Russia presents Western powers as the evildoers by continually spinning the information and creating a common enemy for the people of Russia to unite .
 The U.S. struggles to dominate the information domain and has little success in moving public opinion unless Putin miscalculates and crosses a line with his own population .
 Western countries prevented Russian companies from raising money in Europe and the U.S. and have also blocked arms trades .
 U.S. military actions continue to assure allies and partners in the region of its commitment to create a capability focused on interoperability between national militaries .
 The NATO 'Allied Shield' exercise conducted in June 2015 brought under one framework four distinct exercises . 15,000 personnel from 19 Members states and three partner states were involved .
 Western economic sanctions are having an effect on the Russian way of life for its citizens . The sanctions are affecting Russia's economy .
 The articles from Wilson and Gressel validate the impact to society and the military . Pew Research demonstrates this, and the articles from both men .
 The concern is in the identification of the tipping point, for this driver of instability . The danger of instability is to be identified, says the author .
 The drop in the value of trade is indicative of the collapse in economic activity, says Mr Wilson . Mr Wilson states, "The drop in value oftrade is indicative"
 This leads to the next driver of instability — President Vladimir Putin . Putin is the next leader of instability, says Putin .
 He was the master puppeteer of Russia during his first two terms as president . He was president for two years before becoming president .
 Putin worked behind the scenes as the Prime Minister of Russia before re-ascending to where he is again president . Then, Putin worked as the PM before becoming president .
 Mr Putin is a driver of instability because of how he views the region, says Mr Putin . Mr Putin's views are based on his views of the region .
 Russia's overall end state is the establishment of Russia as a de facto regional hegemony . His overall endState is the end state of Russia. Russia is the world's most powerful state .
 RISK: There are three risks that challenge the credibility of U.S. foreign policy .
 The first of these is not implementing a coherent strategy that safeguards the credibility of the NATO alliance . The first is not implemented a coherent Strategy that safeguards its credibility .
 Russian exploitation of disparate U.S. policies is the second risk of Russian exploitation . The second risk is Russian exploitation.
 The impact of these risks, if not properly addressed, will have disastrous consequences, says U.S. diplomat . Russia will openly challenge NATO's Article 5 and the global reach of the United States, he says .
 The NATO Alliance, including the Armed Forces of the United States of America, is the NATO Alliance .
 To ensure the credibility of the U.S. and its obligations under Article 5 of the NATO Treaty, it is imperative that a comprehensive strategy materialize .
 Russia continues to prepare its military for rapid notice deployments against NATO members in Eastern Europe . Yet, Russia is preparing for rapid deployment of NATO members .
 Any action initiated by Russia requires a response, and if the U.S. action is slow or perceived as a show of non-support to its NATO members, then the credibility of the United States foreign policy is threatened .
 Risks of disparate or contradictory policies, when taken collectively, reduce the effectiveness of an overarching U.S. foreign policy . Risks can also be seen in the United States.
 The recurring congressional policy on funding unnecessarily threatens the U.S. military by placing self-induced domestic pressure that reduces the combat effectiveness of the United States military .
 U.S. Defense Policy and Russia's disregard for the CFE and INF treaties places selfimposed constraints on the other treaty signatories . The United States' ability to show assurance in times of conflict by not providing a substantial force to ensure a credible deterrence .
 The U.S. national strategic documents mention how the approach of BPC limits deterrence through increased assurance . Then there are the United States national documents that mention the approach to BPC.
 The remaining risk is in not implementing a revised strategy that allows a whole of government approach to work toward a clear strategic end state . The remaining risks are not being implemented, says the author .
 This end should counter Russian aggression in a proactive manner, says the author . Russian acts of violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity after the fact, he says . The end should be the typical reaction to Russian acts.
 For the next 12 months the U.S. is vulnerable to belligerent actors testing the will of the political leaders of this country .
 There is a requirement to synchronize all factors affecting U.S. foreign policy toward Russia .
 There must be a unifying effort by the National Security Council to support the synchronization of these policies through a strategy to focus the elements of national power .
 There must be discussion on dissolving the CFE or at least modifying it to allow for the movement and basing of military forces and equipment in the Eastern European region to better assure our allies threatened by Russian Zapad and Lagoda exercises .
 The U.S. needs to reinforce the Budapest memorandum with its own style of hybrid warfare . The United States needs to strengthen the memorandum.
 This will reestablish the damaged credibility of the U.S. by not conducting a visible counter action to Russia's violation of Ukrainian and Georgian sovereignty and territorial integrity . This will not be seen as a counter action against Russia .
 Russia has been trying to counter Russia's antagonistic information campaign . There has been sufficient use of the diplomatic and economic merits of power, but what is lacking is the use of military force .
 Western media proved to be particularly vulnerable to Russian information warfare operations . In line with the principle of providing balanced opinions, enough airtime had to be provided for the Russian narratives as well, even if they were blatantly false .
 The policy of reset has failed, and the current U.S. Russia policy of assurance, deterrence, and cooperation needs expansion . The current policy ofreset has failed.
 In reviewing all three policies affecting foreign policy, it is easy to see the impact, but it was not until this discussion that the seams became visible . U.S. credibility is at stake, and therefore, United States.
 A few mitigation actions can suggest ways for incorporating two underutilized elements of DIME . DIME is the information and military elements .
 The current U.S. foreign policy is ineffective because of the constraints established in these underlying policies, says John Sutter . The current United States foreignpolicy is ineffective, Sutter says .
 This produces an uncoordinated effort preventing the credibility of an effective and comprehensive foreign policy . This is an un coordinated effort to prevent an effective foreign policy. This is not the first time this has happened, says the author .
 This, along with the element of time, presents a vulnerability for the U.S. and a corresponding opportunity for belligerent actors to capitalize on an assessed weakness . This, as well as time, also presents a vulnerable for the United States .
 To salvage the credibility of the U.S. foreign policy, senior leaders must address the lack of synchronization . The United States needs to improve its foreign policy .
 Policy fratricide will continue if there is no unifying effort orchestrated by the NSC to support the synchronization of disparate policies .
 The U.S. could move and base military forces and equipment in Eastern Europe . The NSC could modify each to support the overall foreign policy of assurance and deterrence .
 The NSC Deputies meeting is the appropriate entity to ensure a coherent, coordinated, and credible foreign policy . The appropriate leaders in attendance can represent the interests for the underlying policies affecting the overarching foreign policy.
 identification of seams will show gaps requiring corrections . At this meeting, identification of the seams will be shown .
 NSC Primaries meeting will ensure that underlying policies are correct and produce a focused comprehensive foreign policy . Sending these corrected gaps to the meeting will guarantee implementation actions .
 The second area to ensure credibility is by incorporating the U.S. media establishment and social media conglomerates to join in the fight and contribute to blocking Russian narratives .
 A joint venture between the Department of Defense and United States companies is needed to implement the recommendation . A way to implement this recommendation is through the creation of joint venture.
 This acknowledges that the United States military cannot win in the information arena without the assistance of industry . The U.S. military can't win without the help of industry, it says .
 The final recommendation is to protect against the element of time by immediately supporting the two previous recommendations . The final recommendations are to support the two earlier recommendations .
 With a non-supported CFE, the United States can permanently base a division headquarters, with enablers, in Eastern Europe to provide the appropriate synchronization of forces and efforts within the region .
 This might look like a Division Tactical Action Center under the command of a onestar general officer forward positioned in Latvia . This might be a Division tactical Action Center.
 This will send the appropriate message to Russia and reinforce the U.S. foreign policy of deterrence . This will also send a message to the United States .
 The NSC should convene to approve the moving and basing of a DTAC to Latvia while ensuring it has the requisite enablers to be credible and effective tool for the President to counter any expansionist agenda by Russia .
 The U.S. requires the implementation of the aforementioned mitigation strategies and recommendations by senior leaders within the government .
 The U.S. will lose its standing as a global hegemony. Otherwise, President Putin will continue with his expansionist agenda .
 This will forever change the security situation in Europe and undermine the 70 years of general peace and stability that the U.S. has provided the region, says the author . The United States, in concert with its allies, has provided Europe with peace, stability .
 Failure to act with determination could forever damage U.S. and European relations and cooperation . The United States and European countries could be affected by the failure to act.
 Such a breach of trust could have catastrophic economic effects that would be impossible for Washington, D.C. to overcome .
 The Sphinx roamed the region around Thebes wreaking havoc and killing any who could not answer its riddle .
 At long last, Greek hero Oedipus faced the Sphinx, answered its riddle and secured his throne .
 If these go unanswered, or incorrectly responded to, there could be severe consequences . If they go unanswered or incorrectly respond to, they could be severely consequences .
 Lieutenant Colonel Vahur Karus answers the top five questions facing the region created by a hostile Russian foreign policy .
 The rule of law would be a death knell to a kleptocratic authoritarian regime . Western values such as democracy, pluralism, transparency, human rights, freedom, and freedom would be death knells to the regime .
 Moscow viewed with great alarm the ""color revolutions" that led to freedom in Georgia, Ukraine, and elsewhere . Moscow viewed the revolution as a "color revolution" Moscow also viewed withgreat alarm the 'color revolutions' in Ukraine and Ukraine .
 The Kremlin set out to delegitimize, discredit, and undermine Western policies and institutions as well as the entire post-Cold War security order . Fearing that this was in store for the regime in Russia, the Kremlin is now trying to discredit and discredit the West .
 The Russian National Security Strategy describes NATO and the West as a threat to its regional and global ambitions .
 The Kremlin's strategic end state is to restore Russia's status as a great power with the associated benefit of dominating Eastern Europe . The Kremlin is trying to restore its status as an end state with the benefits of dominating Europe .
 Moscow uses its military to not only flex its muscles, but to deflect attention from Russia's economic troubles and the regime's growing domestic repression . Moscow also deflects attention from its economic troubles.
 Putin is leveraging his military to exploit Russian patriotism to foster national unity and continued political support . Not unlike how Hitler used military adventurism to rally Germany, or when Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands .
 Moscow is determined to abolish them. European and transatlantic institutions and the entire European security architecture stand in the way of fulfilling Russia's main strategic aim . Moscow wants to abolish the European security institutions .
 Moscow accuses NATO of encircling Russia and preparing for military aggression against it . Moscow's military footprint is modest, particularly in comparison with Russia's military forces .
 Russia has demonstrated its penchant for dangerous adventurism . It manages to keep the West off balance and continuously scans for and exploits weaknesses . Russia has also managed to keep its West off Balance and keep it off balance .
 Moscow is aggressively opportunistic when advancing its interests . Moscow's modus operandi is to seize the initiative and achieve a fait accompli that the West would be unwilling to challenge .
 Ukraine is weakened by domestic turmoil, but unable to defend itself . It is weakness rather than strength which provokes Russia into action, it is said .
 The regime respects strength and tends to back down to avoid a direct collision with determined and resourceful opponents . However, the regime respectsstrength and respects strength .
 The United States deployed its warships to the Black Sea in 2008 . The U.S. also promised substantial logistical support to the Georgian armed forces .
 Russia has demonstrated a penchant to use military force, or its threat, when exploiting weaknesses . Russia has shown a penchant for using military force or threat to exploit weaknesses .
 This also involves provocative military behavior to test the responses of the Alliance and individual allies . This includes the case of dangerous overflights of USS Donald Cook in the Baltic Sea in April 2016 .
 Moscow's decision-making circle has shrunk to just President Putin and no more than two or three of his most trusted members of the regime .
 When making decisions, he is not constrained by constitutional checks and balances or the rule of law . When making a decision, he isn't constrained by Constitutional checks or the rules .
 Putin has the military and security apparatus ready to execute his will . Putin has been in power for more than a decade .
 Russian military parade during the May 9, 2016 Victory Day Celebration in the Red Square .
 Russia's use of a wide range of instruments in recent conflicts has generated discussions in NATO on how best to deter future aggression . Russia has also used a variety of weapons to deter aggression .
 Russia would not dare attack a NATO member by means of direct and overt act of military aggression . It would rather choose an indirect approach described by its Chief of General Staff .
 Moscow retains immense advantage with military force in the Baltic region . Moscow retains an immense advantage in the region .
 The Baltic States are the most exposed of NATO allies . Its military power is the hard currency that poses a serious or even existential threat to the Baltic States .
 Russia's military modernization and build-up, including its anti-Access Area Denial capabilities and nuclear strategy, is under scrutiny . The Kremlin is still uncertain about the Kremlin's intent .
 The U.S. military is modernizing nuclear weapons and introducing new systems into the Aerospace Forces, and the Navy and Ground Forces units . The military's priorities are modernizing the military's nuclear weapons .
 Putin's push for military modernization by President Putin is underpinned by significant investments into developing, producing, and fielding new weapon systems . Russia's Armed Forces are steadily giving a new qualitative edge to Russia's armed forces .
Economic woes may force Russia to reassess some of its choices . But cuts in military spending are a last resort, and their effect on the re-armament program would only come after years of recession .
 Western sanctions that restrict access to certain technologies act as a factor to slow the pace of the military modernization, but they are unable to stop it . Western sanctions are not able to stop the modernization.
 Russia's ability to apply lessons learned from past operations, such as the war against Georgia in 2008 or more recent campaigns in Ukraine and Syria is also noteworthy .
 Russia has made steady advances in improving command and control, increasing intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities . Russia is making various units and formations more cohesive and effective in warfighting, and improving logistics .
 Russia is no longer a decaying post-Cold War power with obsolete or vanishing capabilities . Militarily, Russia is certainly no longer an obsolete post- Cold War power .
 Qualitative improvements are accompanied by significant quantitative increases. Qualitative improvement is accompanied bysignificant quantitative increases .
 The ground forces established eight new brigades in 2015 . The Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu announced plans to form three new divisions in the Western Military District adjacent to the Baltic States .
 These changes signal a move back to a Cold War-like military posture, where it was in preparation for high-intensity large-scale combined arms warfare .
 Russia's Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev accused the West of taking the world back to the Cold War . Russia continues to do this in terms of ongoing changes in its military posture .
 Some of the most capable formations in Russia's Armed Forces are located in the Western Military District . In any actions involving the Baltic States they could quickly bring considerable force to bear .
 A number of niche force developments are especially relevant regarding the Baltic region . In addition to the existing maneuver brigades and the announced formation of new divisions, the new divisions are particularly relevant .
 This increases the speed, agility, and flexibility of the forces that can be employed against the Baltic States . This increase the speed and agility of the force, and the flexibility of these forces .
 Russia's military campaigns demonstrate its ability to move substantial forces across vast distances and to sustain them for prolonged periods of time . Even if a larger concentration of forces are deemed necessary for an overwhelming attack, Russia's forces demonstrate their ability.
 Russia has an array of stand-off weapons systems including multi-layered air defense, mobile coastal defense, land, sea, and air-launched cruise missiles, and tactical ballistic missile platforms .
 A2 is a strategic and game-changing problem as it means that those zones are difficult to penetrate —by land, sea, or air . A2 can't penetrate by land or sea.
This would make moving NATO reinforcements into the Baltic region dangerous and costly . This would make NATO reinforcements in the region dangerous, costly and dangerous .
 The AD part is the operational side of the problem, as it makes it more difficult to operate forces inside such zones . The AD side is the Operational side of a problem, with the AD part being more difficult .
 Countering A2/AD is fraught with a high risk of escalation, as well as with significant loss of lives, time, and capabilities . Countering a2/ AD is fraught With a highrisk of escalation.
 The Baltic States, parts of Poland and Finland, and large swathes of the Baltic Sea are under A2/AD threat due to Russia's capabilities in the Kaliningrad enclave and along Russia's border with Estonia and Latvia as well as Russia's alliance with Belarus
 Russia's advanced air defense systems S-300/S-400 are deployed in the Kaliningrad enclave and near St. Petersburg . Russia's air defense system is deployed in Kalinedrad enclave .
Russia's air defense systems in Belarus create an overlapping air defense engagement area over the Baltic States . The Baltic States are capable of threatening aircraft flying in this airspace .
 This is a serious impediment to reinforcing and defending the Baltic States . The importance of air superiority in any conflict is significant, says the U.S.
 Russia's short-range ballistic missiles are capable of targeting infrastructure, bases, and troop concentrations in Poland, Lithuania, and southern Latvia .
 The capability extends to targets in Estonia and the rest of Latvia . In conjunction with the same type of systems based on the western fringes of the Western Military District, this capability is also available .
 Such systems can destroy critical nodes (ports, airports, airports) and infrastructure required for the reception, staging, onward movement, and integration of the Allied forces deployed to the Baltic States . Such systems could further complicating NATO's rapid deployment operations .
 Russia has the capacity to significantly raise the costs of reinforcing the Baltic States . Taking also into account the air and sea-launched cruise missile capability, Russia has a capacity to increase the costs.
 The Baltic States are linked to the rest of the Alliance just by a 65 km-wide gap between the Kaliningrad enclave and Belarus . Only two roads and one railway line passing through it from Poland to Lithuania .
 Establishing control over this gap would cut the Baltic States from the rest of the Alliance . Est establishing control over the gap would make it easier for the Baltic states to do so .
 Moscow places great stock on its nuclear deterrent and uses it to dissuade opponents from intervening in conflicts where Russia has important interests at stake or from pursuing policies seen as detrimental to Russia's geopolitical interests .
 Moscow will use the threat of nuclear escalation to dissuade NATO allies from attempting to reinforce and defend the Baltic States . Moscow will also try to discourage allies from reinforcing and defending the Baltic states .
 The Kremlin uses military exercises for launching operations and intimidating its neighbors . The Kremlin is known for its military exercises .
 These exercises represent a way of camouflaging intent, should Moscow decide to launch a surprise attack, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Russian military demonstrates that they are continuously readying themselves for conflicts of varying scale and intensity . The exercise tempo of the Russian military shows they are constantly readying for conflicts .
 Many of the military exercises conducted by Russia are offensive scenarios, including invasion of the Baltic States and Poland . The exercises are also targeting the Nordic countries .
 Attention is being paid to improving interoperability with the armed forces of Belarus . Attention is also paid to improve interoperability.
 The large exercise Zapad 2013 is a good example of Russia's focus on developing synergy rehearsing joint actions using modern technologies . The exercise heavily features the experimental use of automated command and control .
 The exercise was staged jointly with Belarus and followed an established pattern by rehearsing offensive operations in a Western direction . The exercise followed anestablished pattern, including against the Baltic States .
 Moscow includes first use of nuclear weapons as a "demonstration strike" to induce an enemy to negotiate . In other words, operational use of tactical or other nuclear weapons to "de-escalate" a conflict .
 After the demise of the Soviet Union, allies assumed that Russia was interested in a partnership with NATO and therefore sought a dialogue .
 NATO lacks a cohesive strategy and suitable deterrence and defense posture to deal with a resurgent Russia . The problem is most severe in the Baltic area .
 NATO must address four fundamental challenges that NATO as an Alliance must address, says NATO .
 STRATEGY NATO's Strategic Concept adopted in 2010, while not perfect, is adequate in the current environment .
 NATO's focus is on collective defense, reducing the need to open this document to time-consuming discussions . NATO has made it clear that allies have made itclear that NATO'sfocus is on defense .
 The Alliance is returning to the dual-track approach of deterrence and dialogue first introduced by the Harmel report of 1967 . The Alliance will return to the approach first introduced in 1967 .
 The notion of combining dialogue and deterrence is valid, but the circumstances faced today differ significantly . The circumstances face today's circumstances differ significantly.
 In the 1960s, the threat to NATO was the Soviet Union over-running the entire European continent . The Soviet Union was over-run the entire continent .
 Russia's military aim is no longer to over-run Europe . NATO needs to be on deterrence, because Russia's aim is to protect Europe .
 There are fears that strengthening deterrence would increase the likelihood of escalation, while history tells us a different story . "weakness emboldens Russia and strength deters Russia"
 Russia employs an aggressive anti-Western narrative and accuses NATO of escalating the situation and encircling Russia . The claim that is unfounded but effective in influencing some NATO allies is unfounded .
 The bottom line is that Russia portrays NATO as its main enemy, which means that tensions between NATO and Russia will continue regardless of what actions the Alliance undertakes .
 The safest course for NATO is to demonstrate, both in words and deeds, its resolve and ability to defend every ally against every form of aggression . NATO is still open for dialogue, while remaining open to dialogue .
 There is both a cognitive and a resource-related side to NATO's limited strategic anticipation .
 This is due to difficulties associated with reading the intent and plans of the Kremlin regime . This is because it is not clear how to read the intent of the regime .
 Russia rarely disguises its true political and grand strategic intentions . On the other hand, Russia rarely disguise its truepolitical and grand intentions .
 The West has chosen to not believe Russia's declarations. Russia has proclaimed them publicly, but the West has not . Russia has declared them publicly .
 The West misunderstands Russia by thinking that it will obey the rules . The West thinks Russia will obey its rules .
 Moscow will use the opportunity to carry out its plans without hesitation . Moscow's logic is that when given a chance to further its interests, it will use it to carry on its plans .
 Russia as long as it can assume the West will opt for cooperation rather than confrontation . Doing this is rational behavior for Russia as well as the West .
 Combat forces with firepower were replaced with light capabilities better suited for expeditionary crisis response and counter-insurgency operations . Combat forces were replaced by light capabilities that are better suited to expeditionary crises .
 NATO's maritime efforts have been focused to the southern part of the Alliance . Meanwhile, NATO has been focused on the south .
 Defense expenditures across NATO are not sufficient to rebuild the range of capabilities necessary to deter a resurgent and aggressive Russia .
 NATO has a tendency in some parts of NATO to make the threat fit our existing posture and capabilities .
It is easier to make the threat look less acute so as to not have to undergo changes in capabilities and raise defense expenditures . It is easier than to make a threat look more acute to make it less acute .
 NATO Command Structure has shrunk drastically since the end of the Cold War . The size of the NATO command structure has shrunk dramatically .
 The numbers of host nation and Allied forces in the Baltics are far inferior to the Russian forces in Western Military District . The number of host nations and allied forces is far inferior.
 The Baltic States lack strategic and operational depth, which makes giving up space for time impossible . The Baltic states lack strategic, operational depth .
 A limited incursion could be undertaken by Russia with the forces already stationed in the vicinity of their border and hence with limited early warning .
 NATO's conventional military posture in the Baltic States should be able to convince Russia that it is able to delay and bog down an invading force and inflict unacceptable damage to it .
 This force is not required to win the war, but it must be able to fight alongside host nation forces to buy NATO time for reinforcements .
 The length of the shared border between Russia and the Baltic States offers the Russians the ability to claim territory without even having to fire a shot at NATO forces .
 The uncertainty surrounding their decisions and actions in the Baltics complicates NATO's plans and response options in the region . The uncertainty around Russia and the Alliance complicates their decisions .
Without these two countries in NATO or having very close cooperation with the Alliance in the context of collective defense, NATO lacks strategic and operational depth in the region . Without these two nations in NATO, NATO lack strategic and Operational depth in region .
 NATO's response options, particularly given the A2/ AD threat, would be limited even further . If Russia compel Stockholm and Helsinki to stay out of a conflict, NATO's options would also be limited . The A2- AD threat is a threat that could be
 Moscow has no intent to challenge NATO directly, but this may change overnight . It can be implemented with great speed, following already prepared plans. Even if there is no intent, this could change overnight.
 This might come at the time NATO and the EU are distracted by another crisis or a misperception of NATO's activities and miscalculation of the Alliance's resolve .
 Russia is capable of surprising the West, as happened in Ukraine and Syria . Russia is able to surprise the West with its actions in Ukraine, Syria .
 A military fait accompli in the Baltic States could easily become one of such surprises . The Alliance could be one of the biggest surprises to the Alliance .
 Credible deterrence is key, but the critical question is how NATO's posture fares in its most vulnerable spot . The Baltic States are the most vulnerable.
 The Alliance should move toward a threat-focused approach, rather than a capability- focused approach . The Alliance will focus on the threat rather than the capability-focus approach .
 It should concentrate on what capabilities are needed, not what capabilities is available . It should focus on what is needed and not what is available, it should be focused on the capabilities .
 NATO must strengthen NATO-EU cooperation to make deterrence more credible. In addition, we must look at asymmetric, conventional, and nuclear weapons as part of a single strategy .
 NATO must regain capabilities lost after the Cold War and develop new capabilities to take into account Russia's military modernization and build-up .
 The United States must invest in the necessary R&D and cutting-edge technology, especially in the framework of the U.S. "Third Offset" Strategy . A proper link with the European allies should be developed.
 Allies should step up their investments on capabilities that are required to counter the A2/AD challenge . Allies should also deal with asymmetric threats, as well as conduct largescale combined arms warfare .
 To resource this re-generation of capabilities, NATO must increase defense spending . NATO must spend more on defense spending.
 Eastern flank states should consider going over the 2% benchmark in their defense spending like Estonia has . Estonia has the highest defense spending in the region .
 This would send a message to the U.S. that they are serious about facing the real threat that Russia poses to them . This would be the first time the United States has seen a real threat from Russia .
 Other allies should make a clear statement of intent to move toward the 2% benchmark significantly faster than the promise of trying to do so within a decade . Other allies need to make a statement.
 Sweden and Finland to secure overflight permissions, gain access to their air bases, and develop Host Nation Support arrangements already in peacetime . It will be necessary to work with Sweden and Finnish to secureOverflight permissions .
 The Alliance should also conduct prudent planning for defending Sweden and Finland, as a way of reassuring them that their support would not leave them exposed to Russia's punitive military action .
 The only way to guarantee the security of the Baltic States against a conventional Russian military threat is by having a capable military force .
 Russia must be able to prevent a fait accompli by Russia and should an attack occur, if an attack occurs, delay NATO to deploy additional units to the region .
 General Breedlove and General Scaparrotti would prefer permanent forces in Europe . The debate about permanence should not be at the forefront if the continuous presence of combat-capable forces can be ensured through rotations .
 The United States units rotating through the Baltic States are not enough for credible deterrence and defense . The U.S. units are rotating in the Baltic states, while strengthening assurance .
Russian forces are more vulnerable to Allied air power if Russian forces are unable to act with impunity on land . This would require one brigade in each of the Baltic States that would be able to delay the opposing forces and help counter the Russian A2/AD threat .
 Allied brigades in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania would be able to cover more territory by having their constituent battalions conduct simultaneous independent operations .
 A Very High Readiness Joint Task Force is not regionally focused . An equivalent-sized force in each of the Baltic States would hedge against VJTF being unavailable due to it being deployed elsewhere .
 Air force capabilities are needed to provide protection for Baltic and Allied forces . Russian aircraft are freely operating over NATO's territory .
 The Alliance's aim must be to maintain or establish conditions for local and then general air superiority in the Baltic region .
 As significant Allied reinforcements are brought by sea, it is crucial that access to the Baltic Sea is maintained or re-established quickly . It is crucial for Allied reinforcements to be brought bySea .
 The Baltic States need capabilities in and adjacent to the Baltic Sea that could effectively limit Russia's freedom of maneuver and degrade their capabilities . The Baltic states need capabilities.
 This requires a continuous combat-capable presence with high firepower, high survivability, and authorization to act immediately in response to aggression . This requires high firepower and high survivable presence, and plans, rules of engagement, and permission to act quickly .
 To effectively counter Russia's A2/ AD, for example, sea-based air defense, anti-submarine warfare capabilities, as well as surface ships and submarines with long-range strike capabilities, are needed .
 Allocating an AEGIS-equipped ship for the Baltic Sea area would significantly enhance deterrence . Allocating the ship would significantly increase deterrence .
 The Baltics would be of high importance in defending the Baltics . Their presence would send a strong deterrent signal to Moscow .
 The Baltic States are in the most vulnerable situation in NATO, we propose relocating some of the United States Marines Black Sea rotational force to the Baltic States .
 In the Baltics, the footprint and familiarity with local conditions of the U.S. Marines is modest and mainly gained through Baltic Operations exercise .
 SOF troops are able to operate behind enemy lines and conduct special reconnaissance missions . They would be instrumental in providing information both to the Allied defense establishments and the wider public .
 We propose embedding strategic communication/information officers with the SOF teams operating in the region who could record and disseminate information .
 NATO's high readiness forces need to be more robust and adequately trained to stand the rigors of war . NATO needs to be better prepared for the threat of war, says NATO .
 This means a well-trained and highly cohesive force can operate in a non-permissive environment with proper enablers, well-drilled and taut command and control, and the soundest logistic foundations . This means the force is able to operate in
 A multinational force containing up to 14 nations that have never trained together will not be capable of deterring, let alone fighting . The force will be able to take on the challenge of a multinational force .
 The VJTF must be less focused on hybrid conflicts and more suited for high-end warfare . The V JTF must focus on hybrid conflict rather than hybrid conflicts .
 Prepositioning the stocks of armaments and munitions is needed to speed up the Allied reinforcements . Prepositions are needed for Allied reinforcements.
 At least a battalion-worth of heavy equipment should be prepositioned in each Baltic State . Allied troops should be able to quickly surge the presence of Allied troops.
 Heavy maneuver vehicles, artillery, anti-armor and air defense assets, and munition stocks should be prepositioned . As a priority, heavy maneuver vehicles and artillery should be a priority .
 The Alliance's success in defending the Baltic States depends on the efforts of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania .
 This entails ensuring high readiness of their defense forces . This entails conducting frequent exercises to test this readiness .
Airports, harbors, railways, roads, and bridges are the responsibility of the civilian authorities . Military forces should pay greater attention to the additional requirements for handling large and heavy military forces, says author .
 NATO faces a formidable security challenge, but it is not impossible to overcome . The security challenge that NATO faces is formidable, but not impossible.
 The assessments offer a way for NATO to preserve the peace for a bright and prosperous future . The assessments of this section offer a chance for NATO.
 A Bradley Fighting Vehicle of the United States Army 3rd Infantry Division at Tapa, Estonia . The vehicle is a Bradley Fighting vehicle of the U.S. Army 3th Infantry Division .
 The world is in turmoil; the geostrategic security environment is rapidly changing as witnessed by the new and adaptive threats facing the NATO Alliance . The new threats facing NATO Alliance are rapidly changing, according to reports .
 On the southern periphery are the expansive Islamic State and a refugee/migration crisis of Biblical proportions . The Islamic State is the largest group in the world, with more than 100,000 refugees in the region .
 Most of Europe's peace and stability experienced by most of Europe since 1945 is at risk with the rise of a hostile Russia . Russia is the most hostile country in Europe's history .
 The Kremlin should keep NATO senior leaders up at night, says the Kremlin . But it is the peril posed by the Kremlin that should keep them up at the night .
 Russia's emerging adaptive, hybrid approach to war poses an existential threat to the Alliance . Russia's advantage in geography in Eastern Europe and its emerging adaptive and hybrid approach is a threat to Alliance .
 The Kremlin's emerging adaptive approach to conflict is the application of ambiguity . The key component of the Kremlin's approach is the use of ambiguity, says the Kremlin .
 This cloak of ambiguity has been used to confound North American and European decision makers . North American decision makers have been confound by the use of this cloak.
 So-called "little green men" appeared in Crimea in 2014 . In 2014, so-called 'little greenmen' appeared in Ukraine .
 Vladimir Putin denied the obvious, with key leaders in the West dithering on how to respond . But there was no doubt that Russian forces were Russian forces .
 Moscow's gambit worked, with Putin declaring annexation of Crimea only a month after the "little green men" appeared .
 This was followed by a separatist movement in Eastern Ukraine that was inspired and led by Moscow . The separatist movement was inspired by Moscow and was led by Russia .
 Russia's involvement in this conflict is indisputable, but the response from Europe and the U.S. has been sluggish and inconsistent at best . Russia's response to the conflict has been slow and inconsistent, according to CNN .
 Even after the downing of a civilian airliner in July 2014, the resolve of Western leaders to blunt Russian aggression in Ukraine is still in question .
 More than 2 years later, Ukraine remains in the midst of a bloody war, and an increasingly frustrated Putin is turning up his bellicose rhetoric .
 Putin has put together a powerful information campaign to manipulate the minds of his people . Targeting both his domestic audience and the Russian ethnic populations residing in NATO nations, Putin blames his woes on the West .
 Moscow has announced that it will modernize both its nuclear and armed forces .
 Moscow has demonstrated for the moment that it would rather avoid a direct confrontation with the West by employing a "strategy of ambiguity" Moscow has a large conventional force.
 This ambiguity undercuts decision making and provides Putin with plausible deniability of being behind any crisis . This ambiguity is undercuts the decision making of Putin and gives him plausible deniable deniability .
 Russia employs "local"" proxy forces, bolstered by Russian Special Forces in ethnic Russian zones . Using Eastern Ukraine as the example, Russia employs ""local" proxy forces .
 These are supported by small groups of conventional assets to wage its war . These aresupported by small group of conventional asset to wage war .
 The Baltic States suffered terrible depravations and ethnic cleansing under the Soviets . They do not want a repeat of this .
 The 28 NATO member nations continue to wrestle with an appropriate response to the belligerent Russian behavior in the region .
 The United States took the first action in early 2014 by rotating small units of Army Soldiers through the region . The U.S. took a first action by rotating the small units.
 The force is designed to reassure the Baltic States of NATO support . Now dubbed "Atlantic Resolve," this force is meant to reassure NATO members of the Baltic states .
 NATO announced in September 2014 that it would create a force capable of rapidly deploying anywhere in the region . This was followed by a NATO announcement in September last year that the force would be able to rapidly deploy anywhere .
 Most recently, at its July 2016 summit in Warsaw, the Alliance announced the deployment of four battalions of NATO forces by early 2017 .
 These battalions will be stationed in Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia . The battalions are based in Poland and Lithuania .
 NATO should take measures to mitigate the rising threat that Russia poses to the Alliance . There are specific measures that NATO must take to mitigate.
 The recommendations in this article focus on the military element of power . The recommendations are based on the recommendations in the article .
 Any strategy must apply a comprehensive approach that includes diplomatic, economic, and informational aspects of power . However, any strategy must also include diplomatic and economic aspects.
 The following five proposals are a starting place to build credible deterrence in the Baltics . The following 5 proposals are the starting place for a credible deterrence .
 The nature of the Russian threat to the sovereignty of the Baltic nations goes beyond a hybrid ethnic uprising . The Russian threat goes beyond an ethnic uprising, says the author .
 There is a formidable Russian conventional capability literally on the border of each state . There is also a formidable Russia conventional capability on the borders.
 The Kremlin has demonstrated this capability through aggressive activities by its air, sea, and ground forces . The Kremlin is known for its air and sea operations .
 NATO would have virtually no early warning to prepare to prepare for the unthinkable. These unannounced training events have increased in scope and scale over the past year .
 The reality of the changing strategic environment demonstrates the need for NATO to take concerted action to reduce the element of surprise . NATO has been criticised for its lack of action in recent years .
 This can be done by stationing forward a modest early warning intelligence capability . This can also be done with a modest Early Warning capability .
 This should include a linguist element, equipped with electronic warfare intercept capability, UAVs, and other intelligence assets to monitor military activity in both Russia and Belarus . This should also include an intelligence asset to monitor Russian military activity .
 NATO's Intelligence Fusion Center should provide oversight and synchronization of this forward Baltic Intelligence Center . It would reduce duplicative and costly ""national" capabilities .
 The focus of the collection and analysis would be on the regional Russian military activities of the Western Military District . The focus is on the region's military activities .
 Analysts will be able to both see and feel the Russian threat . The idea of employing so-called "reach-back" capability from headquarters in Western Europe.
 There must be a forward and robust intelligence and early warning capability in the Baltic region . There must also be a robust intelligence capability in Baltic region, says the UK.
 The BIC should be commanded by a U.S. Army Colonel with extensive intelligence and NATO experience . The B IC should be led by a United States Army Colonel.
 All too often, senior U.S. officers with little to no experience working with NATO are assigned to key positions in the Alliance .
 The focus and mission of the G2's task is to provide both real world analysis and long range reporting on the disposition, capabilities and assessment of Russian forces in the region .
 G2 will not only provide more than near-term intelligence, but also long-range forecasting that understands and predicts the application of both its conventional and hybrid capabilities . This G2 is not only need to provide more and longer-range intelligence.
 The BIC will be NATO's expert on Russia's emerging doctrine and approach to war . The bottom line is that the BIC is NATO's experts on the Russian doctrine and approaches to war.
 The Baltic States have increased their defense spending since Russia's invasion of Crimea and its subsequent war in Ukraine . All three of the Baltic States are spending more on defense since the Crimea invasion .
 Estonia is making great strides to improve the size, mobility, survivability, and lethality of its forces . Latvia has also increased its defense spending, and Lithuania has taken the bold decision to reintroduce conscription .
 All three nations must have a robust force capable of responding to both conventional and unconventional threats to create strategic depth . All three of these nations must be able to respond to both unconventional and unconventional threat to create Strategic depth .
 The place to begin is here to create time, space, and depth for a larger, survivable, and mobile force . It's the place to start, and create time and space, for the first time .
 Such a force must be capable of contending with an "ethnic uprising," while also being able to secure vital infrastructure from conventional threats . Such a Force must be able to contend with an ""ethnic uprising" while also be able.
 Estonia is exceeding 2% of its Gross Domestic Product on defense . Only Estonia is above 2% on defense.
 The increase in national defense is of key importance in that it provides tangible evidence of the Baltic Nation's commitment to their own defense . The increase is of important importance to show that the Baltic nation is committed to its defense .
 It will enable them to expand their military infrastructure to support the modest increase of forward stationed forces and assets . It will also enable the military to expand its military infrastructure .
 The United States could provide the nations in the Baltic region with surplus U.S. military equipment sitting in depots .
 These can be provided at a cost and used to improve the lethality, survivability, and mobility of their indigenous forces . These can also be used to help the indigenous forces.
 The increase in national defense spending could compensate for the increase . maintaining and employing these assets comes with a cost .
 The nature of the emerging Russian use of hybrid warfare makes a purely conventional capability ill-suited .
 Baltic States must also have a complimentary Special Forces capacity . The Baltic States have a robust conventional force .
 This should be an adaptive element that works effectively with local security forces and other NATO Special Forces . It should be interoperable with NATO conventional units, and is interoperable. This should also work with other NATO special forces .
 The force should build relationships in the ethnic Russian zones of their respective countries . This force should be positioned to detect an exported Moscow inspired ethnic Russian separatist movement .
 NATO should establish a permanent forward multinational NATO Special Forces presence in the region . NATO should also establish a permanently forward NATO special forces presence in region .
 These can support the training and development of local Special Forces capability, while building relationships that can be leveraged in a crisis . These can also support training and develop local Special forces capability, and building relationships .
 Moscow directed exported "ethnic uprising" in the region . Putin can provide an early warning if Putin sets his gaze upon the region in the form of some sort of Moscow directed .
 If deterrence fails, Baltic Special Forces could form the core of an unconventional warfare capability . NATO can mount a conventional effort to liberate its Baltic allies if it fails .
 NATO should create a permanent forward presence of ground forces, NATO says . The United States and several other nations are rotating small military units through the region .
 There is no greater deterrence than for NATO nations to commit a modest force forward in the Baltics . NATO nations should commit modest force in Baltics.
 Vladimir Putin should seek to assert influence over the Baltics. This would dramatically alter the strategic calculus for Vladimir Putin, writes Peter Bergen .
 Any Russian adventurism would have to contend with the reality of having NATO troops already forward, and an attack on them would guarantee a response .
 This permanent forward force would have far-reaching ramifications beyond deterrence . It would also serve as the nucleus for follow-on NATO forces to build and expand .
 NATO's decision to station a battalion in Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia should be a three-brigade element, one in each Baltic nation .
 These brigades would make their task bloody and difficult to accomplish . They would make the task bloody, difficult to do .
 Moscow's cost/benefit analysis was too high for Moscow to try a violent seizure of West Berlin . The cost of the seizure is too high, according to the Russian government .
 This is the same end desired for the Baltic nations of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania . This is also the same ending desired for Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia .
 The three-brigade Baltic force will not stop a Russian attack, but it would make their task difficult to accomplish . It would make it difficult to do so.
 The risk of attacking the Baltic nations would be too risky and too risky . The Alli133 ance would ensure the commitment of the entire Alli 133 ance to come to the defense of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania .
 There would be no question of resolve and no chance of a successful gamble from the Kremlin with a forward ground force in the region .
 The U.S. should support planning and coordination of this three-brigade multinational force . The United States should create a permanent two-star headquarters in Baltic region .
 The headquarters would serve as the command and control of the division size multinational force in the Baltics . It would oversee contingency planning, coordination, and integration of NATO forces into this organization .
 This would serve as the basis to expand from a division level headquarters to a Combined Joint Lorces Land Component Command . This would be a large multi-division exercise or contingency in the region .
 The headquarters should be located in Riga to facilitate command and control, but prepared to move to either Estonia or Lithuania .
 During the Cold War, the most important annual training event was "Return of Lorces to Germany" or RELORGER in military language . The event was held in Germany during the Second World War .
 The large exercise culminated with a force-on-force training scenario . Forces from outside of continental Europe to arrive in Western Europe .
 The REFORGER units would join forward deployed units (those forces already stationed in Germany) in a complex series of training events that replicated a NATO response to a Soviet attack into West Germany .
 An annual exercise of a deployment of NATO forces from across NATO should be implemented in Baltics .
 The annual training event would encompass a robust force that would arrive from Western Europe and North America to exercise and demonstrate the ability to quickly respond to a threat to the sovereignty of the East European allies .
 The lack of geographic depth in the Baltics means that NATO must respond to any crisis with exceptional rapidity, which is not normally a characteristic of NATO decision-making . NATO must also respond to a crisis with extraordinary rapidity.
 The concern is that it will be in the midst of a crisis that a NATO forward joint and multinational force will have difficulty operating as a joint andinational team .
 The ever-shrinking defense budgets in most of Europe mean smaller armies, which equals a lack of strategic depth from the Alliance .
 An annual DEFORTIC would allow NATO's Very High Readiness Task Force and follow-on NATO Response Forces to exercise their ability to deploy forward into the Baltics .
 The annual DEFORTIC exercise would help deployable NATO forces to refine this important skill set .
 There are concerted measures that the Baltic nations and NATO should take now to deter Russian aggression . As previously discussed, there are also concerted measures.
The question is whether NATO will take advantage of its window of opportunity to prevent the unthinkable from happening . The question is if NATO will be able to prevent it from happening.
 NATO nations are facing the changing security environment from a position of weakness . With ever-decreasing budgets and shrinking military forces, a preponderance of NATO nations is facing a change .
 It is such weakness that historically results in war. It is a cost far higher than what prudent defensive measures in peace could have otherwise averted .
 The response from Moscow will be predictably filled with umbrage and condemnation . The response is expected to be filled withUmbrage.
 So-called Russian trolls and their boosters in the West already attack anyone advocating Baltic defense as warmongers .
 NATO is considering stationing a 3-brigade division in the region comprised of 9 maneuver battalions . If NATO adopts the recommendation of stationing the division, it will be out-numbered, facing nearly 30 Russian ground maneuver batt battalion .
 The idea that this force is provocative or a threat to Russia is preposterous, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The idea of this force being provocative or threat to Russian is prepostous .
 The purpose of this forward multinational NATO division is to both assure the Baltic allies and to deter Russian aggression . The purpose is to reassure the allies of the Baltic nations and deter Russia .
 Moscow would make any adventurism from Moscow costly and bloody . However, should the unthinkable happen, it would be a costly and Bloody event .
 This force guarantees that there would be no chance of Russia reasserting control over NATO members . More importantly, this force guarantees there would not be a permanent reasserted control .
 The saying that freedom requires eternal vigilance seems particularly pertinent to us today . The saying of eternal vigilance is particularly pertinent.
 The Baltic exercise demonstrates a NATO capability to defend its eastern allies . Such deterrence should come in the form of forward deployed forces, an early warning capability, and larger and more lethal Baltic forces .
 The key is that these prudent measures can avert World War III by materially demonstrating resolve and strength . NATO's commitment to protect its members from any sort of foreign intervention, whether conventional or hybrid .
 The Western powers experimented with appeasement in the 1930s . The result was a horrific and costly war that placed the world on a precipice of peril .
 Russian foreign policy bent on dominating the region. Now is the time for resolve and strength in the face of an aggressive and assertive Russian Foreign policy .
 The measures recommended in this paper are not provocative; in fact, they are defensive in nature . The measures suggested in this article are not provocation .
 A little action now can go a long way to assure the eastern allies, and deter Russian aggression, says U.S. diplomat .
 History demonstrates that the certain path to war is passivity and appeasement . History shows that the most common way to war was passivity .
 NATO members to demonstrate resolve and strength. Now is the time for all of the NATO nations to show resolve, strength .
 The simple measures offered in this paper lay out a clear path for the alliance to prevent war and to maintain the security and stability of the continent .
 It will protect entire populations from depravations and destruction . More importantly, it will protect all populations fromdepravations .
 The map of Europe has been the battlefield of countless battles and wars . The map is the world's largest map of the continent .
 Often, those who pay the ultimate price are not the leaders who give into weakness and indecision . It is the people, says the author .
 America and its allies stand for freedom and against all forms of tyranny . America stands for freedom, against all kinds of tyranny.
What we do in life matters, it echoes across generations and into eternity . What we do on life matters is what we do across the generations and in eternity .
 Our challenge is to make decisions that will pass on to our heirs a better and safer world . Our challenge today is to decide whether to pass on our heirs to a better world .
 This can only be achieved by eternal vigilance and responsible strength . This is only achieved by constant vigilance and responsibility .
 The United States and NATO have faced a rising foe in the east . This is not the first time that the U.S. and NATO has faced a rise in the East .
 This is a proven strategy and our answer for the modern version of this old adversary. This is our answer to the modern versions of the old adversary, we say . This is the proven strategy, we believe, and it is the answer for this old adversaries .
 History gives a long list of lessons that weakness and appeasement invite war . History also gives a list of Lessons that weakness, appeasements invite war, says historian .
Life is so dear and peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery. You and I know and do not believe that life is so sweet and so sweet.
 The martyrs of history were not fools, and our honored dead who gave their lives to stop the advance of the Nazis didn't die in vain . The martyr's of history are not fools.
 Winston Churchill said, 'Tire destiny of man is not measured by material computations'
 Radio broadcast given by Winston Churchill, October 1,1939, available from www.churchiU-societylondon.org.uk/RusnEnig.html .
 Richard Cavendish, "The Battle of Narva," is available from www.historytoday.com/richard-cavendish/battle-narva, accessed on February 25, 2015 .
Lieutenant Colonel Setser's portion of this article is included in the Recommendation and Conclusion section of this research project . More of Lieutenant Colonel setser's part of the article is in the recommendation and conclusion section .
 The Win, Ver..2, May 28, 2014, is available from www.army.mil/2020/files/USAREUR_2020_vl-2_28May2014 .
 The Swiss Approach, "The Swiss Approach," "Countering Russian Aggression in the Baltics and Eastern Europe," was released on August 1, 2016 .
 Interview with Lieutenant Colonel Eugenius Lastauskas, Lithuanian Army .
 Frank Smitha, "Sweden, Russia and the Great Northern War," is available from www.rem33.com/images/The%20Baltic%20States/nordkrieg.htm .
 The Diplomat, June 17, 2015, is available from thediplomat.com/2015/06/russia-to-add-40-new-icbms-should-the-west-be-worried/, accessed on June 20, 2016 .
 Moscow's Military Trump Card,"" Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, June 18, 2015, available from www.rferl.org/content/kaliningrad-russia-nato-west-strategic/27079655.html .
 Vladimir Putin, Russian National Security Strategy, Moscow, Russia, December 15, 2015, 15. Putin, Vladimir Putin and Vladimir Putin have been together for years .
 The U.S. Library of Congress will release its annual report on February 4, 2015 . The report will be released on February 8, 2015.
Ukraine to Probe Suspected Russian Cyber Attack on Grid. Pavel Polityuk, "Ukraine to probe suspected Russian cyber attack on Grid"
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine Online, February 1, 2016, available from www.osce.org/ukraine-smm/ 219716, accessed on February 1,. 2016 .
 Aljazeera Centre For Studies Online, September 15, 2015, available from studies . Mark N Katz, "Ukraine and the Future of NATO"
 The World Post, May 20, 2014, available from www.hujfingtonpost.com/hugh-williamson/iohats-at-stake-for-osce-i_b_5356361html, accessed on January 30, 2016
 Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, "The Crisis in and Around Ukraine," January 31, 2016, available from www.osce.org/ukrainecrisis, accessed on January 31.
 Russia Direct, September 25, 2014, available from www.russia-direct.org/analysis/osce-may-not-be-perfect-it-works-goodenough-ukraine .
 Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Home Page is available from www.osce.org.org .
 The Free Dictionary, Idioms, "If you want peace, prepare for war," is available from encyclopedia, thefreedictionary.com/If+you+want+peace%2c+prepare+for+war, accessed on February 2, 2016 .
" GlobalSecurity.org" is available from www.globalsecurity.org/military/ world/ukraine/budget .
 "Military spending in Europe in the wake of the Ukrainian crisis," says Blenckner . "Military Spending in Europe" is one of the most expensive military spending in the world .
 Oleksandr Turchynov: "In Donbas we confront the military units of the Russian Federation, formed by the model of 'Waffen-SS'"
 Stepan Poltorak, Minister of Defense of Ukraine, "Reborn of the Ukrainian Army," is available from www.mil.gov.ua/en/speeches/.
 SIPRI Fact Sheet, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, March 2015, available from books.sipri.org/files/ FS/SIPRIFS1503.pdf, accessed on February 6, 2016 .
 Putin agrees with emperor that Russia's only allies are Army and Navy . Putin agrees that Russia is only one of its allies .
 The term "near abroad" is used by the Russian Federation to refer to the 14 Soviet successor states other than Russia .
 During the Yeltsin era, Russia had to cope with the collapse of Communism, the transition to a market economy, the end of the Cold War, and the loss of superpower status .
 This caused a national identity crisis that engendered key shifts in Russian foreign policy toward what it designates the near abroad . This caused an identity crisis. This caused the Russian identity crisis, which caused a major shift in foreign policy .
 The Gale Group Incorporated, 2004, available from www.encyclopedia.com/doc/lG2-3404100894.html, accessed on May 22, 2016 .
 "Putin could attack Baltic states warns former NATO chief," says Ambrose Evans-Pritchard .
 The Kaliningrad region is surrounded by Lithuania and Poland, two NATO and EU members . The region is also surrounded by Poland and Lithuania and Lithuania .
 Alpo Juntunen, ""The Baltic Sea in Russian Strategy,"" Diskussion&Dcbatt, Nr4, November/December 2010, 120, available from www.kkrva.se/wp-content.se/.
 Alexander Dugin's "Fourth Political Theory" The Washington Free Beacon, September 5, 2015, is available from freebeacon.com/culture/putins-brainand-the-future-of-russia/.
 Olga Oliker, "Unpacking Russia's New National Security Strategy," is available from csis.org/publication/unpacking-russias-new-nationalsecurity-strategy, accessed on May 20, 2016 .
 Stephen Lendman, "Russia's New National Security Strategy," is available from www.globalresearch.ca/russias-new-national-security-strategy.com .
 English translation from the Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, 2014, is a translation of the military doctrine .
 Russian general and Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Russia. Valery Gerasimov presented ideas in early 2013 .
 Publishing Section of the General Affairs Department of the Ministry of National Defence, 2015, 18 .
 Lieutenant Colonel Algimantas Misiunas, Lithuanian Army, is a Lithuanian army officer . He is a member of the Lithuanian National Army .
 The chart was published in a Russian weekly newspaper . See "The Military Industrial Complex" for the chart .
 The Armed Forces" VPK News is available from www.vpk-news.ru, accessed on February 18, 2016 .
 "Putin's Pride at 'Returning' Crimea to Russia Still Costing the Country Dear," Irish Times, 2015 .
 Michael Birnbaum, "Russia Bears Down on Nervous Baltics," "In Latvia, Citizens View Events in Ukraine with Growing Unease"
 Neil Buckley and Roman Olearchyk, "Hunt for Yanukovich as Tymoshenko Pushes for New Coalition," Financial Times, 2014, .
 Putin says Russia will "protect the Rights of Russians Abroad"
 The Interpreter, November 22, 2014, is available from www.interpretermag.com.com/The_Menace_of_Unreality_Final .
 "How the Kremlin Weaponizes Culture," "The Wall Street Journal," October 31, 2014 .
 The U.S. deploys Predator Drones to Latvia in 2016 .
 Matthew Luxmoore, "Latvia Struggles with Restive Russian Minority Amid Regional Tensions," "Aljazeera.com/artides/2015/6/13/latvia-resists-russian-softpower.hhnl"
 Damien McGuinness, "Crimea Crisis Sharpens Latvia Ethnic Tensions," BBC News, March 26, 2014, available from www.bbc.com/news/world-africa~26720549 .
 United States News and World Report, April 9, 2015, available from www.usnews.eom/news/articles/2015/04/09/russias-round-2-a-new-conflictin-eastern-europe .
 The Center for Eastern Studies, January 23, 2015, available from www.osw.ivaiv.pl/en/publikacie/osw-commentary .
 Frederik Van Fokeren, "Countering the Information War in the Baltic States" Baltic Defense blog, April 2, 2015, is available from balticdefense.com .
 "Energy Independence — Common Goal of the Baltics," available from www.eu/energy-security/Energy-lndependence-Common-Goal-Of-The-Baltics, accessed February 1, 2016 .
 NATO Air Policing mission being the preeminent example of NATO covering such gaps . NATO Airpolicing mission is being the first to cover such gaps in the air.
 Latvian Institute of International Affairs, December 5, 2014, available from liia.lv/en/analysis/2-of-gdp-for-defence-414, accessed on May 19, 2016 .
 Jaroslaw Adamowski, ""Latvia, Lithuania To Raise Defense Spending,"" Defense News, July 29, 2015, available from www.defensenews.com .
 "Guidelines of the Minister of National Defense for 20162021" is released December 29, 2015 .
 Nicholas de Larrinaga, "Lithuania orders German PzH 2000s," IHS Jane's 360, September 30, 2015, available from www.janes.com/article/54876/lithuania-orders-gennan-pzli
 International Campaign to Ban Landmines Home Page is available from www.icbl.org/en-gb/home. aspx, accessed on February 12, 2017 .
 Council on Foreign Relations — International Institutions and Global Governance Program, February 2010, 20, 20.
 A Briefing Memo, Washington, DC: Center for Strategic & International Studies, Russia and Eurasia Program, January 2015 .
 Obama, The National Security Strategy of the U.S. of America, 25. Obama, 25, is the president of the United States of America .
 NATO Press & Media, June 22, 2015, 6, available from www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014 .
 Obama, The National Security Strategy of the United States of America, is published in the U.S. State Department's new book .
 The U.S. Army War College is the largest military college in the United States . It is the second largest in the Army's history .
 Former NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen: "Why NATO Matters to America" Speech at Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, March 19, 2014 .
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, "The North Atlantic Treaty," signed in Washington, D.C. on April 4, 1949, last updated March 21, 2016, available from www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/official_texts_17120
 An Introduction to Theory and History, 8th ed., Boston, MA: Longman, 2011, 40.
 Graves, "Multinational Operations," "Seek, Develop, and Share," is one of the best known names in the world .
 The U.S. Army Combat Training Center is located in Carlisle Barracks, PA . The center is called "Cultural Change through the United States Army Combat training Centers"
 School for Command Preparation, Command and General Staff College Press, 2001, 19, was published in 2001 .
 The United States Department of the Army, May 2012, includes Change 2, March 12, 2014, 3, 2014 .
 Graves, ""Seek, Develop, and Share,"" 8; Graves, "Multinational Operations,"" 2.2. 3.3. 2.4 . 3.5 . 2.3 . 3 . 4.5.4. 5.5
Transforming Organizational Community to Strengthen People, Purpose, and Performance, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers.
 The U.S. Department of the Army, Mission Command, 3; Graves, "Mission Command," 6.3, is the Army's third-highest-ranked command . Mission Command is based in the United States .
 Strategic Concept for the Defence and Security of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation adopted by Heads of State and Government in Lisbon .
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Financial and Economic Data Relating to NATO Defence . North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, financial and economic data Relates to NATO defence .
 Kamp, ""From Wales to Warsaw,"" 362; North Atlantic Treaty Organization, ""Active Engagement, Modem Defence,"" 10.2; "Active Engaged Engagement," "Modem Defence" "Kamp, "From Wales To Warsaw"
 Moscow effectively uses deception and disinformation to generate ambiguity as a means to prevent a quick response from the West . Moscow effectively use deception and misinformation to create ambiguity .
 Putin denied that the Tittle green men' were his soldiers until after he had completed annexation of Crimea . Such was the case in Crimea, where despite evidence to the contrary, Putin denied it .
 Putin operated inside the decision-making cycle of NATO and thus gained the initiative . With this approach, Putin operated in the decisions-making process of NATO .
 NATO and the EU must conduct a costbenefit analysis on the prospect of responding to Russian aggression and enduring the potential economic consequences . This approach exploited fissures between NATO and EU, as each nation must conduct an analysis of the situation .
 Putin believes that employing conventional forces is too risky . He resorts to using forces unconventionally, scaled and adapted to the strategic environment .
 NATO has a new 'spearhead force' known as the Very High Readiness Joint Task Force . The Alliance has started to test the new force .
 The VJTF is a brigade that will be able to deploy within 48 hours . It will eventually include 5,000 troops . The brigade will eventually be a brigade of 5,00 troops .
 It is part of the NATO Response Force, NATO's high-readiness force . The force includes land, air, sea and Special Forces units .
 Both the NRF and its new 'spearhead force' aim to strengthen the Alliance's collective defence capability . NATO has the right forces in the right place at the right time, says NRF .
 NATO leaders agreed to the 'Readiness Action Plan' at the Wales Summit in September 2014 . They are a key component of what has been called the ' readiness action plan'
 The Secretary General’s Annual Report 2014 is available from www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/opinions_116854.htm .
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, "Active Engagement, Modem Defence," is 35. North Atlantic treaty Organization, ""Active Eng engagement,modem Defence" is 35 .
 Germany is the Backbone for the Alliance's Military Reorganisation, says the German Institute for International and Security Affairs .
 The Atlantic Council of the U.S. is the largest council in the world . It is based in Washington, DC .
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Public Diplomacy Division, January 2016, 7, available from www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/pdf_2016_01/20160128_SG_AnnualReport_2015_en.pdf
 The Atlantic Council, February 23, 2010, 1, available from www.atlanticcouncil.org/publications/issue-briefs/nato-reform-and-decisionmaking, accessed on December 29, 2015 .
 The United States. Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, France and Iceland, Iceland, Italy, Luxemburg, the Netherlands, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, and the United States .
 The Age, March 5, 2015, available from www.theage.com.au/world/russian-president-vladimir-putin-trying-todestroy-nato-us-commander-20150304-13vm69 .
 These countries are situated in a comparable stage of development and represent in the current global environment a political and economic organization of growing importance .
 Russia Direct, April 14, 2015, available from www.russia-direct.org/qa/europe-relationship-russia.vital-importance .
 The National Interest, January 11, 2016, is available from nationalinterest.org/blog/the-skeptics/why-are-americas-allies-so-persistently-pathetic-14870, accessed on January 31, 2016 .
 Jamie Shea, "NATO Going Global —Or Almost" Jamie Shea is the author of the Brussels Journal of International Studies, 2005 .
 The Netherlands Institute of International Relations, Clingendael Institute the Hague, the Netherlands, July 2015, 7, available from www.clingendael.nl/sites/default/files/New%20Threats_new%20EU_ Nato%o20Respons
 The NATO association of Canada, April 3, 2016, available from natoassociation.ca/adaptation-andassurance-natos-response-to-the-21st-century-security-environment/, accessed on May 3,2016 .
 "NATO Response Force,"" January 2016, available from www.shape.nato.int/page349011837, accessed on May 3, 2016 .
 Havard Sandvik, "Two reasons why the NATO Spearhead still matters," is published on December 3, 2015 .
 "NATO agrees to boost NRF, but lacks 'southern' strategy," says Brooks Tigner . "NATF agrees to help NRF but lacks "southern" strategy," he says .
 Richard Weitz, "Russia vs. the new NATO" Russia Direct, September 12, 2014, available from www.russia-direct.org/opinion/Russia-vs-new-nato, accessed on May 3, 2016 .
 Photo source, available from www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_112460.htm, accessed on May 23, 2016 .
 Jim Garamone, "NATO Commander Breedlove Discusses Implications of Hybrid War" Small War Journal, March 15, 2015, available from smallwarsjournal.com/blog/nato-commander-breedlove-discussesimplications-of-
 "New NATO Commander Says Military Alliance Still Vital,"" Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, May 4, 2016, available from www.rferl.mobi/a/nato-new-commander-says-alliance-stillvital/27716164.
 Photo source, available from www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/topics_49755.htm, accessed on May 23, 2016 .
 "Kremlin Creating New Military Divisions To Counter 'NATO Buildup" available from www.rferl.mobi/a/russia-new-militarydivisions-nato/2771515405.html .
 Joe Biden, "Remarks at the 45th Munich conference on security policy" 2009, available from www. whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-vice-president-biden-45thmunich-conference-security-policy, accessed on April
 European Council on Foreign Relations, October 2015, is available from www.ecfr. eu/page/Russias_Quiet_Military_Revolution .
 The Atlantic Council, December 7, 2013, available from www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/natosource/us-disclosed-tosome-but-not-all-nato-allies-that-russia-violated-inf-
 Russian Direct, November 11, 2015, available from www.russia-direct.org/opinion/russian-diaspora-tooTsoft-power .
 New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations, " Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer"
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2011, 100, available from carnegieendowment.org/pdf/book/post-imperium .
 Artem Kureev: "The real reason why Russia finally left the CFE Treaty" Russia Direct, March 17, 2015, available from www.russia-direct.org/opinion/real-reason-why-russian-finally-left-cfe
 In Russia, "In Russia, Anti-Western Views and Support for Putin Surge" "Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, June 2015, 28.
 The National Interest, November 10, 2015, available from nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/russias-economy-what-do-the-numbers-tellus-14300, accessed on December 13, 2015 .
 A Reassessment by RAND Corporation is published in Santa Monica, California .
 Discussion with Office of the Secretary of Defense -Policy personnel, telephone discussion, November 2, 2015 .
 Henry R Nau, "Obama's Foreign Policy" Policy Review, April-May 2010, 36. Henry R. Nau, ""Obama's foreign Policy,""Policy Review," April- May 2010, was released on Monday .
 How NATO Can Deter the "Goliath" Russian Challenge to the Baltics," "Small Wars journal," October 24, 2015 .
 Interview with Rolands Henins, Director of Latvian Defense Policy, June 27, 2016 . Interview with Henins.
 Interview with Colonel Dalius Polekauskas, Chief of Staff of the Lithuanian Army, June 28, 2016 .
 Steven K Metz Project Leader Colonel Douglas Mastriano is the director of Production . He is also the head of the Project Leader of the Metz project .