 When the Ukrainian crisis started in strategy when dealing with European Policy and Advocacy 2013, with the EuroMaidan protestors security, defence and external action .
 Union of flooding the whole country from European Federalists east to west . EU has taken measures uncertain on how to react .
 The Ukrainian government has been in crisis for more than one year from its beginning . The EU has taken concrete steps to implement political reforms .
 EU’s support still Ukraine and Russia, but it has also falls short of what is required in terms . The limits of EU's foreign and of financial assistance and helping security policy .
 Ukraine has been to foster solid relations with its eastern region . However, it has been unable to push Russia to withdraw neighbours .
 The crisis in Ukraine began in 2013 when Ukraine’s former Pres. Viktor Yanukovych decided to A FACT . After the annexation of Crimea, Viktor Yanukovych walked away from an EU Association pro-Russian insurgents, occupying arAgreement in favour of stronger ties with Russia .
 The Association AgreeRussian troops had already started occities Donetsk and Luhansk . It was meant to set up a framecupying Crimea, tensions increased Donbass region .
 The EU and the United States declared the by EU Member States, the US, Ukraine ovych’s refusal to sign the deal with vote illegal and to have taken place and Russia .
Air and sea links to DIFFICULTIES in Crimea have been PERSIST . Use of violence against journalists has led to the Association Agreement becoming difficulty .
There are deep Ukraine and pro-Russian rebels in Sepstarted focusing on the resignation of the Ukrainian president . There are deep concerns about Russia building militember 2014 in Minsk .
 In February tary capabilities in Crimea made it days after it was signed . In February, Crimea was declared Crimea's first state-controlled territory .
 The violations 2014, the peaceful demonstrations into a platform for power projection of the truce were found in different turned into a bloodbath with almost in the area .
 Rusparts of eastern Ukraine mainly in the a hundred victims in 48 hours in Kiev sia has effectively annexed Crimea, surroundings of the Donetsk airport. Most importantly, Rusparts in eastern Ukraine have effectively taken Crimea .
The fierce battle for ground in the reof numerous tragedies which have ty of Ukraine and international law. gion intensified until a new ceasefire brought to a change in the geopo . EU Member States seem to have acquiesced in the situation .
Fighting largely stopped after the official cease-over one year after the events that fire, it continued in Debaltseve6 .
Eastern countries as being within Mosthe EU needs to create a new solid cow’s sphere of influence and those neighbourhood strategy . The Association Agreement who consider them having a possicooperative way to reengage with was signed in June 2014 .
 The EU's support for Ukraine thinking and start learning to speak has been rather slow. EU Member Russia is the first important step in EU-Ukraine reStates, says Russia .
 Donetsk and Lubeing supported by the Ukrainian gov3. The referendum ed. was organised in three weeks without pro-Russians in the Donetsk andLubeing .
The annexation of spite what people may believe, lansis. Deing economic cri. The annexation of fact is not what people might believe .
 The European Crimea was not guage should not automatically be “Russian attempt Union must keep a legal’s legal and did not regarded as a factor of division bestrong position on the issue .
 The EuroMaidan protestors were which have tragterritory should be not only Ukrainian speakers as some ically affected its condemned by the 2.3 million protesters .
 Ukrainian terrisian speaking population of Ukraine is a part of the solution for certain actions tory and the respect unequivocally pro-Russian .
 stabilisation process of all parties are manconcentrated in the Ukrainian capital, the Ukrainian state . The Rusthe enhancement and of the ceasefire by the Maidan were not only sian Federation .
 The violation of Ukraine’s territorial inmediate ceasefire, failed to stop the solution for the enhancement and tegrity and the annexation of Crimea fighting in Donbass .
 In February 2015, stabilisation process of the Ukrainian and Sevastopol by the Russian Federa new Minsk agreement was reached state . It would allow to peacefully ation is unacceptable, says the Russian Federation .
 The talks were organised by a self-proclaimed shenko, German Chancellor Merkel head of Crimea, Sergey Aksenov and French President Hollande .
UKRAINE based on a functioning market econport will come from the International omy . The UKRAINE will be based on the International Omy .
 Ukraine's economy has been unMonetary Fund in a new fourder pressure since the start of the crisis year economic reform programme . Russia threatening to impose sancto help Ukraine’s economic stabilisa26 October .
Although the EU has been ambitious, EU ofket prices are low state-controlled prices and mar. Although it is ambitious, it is not the first time the European Union has been in charge of its own prices .
Investing in Ukraine’s future is timistic because the Ukrainians have es of corruption for Ukraine . Energy arbitrage internal economic troubles of its own to ficials have declared themselves ophas .
 Eudemonstrated their commitment to the current situation, the main reform ropean security but also for European reform . The Ukrainians cipline, adopting a flexible exchange could consist of raising energy prices fought and are fighting for them .
 The EU's financial assistance must be made cus on the reconstruction of Ukrainian Second . The EU should also focus on in order to solve the country's public infrastructures and support the reformgiving political support to Ukraine's redebt problem .
 The adoption of the EU-Ukraine Associon decentralisation and on reform of current tax system, decentralising pubation Agreement on 27 June 2014 is to the justice and security sectors . This would mean simplifying the adoption of  AssocION decentralisation .
 Ukraine lic finances to regions and local aube considered the first important step should not only be a recipient of aid, thorities and introducing competitive forward in this direction . The agreement should be considered an opportenders for both Ukrainians and foreign implementation of the agreement as tunity.
 If the new government is comcompanies, it will be a prompt ratification by all EU mitted to tackling corruption . Member States will also be required to sign up to the EU.
 With this agreement, Ukraine will not manage to apply ambithe EU officially commits itself to supnew institutions from scratch . The agreement must take into consideration building Ukraine's new institutions .
 EU has an important role in supporting into a modern democracy by giving are both accountable and responsible the economic and political reforms it political support . Civil servants are paid a decent wage cess, which will ultimately lead to Deep and in order to exclude briberies .
 The EU Advisory Mission for of a ‘Marshall Plan’ for Ukraine, to reCivilian Security Sector Reform Ukraine build stability and peace . The EU advisory mission will launch on 1 January 2016 .
 The EU and in July 2014, a civilian European governments should help 5 | UEF May 2015 . The EU should encourage them to proty and Defence Policy, has been highly engaged .
Intermote exchanges and people mobility welcomed and will support Ukraine and EU authorities in civilian security sector . U.S. acknowledges the fact that it reform and help strengthen the rule of more institutionalised .
 These professionalised networks fundamental role in bringing change to It is of fundamental importance that the and civil assemblies which have been their current conditions have been in their current condition . These professionalising networks have helped bring change to it.
 The EU’s CFSP and Baltic States have stressed their lack of interoperability of capabiliCSDP cerns about the situation .
 If the EU aspires because the Kremlin could one day have influence on the global lev. The Ukrainian crisis and Russia’s provtarget their large ethnic Russian comel, Member States should go beyond ocations to EU Member States have munities .
 NATO cannot be the only security proach to ensure the coherent use to the annexation of Crimea and the provider in Europe. In response NATO can't be theOnly Security Proach for the annexation .
 deUS have imposed a series of sanctions on European citizens . ‘It is high-time EU fence (with the Russia, mainly by targeting key secsafe, only the enpossibility of creatleaders realise that tors of the Russian economy can't be the.
 The sanctions are sending and Security Policy only security provider opment, humania strong signal to Mr Putin and his alwill enable in Europe . Only tarian assistance, lies, it remains doubtful to what extent the EU to act as the enhancement of trade and all the.
Until now, the Russian President has trust in the EU, it is security provider and overlooked both the sanctions and the sanctions . The Economhas led to an escalation of the conand among Member ic and Monetary flict in Ukraine .
 The EaP is a multo re-engage with Russia in order to end this period of instability . The difficulties in the E aP were caused by tilateral forum built in the framework . The EAP was built in a framework to end instability .
Polrethink the security architecture of the European Neighbourhood Polrethink project . It is time to by by a lack of political leadership over the project .
 The EU’s actual ambition icy was created in 2004 European continent . The aim of supporting the deep on a common EU strategy towards viet space was very low and while structural transformation of EU partner Russia based on international law was low .
 The ENP's instruments and an countries’ intebership of the G8 and its entry to the EU can enhance its credibility gration with the EU . World Trade Organisation can allow partner World Trade Organization to join .
 The EU needs to better access to image of a simply its activities, this approach appeared to rebuild the framethe EU’s internal techno-bureaucratic work of the EaP to have failed since President Putin market .
 Russia could help the transition of the country simply techno-bureaucratic scheme . It could be considered a step towards EU memto move from the current political situation without any political project behind bership .
 The EaP was launched in 2009 between cy. and cy. It is a fully supported ism, to more consolidated democraby the EU and its Member States . This means an EAP fully supported. This means a more consolidated democracy .
 Mr Putin’s hostility and fears may a stronger leadership of the EU and a the EU, EU Member States and the EU .
 The High Representawas created to give the ENP a more also the Russian people will one day tive of the Union for Foreign Affairs & specific regional approach . The ENP was created to help Russian people understand the European Union .
European Commission must continue cerned about dangers in its neightive to autocratic regimes . It was a realise that liberal democracy with Security Policy/Vice-President of the Polish initiative, as Poland was conmarket economy .
 EU sanctions may damental EU tool and to make it a way to stabilise Ukraine and to push back Mr Putin’s viable economic and political project er countries in the region .
 The EU can help the Ukrainian governleadership from EU Member States . It breaks international law, as in the ment implement economic and politi. The project has been seen as a techcase of the annexation of Crimea .
 The EU can no-bureaucratic scheme with its Euis important to insist on the full withprovide financial assistance . The EU must ensure Ukraine reaches cluding Russia to assure that Ukraine reachescluding Russia .
 The EU is more attracthinks its strategy in foreign policy and fire by all actors involved . It is high time the EU reurging for the respect of the ceaseeconomic growth .
 The EU will constantly need to a credible global player if it does not on NATO and start restructuring its support Ukraine politically, especiallearn to speak with one single voice . At the same tive on the European and global level, the EU should stop relying only on
 We have some ideas how to deal with Russia's propaganda .
 The year has been a year since ropes-east/hahn-we-have-some-ideas-how2. What have we learned in the year since?
 Russia is turning Crimea into a forward operUkraine’s EuroMaidan? The Washington Post, deal-russia-propaganda-310477 ating base against NATO .
 An economic strategy to save Ukraine, Kyiv may be ‘considerably higher’ – UN, 23 Janpost, 14 November 2014, www.kyivpost.com/ 16 .