 In June 2016, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan apologised and called for the two countries to patch up . Then, in May 2016, Erdoğan called for Turkey and Russia to fix things up .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin’s support for Erdoğan in the aftermath of the July 2016 coup attempt paved the way for rapprochement .
 Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh, Moscow and Ankara avoided a broader escalation over the disputed enclave . April 2016 escalation saw the deadliest fighting between Armenian and Azerbaijani forces since 1994 ceasefire .
 N°244, Nagorno-Karabakh’s Gathering War Clouds, 1 June 2017. New Opening or More Peril, 4 July 2016, and N° 244, Nagornan Karabakh's Gathering War clouds, 1 July 2016 .
 In other areas, cooperation could contribute to greater stability, too, too .
 N°47, Russia’s Choice in Syria, 30 March 2016; N°49, Steps Toward Stabilising Syria's Northern Border, 8 April 2016 . N°53, Fighting ISIS: The Road to and Beyond Raqqa, 28 April 2017; and N°56
 Turkey’s downing of the Russian plane in November that year marked a low point in Turkey-Russia relations .
 Crisis Group Middle East Report N°176, The PKK’s Fateful Choice in Northern Syria, 4 May 2017 .
 Russian bombing raids in February 2016 allowed the YPG to capture the town of Tel Rifaat in the Aleppo governorate from Ahrar al-Sham, a militia supported by Turkey .
 Turkish exports to Russia shrank by 40 per cent while Russia saw a decrease of only 19 per cent . Turkey saw a drop of 40% in exports from Russia to Russia .
 Russian gas exports, accounting for the bulk of overall commerce, continued without restrictions . The slump was even more dramatic in tourism and construction .
 In early 2014, massive anti-government demonstrations, known as the Maidan revolution, prompted Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych to flee the country .
 Moscow labelled Yanukovych’s ouster a coup, and shortly afterward annexed Crimea . A referendum on whether to join Russia was held on 16 March 2014 .
 Crimea’s Supreme Court outlawed the body as an ‘extremist organisation’ in April 2016 . The body had links to Turkish ultra-nationalist groups such as the Grey Wolves and the pan-Islamist Hizb ut-Tahrir .
 Moscow has pursued a divide-and-rule strategy toward the Tatars . Moscow also has pursued the divide and rule strategy .
 Erdoğan negotiates release of Crimean Tatar leaders imprisoned by Russia .
 Turkey’s quiet diplomacy and persistence can pay off – at least on some issues. Hide Footnote Their release suggests Turkey's quiet diplomacy could pay off .
 Erdoğan slammed Putin for commemorating the Armenian genocide in late April 2015 . He pointed to Russia’s invasion of Crimea and interference in Donbas .
 Little Russia’ proclamation violates Ukraine’s territorial integrity, foreign ministry says .
 Ankara prefers a stronger Ukraine which could act as an ally in the region . Moscow uses the Donbas conflict as leverage to keep Kyiv in check .
After March 2014, Russia's de facto coastline grew from 475km to 1,200km . That does not count the 300km of coastline belonging to Abkhazia, a region that broke away from Georgia in 1999 and declared independence .
 Russia deployed S-300 batteries to Crimea when reinforcing its military presence in Crimea . Russia deployed the batteries to this region when reinforcing military presence .
Crisis Group interview, de facto Abkhazian official, Sukhumi, August 2017. Crisis Group interview.
 David Batashvili: "Russia troop deployments menace Georgia" The Russian military presence in Abkhazia, Georgia, is seen as a threat to Georgia .
 That nearly equals the length of Turkey’s shore, which is 1,785km or about 35 per cent of the total coastline .
 Turkey acknowledges Russia’s advantage, and avoids direct confrontation with Azerbaijan and Georgia . Turkey chose not to directly challenge Moscow, despite its close ties to Georgia .
Russia-Turkey rapprochement is unlikely to signal major shifts in the region . It might offer opportunities to reduce risks of another flare-up between Armenia and Azerbaijan over the contested enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh .
 The escalation, facilitated by Baku’s beefed-up military capabilities, unleashed a war of words between Russia and Turkey .
 In 2007-2009, Russia supported Turkey's and Armenia’s ‘football diplomacy’ in the effort to normalise ties and unblock the border that Ankara closed in 1993 in connection to the war over Nagorno-Karabakh .
 In April 1994, Ankara decided not to sign the protocol that would have opened the Turkey-Armenia border . That temporary thaw between Yerevan and Ankara led to the October 2009 signing of the two Zurich protocols .
Eduard Abrahamyan is seen as espousing a tough stance on Nagorno-Karabakh . He is also seen as unwilling to consider any return of land to Azerbaijan .
 Armenia ready to establish diplomatic relations with Turkey’s Turkey . Armenia ready for diplomatic relations.
 Ankara has reacted cautiously to Pashinyan. He also mentioned his determination to press for “international recognition of Armenian genocide’s”
 Erdoğan appealed to the Armenian government to show “common sense’ and work for the region’s stability . Ayla Jean Yackley, “Erdoğan calls for ‘commonsense’ from new Armenian government’.
 MHP leader Bahceli hails ‘historic’ success in Turkey’s elections’.
 He is more likely to expend political capital with nationalists over the more pressing Kurdish issue rather than opening a second front .
 The sides are pushing behind the scenes for substantive and honest discussions of a possible peace deal might be feasible .
Turkish companies have done business in Chechnya despite being subjected to pressure and extortion by the republican leadership . Turkish companies have been subjected to forms of pressure.
 Russia abstained from supporting the PKK in late 1998 . In late 1998, it refused PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan asylum .
 Mairbek Vatchagaev, “Another Chechen emigré murdered in Turkey’s Turkey, was murdered in March 2015 .
 New frictions in Iraq and Syria threaten Ankara and Tehran’s usually peaceful management of their Middle East rivalries .
 To rebuild trust and avert open conflict, they should coordinate de-escalation, exchange intelligence and designate representatives to open a new channel between their leaders .
 Turkey and Iran have kept the peace between themselves, compartmentalised growing energy and commercial relations and cooperated regionally when their interests converged . For nearly two centuries, the two countries have kept their geopolitical competition between them .
 Iraq and Syria are at odds over core interests in both countries . Their economies are increasingly intertwined, while their economies are intertwined .
 Iran is a leading regional proponent of both Shiite Islam and theocratic governance . Turkey’s secular constitution is built on a bedrock of Sunni Islamic practice .
 Turkey and Iran generally concur on the strength of the relationship they have had during a long history of cohabitation . Turkey's officials and diplomats attest to their relationship .
 The inability to accommodate each other has the potential to undermine or even undo their strong ties . Their inability to accommodate each other could undermine or undo their ties .
 Both have empowered local partners and proxies on the battlefields of Mosul, Tel Afar, Aleppo and Raqqa . Both are positioning themselves to control whatever emerges from the debris of today's wars .
Both have attempted to build on shared interests – defeating or at least marginalising Islamic State and curbing the rise of autonomy-minded Syrian Kurds . Deep suspicions about the other’s ambitions to benefit from the chaos have stopped them from reaching an arrangement that could lower the flames
 The dynamics instead point toward deepening sectarian tensions, greater bloodshed, growing instability across the region . Even if inadvertent military confrontation between them where their spheres of influence collide, military confrontation could be dangerous .
 The possibility that an Iranian-made drone killed four Turkish soldiers in northern Syria on 24 November 2016, as Ankara alleges, points toward perilous escalation .
 To reverse course and avoid worse, they need to overcome mutual mistrust, they say . To reverse Course and avoid bad behavior, they should reverse course.
To this end, and as a pressing priority, they should establish a channel for continuous high-level negotiations over their regional postures . To this end they should set up a channel.
 President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan of Turkey and Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei of Iran should designate personal representatives with the authority to manage the diplomatic channel .
 The governments should also take confidence-building steps to de-escalate conflict, writes Peter Bergen . If they do this, they should demonstrate seriousness and goodwill, Bergen says .
 Iran might offer as a first step to rein in Shiite militias deployed in Ninewa governorate . Turkey agrees to withdraw its tanks and other heavy weapons from the area .
 Confidence-building measures could pave the way for agreed principles of good neighbourliness . If well executed, it could pave way for mutual recognition of each other’s core interests .
 The United States and Russia have strong military ties with Turkey and Iran . The U.S. and Russia, which have strong ties with both countries, should support such steps .
 Turkey and Iran remain caught in the web of Russia and Iran's relations . Turkey, Iran will be able to succeed only to the extent they find a way to work together .
Only by finding common ground can Turkey and Iran contribute to a more stable and secure region . Only by findingcommon ground can Turkish and Iranian nations contribute to more stable region .
 De-escalation and increased Ankara-Tehran cooperation are necessary but insufficient to resolve the metastasising, intersecting crises involving many actors and heightened sectarian passions .
 Electoral calendars in both countries and the imperatives of domestic politics and balancing ties with regional partners could hinder progress .
 The effort would be important and should be pursued. But it could at least help reduce the tensions fanned by unhelpful rhetoric from both leaderships .
 Iran’s relations with Saudi Arabia is even greater disorder and suffering. The alternative – crystallised in the zero-sum dynamic that marks Iran's relations with the region's other major Sunni power, Saudi Arabia – is even worse .
 Turkey and Iran are two of the region’s strongest non-Arab states, with similar geographic and demographic sizes and tradition of statehood . Turkey and Iranian have not perceived one another as an existential threat .
Turkey has spent most of the past century writing European laws into its statute books in support of explicitly republican, secular constitutions . Iran has experienced first absolute monarchy and then theocratic rule .
 Nearly a quarter of Iran’s population are ethnic Azeris, who speak a Turkic mother tongue .
 NATO radar in Turkey serves to protect Israel . Iran should reconsider relations with Turkey.
 They share deep historic, cultural and economic ties . But they also share deep cultural and cultural ties .
 Over the past two decades, their economies have become increasingly intertwined . Their economies are increasingly intertwined.
 Iran supplies nearly a fifth of Turkey's oil and natural gas . Turkey is its neighbour’s gateway to Europe, with more than afifth of Iran's land trade .
 Iran's 1980-1988 war with Iraq and the peak of nuclear sanctions in 2011-2013. This link became a lifeline for Iran during its most vulnerable periods, the 1980- 1988 war with Iran .
 Iran is Turkey’s main gas provider after Russia, some ten billion cubic metres annually, while after Iraq, Iran is the country's largest oil supplier .
 Between March 2014 and March 2015, more than 110,000 trucks carried goods through the Bazargan border post, compared to nearly 45,000 crossing Iran’s border with Afghanistan during that period .
 Iran's economy is unburdened from nuclear-related sanctions due to the 2015 nuclear accord . Both countries appear committed to boosting their nearly $10 billion bilateral trade .
 Bilateral trade peaked at $21. billion in 2012, mostly from a twelve-fold increase in Turkish gold exports . The increase in gold exports was a 12-fold rise in 2012 .
Iran, Iran, secret gold and the mystery trade boosting Turkish exports. Onur Ant, “Iran, secretGold and the Mystery trade boosting Turkey's exports’
 Mohammad Ebrahim Taherian, Iran’s ambassador to Turkey. Mesut Özcan, director, Diplomatic Academy, Turkish foreign ministry, both Ankara, Turkey .
 U.S. administration appears keen on curbing Tehran's regional influence, underlines their economic link’s vital importance .
 The KDPI and another group, Komalah, continued low-level insurgency until 1996, when they put down their arms . The K DPI and Komalahs continued their low- level insurgency until 1997 .
 Iran and Turkey have been at loggerheads for the past five years . Between 1991 and 2003, the two, along with Syria, consulted closely to prevent an autonomous Kurdish region in Iraq .
 In 1998, Iran mediated between Turkey and Syria, which were on the verge of military confrontation over the latter's sheltering of PKK leader Abdallah Öcalan .
 Tehran backs Jalal Talabani’s rival, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan . The Movement for Change and the PKK has expanded its presence in northern Iraq .
 Iran and the PKK share a short-term tactical interest in defeating IS while consolidating ties with partners and affiliates in Iraq and Syria . Their long-term interests do not align.
 The former seeks to preserve the existing order; the latter strives to overturn it to carve out a Kurdish state . The former wants to preserve an existing order, the latter wants to overturn that .
Iranian Kurds fighting IS in Iraq put Tehran on alert, says Al-Monitor .
 IS could be dislodged from the places it currently holds . Turkey and Iran could be on a collision course with Turkey if and when IS is dislodges .
 Despite their long relationship, Turkey and Iran harbour deep mutual mistrust . Despite their relationship, the two countries harbour deep mistrust .
In the mid-2000s, Iranian authorities annulled major contracts with Turkey's TAV Airports Holding and TurkCell communications that threatened vested interests of powerful stakeholders in Iran . Suspicions are evident even in the bilateral economic realm .
 The two bitterly disputed the price of Iran’s natural gas exports . The two also bitterly disputed prices of Iran's natural gas export .
 A preferential trade deal, ten years in negotiation, was widely criticised in Iran as undermining domestic industries in 2015 .
 Iran decries Turkey's active support of the opposition in its attempt to bring down the Syrian regime . Iran accuses Turkey of supporting Sunni jihadist groups in Syria and allowing IS recruits to transit its territory .
 It deems these developments a direct threat to the stability of its borders with Syria and Iraq and the area's Sunni inhabitants .
 Second chance for Turco-Iranian dialogue appeared following the July 2016 failed coup in Turkey . After nearly three years of mutual escalation in Syria, a second chance appeared .
 Quoted in ‘Iran’s foreign minister boosts ties during Ankara visit’.
 Turkish-Russian reconciliation fuelled in part by YPG advances in northern Syria . Ankara rethinking of its Syria policy .
 Erdoğan: “We do not have an eye on Syrian soil. Assad’s fate. ‘We don’t have a eye on Syria’
 Tehran continued to insist that a swift transition away from Assad before stabilising the country would lead to state collapse and chaos .
 Turkey’s military intervention in northern Syria, Operation Euphrates Shield, disrupted talks and exacerbated mistrust .
 Turkey's and Iran's rivalry has become more complex and intractable . With each failure to find an accommodation, the context of Turkey and Iran’s rivalry is more complex .
 Neither can tolerate a divided country or complete disorder in Syria. What they have in common in Syria is that neither can tolerate the country or the disorder .
 Turkey's absolute priority is to have a stable border and a curb on PKK-led Kurdish aspirations . Turkey would like to see Assad gone and a more inclusive Sunni-led order emerge in Damascus that would be friendlier .
 Both seek to preserve Iraq’s territorial integrity as well, but ensuring Shiite-majority rule is as critical for Iran as a more inclusive role for Sunnis in governance is for Turkey . Turkey is also a key ally of Iran in Iraq .
 For now, there are more reasons to believe the two will persist on their current path than change course .
 The looming U.S. transition is another incentive for Turkey and Iran to create as many facts on the ground as possible before a new administration sets its Iraq and Syria policies .
 Russian-Iranian-Syrian push to subdue east Aleppo and Turkey’s attempt to establish a de facto safe zone in northern Syria . This may explain the Russian- Iranian- Syrian push to Subdue east Syria .
 Erdoğan's nationalistic rhetoric in the run-up to the constitutional referendum on whether to grant Erdoğan more executive powers . The referendum is anticipated in mid-2017, and Iran's May presidential election .
 Rivalry has exposed the limits of Turkey's and Iran’s power projection instead of expanding their clout .
 Iran has shouldered the burden of military protection and financial support of a pivotal ally at risk, at the price of incurring the Sunni world's enmity .
 Inability to work together has diminished their ability to influence extra-regional partners, say experts . They say they have tried to contain their aspirations .
Turkey and Iran will have to live with the outcome of the conflicts now burning around them . Turkey and Iran, as neighbours, will be living with the outcomes of their conflicts .
 Any sustainable solution will require a regional power balance tolerable for both. Any solution will need to be a regional solution .
 This can only be achieved if they cooperate, rein in their proxies and recognise one another’s core strategic and security interests in Syria and Iraq . This is only possible if they recognise one another's core strategic and security interests .
 Turkey and Iran are the latest iteration of an old power game, but with an increasingly ominous twist . They warily eye each other’s moves in Iraq and Syria, prime their proxies and prepare to escalate direct military involvement .
 How the two choose to deploy their power, with whom they align and whether they can manage or overcome their differences is vitally important to them . The two states have a stake in the Middle East .
 Turkey and Iran are the two countries involved in the region's wars . The two are more suited to identify ways toward renewed mutual accommodation than Turkey andIran .
 They have extensive communication channels and long experience in striking geostrategic deals . They share a core interest in preserving their neighbours’ territorial integrity .
 As the region's conflicts worsen, the future becomes more unpredictable, with no actor insulated from potential harm . The region’s conflicts will become more unpredictable.
 Today's seductive opportunities may become tomorrow’s smothering traps .
 It should be an interest of those that have the ability, maturity and long history of peaceful relations not to allow themselves to be sucked further into an uncertain future . To agree to a critical course correction that, while not settling all conflicts, could at least lessen overall tensions .
 The U.S. and Russia should adopt a coherent, supportive approach toward the two regional powers . The two countries should take steps that can help avoid an escalation that would be in neither Russian nor United States interests . The United States and Russia must take steps to help avoid a escalation that
 Turkey and Iran need to set in motion a virtuous dynamic that, by enabling negotiation of a sustainable modus vivendi, could stabilise their relationship and start reducing the flames burning .
 This requires difficult reciprocal concessions and confidence-building steps, but would protect their interests far better than continuation of a highly unstable and unpredictable status quo or, worse still, escalation and direct military confrontation . This requires reciprocal concessions.