 In Crimea, the vast majority are ethnic Ukrainians who speak Russian . In fact, unlike in Crimea, they speak Russian.
 Census data from Tsarist, Soviet, and post-Soviet eras uniformly confirm this for all of the Russian-speaking oblasti in present-day Ukraine .
 At the same time, there is also a substantial ethnic Russian minority in the southeast .
 There are many mixed marriages between Russians and Ukrainians and a large number of southeasteners have family in Russia . There are also many mixed families between Russians, Ukrainians and southeasteners .
 Novorossiya's native region does not correspond entirely to historic Novorosiya . Their native region is not entirely to NovorOSSiya .
 The latter was an old Cossack territory and is largely considered to be the “Piedmont of Ukraine,’s ‘Piedmon of Ukraine’ The movement to unify the Ukrainian people began.
 It is the quality of multiculturalism that really dominates in this part of Ukraine. It is a key part of the country's multiculturalism, says the author .
 Ukraine's largest cities are located in Ukraine’s largest cities . This has attracted many people from other Soviet republics to move to this area .
 Ukrainian nationalism has much less traction in this part of the country . antisemitism and discrimination in general are less of an issue in the southeast than in other parts of Ukraine .
 Jews are well-integrated and there have been many Jewish mayors and governors . There have been several Jewish governors in the U.S.
 Mixed marriages between different ethnic groups is a frequent phenomenon . Mixed marriages are also a frequent occurrence .
 Odessa is perhaps the best example of a multicultural city in the Southeast . The city is one of the most multicultural cities in the region .
 It was a significant region in the “Rustbelt’ of the former USSR, comparable to the Ruhr valley in Germany . It was also a significant area in the "Rustbelt" of the Former USSR .
 There are several large cities in this part of the country with large working-class populations . There are many large cities with largeworking-class population .
 The great miner and Hero of Socialist Labor Aleksei Stakhanov is one of Russia's most famous native sons . He is a member of the Socialist Socialist Labor Party .
 Most of them support neither Euromaidan nor the post-Maidan government of Ukraine . Most of those in Ukraine support the Eurom Maidan government .
 Despite hopeful predictions that Euromaidan would ‘unite Ukraine,’ the opposite has in fact occurred .
 There were even more supporters of the 2004 Orange Revolution in the southeast than there were of Euromaidan .
 Few participated in the recent Ukrainian Presidential election which Petro Poroshenko won . Few took part in the election.
 Most blame the U.S. and the Obama administration specifically for Ukraine’s most recent misfortunes .
 Yanukovych registered consistent victories in the Russian-speaking oblasti of the southeast . Most still disliked his corrupt and incompetent government .
 Few viewed the Euromaidan revolution as the solution to the problem. Few, however, viewed it as a solution to a problem .
 The rebels’ Russian nationalist ideology has led the majority of the people in the southeast to view them with distrust . The rebels' advocacy of a ‘separate’ identity for Ukraine’s Russian-speakers has led many to view the people with distrust
 The rebels are opposed to Kiev. The rebels say they support their general opposition to Kiev . They are also opposed to the government of Ukraine .
 The ideology of the rebels has failed to catch-on beyond the Donbas . Generally, the rebels have not caught-on .
 This is not due to any success on the part of Kiev’s ‘anti-terrorist operation,’ but rather by the rebels’ own narrow and short-sighted nationalist dogma .
 The rebels’ nationalism is particularly unappealing in a progressive multicultural city like Odessa on the Black Sea coast .
 Petersburg of the south was founded on the order Catherine the Great and her lover Prince Potemkin with the vision of the Spanish General José de Ribas .
 Pushkin's love affair with the wife of Prince Mikhail Vorontsov produced some of the most beautiful Russian-language poetry .
 The city is also a city that brought the world Yiddish theatre, Babel, and Ilf and Petrov .
It is this inherent cultural liberalism that explains why the rebels will never stand a chance here ideologically . It is this cultural liberalism which explains why they won't be able to fight back from the rebels .
 Putin, Russia, and the Eurasian Union are all still popular here due to linguistic, familial, and economic connections to Russia .
 support for Russia does not necessarily mean support for the rebels. It should also be noted that support is not necessarily support for rebels . Most southeastern Ukrainians view Russia with distrust .
 The Soviet Union is still greatly missed here and most southeastern Ukrainians are leftists when it comes to economics . Most southeastern Ukrainians have a sense of nostalgia for the Soviet Union .
 Kiev’s bombardment of towns and cities, human right abuses, atrocities, the massive death toll of civilians, and the involvement of right-wing groups like Right Sector have alienated most southeastern Ukrainians against Kiev .
 These include bilingualism and the right to elect their own governors . These primarily include bilingualistism and right to elected their own governor .
 Some advocate for a simple de-centralization in a reformed unitary state . Others favor federalism, and more extreme factions support a confederation .
 The vast majority of southeastern Ukrainians do not want to secede from Ukraine . Most importantly, it must be emphasized that the vast majority don't want to leave .
 This entry was posted in analysis, Former Soviet Union, Russia, Ukraine, and tagged russia .