 Ukraine has accused Russia of waging a disinformation war to create social unrest . About two-thirds of the population view Russia as an aggressor .
 Petro Poroshenko, Yulia Tymoshenko and Volodymyr Zelensky are on a clear path to victory . Polls indicate that none of the three front-runners are likely to win theoshenko election .
 Ukraine-Russia relations have been strained for years. The two countries have been involved in a bitter dispute over Crimea . Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin has been accused of a series of crimes against Russian troops .
 A Poroshenko presidency is the most ‘comfortable’ and ‘convenient’ choice for the Kremlin, says Leschenko . The Poroshenko president is a 'comfortable' choice, he says .
 There is “little hope of the status quo changing’ if Poroshenko is re-elected, says Mikhail Minakov, Principal Investigator at a research center .
 Kremlin refuses to talk with Ukraine until there is a change in leadership . Now, he no longer gives a time frame for ceasefire .
Despite Poroshenko vowing to demolish the system of crony capitalism, the culture of impunity continues to thrive . Despite Poroshenko's efforts, the Culture of impunity surrounding corrupt elites continues to thriving .
 Ordinary Ukrainians are stuck at a monthly average wage of $350 . One in six Ukrainians of working age migrate to Europe to work either temporarily or full time .
 According to the Razumkov Center, 76 percent of Ukrainians think the country is headed in the wrong direction .
 The politically fierce Tymoshenko presents herself as someone who can bring Russia back to the negotiating table, says Korbut, the Chatham House analyst .
 Tymoshenko has a strong political reputation . Once the hero of a 2004 popular uprising against election fraud, she was imprisoned for two and half years .
 She served as Prime Minister for eight months in 2005, and just over 2 years between 2007 and 2010 . She was PM for just over two years from 2007 to 2010 .
 She recently proposed a new format of negotiations, the ‘Budapest Plus’ for ending the war in Donbas and returning Crimea to Ukraine . Leaders from the U.S., France, Germany, the E.U., China and Russia.
 Korbut says the talks could give Russia the chance to make concessions without looking weak . He says it could indirectly allow Russia to exit Donbas while saving face .
 The dream of E.U. membership remains strong in Ukraine, with at least half the population in favor . In Ukraine, the dream of the U.S. membership is strong.
 The fresh-faced Zelensky, 41, appeals to many Ukrainians who are tired of the political class .
 Many analysts fear he could enter into an agreement that favors Russia more than Ukraine . But with his political experience confined to playing the president in a popular TV show, his stance on Russia is unclear .
 The comment prompted criticism, with some denouncing his views on Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 This is beneficial to the Kremlin, says Irina Busygina, a professor at Moscow’s Higher School of Economics .
 The Kremlin wants to make an example out of Ukraine to Russians watching at home . The Kremlin is trying to make a case out of the Ukraine to Russia .
 Russia’s current course would look safe and stable, according to CNN's John Sutter . Russia's current course will look safe, he says .
 His approval ratings have recently dropped to a 13 year-low of 64 percent . The drop is due to increasing frustrations over inflation, falling wages and a reduction in social welfare .
 It marks a steep decline from his approval ratings of 89 percent following the annexation of Crimea . It is a steep drop from his 89 percent approval ratings.
 In July 2018, 40 percent of respondents said the government was going in the wrong direction . That's up from 14 percent in May 2014, according to the survey .
 As long as Putinism is alive, Russia will try to control Ukraine, says Andrei Piontkovsky . Russian political scientist says Russia will continue to try to influence Ukraine .
 Most Ukrainians are unwilling to sacrifice their government’s independence . But most Ukrainians are willing to accept their government's independence .
 Putin seems determined not to make any deals that would enhance Ukraine’s sovereignty . Ukraine won’t make any deal to diminish sovereignty .
 Ukraine’s next president chooses to redefine the red lines. That means the only way to end the stalemate would be if Ukraine's next president decides to change its red lines .