 Last month a major battle broke out between Russian-backed insurgents and Ukrainian forces in the town of Avdiivka .
 Ukrainian society has changed greatly since 2014 in ways that impact the chances for conflict resolution . Alongside the return of such violence in the Donbas, Ukraine has changed significantly since 2014 .
 PONARS Eurasia members argue for the importance of properly understanding regional divergences in identity, public political attitudes and preferences .
 Some said the insurgent groups were reacting to the Ukrainian army’s slight advance in the dividing zone .
 The Ukrainian army has retaken some towns and villages that were supposed to be under Ukrainian control . The Minsk agreements say that the Ukrainian army should be under control anyway .
 When it comes to violations and incidents, context is always needed, according to the author .
Ukrainian army re-asserted control over many towns and villages . Many of those locales were not defended by insurgents . Many towns were not much “newsworthy’s fighting,” says the author .
 Some have mentioned that some of the violence in Avdiivka and elsewhere is related to Ukrainian attempts to implement blockades of the self-proclaimed republics in order to jeopardize their standing .
 This could have irritated some insurgent groups and tensions boiled over . This could be a blow to some insurgents and tensions could have boiled over.
 Avdiivka has seen an unusually pronounced escalation in recent months . However, I do not think this could have resulted in the unusually pronounced increase in violence .
 escalations in Avdiivka definitely require encouragement and probably direct orders from Moscow. What is clear is that escalations like the one in Av diivka require encouragement .
 I do not think the leadership in those republics has the independent decision-making capacity to embark on that kind of warfighting . I don't think the leaders in those nations have the independent ability to make decisions .
 Putin felt emboldened by Trump’s lack of attention and forcefulness, some said . Some said that Putin believed he had carte-blanche to “deal’ with Ukraine .
 Some said that Putin expected a hint about easing or lifting of sanctions, but then became disappointed and decided to escalate the conflict in the Donbas .
 Speaking of signals, the U.S. administration's outlook on the Ukraine conflict has been diverse and confusing .
 UN Ambassador Nimrata Haley and White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer have insisted that Russia needs to return Crimea to Ukraine .
 Trump himself seems to continually cast Russia and Putin in a positive light . At the same time, Trump himself appears to cast Putin and Russia in apositive light .
 In addition, the killings of prominent Ukrainian journalists that happened under Poroshenko’s watch remain unresolved .
 The Security Service stonewalled the investigation of alleged human rights by the Security Service . The government refused to seriously investigate allegations by international organizations regarding the use of banned cluster munitions in the Donbas conflict .
The use of violence to resolve political disputes has been normalized with the inclusion of paramilitary battalions into the political process . The use of paramilitary Battalions has also been normalized, says the author .
 The increasingly common use of violent tools in political competition has been the most important change in Ukrainian politics since 2014 . The increasinglyCommon use of violence has been a key change in Ukraine's political competition .
 The best that the new U.S. administration can do in dealing with Poroshenko’s regime is to recognize its democratic deficiencies and exert pressure to address them .
 Regional identities are and will continue to be an important factor in Ukrainian internal politics and political debates for years to come. Regional identities will be a key factor in Ukraine's internal politics for years.
 The issue of language and identity has only sharpened since the war erupted in 2014 . About 5 million ethnic Russians and 8-9 million Russian speakers live in Ukraine .
 "Russian spring" project largely failed in Ukraine, but it will long remain a Kremlin trump card to play the Russian ‘ethnic card’ on neighboring states .
 One visible outcome of Russia's war in Ukraine is the coalescence of Ukrainian identity in all regions of the state .
 The share of ethnic Ukrainians grew from 78% to about 85% since the war began . With the "loss" of some 6 million people, mainly ethnic Russians stayed in the occupied territories .
 Some are tempted to see this as a chance to build an ethnic nation, others are worried about being marginalized again . The Crimean Tatars, like the Crimean Tatar, are worried that they are marginalized again.
Ukrainian political elite has never agreed on a single nation-building policy to pursue. These and many related questions have no easy answers because of the Ukrainian political elite .
 The prime cause in Ukraine’s difficult policy planning lies deeper than it seems, it seems .
Developing and enacting any long-term policy requires effective leadership and viable state institutions . Developing a long- term policy — be it defense, health care, social security, or nation-building — requires effective leaders and viable institutions .
As long as statecraft continues to be a source of rents for the kleptocratic elite, nation-building will depend on the will of society and not state structures .
 I think this process may drag on for years, and battles over “memories’ and “identities’ will long remain a salient issue in Ukraine . I think that this process will drag on.