 Eastern Ukraine war being fought in their homeland has been frozen for months . As the shores of the Black sea freeze over, the people of Eastern Ukraine flee for shelter .
 Despite the initial media frenzy surrounding the conflict, it has received little mainstream coverage .
 The conflict has evolved to a new stage and some politicians are claiming the Ukrainian conflict is at risk of becoming the new Korean War .
 Ukraine got its first taste of independence after almost a century of subjugation . The map of Eastern Europe was redrawn in the winter of 1992 .
 Ukraine had been under the Russian yoke for centuries . Ukraine was part of the Soviet Union for 80 years and the Russian Empire prior that .
 Russia has always fought to maintain a buffer zone of proxy states, of which Ukraine was the most important . Ukraine was most important in the buffer zone .
 The current war in the Donbass region is a continuation of Russia fighting to keep Ukraine in its sphere of influence . Russia is trying to keep the Ukraine in the sphere of Influence .
 The conflict in Ukraine began when former president Viktor Yanukovych suspended negotiations for a trade agreement with the European Union under pressure from Russian President Putin .
 Hundreds of thousands of people filled the streets of Kiev demanding Yanukovych’s resignation .
 Yanukovych resigned and a new Ukrainian government had formed within weeks . Within weeks Yanukovych had resigned .
 Despite the widespread support for the protests in Kiev, there was a significant portion of the Ukrainian population who were dissatisfied with the government change .
 mass counter-protests erupted in Southern and Eastern Ukraine – areas with a large number of ethnic Russians .
 Crimea, the southernmost region of Ukraine, was taken over by pro-Russian paramilitaries . Ukraine continued to spiral out of control when Crimea was seized by the pro-Russia forces .
 On March 14th 2014, Russia formally annexed Crimea . Tensions between Russia and Ukraine continued to rise .
 In the aftermath of the Crimean annexation, protests in the Eastern Ukrainian cities of Donetsk and Luhansk turned violent . In the wake of the annexation of Crimea, protests turned violent.
 In the spring of 2014 pro-Russian Separatists took hold of the Donbass region . They proclaimed the independence of the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic .
 A Russian "humanitarian envoy" was sent to the separatists full of artillery, weapons and allegedly Russian military personnel . It looked as if the Ukrainian government would crush the rebellion .
 With Russian support, the separatist movement was able to gain the upper hand in the war and take back much of the territory previously lost .
 separatist forces slowly pushing the Ukrainian government out of Donbass . For months the war waged on with the separatist forces .
 The Minsk protocol was signed by Ukraine, Russia and both the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republic . In September of 2014 the Minsk Protocol was signed.
 All sides agreed to halt all fighting to work towards a permanent solution to the conflict . In the agreement all sides agree to stop all fighting.
 Both sides violated truce within a few months with both sides violating truce .
 Since the first Minsk deal there have been over 10 attempted peace deals . All of which have failed, all of them have failed .
 separatist forces successfully captured the town of Debaltseve and the Donetsk airport in 2015 . The war has turned into a stalemate.
 On December 23rd, 2017 another truce was signed, but violation of the truce occurs daily . Both sides accuse the other of firing the first shot .
 Since the separatist victory at Debaltseve, the pro-Russian movement has been unable to launch successful offensives .
 The same can be said for the Ukrainian government, every counter-offensive launched has been met with failure . The Ukrainian government has been accused of failing to respond to the attacks .
 The U.S. has agreed to supply the Ukrainian government with military weapons and supplies . In recent months the United States has agreed.
 Ukrainians have been unable to achieve any meaningful victories against the rebels . Despite their best efforts, the Ukrainians have not been able to achieve a meaningful victory .
 The conflict has been in a stalemate for years . The Ukrainian government has been backed by the United States .
 The Russian ruble fell to an all-time low and the economy teetered on complete collapse . The Western powers placed tough sanctions on Russia, resulting in the fall of the ruble .
 Russia's financial misfortunes are an example of the changes in perceptions that the international community has towards imperialist actions today . Russia’s financial problems are a sign of the change in the world's view of the world.
 Russian nationalist spirit may support the separatists, but investors do not. While the Russian nationalists may support them.
 A full-scale war in Ukraine is not a viable path to prosperity for Russia, hence why Russia has not thrown their full support behind separatists .
Every time the conflict escalates, investors continue to lose confidence in the Russian economy . The conflict has been escalating for years .
 The Ukrainian government is aware that its chances of defeating the Russian military are slim at best . The Russian military is also aware of the situation in Ukraine .
 Russia still maintains a military that is too large and too well equipped for Ukrainians to defeat in an open conflict . The Russian Federation is no longer the great power it was as the Soviet Union .
 Ukraine's continued efforts to push back separatists have been unsuccessful . This explains why it constantly seeks out peace deals, despite Ukraine’s efforts .
 Launching a full-scale assault would almost certainly be countered, resulting in a massive loss of lives . Launching an assault would most likely be countered.
 As the conflict stands in its current “frozen’ state, predicting when and if it will end remains a difficult task . The conflict is currently in a ‘frozen state’
 Neither side is willing to withdraw from their frontline position despite both having realized that large-scale offensives are futile . Neither side has decided to withdraw.
 The separatists do not want the separatists to back down in fear of a pro-Europe government taking control of the border state . The Russians do not believe the separatists should back down .
 Ukrainians will not pull back in fear that the separatists will attempt to retain full control of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions . Conversely, the Ukrainians won't pull back.
 It could be a while that they remain frozen in their current joist as all signs point to this fight going the distance .