There is no question that Vladimir Putin started the war and is responsible for how it is being waged . Understanding its root causes is essential if we are to prevent it from getting worse and, instead, to find a way to bring it to a close .
 The mainstream view in the West is that he is an irrational, out-of-touch aggressor bent on creating a greater Russia in the mould of the former Soviet Union .
 He alone bears full responsibility for the Ukraine crisis . But that story is wrong, he alone bears the responsibility .
 The West is principally responsible for the crisis which began in February 2014 . The West, and especially America, is responsible.
 Russian leaders responded immediately with outrage, characterising this decision as an existential threat to Russia . Russian leaders have vowed to thwart it, vowing to thwart the decision .
 Mr Putin ‘flew into a rage’ and warned that ‘if Ukraine joins NATO, it will do so without Crimea and the eastern regions’
 America ignored Moscow’s red line, however, and pushed forward to make Ukraine a Western bulwark on Russia's border .
 The next major confrontation came in December 2021 and led directly to the current war . In response, Russia took Crimea from Ukraine and helped fuel a civil war that broke out in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine .
 The weapons looked offensive to Moscow and its allies in the Donbas region . The weapons are not clear-cut, but they look offensive to the Russian government .
 NATO countries got in on the act, shipping weapons to Ukraine, training its armed forces and allowing it to participate in joint air and naval exercises . Other NATO countries also got in the act.
 In July 2021, Ukraine and America co-hosted a major naval exercise in the Black Sea region involving navies from 32 countries . The exercise will take place in July 2021 .
 Operation Sea Breeze almost provoked Russia to fire at a British naval destroyer that deliberately entered what Russia considers its territorial waters .
 Moscow began mobilising its army on Ukraine’s border last spring to signal its resolve to Washington . The document explicitly builds on ‘the commitments made to strengthen the Ukraine-u.s.’
 The Biden administration continued to move closer to Ukraine . But it had no effect, as it was still moving closer to the country .
 This led Russia to precipitate a full-blown diplomatic stand-off in December . This led to Russia to pull out of the world's largest-ever diplomatic standoff .
 Russia demanded a written guarantee that Ukraine would never become part of NATO . Russia also demanded that the alliance remove the military assets it had deployed in eastern Europe since 1997 .
 A month later Mr Putin launched an invasion of Ukraine to eliminate the threat he saw from NATO . This interpretation of events is at odds with the prevailing mantra in the West.
 Putin surely knows that the costs of conquering and occupying large amounts of territory in eastern Europe would be prohibitive for Russia . For starters, the issue at hand is not what Western leaders say NATO's purpose or intentions are .
 "Whoever does not miss the Soviet Union has no heart. As he once put it, “Whoever do not miss it,’s no heart"
 His beliefs about the tight bonds between Russia and Ukraine notwithstanding, trying to take back all of Ukraine would be like trying to swallow a porcupine .
 Russian policymakers have said hardly anything about conquering new territory to recreate Soviet Union or build a greater Russia .
 Russian leaders have repeatedly said that they view Ukraine joining NATO as an existential threat that must be prevented . Since the 2008 Bucharest summit, they have said that Ukraine should not join NATO .
 Western leaders rarely described Russia as a military threat to Europe before 2014 .
 Mr Putin’s seizure of Crimea was not planned for long, says Michael McFaul . It was an impulsive move in response to the coup that overthrew Ukraine's pro-Russian leader .
Until then, NATO expansion was aimed at turning all of Europe into a giant zone of peace, not containing a dangerous Russia .
 Once the crisis started, U.S. and European policymakers could not admit they had provoked it by trying to integrate Ukraine into the West .
Many U.S. foreign-policy experts have warned against NATO expansion since the late 1990s . They declared the real source of the problem was Russia's revanchism .
 The upshot of my interpretation is that we are in an extremely dangerous situation, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Western policy is exacerbating these risks .
 Ukraine has little to do with Russia's imperial ambitions being thwarted, says Putin . Russia's leaders are dealing with what they regard as a direct threat to Russia’s future .
 Mr Putin may have misjudged Russia’s military capabilities, the effectiveness of the Ukrainian resistance and the scope and speed of the Western response .
 America and its allies are doubling down, hoping to inflict a humiliating defeat on Mr Putin . U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to be forced to step down from the presidency .
 Putin now sees Ukraine as “akin to a declaration of war’ The country will be gravely damaged, if not dismembered . The U.S. and its allies may be able to prevent a Russian victory in Ukraine .
 There is a serious threat of escalation beyond Ukraine, not to mention the danger of nuclear war . Also, there is the threat of escalating beyond Ukraine .
 Russia is pushing a great power to the brink, it is in effect pushing Russia's economy to brink . If the West not only thwarts Moscow on Ukraine's battlefields, it also does serious, lasting damage to Russia’s economy .
At this point it is impossible to know the terms on which this conflict will be settled .
There is no question that Vladimir Putin started the war and is responsible for how it is being waged . Understanding its root causes is essential if we are to prevent it from getting worse and, instead, to find a way to bring it to a close .
 He alone bears full responsibility for the Ukraine crisis, but that story is wrong . The Ukraine crisis is a major crisis in Ukraine .
The next major confrontation came in December 2021 and led directly to the current war . In response, Russia took Crimea from Ukraine and helped fuel a civil war that broke out in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine .
 Operation Sea Breeze almost provoked Russia to fire at a British naval destroyer that deliberately entered what Russia considers its territorial waters . The links between Ukraine and America continued growing under the Biden administration .
 Moscow began mobilising its army on Ukraine’s border last spring to signal its resolve to Washington . Moscow found this evolving situation intolerable.
This interpretation of events is at odds with the prevailing mantra in the West, which portrays NATO expansion as irrelevant to the Ukraine crisis, blaming instead Mr Putin’s expansionist goals .
 Putin surely knows that the costs of conquering and occupying large amounts of territory in eastern Europe would be prohibitive for Russia .
Western leaders rarely described Russia as a military threat to Europe before 2014 . Tellingly, Western leaders rarely referred to Russia as military threat.
 American foreign-policy experts have warned against NATO expansion since the late 1990s . They declared the real source of the problem was Russia’s revanchism and its desire to dominate if not conquer Ukraine .
 The upshot of my interpretation is that we are in an extremely dangerous situation, says David Frum . Frum: Western policy is exacerbating these risks .
 America and its allies may be able to prevent a Russian victory in Ukraine . But the country will be gravely damaged, if not dismembered .
At this point it is impossible to know the terms on which this conflict will be settled . Mr Putin might then turn to nuclear weapons .