 The president of Russia called the Kerch tragedy as a result of shootings in U.S. schools .
 Ukraine will not be able to conduct joint training with NATO in the Sea of ​​Azov . This requires the consent of the RF, Lavrov, as this requires consent of Lavrov .
 Vice Prime Minister of Italy has promised in Russia to say no to sanctions . Italy's vice PM has promised no sanctions in Russia .
 Russia in 2016 became the world leader in "modern slavery" the Council of Europe . Russia became the first country in the world to become the leader in 'modern slavery' in 2016 .
 Russians will be imprisoned for violating the rules of entry into Ukraine . They will be jailed for violating rules of entering into Ukraine.
 Bloomberg spoke about new sanctions that the U.S. is preparing against Russia .
 Canada condemns "insidious act of violence against young people" in occupied Kerch . Canada strongly condemns "insidious act of violence against young people"
 Russia is ready to use nuclear weapons only after it is convinced that a potential enemy strikes on it . President of the country-aggressor Vladimir Putin said that Russia is prepared to use nukes only after a potential attack .
 Putin says young people grab this surrogate of heroism because they do not create the necessary, interesting and useful content . He accuses globalization and the Internet of this .
 An explosion at the Polytechnic College broke out in Kerch in a Russian-occupied Crimea .
At first, there were 10 dead and 50 wounded . At first, a version of a possible gas explosion appeared in the media, but later the Russian authorities announced a terrorist attack .
 Body of alleged executor of terrorist attack found in building . It was also reported that three suspects were detained .
Due to events in Kerch Ukraine has stepped up security measures on the border with Crimea .
 The number of victims as a result of the explosion and firing at the college of occupied Kerch has increased to 21 .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov considers it unrealistic to carry out exercises of ships of Ukraine and NATO in the Azov Sea .
 NATO's actions on Russian borders are provocative, the head of the Russian Foreign Ministry says . Russia's foreign ministry says the actions are provocative .
 The placement of an American division on a permanent basis in Poland would be a direct violation of the NATO-Russia Basic Act . Russia will monitor such processes, because it concerns its security .
 Ukraine intensified the grouping of the Armed Forces in the Azov direction in response to the aggressive actions of the Russian Federation . Recall Ukraine intensified its grouping of armed forces.
 The National Security and Defense Council approved a package of measures aimed at protecting national interests in the Azov and Black Seas . The measures were approved at the meeting of September 6 .
 The Azov Sea is about strengthening the naval presence in the sea . It is about creating a ship-naval grouping of the Navy of the Armed Forces .
 The death toll in the slaughter at the Polytechnic College in the Russian-occupied Crimea's Kerch has reached 21 .
 A girl has also died after the attack, according to other reports .
 As reported, an explosion hit the Polytechnic College in the Russian-occupied Crimea's Kerch .
 Some 18 people were killed and at least 50 wounded, when an unidentified explosive device detonated . The device was detonated by an unknown explosive device .
 Witnesses reported the terror attack and automatic shooting in the college . The attack took place in the early hours of the morning .
 With such a statement, he spoke during a business conference in Moscow .
 The EU introduced economic sanctions against Russia in 2014 after the annexation of the Crimea and incitement to the conflict in the Donbas . The sanctions were introduced after the Crimea annexation and the conflict.
 Leaders are expected to vote for an extension of economic sanctions against Russia for another six months . Italy may offer a proposal to finance the Russian small business as a condition for supporting the prolongation of sanctions .
 Cenzor.NET outlined in a statement to the press service of the State Duma .
 The State Duma states that the historic responsibility for the rupture of Russian-Ukrainian relations lies with the leadership of modern Ukraine .
 According to the Council of Europe, in Russia in the so-called "modern slavery" 8 million people were kept in the country .
 The term "modern slavery" is increasingly used to identify a wide range of human rights violations, the Council of Europe said .
 In 2016, 16 million people were registered in the world, according to the Council of Europe . About 15 million are in Europe, including 8 million in Russia . In September 2018, a gang in the Carpathian region detained a gang that forced more than 30 people into
 The same acts committed repeatedly or by a group of persons shall be punishable by imprisonment for a term of 3 to 5 years . For the illegal crossing of the Ukrainian border with the use of weapons, shall be imprisoned for 5 to 8 years .
 The law is to be signed by the Verkhovna Rada Speaker and the President of Ukraine .
 entry into the temporarily occupied territories of Luhansk, Donetsk and Crimea through closed entry points in uncontrolled areas of Ukraine is also a violation of Ukrainian legislation . It should be noted that entry into temporary occupied territories is also violation of Ukraine legislation .
From the beginning of 2018, Russian citizens should pass their biometric data when entering Ukraine . Recall that from the start of 2018.
 The United States sent a letter to the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine on the provision of military technical assistance to the Armed Forces of Ukraine . The U.S. Embassy in Ukraine is the military attache of the United States Embassy .
 The said ships can significantly increase the defense capabilities of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the Black Sea and Azov Opera Theater . The publication observes that the said ships are capable of protecting Ukraine's armed forces .
 In the 2000s, Ukrainian ships were trained on these ships . In March 2009, a frigate of this type, the USS Klakring, went to Sevastopol .
 71 frigates were built at the US, Spain, Australia, Australia and Taiwan basements . In total, 71 frigate were built in the US.
 Turkey 8 units, Taiwan 8 units; Australia 6 units, Spain 6 units; Egypt 4 units; Poland 2 units; Bahrain 1 frigate . Pakistan 1 friggers; Pakistan 1 Frigate . Turkey 8 Units; Taiwan 8 unit; Australia 8 units.
 At the end of September in the United States a ceremony for the transfer of two patrol boats in the class of Iceland took place .
 US Congress preparing to introduce restrictions for Russian state-owned banks . US Congress is preparing to introduced restrictions for state- owned banks .
 Then they will not be able to deal with financial organizations abroad . Then they won't be allowed to do so again .
 The United States Congress is considering extending United States sanctions against Russia . The U.S. Congress is also considering extending the sanctions .
 It is proposed to introduce restrictions for large Russian state banks . It is also proposed to impose restrictions on large Russian banks .
 Alexis Rodzianko is president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Russia . He says the possible simultaneous imposition of sanctions against all Russian state lenders is "looking like a Rusal case, but sometimes worse"
Russian bank that dominates the Russian financial sector will be equivalent to "tactics of scorched earth" for diplomacy, he says .
Mid-term elections in the USA are scheduled for November 6th . This is not to be expected before the mid-term midterm elections .
 The desire to increase pressure on Moscow is widespread in both parties . But the desire to raise the pressure on Russia is widespread.
 Rodzianko is convinced that it is unlikely that a new American strike will cover all state banks . He says it's unlikely that it will cover state banks.
 Through them is the majority of transactions related to the export of Russian oil and gas . Through them are the most significant transactions relating to the exports of Russia's oil.
 More restrictive sanctions were imposed in 2014 against Rosneft and Gazprom . This trend only increased after more restrictive sanctions. This trend was only increased in 2014.
 Exporters may try to transfer their business to services of other Russian banks that will not be subject to sanctions or to seek help from foreign financial institutions . Exporators may also try to move business to other banks that are not subject to sanction .
"It will be a big commitment," says Alexander Daniilov, an analyst at Fitch .
 The Senate also proposes to prohibit investors from buying securities of the Russian government . The publication also reminds that in addition to the Senate proposes to ban investors from investing in Russia .
 The first deputy director of the FSB Sergey Smirnov, reports Censor.NET with reference to Rain.NET .
 "Without this, we can not guarantee the proper security of information security," Smirnov said .
 He noted that the issue was related to terrorism, extremism and organized crime . The issue is related to terror, extremism, organized crime, he said .
 Shanghai Cooperation Organization agrees to cooperate more closely with intelligence agencies in monitoring the Internet for such threats .
 The meeting created a secure communications channel for the exchange of information on terrorists and extremists . The meeting discussed the expansion of data banks about such organizations .
In the summer of 2018, the British human rights organization Article 19 stated in the UN about the threat of Russia's freedom of internet users around the world .
 Russia regularly adopts laws that are contrary to international standards for the right to information and privacy . Authorities are putting undue pressure on Internet companies, according to the organization .
 Human rights activists have warned that if these processes continue in Russia, the free flow of information on the Internet will be severely restricted throughout the world .
 The organizer of the attack on college a 22-year-old resident of Kerch, he committed suicide . The victim was a resident of the Kerch campus .
 State Border Guard Service of Ukraine took a number of measures to enhance security at the administrative border with the temporarily occupied territory of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in connection with the explosion .
 The Prosecutor's Office of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea opened a criminal investigation into a terrorist act in Kerch . The explosion occurred in the Kerch region of Crimea .
 Canada expressed its condolences to the relatives of those killed during firing at the Polytechnic College of Kerch in the temporarily occupied Crimea . Canada expresses its condolences.
 This was stated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada Christine Friland, according to Censor.NET.NET . This was said by Friland .
 Canada continues to condemn the illegal occupation of the Crimea by Russia . At the same time, Friland noted that Canada continued to condemn Russia .
"We reaffirm our condemnation of illegal occupation and Russia's invasion of Crimea," the head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Canada noted .
 UEFA Trial Chamber has decided that Kazan club will be excluded from the European Cup if it succeeds in its results in the Russian championship during the next two seasons . Kazan will not be allowed to play in the tournament if it fails to win the Russian Championship .
 UEFA Arbitration Chamber for financial control over the fact that Rubin violated the terms of the agreement to comply with the rules of financial fair play . The decision was made by the UEFA arbitration Chamber .
UEFA may disqualify the Portuguese "Benfica" for financial manipulation of the Portuguese club's leadership . In ""Ruby"" remains the right to appeal the verdict in the Sports Arbitrage Court .