 The United States has identified four Russian reconnaissance aircraft off the coast of Alaska . The U.S. has identified the aircraft .
 Great Britain will send the Royal Marine Corps and Fleet to Ukraine to stop the Cold War .
 Proponents of Zyuganov throughout Russia protest against pension reform . Proponents say pension reform is a waste of money .
 As reported earlier, the British and French air force fighters climbed into the air for intercepting Russian military aircraft flying over the North Sea .
 A British military Typhoon fighter from a base in Romania intercepted the Russian naval patrol aircraft Be-12 over the Black Sea .
 Two British fighter jets intercepted the Russian An-26s and Be-12s over the Black Sea on August 26 .
 The UK will expand its military presence in Ukraine by the end of the year, it was reported .
 Great Britain is going to send the Royal Marine Corps and patrols of the Royal Navy to Ukraine . It will substantially expand its military presence in the country .
 The Royal Marine Corps will expand its presence in the Black Sea in 2019 . By the end of the year, the UK will send the Marine Corps to the country .
 Russia is becoming a rogue state, says Williamson . "This is not the behavior we are expecting from any state, especially from a permanent member of the Security Council"
 The UK and Ukraine are ready to fight for them, he said . He stressed the importance of the United Kingdom and Ukraine sharing "common values"
 Russia does not adhere to a law-based international order, according to the minister . In particular, it was about an international order .
"We must clearly make it clear that such actions will have to be paid," says Williamson's publication . "Such actions will be paid" says Williamson .
 The British minister visited the forefront of the OEC zone .
 Gavin Williamson struck by persistence and courage of Ukrainian soldiers . Williamson was struck by the persistence of the Ukrainian soldiers.
 He stated this in an interview with the Russian channel RT, reports Weekly . He stated that he was speaking to a Russian channel .
 We need honest and direct discussion about whether sanctions have been successful . We need to be honest about the impact of sanctions on the world .
 Let's analyze the facts of whether sanctions were helping the European economy or the Russian economy, or on the contrary, helped to put pressure on Russian economy .
 Having honestly answered these questions, we must decide on our future, "said Siayardto."
 Hungary will never violate the unity of the EU in this matter, he says . At the same time, he said, Hungary will not violate the united EU in the matter .
 As reported, Klimkin told what would happen to the Hungarian consul after the issue of passports . The consul said it would happen after passports were issued .
 In Moscow, about 3,000 people gathered in the "Social march of millions" in Moscow . The march was held in the city's capital .
 The State Duma of Russia will consider the bill in the second reading of the bill on raising the retirement age . It is timed to the upcoming consideration by the state of Russia .
 Actions against raising retirement age are taking place this Saturday in other cities of Russia as well as in the occupied Crimea .
 The State Duma of Russia approved July 19, the first reading a bill on raising the retirement age. Recall July 19 .
 He assumes that women in Russia will be able to retire at 63 years, and men at 65 years . He says men at age 65 will also retire at the age of 65, and women at 63 .
 Donetsk Regional Prosecutor's Office is about to abolish the local council during the presidency of Viktor Yanukovych to recognize the Russian language as a regional one .
 This is reported by the Prosecutor's Office of the region's press service of the prosecutor's office .
 Regional prosecutor's office filed six lawsuits concerning the abolition of similar decisions in Konstantinovka, Slavyansk, Kramatorsk, Volnovasy . It is also specified that the regional prosecutor's Office filed six suits .
 Lviv Regional Council adopted a moratorium on the public use of Russian-language cultural product in the territory of the Lviv region .
 Presidents of Belarus and Russia, Alexander Lukashenko and Volodymyr Putin, discussed political interaction and Ukrainian issues in Sochi .
 A very positive dialogue was a dialogue, "Lukashenko said at a meeting on Saturday in Minsk," he said .
 Belarusian leader said in a one-to-one format, political issues, relations between Russia and Belarus were discussed . The Belarusian president said relations within the framework of IEA, CIS, CSTO and further development of the Union state were discussed.
 Lukashenko also said that on the Russian side there was no refusal to provide state credit for $1 billion . The Russian president also said on the Russia side there were no refusal.
 The alliance is grateful for the contribution Georgia contributes to the NATO operation . Georgia is a member of the NATO alliance .
Georgia will be a member of NATO, and I want to say these words to you now . We always say that Georgia will be an member of the NATO .
 NATO's position is firm and clear that Georgia will become a member of the Alliance, says the Under-Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Alliance . Of course, there is still a lot to do and still steps have to be made.
 NATO has challenges, such as what happened in Ukraine in 2014, says NATO chief .
 Russia annexed Crimea and the destabilization of the situation in the Donbass continues . Russia annexed the Crimea and destabilization in the region continues .
"We still have to cope with the results and the crisis," says Goethejuller .
 Georgia's crisis began much earlier and nobody knows about it better than Georgia . Georgia's governor says the crisis began earlier than Georgia's .
 "We firmly support you and say that Russia should withdraw this decision, as well as fulfill the obligations assumed by itself in within the limits of the cease-fire agreement, signed by the European Union .
 In August 2018, Lithuania's Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius stated that Georgia and Ukraine would not join NATO in the near future .
 During the current day, from 7:00 to 18:00, Russia's mercenaries fired 7 times the positions of the United Nations forces operations in the Donbas .
 The enemy opened a targeted fire with grenade launchers of various systems, large-caliber machine guns and small arms in positions of the Joint Forces in the area of Crimea .
 commanders decided to carry out a fire impact on the enemy, forcing him to stop the shelling .
 Losses among the troops of the Joint Forces have not been allowed during this day .
 "The situation in the area of ​​operation remains under the control of the United Force," said in a statement .
 Vyacheslav Maltsev, who currently lives in France, said this on his YouTube channel . He is a leader of the Russian opposition .
 The politician comes from the Russian airbase of Saratov and is also an expert on aviation and aeronautics .
 Konoshenkov says IL-20 did not protect the S-200 system . Those C-200s who sell abroad do not install this system because they will work abroad .
 If it were equipped with this system, they would not "cover themselves" If it was equipped with the system, it would not ""cover themselves.
 The Kremlin waived the Israeli version of the obstruction of the IL-20 . Norkin arrived in Moscow and provided certain secret documents .
 Bashar Assad did not call Putin, but sent an official telegram . At the same time, Maltsev drew attention, as Bashar Assad didn't call Putin .
 Maltsev emphasized that even supposing that Israeli pilots were ""sheltered" from the missile by the Russian Il-20 aircraft is "the top of professionalism" rather than the alleged evidence of their "unprofessionalism"
 Israeli air force attack was arranged. No bombs, why they came at a low altitude, and why they were throwing and leaving at the same height at a high altitude .
 Petro Poroshenko says Russia does not cease efforts to interfere in internal affairs in Ukraine . He says it affects both political forces and will interfere in elections .
 The President stressed that over the past few years Ukraine has been able to implement more reforms than was done 20 years before . He stressed that the President was able to improve Ukraine's economy .
 Angela Merkel has proved that he is not only a successful federal chancellor, but also a great European leader . This is the merit of Angela Merkel, who is a good European leader, says David Cameron .
 Petro Poroshenko: "We will never forget about this help. on its part and on the part of the German people"
 The North Atlantic Alliance remains the only guarantee of Ukraine's security . Russia, as a permanent member of the UN Security Council, does not respect international peace and order .
For us, the goal of future EU membership is a powerful motivation to continue the reform process . For us, we want to keep the EU membership in the future .
 The West, with which we are "said Petro Poroshenko," reports TCensor.NET with reference to Interfax-Ukraine .
 "We are struggling not only for ourselves, but for Europe, democracy, the West and its values," the President emphasized .
 Britain intends to send marines and ships to the Black Sea for patrolling to Ukraine by end of the year .
 British Defense Minister Gavin Williamson reported this, according to The Daily Telegraph .
 The British defense minister noted the unacceptable behavior of Russia . Russia attacks Ukraine not only in the Donbass, but also in the waters of the seas .
 British instructors will train Ukrainian soldiers so that they are ready to confront threats and at sea .
 As long as the danger persists, we will continue to stand with you side by side . We will stand together as long as danger persists .
 Williamson told Ukrainian soldiers during his visit to Donetsk. "The safer here you are, the safer we are in the UK," he said .
 Russia promises Germany to assume all financing of "North flow-2" Moscow is convinced by Berlin not to fear the U.S. sanctions for the construction of the pipeline .
 Russia is ready to fully finance the construction of the North Stream 2 gas pipeline if the U.S. imposes sanctions against consortium members implementing this project .
 This is Saturday, September 22, reports Censor.NET with reference to the German edition Süddeutsche Zeitung . This is September 22 .
 Putin informed the German government during his visit to Mezeburg on August 18, according to the publication . He met with Chancellor Angela Merkel on the same visit .
 The construction of the "North Stream-2" is being conducted by an international consortium . The main investor is Russian Gazprom .
 Among the participants in the consortium is the daughter of the German concern BASF Wintershall, Uniper and Shell .
 Wyoming senator John Barrasso submitted a bill on sanctions against North Stream 2 . Barrasso is a Republican from Wyoming .
 Rick Perry did not deny that Russia would introduce new restrictive measures that would affect North Stream 2 . The U.S. Energy Secretary said the measures would not affect the North Stream .
 US President Donald Trump sharply criticizes the German government for saying that, on the one hand, this country is supporting economic sanctions against Russia . Gazprom buys gas billions of dollars annually, Trump says .
 Trump on North Stream 2: The fact that Germany pays billions of dollars in Russia is inappropriate and funny .
 The White House considers the North Stream 2 a politically motivated project . The realization of the project will only increase the energy dependence of the European Union on Russia .
 Ukraine risks losing the status of a transit country of gas to Europe . In addition, Ukraine is also losing its status as a transit nation of gas .
 The capacity of the new pipeline will be 55 billion m³ of gas per year . The length of the route will be more than 1200 km . The new pipeline is more than 600 km long .
 The cost of the project is € 9. billion, it is financed in half by Russian Gazprom and five European companies . The project is funded in half.
 Gazprom predicts that the North Stream 2 will be put into operation by the end of 2019 . Gazprom says it will be in operation by end of the year .
 Germany, Finland and Sweden allowed to pipeline through their territory, Denmark no. 2 . Germany, Sweden and Finland allowed to pipelines through their territories . Denmark no.-Denmark no. 3 .
 The authorities of Ukraine, Poland, Hungary, Hungary and Moldova consider the Nord Stream 2 as a threat to Europe's energy security . Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lithuania and Estonia are among the countries that consider it a threat .
 In the network there was a video of two units of armored vehicles by Ukrainian troops .
 AFP officer Anatoly Stefan shared the corresponding video on Facebook . An AFP officer posted it on the same day .
 On the frames of the video it is visible how the fighters are striking 2 attacks on the technique of the enemy .
 The first projectile fell next to the target, after which pro-Russian militants apparently threw combat vehicles those stopped .
 The second shell destroyed the equipment, provoking a powerful explosion . The explosion was caused by a second shell .
Social network users wrote in comments to the video that it was taken about 2 years ago . However, social network users said it was a video taken about two years ago.
 Also, in the comments, they are interested in which weapons the shot was made .