 Russia's top security official has warned that neighboring Ukraine may no longer be a country soon . The former Soviet republic is divided by competing interests .
 Kiev's successor government has accused Moscow of seizing the Crimean Peninsula in a disputed referendum and sponsoring an eastern insurgency . Ukraine has been beset by unrest since a 2014 political uprising ousted former President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Russian Security Council Secretary Nikolai Patrushev warns that Petro Poroshenko's current pro-West strategy could lead to a total dismantling of the state . Nearly five years into the conflict, he says .
"Even Ukrainian experts are skeptical of the four-year work of Petro Poroshenko as head of state," Patrushev said .
 The United States has supplied Ukraine with military assistance and deployed advisers to help the country's armed forces and allied, pro-government militias combat the rebels . The rebels have declared the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, collectively known as Donbass, as independent people's republics. The U
 Washington has stepped up aid to Kiev and broadened sanctions against Moscow . President Donald Trump has vowed to strengthen U.S.-Russia ties .
 The war that has already killed up to 10,000 people since 2014 has largely been locked in a stalemate . A recent incident prompted new fears that Ukraine and Russia would soon engage in direct fighting .
 Warships of Russia's Black Sea Fleet fired on and seized three Ukrainian naval vessels, along with their crew, in November . They accused them of violating maritime law as they sailed through the disputed Kerch Strait .
 Poroshenko demanded Moscow release the sailors and repeatedly warned that an all-out war was imminent . Russia has moved new defensive weapons systems to Crimea .
 Moscow’s Lefortovsky District Court extended the detainment of at least eight of the 24 Ukrainian sailors for another three months . No conflict ensued, the court says .
 At least three of the detained sailors were seen confessing in footage broadcast shortly after incident in November .
 The European Union and the United States have also attempted to pressure Russia into releasing the sailors . The White House national security adviser John Bolton warned last month that Trump would not meet with Putin until the issue was resolved .
 The dispute between Moscow and Kiev has also been largely cast as part of a greater struggle being waged by Russia and the U.S.-led NATO military alliance . Russia's interventions in Eastern Europe expedited the breakup of other states, such as Yugoslavia in the 1990s .
 Ukraine is not a NATO member, perceived Russian aggression there was answered by the formation of international coalition battle groups in Poland and the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania .
 Moscow has accused the Pentagon of using NATO to dominate Europe . Russia argues that it undermines its own national security .
 The two leading military powers also accused one another of violating the 1987 Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces treaty . Trump has vowed to scrap in a move Putin has said would compel him to take retaliatory action .
 Ukraine has also been preparing for presidential elections at the end of March . Ukraine is preparing for the presidential elections in March .