 92 percent of Ukrainians voted for independence in a referendum . Leonid Kravchuk was elected president .
 The Russian, Ukrainian, and U.S. presidents sign a statement that reaffirms Ukraine’s commitment to transfer all strategic nuclear warheads to Russia and dismantle strategic launchers .
Leonid Kuchma defeats incumbent President Leonid Kravchuk . Viktor Korotayev is the former Prime Minister of Russia .
 It theoretically requires separation of powers, but the president holds significant sway . The president holds a significant sway.
 NATO leaders sign document establishing a distinctive partnership between Ukraine and the defense alliance . Kuchma meets with NATO leaders in Madrid .
 Heorhiy Gongadze, a Ukrainian journalist investigating alleged corruption in the Kuchma administration, disappeared on September 16 .
 The parliament passes a no-confidence motion against Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko, who steps down .
 The 2004 presidential race pits Western-oriented Yushchenko against Viktor Yanukovych .
 A pricing and transit dispute between the Yushchenko government and Russia’s state-owned Gazprom results in a gas cutoff, lasting a couple of days . European countries that import Russian gas via Ukraine have been affected .
 NATO begins its twenty-second summit amid a debate about whether it should offer Membership Action Plans . Croatia, Georgia, and Ukraine are among the countries that are considering membership .
 Russian troops invade Georgia following a Georgian military operation against a South Ossetian separatist stronghold . Russian troops are based in Georgia .
 Yanukovych narrowly defeats Tymoshenko, prime minister at the time, in a presidential election . Most international observers view the election as free and fair .
 Yanukovych has Tymoshenko arrested for “abuse of office,’ and she is sentenced to seven years in prison . She is sentenced for seven years .
 The Ukrainian government states that it will not sign the association agreement at an upcoming EU-Ukraine summit in Lithuania .
 Ukrainians turn out in large numbers to protest Yanukovych’s announcement on EU ties . Yanukovych has announced a new deal with the EU .
 Pro-Russia forces, including so-called little green men, have removed identifying insignia from Crimea . Crimea is a Ukrainian peninsula where the majority of residents are ethnically Russian .
 Russia provokes an armed separatist movement to seize government buildings across eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region .
 Petro Poroshenko, a pro-West oligarch, wins an outright majority in the first round of Ukraine’s presidential election .
 Russian units enter Ukraine to push back Ukrainian forces that were on the verge of regaining control of Donbas .
 Putin and Poroshenko meet in Minsk to negotiate a cease-fire in eastern Ukraine .
 U.S. approves lethal arms sales to Ukraine, moving beyond the nonlethal military assistance that the Obama administration had allowed .
 The Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople recognizes the independence of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church . The Russian Orthodox Church has close ties to the Kremlin and had overseen Ukrainian church for centuries .
 Valentyn Ogirenko, a television comedian and political novice, wins a presidential runoff with more than 70 percent of the vote, defeating Poroshenko .
 Trump and Zelensky have a phone conversation that later becomes the focus of an impeachment inquiry by the U.S. Congress into abuse of power .
 Zelensky orders a series of measures against oligarchs, notably Viktor Medvedchuk, a businessman, chairman of Ukraine's largest pro-Russia political party, and close friend of Putin's .
 Officials from Ukraine and EU member states warn about recent Russian deployments near Ukrainian border areas and in Crimea .
 Gazprom finishes construction of the Nord Stream 2, a pipeline that is set to deliver natural gas under the Baltic Sea to Germany . It could cut off a major source of income for Ukraine, a current transit country .
 Russia launches a multi-pronged assault on Ukraine, including an invasion by Russian forces from neighboring Belarus .
 Putin reiterates his claim that Ukraine is part of Russia . He calls the government in Kyiv a fascist “puppet regime’s” run by foreign powers .
 He frames his intervention as a mission to ‘demilitarize’ and “de-Nazify’ the country and protect its Russian-speaking population in the east from genocide .
 The invasion draws broad international condemnation, including from the United States, European Union, and the United Nations . Washington and Brussels promise “severe’s sanctions on Russia.
 Biden rules out any involvement of U.S. troops in Ukraine . However, Biden also rules out involvement of United States troops.