 Putin's Russia moved on to the next stage of its invasion of Ukraine . The occupation and annexation of Crimea was confirmed in the March 16 referendum .
 No fewer than five provinces of Ukraine were considered to be vulnerable to Russian invasion . Russia is believed to have invaded Ukraine in the past .
 The ease by which Crimea was taken was an irresistible invitation to further incursion . The ease of Crimea was the irresistible invitation for further incursions .
 Putin understood why no real resistance was offered against his aggressions . Putin understood better than baffled Western analysts why noreal resistance was given against him .
 The gradual destruction of the world’s former fourth largest military power needs to be told to better understand this second phase of the Russian invasion and the de facto Ukrainian-Russian War .
 He also agreed to the division of the Black Sea Fleet on a proportional basis, forgetting to also include the Soviet Union's entire navy in that proportion .
 Russia allowed Russia to base their lion's share of the Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol on sovereign Ukrainian territory . Instead of keeping the entire BSF, he agreed to a mere 18.3% of it .
 The army was optimized, reduced, reformed, restructured, and ultimately left unprepared for combat . In just two decades the army wasoptimized, reduced and reformed, and eventually left unprepared .
 Decades later Kravchuk’s mixed loyalties, or rather his lack of them, would have a price .
 Minister of Defense, Oleksandr Kuzmuk sold the partly completed Soviet-era Kyiv-era aircraft carrier Varyah for scrap to China .
 This so-called scrap metal was launched by China as the aircraft carrier Liaoning in 2011 . It was launched as an aircraft carrier in 2011.
 The Guided Missile Cruiser Ukrayina that was already 95% complete was mothballed at the Mykolayiv Shipyard . Under the Minister of Defense Volodymyr Shkidchenko.
 President Yushchenko decided to, “upgrade the military to NATO standards,’ and so reduced this force even further to 210,000 . The force is now 210, 000 .
 Similarly, the upper echelons of command were riddled with Pro-Russian patriots .
 The language of command and control in Ukraine’s military apparently remained Russian despite twenty-three years of independence .
 The leadership and self-defence of the Maidan Ukrainian Revolution set an example for Ukraine’s much blunted military when Ukraine came under threat this year .
Russian oligarch Governor of Dnipropetrovsk, Igor Kolomoysky, allowed for formation, training, and equipment of a citizen’s fighting force .
 This force consisted of several colorfully named battalions under the umbrella designation of the National Guard . This force was named under the name National Guard.
 In the first weeks of the war it was the Aidar, Azov, and Donbas battalions, as well as the original ‘Right Sector’ that would see the heaviest fighting and take the greatest number of casualties .
 Russian diplomatic threats included Putin’s statement about revising the Bialowieza Accords . An agreement to split up the USSR set out on December 6, 1991 .
 Ukraine’s Sluzhba Bezpeky Ukrayiny Security Service intercepted diversionary groups in Luhansk oblast .
 A report of the event states that other similar intercepted groups were comprised of Russian citizens including operatives of its special forces .
 Among confiscated items were rifled firearms, firearm instructions, lists of members of the group, as well as currency .
 The center of the pro-Russian occupation was the town of Slovyansk . It is located on a major highway at the halfway point between Donetsk and Kharkiv .
 Other towns occupied within a 30km radius included Krasnyi, Kramatorsk, Kostyantynivka and Krasnoarmiisk . Other towns in the area include Krasnnyi and Kramatork . Kras
 Ukrainian aircraft and helicopters at the Kramatorsk airfield had to be scrambled to prevent their capture . The military attempted to fight off the assault as the military tried to stop it .
 Ukrainian forces tried to retake Slovyansk on 1 May 2014 . The downing of a Ukraine helicopter resulted in the capture of its wounded pilot .
 Ukraine's helicopter losses are the first of many helicopter losses by Ukraine . This was a clear indication of the sophisticated armaments that Russia was willing to supply to their surrogates in Ukraine .
 Ukraine was dealing with widespread Russian aggression led by Moscow’s intelligence and diversional operatives . By 14 April 2014, Ukraine was dealt with widespread Russia aggression led to Ukraine's crisis .
 Armed men bearing no identification other than that of the infamous orange and black striped Georgian ribbons were taking over police stations and municipal buildings .
 The assaults were met with little resistance from local police, say police . They were a direct result of the corruption of ‘civil servants’ who had been supplementing their meagre salaries through protection rackets, extortion and often, drug trafficking .
Much of eastern Ukraine that had been shielded from western influence continued to be supporters of Victor Yanukovych, their deposed leader .
 The so-called ‘separatist’ movement also attracted the local crime world who were also afraid of post-revolutionary Kyiv’s anti-corruption reforms .
 The deeply criminalised world of Yanukovych’s wild Donbas were a force to be reckoned with . The deeplycriminalised world was a force for Yanukovych's regime .
Russian infiltration initially met with some active support and very little resistance . As a result, the Russian infiltration initially meeting with someactive support .
 On 2 May 2014, an event occurred in the city of Odesa, located hundreds of kilometers away from the occupied zone . The event may prove to be pivotal to Russia's planned occupation of several oblast’s of Ukraine .
 Odesa, originally the Ottoman town of Hacibey, had been conquered by Catherine II of Russia . It was the Russian Empire’s only warm water port .
 Reconquering Odesa would be a great source of pride for Putin’s imperial ambitions .
 Keeping Ukraine dependent on Russian energy sources had long been Putin's means of control over the empire’s former colony .
 Putin wanted to keep in place. This made it a threat to the dependence on Russian oil that Putin wanted.
 A recent history of anti-Ukrainian violence in Odesa was seen as an invitation to Russian annexation . The violence was also seen as a invitation to Russia's annexation .
 The Russian military buildup in Crimea already included the additional naval forces that could threaten and take Odesa . The military buildup has already included more naval forces .
On 2 May 2014 what began as a march of football fans showed that there was actually very little popular support for Russian annexation .
 Odesa's Chornomorets were scheduled to play Kharkiv’s Metalist on 2 May 2014 .
 Football fans of both clubs united in a march of solidarity in support of Ukraine . Football fans from both clubs took part in the march of support for Ukraine .
 This march was intercepted by a pro-Russian crowd in what appeared to be a planned provocation . The march was held in what appears to be an anti-Russian protest .
 At least some units of local police appeared to be in league with pro-Russian provocateurs .
Pro-Russian demonstrators fired at pro-Ukrainian crowd from behind a row of police holding shields . At one point the pro-Russian crowd fired at the crowd at one point .
 There were tents on that field left over from an earlier pro-Russian manifestation .
 This action was met by bullets and Molotov cocktails from men that had already been waiting on the rooftop .
 A fire appeared on an upper floor of the building, a height beyond easy reach of hand thrown bottles . The building is located in a high-rise apartment block .
 After the fire was extinguished, there were some 30 dead found inside the house .
 Later investigation suggested asphyxiation due to chloroform poisoning . Later investigation suggests chloroforms poisoning .
 Early reports stated that among the dead were Russian nationals as well as some from Transdnistria, but this was later denied .
 The Prosecutor General determined that some police were co-conspirators in the provocation . On 6 May 2014, at least 40-two dead, including one police officer, were found dead .
 He was the brother of the former Minister of the Interior of that Russian puppet state . He was a former minister of the interior of Russia's puppet state.
Odesa's patriotism may have saved Odesa from a provocation and a pretext to Russian invasion . However, the patriotism exhibited by the “ultras’s’ football fans and the ODesa public in general may have been a pretext for Russian invasion.
 Odesa's football fans and most of its citizens would have no part of that . Despite pro-Russian sympathies on the part of officials and the police, ODesa’s football fans would not have any part of the incident .
 In eastern Ukraine the Russian invaders tried to occupy as much territory as possible before the 25 May 2014 elections . The Russian invasion was in eastern Ukraine before the elections .
 Doing so would prevent a vote from taking place there and so cast doubt on the legitimacy of the result . It would prevent the vote from being held in the country .
 As Donetsk was occupied, he raided the local hospital taking up to 60 wounded men as prisoner . He raided the hospital in Donetsk, Donetsk.
 In Luhansk, civilians were being shot in the streets by the invaders and their collaborators .
 Vostok was formed of Ossetians and Chechens with experience in the Georgian war of 2008 . The “separatist’s’ battalion, Vostoks, was formed by Ossetian and Chechen with experience.
 Russian extremist theories of world dominance see warfare from a perspective which could be unusual for Western audiences .
 The information war was launched at home in Russia to drum up support and inoculate the populace against any competing viewpoints .
For the first time in Ukraine’s history there was a clear winner in the first round of elections . For the firsttime in Ukraine's history there were a clear winners in the elections .
 Petro Poroshenko was declared the outright winner with 54.7% of the vote . Theoshenko won the presidential election in Ukraine .
 This avoided possibility of Russian disruption of a run-off election . This avoided the possibility of a Russian run-offs .
 The Ukrainian Revolution legitimized the Ukrainian Revolution in the eyes of western democrats . It was legitimized by western democrat.
 Bulgaria called a halt to its portion of the South Stream pipeline project in early June . In early June, Bulgaria called the project's portion of its pipeline project a halt .
 European Union rules and American sanctions were having an impact on the project . But they still could not kill the project altogether .
 A company under sanctions by the USA had been awarded a South Stream pipeline contract . Among the many obstacles the sanctions created was the fact that the company had been given a contract by USA .
 Putin's primary plan for the collapse and annexation of Ukraine was stalled although not scrapped altogether . Putin’s primary plan was stalled but not scrapped entirely .
 The Anti-Terrorist Operation, as president Poroshenko officially called the war, continued with heavy losses on both sides .
 Ukraine’s front line troops felt that their every move was somehow known ahead of time by the enemy . This feeling was confirmed by pro-Russian fighters .
 Ukraine's National Guard volunteer battalions felt that they were safer when not coordinating their activity with Ukraine’s military .
 The missile was hit by a missile but continued its approach until it succumbed to heavy machine gun fire . It was struck by the missile but was not hit by any other missile .
 General Oleksandr Shutov of the General Staff was relieved of his duties on 15 June 2014 . He was relieved on directions from President himself .
 President Poroshenko declared a unilateral seven day cease fire that began on June 20 . Under pressure from the EU, he declared the cease fire .
 He then extended the cease fire three more days, during which 9 more Ukrainians were killed . The cease fire was extended for three days, with 9 more people killed .
 Ukrainian forces began a major offensive that by 5 July 2014 had liberated Slovyansk and Kramatorsk and forced Strelkov and his men to retreat to Donetsk .
 President Petro Poroshenko appointed Valeriy Geletey as Minister of Defense . On 2 July 2014, President Poroshenko appoints Geletesy as Defense Minister .
 Both men had recently led a victorious assault on Karachun, a strategic hill overlooking Slovyansk .
After the successful liberation of Slovyansk and Kramatorsk, the ATO began to pursue two objectives . The ATO was founded after the liberation of Slovakia's two largest cities .
 The first was to surround Luhansk and the second was to re-establish control over the border with Russia . The first is to surround the city and re- establish control of the border .
 A week later there was still a gap in the border directly east of Luhansk that included two major highways that were wide open to fresh invaders . But a week later, a week after the border was still open to new invaders .
 Ukrainian forces controlled the border south of that, but were trapped in a very narrow pocket with the terrorists on one side .
 The ATO had success in early July and had squeezed the pro-Russian forces into an area less than half of what they had once occupied . The ATo had success.
 The nearly completed closure of the border was eliciting a response from the regular Russian forces sitting on Ukraine’s border .
 The 24th motorized brigade from Yavoriv and the 79th Air Mobile brigade came under a brutal missile attack in Zelenopillia at 4:30am of 11 July 2014 .
 The hail of Grad missiles was from the direction of the Russian border . They were hit by a hail of missiles from the Direction of the border . The missiles were fired from a range of Russian territory .
 Four armored columns proudly displaying Russian flags crossed the border heading for Luhansk . In addition to this shelling, at noon on 12 July 201, four armored columns displayed Russian flags .
 The next day, a concentration of Russian troops and vehicles displaying the Russian flag were seen near Heyivka in the Luhansk oblast’ near the border .
Pro-Russian troops from Luhansk appeared to be allowing for the rotation of pro- Russian troops . They appeared to have been able to rotate pro-Russia troops .
 A Ukrainian Su-25 ground attack fighter was hit and damaged by a MANPADS surface-to-air missile . That same day a Ukrainian U.S. ground attack Fighter was hit by a missile .
 ATO attempt to surround Luhansk was later abandoned . Ukrainian troops were trapped in a pocket facing fresh troops from Russia .
Terrorists in the area of Saur Mohyla began a massive attack from the village of Stepanivka .
 The attack against the Ukrainian post employed tanks, mortars, and portable missiles . The attack was carried out by the Ukrainian government .
 National Guard fought off the attack and pushed the enemy back to Stepanivka . The National Guard pushed back the enemy.
 The previous night the forces of the ATO had been attacked by Grad missiles, mortars, and self-propelled 122mm guns .
 Experts conclude it was a Buk surface-to-air missile . It was flying at about 6400 m when it was hit by what experts conclude was a missile . The missile was hit at 6400m .
 Ukrainian officials concluded that the surface-to-air missile had to be fired from inside Russian territory .
 It is likely that the transport plane was involved in a resupply mission for the beleaguered forces at the border . It is also likely that it was a transport plane.
 Strelkov’s terrorists asked Russia to supply them with their own Buk anti-aircraft missiles . It may be that it was at this point that they asked Russia for their own missiles .
 Buk system consists of 4 missiles mounted on a tracked vehicle chassis equipped with an integral radar system . The Buk system is equipped with a radar system and a tracking system .
 Infrared guidance of the missiles provides them with a fire-and-forget capability . It reduces the vulnerability of the vehicle to anti-radar missile attack .
Only a sophisticated Buk surface to-air-missile could have brought it down . The plane's altitude could have been too high .
 Monitors of the internet had recorded Strelkov, the self-appointed ex-GRU Minister of Defense of the terrorists, bragging about bringing down a Ukrainian AN-26 transport plane following the crash .
 At present, the terrorist site Russka Vesna continues to claim that they hit a Ukrainian military aircraft that day .
 The following is a translation of a conversation just as the plane was hit . The conversation was just as a plane hit .
 Malaysian Airlines MH-17 was shot down by a Buk M1 surface-to-air missile . It crashed near the town of Torez, near Snizhne .
 Intelligence from civilians with pictures and video evidence, combined with SBU intercepted phone conversations, allow us to paint a picture of this infamous Buk missile battery .
 It was transported by tractor trailer on 17 July 2014 to an area just south of the town of Snizhne . It was taken to the area by a tractor trailer.
 Sergei Nikolaevich Petrovskiy, Officer of Main Intelligence Directorate of Russian Federation, Deputy Chief of Igor Girkin on Intelligence . At the time of the interception he was in Donetsk .
 "Vostok" tanks will go together with ‘vostok’ tanks. Don’t put in anywhere, I’ll tell now where it should go, it will go . It will be the first time the tanks have been put in
 Sanych: "BUK–M" will go with yours, it is on a tug. SanyCh: "I'm going to go with my "Buk-M"
Behind the circle near “Motel, there will be you know what. Listen to me carefully, behind the circle behind ‘Motel’ There will beYou know what, says the author .
 Only those who just came back, only as much as you need for the convoy. Bring inside only those, who just come back .
 Your task is reserve, plus protection of this piece, which you will drive now . You will drive this piece now .
 They are now in Zelenopillja, trying to break free, but their way out is only through me . They are trying to escape, but they are only through the door of a prison .
If you need anything, call me – and I'll arrive immediately . I will arrive immediately. What can I say? If you need something, call us – and call me .
 The systems have been quickly shipped back to Russia . They have also noted that the systems have also been quickly sent back to the country .
Crash site near village of Hrabove near Torez on Donetsk-Luhansk oblast’s border was poorly secured . The crash site is near the village of Hrabove on the Donetsk- Luhansk border .
 They took the plane’s black-boxes and threatened to send them to Moscow . The plane's black-boxes were taken from the plane and sent to Moscow.
 UN Security Council resolution on the subject allowed international experts to perform their work . It was on the fourth day, only after a UN Security council resolution .
 Russian forces scrambled a MiG-29 fighter across the border and fired a missile at a Ukrainian Su-25 ground attack aircraft. Ignoring world opinion and scrapping any pretense of non-involvement in actual combat .
 The misguided missile attack on flight MH17 was likely part of the terrorists’ supply interdiction tactics in the Saur Mohyla battle with Ukrainian forces .
 The events of 17 July 2014 came just a day after the U.S. boosted the level of its sanctions on Russia .
Rosneft, Gazprombank, Vnesheconombank and VEB stopped short of freezing their assets . This included for the first time, sectoral sanctions against specific companies including Rosneft .
 Canada is expediting new sanctions against both individuals and entities . Canada’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, John Baird, announced new sanctions on 21 July 2014 .
 Russia appears to be oblivious to sanctions, international law, and world opinion in pursuing an imperial goal that should have no place in the 21st century . Russia seems to be unaware of sanctions and international law .
 Much of the world had been able to turn a blind eye to events in Ukraine . So far, much of the World had turned ablind eye to Ukraine .
 The shoot-down of the Malaysian aircraft has brought the world's attention to Russia's hybrid war on Ukraine . The Malaysian aircraft was shot down by a Malaysian military aircraft .
 Nearly a century ago it took the sinking of the Lusitania to bring America into a stalemated war . The sinking was the first time the U.S. had been involved in a war with the LUSitania .