 The two countries might be able to escape the animosity of the Cold War . During the 1990s, Russia seemed poised to make a peaceful transition to democracy as a member of the European community .
Recent years have seen a more adversarial relationship than at any point since the collapse of the Soviet Union . History took a different path, however, and recent years have arguably seen more adversary relationship .
 Russia itself poses limited military threat to the United States, primarily through its nuclear arsenal . Even its ability to threaten America's North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies is often exaggerated .
 Russian military spending appears extremely high, but that number is artificially inflated by Russia’s poor economic performance .
 Russia’s military modernization program has been relatively successful in recent years . The Russian military lags behind Western forces in technological sophistication .
 The Russian military appears large when compared to small neighboring states like Lithuania or Estonia . Similarly, the Russian military seems large compared to smaller states like Estonia .
 The Union could easily conquer much of Europe with conventional forces if it chose to do so .
 NATO’s ability to escalate the conflict in the case of a Russian invasion remains its primary deterrent. Then and now, NATO's ability to escalating the conflict remains its main deterrent .
 It is highly unlikely that Russia would consider intervention in the Baltics or other NATO member states .
 Russia’s force posture today gives no indication that it intends such aggression, experts say .
 In short, it is one thing to foment chaos in a troubled neighboring state .
 It is another to risk intervention in a NATO member state, where U.S. treaty obligations compel a strong military response .
 Russian aggression in eastern Ukraine, while abhorrent, poses no direct threat to the U.S. Russian aggression is not a direct threat.
 Growing tensions in Europe and troop buildups by both sides raise the risk of military conflict and even nuclear escalation .
 Tensions over Ukraine have largely overshadowed and prevented U.S.-Russian dialogue on various important issues, such as nonproliferation and arms control .
 Improving our relationship with Russia and ratcheting down tensions has the potential to alleviate U.S. foreign policy woes in Europe and elsewhere . It should be a top priority for policymakers.
 The relationship has worsened substantially since Russia’s military incursions into Ukraine . Russia's incursion into Ukraine is only six years after similar incursions in Georgia .
 Many date the start of the conflict to Russia’s March 2014 seizure of the autonomous Ukrainian province of Crimea, home to the headquarters of the Russian Black Sea fleet .
 Ukraine's ethnic cleavages have produced confrontational and corrupt domestic politics . Since independence, Ukraine’s ethnic Cleavages has produced confrontations and corrupt politics .
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych’s refusal, under pressure from Moscow, to sign an association agreement with the European Union prompted street protests that soon turned into a violent revolution . Yanukovych's refusal to sign a deal with the EU led to street protests .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia, and a new pro-Western government was inaugurated . The new government was in place after Yanukovych fled .
 Yanukovych himself had been previously displaced by pro-Western politicians in the largely peaceful 2004 Orange Revolution, only to be reelected president in 2010 .
 Yanukovych's ouster was consistent with the post-Soviet instability of Ukrainian politics . Russia’s subsequent annexation of Crimea, followed by its aggressive involvement in arming pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine was unprecedented .
 Russian aggression did not pose a direct threat to U.S. interests, but it was a clear violation of international norms . The move raised the worrying possibility that Russia might try something similar in NATO member states .
 The issue was further complicated by Ukraine’s corrosive culture of political corruption, the genuine — if minimal — support for the insurgency in the Donbas by some locals .
 There were also more subtle protestations within the Russian establishment that its actions in Ukraine were justified by NATO “encirclement’s” NATO ‘encircment’ was a violation of Cold War-era promises .
 The Obama administration ultimately decided against intervention and against arming Ukraine . The next administration would be wise to continue those policies, he says .
 The Obama administration chose to pursue a compartmentalized approach to arms . Instead of providing arms, the Obama administration opted to pursue the compartmentalization approach .
 The administration continued a pragmatic policy of diplomacy with Russia on issues like the Iranian nuclear deal . Outside of Europe, the administration continued to be pragmatic .
On European issues, in contrast, the administration engaged in a massively ambitious program of targeted sanctions . In contrast, on European issues.
 sanctions made it difficult for companies linked to Russian government or to Kremlin cronies to raise money on international capital markets . Companies linked to the Russian government could not raise money to conduct joint ventures with U.S. energy and finance companies .
 The sanctions have been largely ineffectual in altering the Kremlin’s calculus on Ukraine . Yet the sanctions, even in conjunction with a crippling drop in global oil prices, have been mostly in effect .
 The burden of sanctions has fallen most heavily on the Russian population . The sanctions were designed to target elites close to Russia’s decisionmakers .
 The difficult truth is that this failure leaves few good policy options on Ukraine . The Ukraine government has failed to make a clear decision on Ukraine's future .
 Any strategy that relies on coercion or threats is unlikely to improve relations with Europe . Any strategy using large numbers of troops in Europe is likely to be unsuccessful .
 Russian foreign policy decisions reflect Vladimir Putin’s own insecurities, both international and domestic .
 The Kremlin fears looking weak to domestic audiences and has stoked nationalist and pro-Soviet sentiments to compensate for poor economic performance .
 Russia fears being treated as if it is no longer a “great power,’ a fear that is worsened by NATO expansion . In many ways, Russia fears that it is being treated like if it's no longer ‘great power'
 Increasing the Kremlin’s perception of external threat is likely to result only in intransigence and further saber rattling . Tensions high in Europe and impeding U.S.-Russian cooperation on other issues .
 U.S. policy response to Russian aggression in Georgia and Ukraine is challenging for policymakers . Russia's actions like the assassination of Aleksandr Litvinenko on British soil, or increasing hostility in Russia is challenging.
 The risk and potential costs of a conflict with Russia dramatically outweigh the possible benefits of drawing Ukraine closer to the West . In contrast, any cost-benefit analysis would argue strongly that the risk of the conflict would outweigh the potential benefits .
 Russia will always have more at stake in Ukraine than the U.S. does. Put simply, it will always be at stake. The United States does not have more than Russia does .
 diplomacy remains the best approach to resolving many challenges posed by Russia, including the Ukraine crisis . For all these reasons, diplomacy is the best way to resolve many challenges, including Ukraine .
 The Minsk process has been slow, driven by the willingness of French and German diplomats to take the lead . But it still offers the best chance for a peaceful resolution to the conflict .
 Offering sanctions relief in exchange for successful implementation of the Minsk process could contribute to diplomatic success . Offered sanctions relief could also contribute to success in the process of Minsk .
 It is important to be realistic about what can be achieved through diplomacy and sanctions . But it is also important to have a realistic view of how to achieve this .
 Ukraine will have to weigh for itself the costs and risks of future conflict with Russia against joining NATO or the European Union .
 Neither Crimea nor a neutral Ukraine presents a major loss for U.S. interests, but accepting these unpleasant realities is likely to be unpopular . Some see NATO less as a mutual defense pact and more as a mechanism for incorporating and socializing democratizing states in Eastern Europe into the transatlantic
 Russia's role as aggressor often obscures the fact that Ukraine's elites remain corrupt, disorganized, and often unwilling to make necessary political reforms . Russia’s role in Ukraine's political crisis is often blamed for the country's political problems .
 To succeed, pressure must be brought to bear not only on Russia, but also on Ukraine’s government to fully implement the political provisions of the Minsk process, including elections in the Donbas .
 sanctions focus on impeding military modernization are likely to be more useful than those aimed at Russia's leaders . Current sanctions have been largely ineffectual .
 sanctions on electronic components and the shutoff of military trade with Ukraine has impeded Russia’s ability to manufacture helicopters and frigates, as well as some ship and heavy-lift capabilities .
Military-industrial sanctions can weaken Russia’s ability to fight in the future . By making it harder to obtain high-tech components in particular, military- industrial sanctions could weaken Russia's ability to battle .
 The Iranian nuclear deal highlighted the potential to yield agreements that likely couldn't be achieved otherwise . Continuing diplomatic work with Russia, independent of ongoing events in Ukraine, could yield agreements .
 The Syrian crisis has powerfully illustrated Russia’s ability to make life more difficult for the United States if it so chooses . Russia certainly does not — and should not — possess a veto on U.S. foreign policy objectives .
 Russian diplomatic support will be particularly valuable in pursuing a solution to the crisis in Syria, given Moscow's strong influence over the Assad regime . Moving forward, Russia's diplomatic support is particularly valuable.
 U.S. foreign policy tools cannot always force other states, particularly major powers, to act as we wish . But it is also a striking illustration that we may pretend otherwise, writes Tom Charity .
 When the benefits of increased U.S. intervention in Ukraine are compared with the costs of a potential conflict with Russia, it is clear that military solutions are not viable .
 Continued poor U.S.-Russian relations have the potential to cause future conflict and to undermine foreign policy objectives elsewhere . At the same time, continued poor relations with Russia could cause conflict .
 Instead of seeking to ratchet up tensions, policymakers should continue to pursue a diplomatic solution to Ukraine crisis . Focus on inhibiting Russia’s military modernization where possible, and seek a constructive working relationship with Russia on non-European diplomatic issues .