 The Ukrainian parliament approved a new pro-reform, pro-Western government on February 27 . The new government is a pro-western government .
 Russia has condemned the new government in Kyiv as illegitimate and responded by sending troops to seize Ukraine’s Crimea region . Russia has sent troops to take Crimea region.
 Russian annexed Crimea on March 18. Ignoring international condemnation, Russian annexed the Crimea .
 In April and May 2014, armed men seized government buildings in several cities in eastern Ukraine, mainly in the Donbas region .
 United States and Ukrainian officials charge that Russian intelligence officers in Ukraine are coordinating the unrest . The U.S. and Ukraine officials say that Russia is coordinating unrest in Ukraine .
 U.S. officials have expressed concern that Russia's efforts to destabilize eastern Ukraine may be the prelude to an invasion by an estimated 40,000 Russian troops on Ukraine's borders .
 In the near term, the government's dwindling foreign exchange reserves raised the prospect of a default on sovereign debt later this year .
 The United States is working with the EU, the IMF, and other international financial organizations to support a new Ukrainian government . The U.S. is working to support the new government committed to reforms .
 In May 2014, the Ukrainian government received the first installment of a $17 billion IMF loan .
 The European Union has unveiled an 11.175 billion Euro aid package for Ukraine . The package is part of a $1.2 billion package for the country .
 The EU has also imposed sanctions on 48 persons from Ukraine and Russia held responsible for undermining Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 The Administration requested funding from Congress for $ 1 billion in loan guarantees for Ukraine .
 U.S. aid will also help Ukraine stabilize its finances and hold free and fair presidential and local elections on May 25, 2014 . Other United States aid will help Ukraine stabilize its finances .
 In April, the Administration added seven senior Russian officials and 17 companies . The Administration added 7 senior Russians and 17 firms .
 Congressional action has focused on providing assistance to the new Ukrainian government and supporting sanctions against Russia for its occupation of Crimea .
 On March 27, the Senate approved an amended version of H.R. 4152 by voice vote . The Senate approved the amended version on March 27 .
 The bill also “encourages the President to impose these sanctions on Russian figures responsible for corruption in Russia. The bill requires an annual report by the Secretary of Defense on military and security developments involving the Russian Federation .
 President Obama signed a bill requiring Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty and Voice of America to increase broadcasting in eastern Ukraine, Crimea, and Moldova . On April 3, Obama signed H.R. 4152 into law .
 Reaction to Russian Annexation of and Efforts to Destabilize Ukraine. Reaction to the Russian annexing of and trying to destabilize Ukraine .
 President Viktor Yanukovych drew his main support from oligarchs from the Donets Basin region of eastern Ukraine . Yanukovych was elected in February 2010 .
 Yanukovych's government was criticized for massive high-level corruption, in part committed by his own family and associates .
 U.S. and EU officials expressed concern over the government's human rights record . The government's targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution, they said .
 Yuliya Tymoshenko was Yanukovych’s opponent in the 2010 presidential vote . She was convicted of abuse of power in 2011 arising out of her role in signing a natural gas supply agreement with Russia .
 Many observers have believed that despite growing dissatisfaction with the government, there was little likelihood of public unrest in Ukraine .
 The government made a last-minute decision to not sign an Association Agreement with the European Union in November 2013 . It was due to Russian pressure, but the government made the decision due to the Russian government .
 Ukrainian special police attacked and viciously beat peaceful protestors in Kyiv’s Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square .
 demonstrators were not just protesting against Ukraine’s failure to sign the Association Agreement . They were protesting against the government's lack of respect for the basic human dignity of Ukraine's citizens .
 Yanukovych government alternated between attempted crackdowns and conciliatory gestures . The latter apparently made in an effort to play for time .
 On February 18 the government embarked on its most violent crackdown attempt against the Maidan . The regime's own demise quickly resulted in the regime’s own demise .
 Elite “ Berkut ” riot police attempted to clear protestors from the Maidan and other areas of Kyiv . The support of roving gangs of street thugs hired by the government .
 Yanukoyvch and man of his supporters in the government and parliament fled the capital by February 21 . The former prime minister is a former member of the parliament .
Ukraine's parliament passed sweeping measures with little or no opposition . After the flight of Yanukovych and his supporters, the parliament is now composed mainly of opposition deputies .
 Oleksandr Turchynov, a long-time top aide of Tymoshenko, was elected as speaker of the parliament . He was made acting president until new presidential elections are held .
 The government includes members of Fatherland and Freedom, as well as Maidan activists, but no key figures from the former ruling regime . The government is also known for its anti-government protests .
 Many Maidan protestors view the new governing parties very skeptically . They suspect that they are nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the Yanukovych regime .
 On March 21, the government announced that it would disarm the armed groups . The government announced the move on March 21 .
 Government officials hope at least some of the men will join the army or a new National Guard that has been created .
 There have been several disturbing incidents involving Pravy Sektor and other nationalist groups since March 21, including clashes in central Kyiv .
 Russia responded to the change of government in Kyiv by seizing Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula .
 In April 2014, Putin admitted that Russian Federation military forces did in fact invade Crimea .
 Ukraine has been struggling to establish control over eastern and southern Ukraine . In addition to Russia’s annexation of Crimea, the Ukrainian government has been trying to control the region .
 In March 2014, thousands of pro-Russian protestors demonstrated in the Donbas region and in Kharkiv .
 Some demonstrators favor union with Russia, others only greater autonomy from the government in Kyiv .
 Policy Current Political Situation Unrest in eastern Ukraine has taken an even more ominous turn since April 2014 . The situation has taken a more sinister turn since the start of 2014 .
 Armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in the key cities of Donetsk and Luhansk . At least 13 other towns in the Donbas region were also targeted .
Demonstrators in Donetsk and Luhansk have raised Russian flags . They have called for Russia to send troops to protect them .
 The leadership of the “republics’s” preparing to hold referendums on independence from Ukraine on May 11 . Ukraine is expected to hold a referendum on independence.
 Philip Breedlove has also said that Russia is directing the activities of the armed separatist groups in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia may be using the threat of invasion to deter Ukraine from using its armed forces to neutralize the armed groups within Ukraine . The threat may allow them to continue their efforts at destabilization unhindered .
 Russia announced it would hold military exercises near Ukraine’s borders . Ukraine re-launched an ‘anti-terrorist operation’ on April 23 . Several dead and wounded among the separatists .
 Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu warned that if Ukraine did not halt its operations and large numbers of casualties resulted, Russia would have to react .
 Ukraine’s acting President Oleksandr Turchynov, Prime Minister Yatsenyuk and other Ukrainian leaders have noted the repeated failure of security forces to maintain or restore order in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Turchynov admitted that local police in Donetsk and Luhansk regions are “helpless’ against separatist forces . He has admitted that police are ‘helpless' against separatists .
 Scores of deputies have left the party since the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014 . Most of the rest of the deputies are apparently unwilling or unable to offer serious resistance to the new leadership .
 Former party leader Arseniy Yatsenyuk is Prime Minister in the new government . He is the former leader of the former party leader.
 Policy professionalism among the police, covert political games played by oligarchs once affiliated with the previous regime . Payoffs by Russian agents and payoffs by Russia agents .
 Efforts by elite security forces to restore order have often met with humiliating failure and substantial casualties . Efforts to restoreOrder have often been met with humiliation and serious casualties .
 Ukrainian and Western experts believe Ukrainian intelligence and security forces are thoroughly penetrated by Russian agents . Both Ukrainian and West experts believe Russian agents are involved .
 Ukrainian leaders may increasingly support the use of armed volunteers to supplement the regular security forces . Ukrainian leaders could increasingly support armed volunteers.
 Most of those killed were pro-Russian demonstrators, according to conflicting sources . They died when the building in which they had sheltered during the fighting was set on fire .
 67 pro-Russian demonstrators who were arrested for participating in the violence were released by police under threats from pro- Russian rioters .
 The government says it is tightening border security to stop Russian demonstrators from entering Ukraine . But apparently with limited effect, the government says .
 The government has tried to enlist the support of some oligarchs to try to quiet the situation in the Donbas, Kharkiv, Dnipropetrovsk, and other areas where they own large businesses .
 Petro Poroshenko held high-ranking government posts during Yushchenko’s presidency, but also under Yanukovych . According to polls, the leading candidate by far is pro-Western billionaire Poroshenko .
 At present, it appears likely that Poroshenko and Tymoshenko will enter a runoff in June . If Poroshe nk o gets the winning majority in the first round, it will likely be in a runoff .
Local elections will be held at the same time as the presidential vote . Local elections will take place at the time of the election .
It is uncertain whether the situation in eastern Ukraine will be stable enough to permit the holding of elections there . It is uncertain if the situation is stable enough.
 Preventing the holding of the elections is one of the stated goals of the leaders of separatist leaders in eastern Ukraine .
 Current Economic Situation Ukraine is much poorer than other European countries, despite advantages such as rich soil, a strategic location, and a substantial heavy industrial sector .
 Ukraine’s real GDP growth was a mere 0.2% in 2012, due to a downturn in the EU and Russia .
 By late 2013, Ukraine’s foreign exchange reserves had dropped to dangerously low levels . Fears that Ukraine could default on its sovereign debt in 2014 .
 The weak currency hurts ordinary Ukrainians, in part because it makes imported consumer items more expensive . It makes imported goods more expensive.
 Policy on April 30, 2014, the IMF approved a $17 billion loan for Ukraine . The IMF approved the loan in April 2014 .
 The IMF loan is expected to unlock $27 billion in international aid to Ukraine over two years .
 One of the main goals is to reduce Ukraine’s deficits. The IMF-supported reform plan is to cut Ukraine's deficits .
 The reform plan will involve significant expenditure cuts, including cancelling wage and pension increases, cutting government employment and social spending . It will also cut back on corruption through a new government procurement law .
 Tax increases also envisioned, including ending tax evasion schemes and other frauds . Tax increases are also envisioned .
 Naftogaz’s deficit is targeted for elimination by 2018, partly by reforming the company, and partly by substantial increases in currently heavily subsidized domestic natural gas prices .
 Ukraine is obliged to keep a “flexible’ exchange rate, which will likely mean a weak currency for the near future . The IMF loan may restore some degree of confidence in the currency .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has said that his government is a "kamikaze government" given the political unpopularity of some decisions required as part of the IMF-mandated reform program .
 Ukraine’s government already announced that natural gas prices for domestic consumers would increase by 73% starting May 1 . Further increases are planned .
 IMF officials claim the amount of fiscal consolidation required of Ukraine is moderate . Under the plan budget deficits are permitted to increase this year over last year, due to the poor performance of Ukraine's economy .
 The signatories affirmed that they would refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of Ukraine . None of their weapons will ever be used against Ukraine except in self-defense or otherwise .
 Kyiv is also seeking urgent international assistance to ameliorate the country’s dire economic situation .
 The government strongly supports European Union integration for Ukraine . But says that NATO membership aspirations are not a current priority .
 NATO has agreed to support the country’s defense reforms, including advice on the protection of critical infrastructure . NATO has also agreed to help the country's defense reforms .
 The Association Agreement is the EU's main instrument to promote European values and deepen economic ties with Ukraine and other former Soviet countries .
 Ukraine's government announced on November 21 that it would not sign the agreement . Russia strongly opposed Ukraine’s intention to sign the AA, which led to regime's demise .
 EU officials condemned violence by the former Ukrainian government and their allies against peaceful protestors . EU officials and officials of EU member governments condemned violence .
 The EU imposed a visa ban and asset freezes on Ukrainian officials responsible for violence on February 18 and 19 .
 The EU and Ukraine signed the parts of Ukraine’s Association Agreement dealing with political issues on March 21, 2014 .
 The parts of the A A dealing with economic issues are expected to be signed in June . The new Ukrainian President takes office in June after the new president takes office .
 The EU has lifted tariffs from almost all Ukrainian through November 2014 . But the economic parts of the DCFTA will have come into force in November .
 The European Commission unveiled an 11.175 billion Euro aid package for Ukraine on March 5 .
 The package includes 1. billion Euro in macro financial assistance loans to support Ukraine’s government finances .
 The EU will also provide 1.565 billion Euro in grant aid between 2014 and 2020 to assist Ukraine’s reform efforts .
 The package includes up to 3 billion Euro in loans from the European Investment Ra nk and 5 billion Euro from the EU Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
 The European Union imposed a visa ban and an asset freeze on 21 figures from Ukraine and Russia who played roles in Russia’s seizure of Crimea .
 The EU imposed sanctions on 12 additional Russian leading figures on March 21 . President Putin signed an agreement with Crimean leaders incoiporating the region into Russia .
 The EU list includes some senior government officials and members of the Russian parliament, but also fairly low-level figures directly involved in the Crimea operation and efforts to destabilize Ukraine .
 Some EU countries have reportedly been reluctant to do so, given the important economic ties many countries have with such persons and institutions .
 Recent Russian actions in Ukraine are the culmination of longstanding Russian resentment of the outcome of the Cold War . Russia in some ways, recent Russian actions are a culmination of Russian resentment.
 Russian leaders have also asserted that the post-Soviet region is an area of privileged interests of Russia . Russian leaders also have said that the region is a part of Russia's privileged interests .
 Eastern Orthodox civilization got its start in Kievan Rus, a state centered on what is now part of Ukraine . Prince Vladimir converted to Christianity in 988 .
 Russians often point out that their ancestors spilled a great deal of their blood to incorporate most of what is now Ukraine into the Russian empire . The Russian empire has been through many wars .
 Ethnic Russians make up 17.3% of Ukraine’s population, according to 2001 Ukrainian census . They are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country .
 Many ethnic Ukrainians in the east and south tend to be Russian-speaking, and support close ties with Russia . In addition, many ethnic Ukrainians are suspicious of Ukrainian nationalism .
Until the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, Putin preferred indirect methods of influence in Ukraine . Putin preferred using indirect methods to influence in the country .
 Policy economic sanctions and using Russia media to attack uncooperative leaders . Use Russia media as a tool to attack Russia's leaders .
 Russia reacted with great hostility to the emergence of a new, more pro-Westem leadership . Russia reacted to the rise of the new, less pro- Westem leadership.
 Moscow has not recognized the new government in Kyiv as legitimate, and still recognizes Yanukovych, now residing in Russia, as President .
 Russian forces invaded Ukraine’s Crimea region in February 2014 and annexed in March . Russia annexed Crimea in March.
 Russia has also made strident demands on the subject of Ukraine’s political future .
 Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov called for the disarming of Pravy Sektor and other armed Ukrainian nationalist forces . The regions woidd have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finances, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties with neighboring countries or
 Legitimate election could only occur after constitutional changes are made, Lavrov says . Legitimate elections could only be made after such constitutional changes, he says .
 Russia considers Viktor Yanukovych to be the legitimate President of Ukraine . Russia still considers Yanukovych a legitimate President .
 Ukraine has rejected a “federalization’ of Ukraine that would give very broad autonomy to the eastern and southern parts of Ukraine . Ukrainian leaders fear it could be used by leaders there to break up the country eventually .
 Kyiv has signaled that it is willing to make Russian an official language in the constitution . But it is also willing to give the regions more powers in some areas, not one dictated by Moscow .
 Russia’s federalization proposal appears to be an effort to cripple the central government in Kyiv, analysts say . The proposal would give forces in eastern Ukraine under Moscow's sway a veto power .
 Federalization could also be used to give Russia enhanced control over key economic assets in the east, including defense industries . The move could also give Russia increased control over the east's defense industry .
 Analysts have deduced that one of Russia's real goals in Ukraine appears to be to discredit and delegitimize the current government .
 May 25 presidential elections in Ukraine are not held in eastern Ukraine or there is low turnout due to potential violence and intimidation . Creating a chaotic situation makes the government look weak and may help Moscow claim that the elections are illegitimate .
 He also claimed that Russian troops had been pulled back from Ukraine’s border to their permanent bases .
 The United States and NATO officials say they have seen no signs of a Russian pullback . It is unclear whether Putin’s statement signals a genuine desire to compromise or merely an effort to deny responsibility for ongoing Russian efforts to destabilize Ukraine .
 Some analysts believe Russia may use the same tactics it has used in other former Soviet territories . Russia may set up a self-declared independent state that Russia would support and protect .
 Ukraine would be likely to resist militarily (including perhaps in the form of a guerrilla war) Russia could face much stronger Western sanctions, including against key sectors of Russia’s economy .
 Russia has taken other steps against Ukraine, including imposing some de facto trade sanctions against Ukrainian imports . Russia has also imposed some trade sanctions on Ukraine .
 Russia could expand sanctions into economic warfare against Ukraine . Russia could decide to expand these sanctions into an economic warfare .
 Ukrainian government servers hit by sophisticated cyberattacks, which may have come from Russia . No proof of this has been publicly disclosed so far .
 Russia could harass or expel some of the large number of Ukrainian citizens living and working in Russia .
 Past Russian efforts to greatly increase gas prices for Ukraine provoked a crisis that resulted in a cutoff of Russian gas to Western Europe for several days in January 2006 .
 Kyiv’s refusal to cede control of one of its key economic assets. Its efforts have been unsuccessful, due to Kyiv's refusal to take control of a key asset .
 Ukraine’s reduced share of gas transport to Europe may have led Russia to feel it would have a freer hand to put greater pressure on Ukraine on other issues .
 Key West European countries may feel they have less of a stake in Ukraine’s future . If they, like Russia, were no longer dependent on Ukrainian gas transport infrastructure .
 In March 2014, Oettinger said only 14% of the EU’s natural gas consumption came from Russia via Ukraine . That has diminished Russia's leverage over the EU in a possible gas crisis .
 Policy Russia continues to deteriorate, and South Stream could be scrapped . West European countries could take more serious steps to find alternatives to Russian gas .
 The Russian parliament renounced the 2010 Kharkiv agreements, which provided Ukraine a natural gas price discount in exchange for basing rights for the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Crimea .
 Gazprom then said it would start charging Ukraine $485 per thousand cubic meters of gas . It is about a third more than it charges any other country in Europe .
 President Putin warned that if Ukraine does not pay its debt for natural gas, Russia would start demanding that Ukraine pay in advance for gas .
 Putin warned European leaders that in such a case Ukraine could siphon off Russian gas supplies meant for Western Europe .
 Gazprom could spark a third natural gas crisis in Europe in less than 10 years . Such a move by Gazprom would spark a Third natural gas Crisis in Europe.
 On April 30, Gazprom officials estimated Ukraine’s debt to Gazprom at $3.3 billion . On April 20, officials estimated the debt to the company was $3 billion.
 The best hope is to import cheaper gas from central Europe, using the former Soviet gas transit pipelines in “reverse flow’s mode .
 Kyiv is seeking gas supply agreements with Hungary and Romania as well as other countries . Kyiv wants gas supply agreement with Hungary, Romania and Hungary .
 Ukraine's biggest capacity pipelines run through Slovakia . Ukraine's dependence on Russia cannot be made unless Kyiv can reach agreement with Slovakia .
 Slovakia has declined to supply Ukraine with the much larger amounts of gas it needs, due to fear of retaliation from Gazprom . In April 2014, the two sides reached agreement for Slovakia to supply a modest amount of gas.
 Ukraine could develop its own shale gas reserves, improve exploitation of its own domestic gas reserves . In the long term, Ukraine could import liquefied natural gas, or import gas from Azerbaijan, Central Asia, and elsewhere .
 Ukraine currently consumes about as much Russian gas as Germany, but with a much smaller economy . Ukraine will have to make much greater strides in energy conservation .
 U.S. officials urged Ukrainian leaders and the protestors to find a peaceful, democratic solution to the crisis .
 President Obama and Administration officials tried to reassure Russia that the U.S. was not in a geopolitical competition with Moscow over Ukraine .
 The United States has strongly condemned the Russian military invasion of Crimea . The U.S. has also strongly condemned Russia's annexation of Crimea.
 President Obama acknowledged Russian ties to Ukraine . President Obama said “all of those interests 1 think can be recognized’
 The United States has suspended some bilateral cooperation with Russia . The U.S. has also suspended some cooperation with the Russia .
 On April 2, the Administration announced that it was suspending several projects planned under the aegis of the U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission . It also planned to use that funding for aid to Ukraine .
 On March 16 and 20, after Russia moved to annex Crimea, the Administration issued two additional Executive Orders expanding the scope of sanctions . The orders were issued after Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 On April 28, the Administration imposed asset freezes on additional 7 senior Russian officials .
 The companies appear to have been chosen due to their links to sanctioned persons in Putin’s inner circle . Energy trader Genneddy Timchenko, bankers Arkady and Boris Rotenberg or Bank Rossiya .
 He added that Russia has not yet chosen to move forward, and these sanctions represent the next stage in a calibrated effort to change Russia’s behavior . He said that Russia is not yet choosing to move Forward .
 The sanctions imposed so far appear to have had little on Russian behavior . The next phase could be sectoral sanctions, less narrowly targeted, addressing sectors like banking or defense industry .
 Russian-supported gunmen accelerated their seizures of buildings in the Donbas after sanctions were imposed .
 U.S. officials have accused Russia of organizing the seizure of buildings and the erection of roadblocks in Ukraine .
 U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Samantha Power noted that the dress, equipment, and well-planned actions of the pro-Russian gunmen in eastern Ukraine were similar to those who occupied Crimea .
 Donetsk and Luhansk appear to be chosen for seizure by gunmen to cut off from Kyiv . The towns and roads appear to have been chosen by gunmen .
 Secretary Kerry and other U.S. officials have repeatedly called for the estimated 40,000 Russian troops on Ukraine's borders to be returned to their barracks immediately .
 The Administration continues to seek a diplomatic solution to the Ukraine crisis . Despite this intensification of Russian efforts to destabilize and possibly dismember Ukraine, the Administration is looking for a solution .
 John Kerry reached agreement with Lavrov, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Andrei Deshchytsia, and EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton on April 17 in Geneva . The agreement is aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis .
 OSCE calls for illegal armed groups to be disarmed, illegally occupied buildings and roadblocks cleared . It calls for an “inclusive, transparent, and accountable” constitutional reform process .
 Secretary Kerry praised Ukraine’s efforts to comply with the agreement . He sharply condemned Russia for not taking a single step to implement the accord .
 The Administration requested $57 million in Economic Support Fund assistance for Ukraine . The request was likely drafted before the crisis in Ukraine .
 Ukraine is also expected to receive $6. million in USAID Global Health funding, $22 million in State Global Health Funding, $2 million in INCLE law enforcement aid, $1.1 million in IMET military training assistance, and $2million in Foreign Military Financing
 In March, the Administration unveiled the first details of an aid package for the new Ukrainian government .
 A reduction in energy subsidies is one of the most politically sensitive conditions the IMF is likely to place on a loan for Ukraine . The IMF is expected to place a loan on a Ukraine loan for the country .
 The United States is also providing technical advisors to help the Ukrainian government deal with its financial crisis and to implement energy sector reforms . The U.S. is also helping to help Ukraine deal with the financial crisis .
 Other technical assistance would be provided to help Ukraine recover assets stolen by the previous regime and fight corruption . Other technical help would also be provided.
 The United States would also provide help so that Ukraine can hold free and fair presidential elections in May 2014 . The U.S. would also help Ukraine hold free presidential elections .
 The United States would provide technical assistance on how Ukraine can use its rights as a WTO member to combat potential Russian trade sanctions . The U.S. would also provide technical help on how Ukrainian rights can be used in the WTO .
 Administration package would also provide advice and financing to help Ukrainian firms find new export markets and enhance Ukraine’s energy efficiency .
 On April 21, the Administration unveiled a new aid package totaling $50 million .
 Of this amount, $11. million is being used to help Ukraine hold free and fair elections on May 25 . Experts will send experts to Ukraine on such issues as constitutional reform, local governance, public participation, and judiciary reform .
 The Administration package includes additional technical assistance to Ukraine to help the country on economic reform issues .
 The Administration says it will send additional advisors in such areas as public debt management, macroeconomic policy, and budget and tax administration . Three banking advisors already in Kyiv, the Administration says .
 U.S. experts are advising Ukraine on securing reverse flows of natural gas from Poland, Hungary, and Slovakia . Ukraine is increasing its domestic conventional gas supply, and improving energy efficiency .
 The United States will expand technical help to Ukraine on fighting corruption . It will help coordinate international efforts to repatriate to Ukraine funds stolen by members of the Yanukovych regime .
 The U.S. plans to extend the validity of visas for businesspeople and tourists from ten years from the current five .
 Policy ammunition, communications gear, intelligence support, aviation fuel, night-vision goggles, mine-clearing equipment, medical gear, and other items .
 The Administration has declined so far to send lethal military aid to Ukraine . It is concerned that it could make a diplomatic settlement more difficult .
 In April 2014, the White House detailed an $18 million security assistance package for Ukraine .
 The amount includes 300,000 Meals Ready to Eat to Ukraine in March, as a cost of about $3 million .
 The Administration is also providing an additional nearly $7 million in health and welfare assistance to Ukraine’s armed forces .
 An additional $8 million in non-lethal includes explosive ordinance disposal equipment and handheld radios for Ukraine’s military and engineering equipment, communications equipment.
 The Administration says it is “actively reviewing’s other Ukrainian requests. The Administration is ‘actively reviewed’ other requests .
 The resolution sponsored by Senator Murphy urges the U.S. and EU to work together to promote a peaceful resolution of the Ukraine crisis . The President and Congress shoidd consider whether to apply targeted sanctions against individuals responsible for ordering or carrying out the violence .
 Policy Economic Support Fund, and from unobligated balances for State Department and Foreign Operations funding, for prior years .
 On March 27, the Senate approved an amended version of FI.R. 4152 by voice vote . The Senate approved the amended version on March 27 .
 The bill includes the loan guarantees for Ukraine, but also provisions of S 2124 . The bill had been approved by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on March 12 .
 The House also passed S 2183, which requires Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty and Voice of American to start a programming “surge’ to provide accurate information to eastern Ukraine, Crimea, and Moldova .
 The bill authorizes up to $10 million in appropriations for this effort . The bill also authorizes $10million in appropriations .
 The provisions of S 2183 were originally part of H.R. 4278 . They were passed by the Senate as a separate bill on March 27 by unanimous consent .
 The measure seeks to impose wide-ranging economic and diplomatic sanctions on Russia . It seeks to take steps to strengthen NATO, and to support Ukraine and other states of the former Soviet Union .
 The United States and other countries have ruled out military action to eject Russian forces from Crimea or even stop an invasion of eastern Ukraine . The U.S. has ruled out any military action.
 The United States and its NATO allies have limited their military actions so far to a modest increase in air assets and troop deployments . The U.S. and NATO allies are trying to signal NATO's resolve to defend member states .
 The main tool at the disposal of U.S. policy makers to pressure Russia to negotiate its withdrawal from Crimea is far-reaching financial sanctions .
 Many believed or hoped that Russia would not take the steps that it has already taken, for fear that the Russian elite could lose its vast assets in Europe and elsewhere .
 The deterrent effect of possible sanctions has failed, policy makers may be faced with the possibility that the implementation of sanctions may not be powerful enough to compel Russia's compliance .
 The sanctions would then be mainly in effect a mechanism to show Russia the “cost’ of its violation of international norms or deter it from occupying additional Ukrainian territory .
 Russia’s economic importance, particularly for Europe but also for some U.S. firms, could also be substantial for those imposing it . The cost could be substantial.
 Cooperation between Russia and the U.S. on other issues, such as Iran, Syria, and withdrawal of military cargoes from Afghanistan, could also come to an end .
 The prospect of an open-ended new Cold War with Russia may be enough for U.S., EU policy makers to be reluctant to impose serious sanctions on Russia .
 A related issue is whether additional sanctions should attack key Russian businessmen, banks, and energy companies . The sanctions could have a serious impact on Russia’s economy .
 Putin's most outspoken advisors and subordinates could have a mainly symbolic impact . Alternatively, one could continue to limit sanctions to a few of Putin’s most outspoken advisor and subordinates .
 Once sanctions are imposed, U.S. and EU policy makers might feel compelled to keep sanctions in place . They fear the loss of credibility that could result if they do not .
 Some observers continue to call for trying to engage with Russia to stabilize Ukraine . Some observers say there is a lack of workable alternatives to Ukraine .
 Russia will always have the superior means and stronger motives to influence Ukraine than Western countries will, they say . They assert that Russia willalways have a superior means to influence the Ukraine .
 The U.S. needs to show resolve in the face of Russian aggression against Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, says some .
 aid could serve to deter Putin from invading eastern Ukraine, say experts . They argue such aid could help deter Putin.
 Some objections to military aid for Ukraine are that it could foreclose a diplomatic solution to the crisis . It could actually provoke Putin to attack eastern Ukraine; it could end U.S.-Russian cooperation in such issues as the withdrawal of United States equipment from Afghanistan .
 There could also be concerns about the aid absorption capacity of Ukraine’s armed forces, which are in a poor state at present .