 On the Sources of the Donbas, I oppose the claim that the armed conflict in theDonbas has domestic sources . “structural feasibility’ and “group emotions’ are important variables in explaining the case, I say .
 A well written memo is misleading for at least two reasons, I believe . The memo was written in a memo to the White House .
 The language Kudelia uses establishes a problematic frame for the perception of recent events in Ukraine . Second, the language is used to establish a negative frame for recent events . The language is also used to describe the Ukraine crisis .
 I will start with questioning the logical consequences of Kudelia’s argument . I will also question the logic of the argument .
 If the admixture of the structural and agency-based variables constitutes a sufficient condition for the eruption of separatist conflict in one region, we may well expect it should have launched secessionist movements in similar regions .
 Odesa went through violent clashes between pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian activists that resulted in the deaths of more than 40 people . The clashes also resulted in more than forty deaths .
 The resentment to, and fear of, "fascists" from Kyiv should have brought about the same results there as they did in Donetsk and Luhansk . The resentment of, and fears of, “fascist’s” from Kyv should have
 Kudelia mentions resentment and fear as emotions instrumental for the beginning of the internal conflict .
Relying on figures from an opinion poll without asking where the fear came from is shortsighted . There are variations in responses to this question across the South East of Ukraine .
 The poll, actually, reveals quite ambivalent attitudes of the respondents of Donetsk and Luhansk regions to the Right Sector .
36 percent of respondents in Donetsk and 40 percent in Luhansk see the Right Sector as one of a dozen marginal groups having little weight in the political process . 50 and 42 percent in the same regions believed that the right Sector is a large and influential military formation that poses a threat to
 The questions on the role of Russia in the conflict reflect quite interesting opinions, which Kudelia prefers not to discuss . The questions are not discussed .
 roughly 50 percent of respondents agree that Russia does play a role in the conflict . The figures demonstrate that roughly 50% of respondents of these two regions agree Russia plays a role.
 The first seeds of resentment were planted in the Ukraine’s south and east by Russian ‘political technologists’ back in 2004 . We also know that the first seeds were planted by Russian political technologists .
 Victor Yanukovych remained connected with Vladislav Surkov, a once-close advisor to Putin, and several other high ranking Russian figures over the entire period of crisis .
 The word choices we make reflect not only our vision, but also the perception of the subject by the reader . We all choose terms that best serve our research purposes .
 Such terms create an impression that there was a coup and resulting civil war in Ukraine, Umland's comment says .
 Alternative terms like “revolution,” “political revolution,’ and “transfer of power” might have produced quite an opposite picture of the political process in Ukraine .
 Kudelia is aware that part of Russia’s war in Ukraine is psychological warfare waged in the public sphere .
 The Russian authorities and media present the Ukrainian events exclusively in terms of illegal actions undertaken by protesters and their leaders . “coup is a key term, where ‘coup’ is a crucial term .
 The lack of documented evidence of Russia’s role in initiating the crisis should not preclude us from taking into account the numerous facts that indicate who the perpetrator is .
 As Putin himself conceded in May, the Russian military was indeed in Crimea .
 The same, I am sure, will sooner or later be released about the Donbas . The same thing will be released. The Donbas will also be released, I'm sure .
 Andreas Umland is a Senior Research Fellow at the Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation, Kyiv . He is also a senior Research Fellow.
 The Donbas Insurgency Began At Home by Serhiy Kudelia . The DonBas Insurgence Began at Home .
 Dmitri Kukikov, Timofei Sergeitsev and Vladimir Granovski worked for Andriy Kluev during the 2004 presidential elections . They were the head of the shadow electoral team of Victor Yanukovych during the election .