 The Information Resistance OSINT community explores methods and instruments Russia exploits to gain influence across continents . The group also explores methods, instruments Russia uses to gain power across the world .
 "International independent non-governmental organization" declares its objective the research of international relations and raising the level of international security . Information Resistance reports.
 Russian agents have different goals and methods, such as to shift attention away from aggressive actions and imperial ambitions toward the U.S.
 Russia has been criticized by many European politicians, businessmen, scientists, and other advocates of Russia . Russia is trying to improve relations with the United States .
 Former Austrian Chancellor Alfred Gusenbauer was once an advisor to former Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych and his team . He was a scandalous political technologist who was once a advisor to Yanukovych .
 Its main speakers will be former Foreign Minister and Vice-Chancellor of Germany Fischer . From the Russian side there will be Deputy Foreign Minister Lavrov and other representatives of Russian political elite .
 As an official cover, representatives of international organizations, mass media, and research centers of America, Europe and Asia take part in DC activities . As a cover,representations of the U.S., Europe, Asia and America take part.
 DC cooperates with UNESCO, the League of Arab States, the Asia-European Foundation and other non-governmental organizations . DC is a member of the United Nations, the Arab League and the Arab States .
 The main ideology of the DC is to shift the responsibility of the Kremlin for the numerous crises connected with ISIS, international terrorism, mass migration, on the so-called "collective West"
 The DC has been actively promoting the "alternative worldview" that is beneficial for the Kremlin . Since the annexation of the Crimea and Russian invasion of Donbas, the DC is promoting the alternative  worldview .
 In the interests of the Kremlin, attention was deflected once again from Russia's aggression in Ukraine and other areas of Russia's imperial interests .
 Forum in 2016 marked by presence of a massive delegation of so-called Eurosceptics . Forum was marked by the presence of huge delegation.
 Among them were the pro-Russian head of the Czech Republic Zeman, former head of IMF Dominique Strauss-Kahn, former prime minister of Hungary, Putin's friend Orban, and others .
 The Rhodes Forum was launched as an informal summit of former heads of states and governments . The so-called "Leaders Club" was launched in 2017 .
The main task was to create groups of influence in a number of conflict zones . The main task is to create group of influence. The main goal was to establish groups of control in a variety of conflict areas .
 The council of heads of the organization now includes Gusenbauer, a Russian oligarch Vladimir Yakunin, a Greek businessman .
 The DC does not receive funds from the Russian state budget, drawing funding from the Swiss fund Endowment for the World Public Forum . membership fees and private donations remain closed to the public eye .
 Another important area is the strengthening of Russian influence in Europe . Another important region is the strengthening of Russia's influence on Europe .
 The goal is the further formation of a cohort of "friends of Moscow" in Western Europe, manipulation of public opinion and carrying out pro-Russian propaganda .
 Another important role is direct communication with some heads of states . Other important roles are direct communication and direct communication.
 President of the Czech Republic, Zeman, maintains friendly relations with the head of the DC Yakunin .
 Alfred Gusenbauer is closely associated with the Mercury Group . The Mercury Group is one of the companies targeted by the probe . The probe was launched in 2010 .
 There is also information that Gusenbauer is involved in the activities of the so-called "Habsburg Group" The group was supposed to promote the Yanukovych team and their policies .
 The IR concludes that some of the experts who are involved in the Kremlin's hybrid influence organization think they are engaged in useful research in an attempt to make the world a safer place .