 The difference is that Mr Trump has made it so easy for the media and his opponents to get ahead of him . He's made it easier for his opponents.
 The latest stories comport with what we also hear from sources close to the Trump campaign . The latest story comports with the latest stories we hear from source close to Trump .
 Mr Trump's advisers and his family want the candidate to deliver a consistent message making the case for change .
 They want him to focus on growing the economy and raising incomes and fighting terrorism . They say he should focus on raising incomes, fighting terrorism and raising income .
 They think he should make the election a referendum on Hillary Clinton, not on himself . They think they should make it a referendum, not a referendum .
President Obama will spend a little time each day studying the issues he'll need to understand if he becomes President .
 Mr Trump prefers to watch the cable shows rather than read a briefing paper . He prefers to read the briefing paper.
 The same shoot-from-the-lip style that won over a plurality of GOP primary voters can persuade others who worry if he has the temperament to be Commander in Chief .
 He also thinks the crowds at his campaign rallies are a substitute for the lack of a field organization and digital turnout strategy . He also believes the crowds are a replacement for a lack of field organization.
 Twitter and social media can make up for being outspent $100 million to zero in battleground states, he says . And he thinks that social media and Twitter can make it up for $100m to $100M to zero.
 It's obvious to many of his advisers, who are the sources for the news stories about dysfunction .
 They may be covering for themselves, but this is what happens in failing campaigns . It's what happens when campaigns fail, but it's what happened in failed campaigns .
Recriminations typically start in October, not mid-August . The difference is that the recriminations begin in October .
 The polls show that Mr Trump is on the path to losing a winnable race. These stories are appearing now because of the polls .
 He is losing in every key battleground state, some like New Hampshire by double digits . He is now losing in all key battleground states, including New Hampshire .
 The Midwest industrial states he claimed he would put into play have turned sharply toward Mrs. Mrs. J.
 More ominously, states won by John McCain and Mitt Romney are much closer than they should be .
 If Mr Trump is fighting to hold Georgia, Arizona and even Utah by September, a landslide defeat becomes all too possible .
 The tragedy is that this is happening in a year when Republicans should win, says John Avlon .
 Alan Abramowitz has spent years developing his “time for a change’s forecasting model . The political scientist has been working on the model for years .
 The model looks at the rate of GDP growth in the second quarter of an election year . President's approval rating, and the electorate's desire for change after eight years .
 Mr Abramowitz’s has predicted the winner of the major-party popular vote in every presidential election since 1988 . No model is perfect, but he has been predicting the winner since 1988.
 A mainstream GOP candidate who runs a reasonably competent campaign would have about a 66% chance of victory . A mainstream Republican candidate with a good chance of winning would have 66% of the vote .
 Mr Trump has alienated his party and he isn’t running a competent campaign . He has alienated the party and is not a competent candidate .
 Clinton is the second most unpopular presidential nominee in history, after Mr. Trump .
 Mr Trump’s window for a turnaround is closing. Even with more than 80 days left, Mr Trump's window is closing .
 The ‘Trump pivot’ always seemed implausible given his lifelong instincts and habits, but Mr Trump promised Republicans .
 Those who sold Mr Trump to GOP voters as the man who could defeat Hillary Clinton now face the truth .
 Chris Christie, Newt Gingrich, Rudy Giuliani, Paulafort and Paulafort told Republicans their man could rise to the occasion . The talk-radio right told Republicans they could rise.
 The GOP will have no choice but to write off the nominee as hopeless and focus on salvaging the Senate and House and other down-ballot races .
 Mr Trump needs to stop blaming everyone else and decide if he wants to behave like someone who wants to be President .
 Crude hit a one-month high Monday on hopes that the prolonged oil-price rout may drive major producers to reconsider a collective production cap .
 Brent crude, the global oil benchmark, rose 0.9% to $47.38 a barrel on London's ICE Futures exchange . Brent crude is the world's largest oil benchmark .
 Officials in the Russian North Caucasus region of Daghestan have announced a security alert . The alert is in the village of Tagirkent-Kazmalyar .
 A Russian lawmaker's son goes on trial this week in the state of Washington . Prosecutors say he orchestrated a hacking scheme that resulted in about $170 million in fraudulent credit-card purchases .
 French Muslims bristled at the creation of a mosque-monitoring body led by a non-Muslim .
Donald Trump's campaign team must disclose all pro-Russia links, Hillary Clinton's manager says . Hillary Clinton says a newspaper article alleges secret cash payments to Donald Trump's team .
 MOSCOW Russia said on Monday it had started planned tactical exercises in the eastern part of the Mediterranean Sea to test the ability of the Navy to act in crisis situations of a terrorist nature .
Manafort continued working in Ukraine after the demise of Mr Yanukovych’s government . allies of the ousted president and others form a political bloc that opposed the new pro-Western administration .
Davisafort has formally dissolved the local branch of his company . Some of his aides were in Ukraine as recently as this year, company records show .
 The most moderate FSA groups will be forced to choose between military and revolutionary unity, or operational isolation and subjugation . The most extreme FSA groups are likely to be more moderate .
 In short, Jabhat al-Nusra is taking yet another step toward shaping the Syrian opposition in its favor .
 Vladimir Putin's dismissal of his powerful chief of staff and longtime confidant Sergei Ivanov did not happen in isolation . But by whatever name, it did not occur in isolation.
 Russia's ruling elite has been shaken by a mass shake-up of regional and federal elites . Four regional governors, four federal district chiefs, and a disgraced customs boss replaced . It illustrates that these are far from normal times for the ruling elite .
 Former Putin cronies who were once untouchable are being thrown under the bus . The former Russian cronies are now being thrown out of the bus.
Political commentator Leonid Bershidsky wrote in Bloomberg . "This is a new stage of Putin's rule," he wrote .
 For most of Putin's long rule, he was essentially the front man for an oligarchic elite . The so-called "collective Putin" effectively ruled Russia .
 Putin is effectively abandoning an elite personnel policy resembling Leonid Brezhnev's "stability of cadres" approach . The policy is reminiscent of Josef Stalin's -minus, of course, according to Petrov .
 An early clue that changes were afoot in Putin's governing model came back in 2014, at the height of the nationalistic fervor accompanying Ukraine conflict .
 Reports surfaced that Putin had been quietly bringing a new cadre of officials to Moscow . The new official was vetted by the security services and vetted for loyalty to Putin .
 Vladimir Pastukhov wrote in Polit.ru at the time that the fledgling new nomenklatura were between 25 and 35 years old, hailed mostly from the regions .
 They were selected based on their loyalty to the regime and for being "psychologically closer to Putin" than their predecessors . They were chosen based on the loyalty of the regime. They were also selected for being psychologically close to Putin .
 People without deep roots were "ready for anything" that facilitated their advancement, they said . And they were "people without deep Roots" who were "prepared for anything," they said.
 Putin's new "Class of 2014" was a generational shift that drew obvious comparisons to Stalin's ""Class of 1938" The cohort of officials brought to Moscow from the provinces in the wake of the purges and ruled the Soviet Union from the death of Stalin to the rise
 Putin sacked his longtime crony Vladimir Yakunin as head of Russian Railways a year ago .
 Yakunin was kicked off the island as a powerful, influential, and close to the Kremlin leader . It was a surefire sign that all was not well with Team Putin .
 Putin's loyalty to longtime associates only went so far, it showed . It showed that Putin's loyalism to long-term associates only goes so far .
 Putin's longtime pact with the ruling class -loyalty in exchange for a license to use the state budget as their personal ATM machine - was changing .
 Yakunin's fall - which came almost exactly one year before Ivanov was dismissed - was indeed a harbinger . Yakunin was dismissed by Ivanov last year .
 In the past year, three regional governors have been arrested on corruption charges . The FSB raided the Moscow branch of the Investigative Committee, arresting three top officials on charges of taking bribes .
 Andrei Belyaninov, head of the Federal Customs Service, was accused of corruption . He served with Putin in the KGB, like Ivanov, in Russia .
 Another purge is likely in the autumn following the State Duma elections in September .
 There has also been speculation that more close Putin allies - including Igor Sechin, the CEO of the state-run Rosneft - could be vulnerable .
 Putin's reliance on trusted veterans of the security services is increasing . Putin's personal security detail has become increasingly important to him .
 There is a lot less money around to feed a kleptocratic elite that had grown accustomed to seeking rents with impunity .
 Sergei Ivanov was dismissed as Kremlin chief of staff . This post has been updated to reflect that development .
 The widening scope of the attack has prompted the F.B.I. to broaden its investigation . Agents have begun notifying a long list of Democratic officials that the Russians may have breached their personal accounts .
 Officials have acknowledged that the Russian hackers gained access to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and to theDemocratic National Committee, including a D.N.C. voter analytics program .
 Democrats say they are bracing for the possibility that another batch of damaging or embarrassing internal material could become public before the November presidential election .
Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz resigned as D.N.C. chairwoman after WikiLeaks released a trove of hacked internal emails . The emails showed party officials eager for Mrs. Wasserman Schultz's resignation .
 U.S. intelligence agencies have said they have “high confidence’s that the attack was the work of Russian intelligence agencies .
 Democrats have alleged that the Russians are trying to help tilt the election toward the Republican nominee, Donald J Trump . It has injected a heavy dose of international intrigue into an already chaotic presidential campaign .
 Mr Trump stunned Democrats and Republicans when he said last month that he hoped Russian intelligence services had successfully hacked Mrs. Mrs. Trump .
 Clinton's email encouraged people to publish whatever they may have stolen . He said later that he was being sarcastic .
 Intelligence and law enforcement officials are taking the issue seriously, but are taking it seriously .
 F.B.I. officials briefed staff members of House and Senate Intelligence Committees last week on the investigation into the theft of emails and documents from the Democratic National Committee .
 Briefings for other congressional committees are expected in the coming days .
 Russian intelligence agencies have virtually no doubt that the Russian government was behind the theft, according to one staff member .
Mrs. Clinton said she discussed the 2013 hack with the technician who ran Mrs. Clinton . She said she talked about the hack with a technician who worked for her .
 Clinton’s private server and considered “whether this event might affect Secretary Clinton's email,’ according to a written account Ms. Clinton's private server .
 Judicial Watch is a conservative legal group that is suing the State Department . Mills provided to Judicial Watch .
 It does not appear that the Russian hackers sought or gained access to any computer systems used by Mr Trump, officials said .
 The D.N.C. hack broke in June . A number of Democratic organizations have been scrubbing their files to determine what might have been compromised .
 They have been shoring up their cybersecurity defenses to guard against another attack . They have also been shored up their cyber defenses to protect against an attack .
 An official with the D.N.C., speaking on condition of anonymity, said the committee took the threat very seriously . The committee would not comment on specific security steps taken .
 WikiLeaks offered a $20,000 reward for information on the shooting death of a former D.N.C. staff member, Seth Rich, outside his Washington home .
 Police have not given any credence to that speculation . His killing fueled speculation on the internet that he was somehow tied to the hacked emails .
 Julian Assange has made it clear that he would like to hurt Mrs. Assange . The WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, has said he would want to hurt his wife .
 Clinton’s bid for the White House, opposing her candidacy on policy and personal grounds, has been criticized for her personal issues .
 He has hinted that he has more material about the presidential campaign that he could release . He has said he has a lot of material about his presidential campaign .
 The main concern this time around is whether the hack represented a routine cybersecurity attack or a more pointed attempt to influence the presidential election on the part of the Russian intelligence .
 The first round of emails showed the Democratic National Committee’s bias against Bernie Sanders during the primary elections . Debbie Wasserman Schultz resigned as DNC chairwoman after the emails leaked .
 Investigators found similarities between this attack and previous hacks by Russian intelligence, as well as malicious code that was built on Russian servers .
In Russian cybersecurity, confusion is a tactic. Still, confusion remains – and in the world of Russian cybersecurity,. Still, it's a tactic, and in Russia, confusion still remains .
 Hillary Clinton’s campaign has repeatedly claimed that the Russian hacks are a plan to interfere with the presidential election . Donald Trump has said positive things about Vladimir Putin in the past .
 Trump’s campaign manager, Paulafort, has ties to the former prime minister of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych . Yanukovych fled to Russia after the Ukrainian revolution in 2014 .
Ukrainian political expert Oleg Kravchenko says Mr Yanukovych worked for Mr Yanukovyach in the early 2000s . He helped improve his public image and ultimately played “a decisive role in the victory of Yanukovych’s victory,’
 Trump's campaign has made efforts to prevent the GOP from pledging support for, or giving weapons to, the Ukrainian rebels fighting against Russia .
 The phone numbers and emails addresses were not, in and of themselves, a cause for concern . Some are worried about what the hack and potential connections to Russia could mean for the election .
 The U.S. has little experience dealing with cyber warfare. One overarching concern is that if this is cyber warfare through public manipulation, it is something the United States has no experience with .
 The looming possible escalation follows claims by Russia’s FSB state security service earlier this week that it prevented two attempts by Ukrainian special forces to launch attacks in Russian-held Crimea .
 Vice President Joe Biden urged Poroshenko to avoid escalating the conflict as much as possible . On Friday, Vice President Biden urged theoshenko to stay calm .
 The renewed hostilities in Crimea come as violence has surged during the summer months in eastern Ukraine . Despite a nominal ceasefire, the renewed hostilities have continued .
 civilian casualties have spiked to a level not seen since August 2015, according to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights .
 Russia's claims of Ukrainian incursions into Crimea could be a way for it to back out of peace talks that had been planned for next month’s G20 summit in China .
 Russia's plan could focus on smaller military operations in order to “scare the West with the prospect of full-scale conflict with Ukraine,’s political analyst in Ukraine says .
 The timing of the spat is notable in light of upcoming elections in both America and Russia . The spat is in the wake of upcoming presidential elections in the U.S.
 Barack Obama has made it clear that he wants progress on Ukraine before the end of his term .
 Victoria Nuland, the State Department official responsible for Ukraine, has been in talks with Vladislav Surkov, a close confidant of Mr Putin .
 Mr Putin may be hoping to pressure Mr Obama into making the grand Yalta-style bargain he has long desired .
 A re-run of the Ukrainian drama may also play well ahead of Russia’s parliamentary elections on September 18th . Russia's parliamentary elections are scheduled to be held in September .
As the country’s economic crisis grinds on, the looming vote has the Kremlin anxious .
 The war in Ukraine has largely disappeared from state media in recent months . The return to the headlines could provide a welcome distraction .
Donald Trump is seen as sympathetic to President Putin, and sometimes admiring of him . Members of his campaign are directly entangled with elements of the Russian regime . The Ukraine conflict could also have implications for the U.S. presidential race .
 Trump and his campaign have also sought to downplay the threat that Russia poses to Ukraine .
 Trump said in a recent interview that Putin “is not going into Ukraine,” in addition to recently saying that he would not defend America’s Baltic NATO allies against Russian invasion .
 There is also the added intrigue of the extensive cyberattack on Democratic party groups . The possibility that the United States will issue new sanctions on the country as a result .
 A Swiss man set a fire and stabbed people on a train in the country’s northeast . Six people were wounded, including six people as well as himself .
 Fidel Castro has written a long letter thanking Cubans for their support on his 90th birthday . The 27-year-old suspect had at least one knife and poured out a flammable liquid .
 Castro accompanies his thanks with reminiscences about his childhood and youth . Castro accompanied his thanks by reminiscoes about his youth .
 President Obama appeared to anger the revolutionary leader with a March trip to Cuba . He called for Cubans to look toward the future .
 Castro also criticizes Obama for not apologizing to Japan during a trip to Hiroshima in May . A Swiss man set a fire and stabbed people on a train in the country’s northeast .
 Gallen canton say incident happened Saturday afternoon as the train neared the station in Salez, near the border with Liechtenstein .
 Police say the wounded included a 6-year-old child, three women aged 17, 34 and 43, and two men aged 17 and 50 . The wounded include a child, a woman, a man and a woman aged 17-50 .
 Some of the injuries were said to be serious but there were no further details immediately .
 The local fire department responded along with three rescue helicopters, two emergency doctors, three ambulances and railroad authorities . In addition to large police presence, the fire department also responded .
 A preliminary estimate says that the train suffered 100,000 Swiss francs in damage .
 In July, a refugee from Afghanistan attacked four tourists on a German train, then stabbed a woman as he fled .
 A teenager armed with an axe and knife attacked passengers on another train in Germany . Later in the same month, a teenager attacked a train with a knife and axe .
 He was shot and killed by police as he tried to escape from the train . He too was shot by police and killed as he was trying to escape .
 Last September, a heavily armed gunman opened fire on a high-speed Amsterdam-Paris train . He was overpowered by two young American soldiers and their companion .
 Vladimir Putin accuses Ukraine of killing Russian servicemen in terrorist attacks in Crimea . Putin warns that the deaths will not be ignored .
 Petro Poroshenko orders Ukraine's military to be in a state of combat readiness . The Ukrainian president orders his country's military in state of readiness .
 Talks over the Minsk agreement have been put on hold . The agreement established a ceasefire of sorts in the vicious conflict .
 The upsurge of this particular episode of violence, and its venue, has come as a surprise . It has been a surprise.
 Crimea has not experienced serious military action since it was annexed by the Kremlin . There has been low intensity, but rising, strife in separatist Donetsk and Luhansk in the east over the last few months .
 Tartar and Ukrainian activists had claimed systematic persecution by the Russian dominated government in Simferopol . Tartar, Ukrainian activists claim systematic persecution.
 Some of those we met while reporting from there at the time have fled, some are in prison . Some of the people we met have been arrested .
 Russians consented to the first Minsk agreement before taking the city of Mariupol . It would have helped open a land corridor from the Donbas to Crimea .
 Eastern Ukraine, despite periodic flare ups, has been a frozen conflict since then . Eastern Ukraine is a state of affairs which should suit Moscow .
 No one seriously believes that Crimea, which was part of Soviet Russia until 1954, would ever revert to Ukraine .
 Kiev, backed by the West, continues to claim suzerainty . But the Ukrainian government also admits that it cannot make that happen by military means .
 The war between Russia and Georgia took place in 2008 at the time of the Beijing Olympics . Mr Putin, they repeatedly point out, has form for this .
 Mikheil Saakashvili may have fallen into a well-prepared Russian trap by sending troops into the rebel enclave of South Ossetia . But there is evidence that on that occasion he had begun hostilities with troops .
 The Georgian president had believed that the United States would come to his aid if necessary, despite a senior American diplomat warning him this will not happen .
 American forces training the Ukrainians head off fast to Tblisi airport along the George W Bush Boulevard when the fighting started .
 Moscow has claimed that an officer in its intelligence service, FSB, and a Russian soldier were killed in two separate fire fights at the weekend .
 It is also claimed that weapons, including explosives for 20 bombs, and grenades, have been discovered . The weapons are intended for use in an insurgency campaign, it is claimed .
 Those of us there at the time of the Russian takeover in 2014 were convinced that a plan already in place was in play . Those of we there were convinced.
 The Russian Black Sea fleet quickly surrounded Ukrainian bases while the government in Kiev dithered .
 This time the Ukrainian forces, some trained by the West, are prepared . The Ukrainian forces have been trained by West .
 It makes little logistical sense for the Russians to carry out an invasion, needing armour, through one bridge and very few crossing points across the isthmus .
 Even Ukrainian military intelligence, accused by Moscow of plotting terrorism in Crimea, seems to be relatively relaxed .
 Russian troops in the Dzhankoy area are part of a regular six monthly rotation . Vadim Skibitsky said the Russian movements were in preparation for an annual exercise .
 The EU and U.S. have extended sanctions against Russia over Crimea and the Donbas . Some of European states want to see them relaxed in the future .
 Ukrainian government accused of failing to fulfil some of its obligations under the Minsk agreement . Ukrainian government also accused of holding local elections in the Donbas .
 There continues to be irritation in the West over the failure of the Poroshenko government to combat widespread corruption . The Poroshenko Government has been accused of corruption .
 Some officials in Kiev realise it is more likely to be manoeuvres to position the Kremlin in a stronger position in the Crimea .
 Ukraine is not to pave the way for Ukraine to plunge back into war. mikenova shared this story from Radio Free Europe .
 A judge has been gunned down in Russia's volatile North Caucasus region of Daghestan .
 Turkey's ambassador to Russia says that Turkey will develop its ties with Russia despite tensions between the West and Moscow .
 The Russian plan will halt “all military action, air and artillery strikes’ in the Syrian city for three hours every day . aid groups will be able to enter the city for the first time .
 The two neighbors have failed to make progress toward ending the civil war. mikenova shared this story from NYT .
 A man with a child after a bombing in Aleppo in June was killed by a bomb .
 Yemeni expatriate killed a policeman in Saudi Arabia on Wednesday by running him over with his car and then stabbing him .