 He is now manoeuvring to achieve his goal in Ukraine, and has again displayed his skill by adjusting his tactics as the situation has changed . He is currently in Ukraine trying to reach a goal in the country .
 Western propaganda has sought to depict his aim to be to seize Ukraine or annex the Russian-speaking East of the country .
 Ukraine is a basket case economically and financially, and if he took over the country Russia would be saddled with the burden of keeping it afloat, as well as having to deal with the many in the population who don't fancy being annexed .
 Putin has changed his tactics as the situation has evolved, says Putin . In pursuit of this goal Putin has been changing his tactics.
 He maintained the threat of moving troops into East Ukraine to provide time and opportunity for pro-Russian sentiment to mobilise there . Local activists seized control of Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 He sought an agreement with the West for a decentralised Ukraine . He appeared to succeed in Geneva in mid-April .
 Putin then ratchetted up pressure by holding new military manoeuvres near the border . Putin then again ratcheted up pressure. He then again held new manoeuvres.
 In May, he made another effort for an OSCE sponsored political dialogue between the Kiev authorities and the Eastern separatists . In early May, in concert with Angela Merkel, he tried to talk to the latter .
 Russia is facing more severe Western sanctions. This would saddle him with the responsibility of sustaining and defending them, while exposing Russia to much more severe sanctions .
 It could also lead to an escalating confrontation with the West that could spiral out of control, with potentially devastating consequences . It could be the first time the West has been involved in a confrontation with each other .
 Petro Poroshenko appeared set to win the Ukrainian presidential election . However, events soon presented him with another, and better, alternative, alternative .
 He had dealt with Ukrainian oligarchs often before, and knew how they could be bought and manipulated . He knew how to deal with them often before . He had also dealt with Ukraine's political leaders before .
 He appears to have calculated that, based on their business interests, he had a lot of business interests . He appeared to have made the decision based on business interests.
 Russia and the former Soviet republics are the main markets for Chocolate King Poroshenko's products . He even has a factory in Russia. Russia and former Soviet Republics are main markets.
 Rinat Akhmetov, Ukraine's richest man, has his business empire in the Donbas region . His business empire is dependent on Russian goodwill for his business to survive .
 The oligarchs cannot ignore the many economic and industrial ties that bind the Ukraine to Russia, in addition to its critical dependence on Russian gas supplies . Russia is a key part of Ukraine's relationship with Russia .
 He decided to maintain the leverage given him by the breakaway of the Donbass from Kiev . He also decided to keep the leverage he had given him .
 Poroshenko has to reassure the West and the political parties supporting the present Kiev regime of his resolve . He has come out so strongly against Eastern separatists in his recent statements .
Security and defence posts are almost all held by the far-right Pravy Sektor and Svoboda parties . But the current increased military action against the separatists is being launched by the present regime .
 Poroshenko assumes the office of president on June 7 . If he does desire to resolve the separatist issue through negotiation rather than force the first signs will be the removal of these far-right appointees and the stopping of military action .
 The takeover of Crimea by Russia has been portrayed in the West as just an opportunistic land grab . The takeover by Russia by Russia is portrayed as just a land grab.
Mother Russia's soil is dyed with Russian blood, and has deep symbolism for all Russians . Recovery of this part of Mother Russia has deep symbolic significance .
 The Russian fleet based in Sevastopol was critical to this. There is also a strategic aspect of control of the Black Sea, which exposes Russia's underbelly .
 Russia had to rely on treaties and Ukrainian goodwill for this was a major strategic concern for Russia . The prospect of Ukraine joining NATO became a serious possibility .
 The Ukraine crisis has also provided Vladimir Putin with clarity on Russia's standing with the West, and what he could expect in future .
 Putin has tried to restore Russia to the status of a respected member of the international community . Putin has been in power since coming to power in 2000 .
 In this behalf he has sought to have Russia treated as an equal by the U.S. and other major Western powers . He wants Russia to be an equal to the United States and other Western powers.
 NATO began moving eastwards after German reunification . For example, he did not make a fuss when NATO moved eastwards .
 In 2011 he joined the West in voting in the Security Council for the 'no fly' zone over Libya, only to feel tricked when the West expanded this mandate into military intervention .
 His most recent attempt was the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi . He spent lavishly in order to showcase the new Russia, only for the games to be shunned by most Western leaders .
 Putin has made a major readjustment in his strategic thinking and calculations . This new clarity on how Russia was regarded by the West has caused Putin to make a major readingjustment .
 His wide-ranging economic agreements with China led to his recent wide-range economic agreements . It was this that led to this. It is this that lead to his wide- ranging economic agreements.
 He is also reaching out to other countries that seek to free themselves from being overly dependent on the USA . Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Brazil and India are among the countries he has reached out to .
 He will likely foster closer relations with countries that are at odds with the West, such as Iran, Venezuela and Syria . He will also foster closer ties with countries such as Venezuela, Iran and Venezuela .
 Vladimir Putin has already gained two valuable prizes − Crimea, and clarity on where Russia stands with respect to the West . The Ukraine game continues, but Vladimir Putin is still in charge of Ukraine .