 The Aveiro LP is a subsidiary of Wiley Rein’s Avenueiro LP . The company is based in the U.S.
 Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 12:29/19 .
 Yulia Tymoshenko meets with representatives of anti-corruption civic organizations 6.7pm .
 Kurt Volker confirmed U.S. support for sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . Volker said the United States would continue to make efforts for the reestablishment of the territorial integrity of Ukraine and establishment of peace in the east .
 You named the war a ‘war’ and do not leave us alone to face the aggressor country, Russia .
 Yulia Tymoshenko: "We are sincerely grateful for everything you have done for us and for your help"
 We are ready to further support your country together with experts, representatives of civil society and business community members to draw our country out of the current crisis . We're ready to support our country with experts and representatives of the civil society .
 I have stressed that the ongoing reforms process in Ukraine has to be irreversible . I've stressed that ongoing reforms in Ukraine must be irreversible, he says .
 The new government will not agree to any compromise with the Kremlin that will allow for an end to the war at the expense of Ukraine’s interests .
 Yulia Tymoshenko spoke during her speech at the third Ukrainian Lunch at the Munich Security Conference . The speech took place within the framework of the Munich Conference .
 Lithuanian Minister of Foreign Affairs Linas Linkevicius met with Lithuania's foreign minister . She stressed that the economic prosperity of Ukraine would be an additional weapon in the fight against the 3 Yulia Tymoshenko .
 Russian aggressor. Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/ 2019 .
 This could be secured by the adoption of a new Constitution and the realization of new economic course . This could also be secured.
 Participants included President of Estonia Kersti Kaljulaid, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Canada Chrystia Freeland, U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker and others .
 Ukraine needs a leader who would drive the country's ""transformation," Yulia Tymoshenko told DW in Munich . Ukraine's presidential candidate says he wants to lead Ukraine's "transformation"
 Ukraine's former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko tells DW on the sidelines of the Munich Security Conference . Ukraine's presidential elections in March are set to be held in Ukraine .
 Tymoshenko is one of the key candidates ahead of the March 31 poll . Current President Petro Poroshenko is the current President of the country .
 Analysts still believe comedian is unlikely to triumph against Poroshenko or Tymoshenko in a run-off vote . Both of them are currently trailing behind political outsider Volodymyr Zelensky .
 Tymoshenko told DW that there are some obvious differences between her and the current president . However, she also said that there were some obvious Differences between the two .
 Tymoshenko also commented on the controversial Nord Stream 2 project to deliver gas from Russia directly to Germany . The project will deliver gas to Germany directly to Russia .
 Ukraine opposes the project for fear of losing its role as a gas transit nation . Ukraine opposes project for fears of losing role as gas transport nation .
 Russia would be able to shut off the pipelines passing through Ukraine and deny Kyiv lucrative gas fees without jeopardizing its buyers in Germany . The project would be completed with the project completed .
 Tymoshenko said Nord Stream 2 was unnecessary and ran against Ukraine's interests in terms of its energy economics . In Munich, she said that Nord Stream2 was unnecessary .
 "Everything is being decided without consulting Ukraine," she said . "That is why it is very regrettable," she added . The new course for the UKRAINE is "very regrettable"
 Ukraine's association agreement with the EU repeatedly states that Kyiv should be consulted over such issues, according to Tymoshenko . The Ukrainian prime minister is also a prisoner .
 Tymoshenko first grabbed international headlines as one of the leaders of Ukraine's 2004 Orange revolution . She was the country's first female prime minister between 2007 and 2010 .
Tymoshenko ran for president in 2010, losing to pro-Russian leader Viktor Yanukovych . Tymoshenko lost to Yanukovych in 2010 .
 She was subsequently sentenced for corruption in a trial regarded in the West as politically motivated . She was later sentenced to prison for corruption .
 The politician was released from prison in the final days of the 2014 Maidan uprising . Yanukovych fled the country as the Maidan revolution began .
 This happened during the TV show ‘The Right to Power’ on 1+1 TVchannel . The show was on 1-1 TV channel .
 They discussed parallel vote counting with a view to preventing any falsifications during the presidential elections on 31 March . They also discussed Parallel vote counting .
 Yulia Tymoshenko reminded that fair elections are a core EU and NATO value . She said the head of state and his entourage pose a threat to a fair vote .
 Yulia Tymoshenko met with representatives of the AntiCorruption Agenda initiative . The initiative unites 23 anti-corruption civic organizations .
 Meeting participants discussed the key problems of Ukraine’s anti-corruption policy . Participants discussed the need to protect them from the influence of politicians .
 Ukraine occupies the 62nd position in the 2019 Quality of Life Index for Country study . It is a lower ranking than all neighboring countries .
 Denmark, Switzerland, Finland and Denmark are the first three positions in the Quality of Life Index . The first three places are taken by Denmark and Switzerland .
 Germany is 8th, with Japan and the U.S. 12th and 13th correspondingly . Germany and the United States are 12th, 13th and 12th .
 Russia and Ukraine are substantially lagging behind Belarus. At the same time, Russia andUkraine are substantiallyLagging behind Russia .
 Serhiy Leshchenko is a Ukrainian politician and former investigative journalist . He is currently serving in parliament as member of Petro Poroshenko’s Bloc .
 Leshchenko serves on the parliamentary committee on Corruption Prevention and Counteraction . He is one of the president’s loudest critics .
 Viktor Medvedchuk is known for his work on corruption . He was formally the Deputy Editor-in-Chief for the Ukrayinska Pravda publication . He is one of the worst examples of the political, let's say, zoo in Ukraine .
 He's a political animal, and he's a member of Putin’s family, and his team, Poroshenko's team . He's also a part of the Ukrainian government's political team, according to his family .
 Journalists founded and run the organisation . Funding comes from non-profit organisations .
 The NEW COURSE FOR UKRAINE.com is a new course for the UKraine .
 For the first time, we need to vote not for individuals, but for real, serious, well-founded programs of action 4. The program is called "action 4.4"
 Yulia Tymoshenko signed a Presidential Candidate Commitment to Every Ukrainian Citizen on 7 March . She signed a presidential candidate commitment to every Ukrainian Citizen .
 The parties discussed the situation in eastern Ukraine and annexed Crimea . First of all, the parties discussed Ukraine and Crimea .
 Yulia Tymoshenko called for a strengthening of sanctions against Russia . She stressed that Crimea must be returned to Ukraine . She said her team was not prepared to make any concessions to Russia's President Vladimir Putin .
 She underlined the need to initiate new negotiations on the war in the Donbas within a new Budapest* format . She also said she wanted to preserve the Minsk format of negotiations .
 She thanked the U.S. for the support provided to our state in its fight for peace, independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Yulia Tymoshenko also informed the Under Secretary about the political and social and economic situation in Ukraine . Tyloshenko also spoke about the process of reform implementation .
 This is the worst corruption at a moment when we are lS lS The New Course for UKRAINE opposing Russian aggression, says David Cameron . "This is the best corruption at the moment," he says .
 The whole Ukrainian nation now knows that top government officials are using this money for its corrupt purposes, Yulia Tymoshenko said .
 Ukraine’s prime minister twice, was the global face of a revolution, imprisoned by two different presidents . Tymoshenko was the target of an operation to discredit her by President Donald Trump's ex-campaign manager .
 Petro Poroshenko hopes to unseat her old rival in a tightly fought presidential vote on March 31 . The 58-year-old is known for her fiery rhetoric and for her peasant braid hairstyle .
 The IMF set as a condition for more loans for more home heating loans . The IMF has set a cap on the price of gas used for home heating. The IMF also set a limit on the amount of home heating gas used .
 At stake is the chance to lead Ukraine five years after Maidan street protests ousted a Kremlin-backed leader . The Maidan protests ousted the Kremlin- backed leader and set the country on a pro-Western course .
 For ordinary people, “virtually all of their income is wiped out through exorbitant, high gas prices, she said .
 Her plan for dealing with Russia is to persevere with the Minsk peace talks, she says . The talks have staunched but not ended the bloodshed in the Donbas .
 She also called for wider negotiations involving the United States, Britain and the European Union .
 She compares the attacks from Poroshenko's camp to that time of Yanukovych’s rule . She compares that time to that of Yanukovych's rule .
 She called for his impeachment in February over corruption allegations involving the son of one of Poroshenko’s close allies .
 The EuCham has published best EUROPEAN COUNTRIES for BUSINESS 2019 rating . UKRAINE is the last in the 2019 doing BUSINESS RATING .
 It confirms that Ukraine needs change and real reforms, not their imitations . It confirms Ukraine needs real reforms and real reform .
 The number of candidates in this year's elections in Ukraine represents an absolute record in Ukraine’s history . Ukraine's elections are the first in Ukraine's history .
 Among the candidates are classical technical candidates who run in the elections to decrease the support of the likely front-runners .
 They copy the slogans of their competitor, his/her rhetoric, and draw voters over to their side . They also criticize their “victim’s” and underlining their weaknesses .
 The clones are typical clones who have the same or similar name and initials . They are similar or similar to each other.
On the ballot paper, voters can easily confuse them with the candidate they support and vote for them by mistake .
 The candidate used by the current President Poroshenko against Yulia Tymoshenko is Yuri Tymenko . The candidate for the current president is YuriTymoshenko .
 He has the same initials as Yulia Tymoshenko and was elected to the Parliament in 2014 . He was elected with the support of the People’s Front .
 V BATbKIBLUMHA NEWSLETTER ISSUE 22,18 MARCH 2019 BATKIVSHCHYNA PARTY NEWS 1 .
 The Batkivshchyna party reveals plans for massive election fraud by President Poroshenko 2.2 .
 Yulia Tymoshenko discusses with the Head of EU Delegation to Ukraine massive violations during the election campaign 7.5 years ago .
 Yulia Tymoshenko will win the presidential elections poll of 2. million Ukrainians . She will be the first woman to win a presidential election in Ukraine .
 The following methods of massive fraud initiated by President Poroshenko have been implemented throughout Ukraine . Fair democratic elections are a national security issue for Ukraine . The following ways of massive Fraud initiated by Poroshenko and implemented throughout the Ukraine have been a nationalSecurity issue .
 Elections that will be considered unfair by Ukrainians can provoke unrest, which can in turn be used by the aggressor-state to further destabilize the situation in Ukraine .
Public opinion polls to distort the assessment of real support among voters for one or another presidential candidate . The candidate used by the current President Poroshenko against Yulia Tymoshenko is Yuri Tyloshenko .
 At the same time, other candidates have 17 senior positions on the average . Concerns over election fraud extend to a range of additional issues .
 Minister of the Interior of Ukraine Arsen Avakov said that the campaign office of a pro-government candidate allegedly tried to buy votes of pensioners in Kyiv, Kyiv region and one more region with the help of administrative resources .
 A month before the election, Poroshenko ordered one-time payments of $90 to the poorest pensioners . Poroshenko is expected to win the election in a landslide .
Pensioners are the most actively voting group in Ukraine . But pensioners are also the most active voting group .
 Starting March, or right before the election, the 2 Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 .
 Ukraine is still not Turkmenistan, where people hail the great leader and hang his picture in every office or school .
 Ukraine's presidential candidates must stop going to only scripted events where praise is heaped on them and no important questions are asked . But for Ukraine to have democracy, its presidential candidates need to be more open to questions .
 Petro Poroshenko is seeking reelection on March 31 by trying to stay above the campaign fray . He is seeking a second term as president .
 He rarely speaks with independent journalists, preferring loyalists and speeches to friendly audiences . He often speaks to independent journalists .
 Viktor Yanukovych refused Yulia Tymoshenko in 2010 and Poroshenko did the same in 2014 . Yanukovych refused the former Ukrainian president in 2010 .
Campaigners hired by “progovernment campaign office’s ‘progovernment’ make a list of the poorest residents and then visit them and ask whether they are ready to support their candidate .
 Yulia Tymoshenko told the ambassador about the situation in Ukraine and the presidential campaign . The ambassador said the falsifications were organized and carried out by the current President Poroshenko's team .
 There were two 3 Received by NSD/FARA Registration Unit 07/29/2019 .
 EU Ambassador told the EU Ambassador about the methods of falsification being used by the team of President Petro Poroshenko .
 It’s time for the pro-Ukrainian forces to win and to combine their efforts. It's time to combine our efforts, says the Ukrainian government .
 He added that his decision to back Yulia Tymoshenko is a signal for other candidates to think about the country . He also added that he also said his decision was a signal that other candidates should think about their country .
 The victory of Yulia Tymoshenko in the presidential elections on 31 March is beyond question according to a major nationwide poll .
 The survey found that 31.68% of voters will support her in the first round . In the run-off she confidently defeats both Volodymyr Zelenskiy and Petro Poroshenko .
 During February, 2. million citizens were interviewed in all regions, and in most The NEW COURSE for UKRAINE .
 Yulia Tymoshenko defeats Volodymyr Zelenskiy 50.53% against 40.55% in the run-off . Petro Poroshenko by 57.5% against 31.2% of the POLL of 2.2%.
 All sociological surveys conducted by respected companies before December proved that Yulia Tymoshenko was the clear leader .
Since the beginning of the election campaign, signs of dirty manipulations have started to appear in survey results . However, since the start of the campaign, there have been signs ofdirty manipulations .
 The Great UKRAINIAN People need to become a strong and successful nation, says NSD/FARA Registration Unit .
 We have comprehended all the challenges facing us as a country, we know how to pave the right path to peace, to a successful, prosperous life of people. We have understood the challenges we face, we say .
I am convinced that Ukraine will manage to become a prosperous, powerful European country . I am convinced. Ukraine will be a prosperous European country, I'm convinced .
 Each millimetre of success won back is important in a modern competitive and rather brutal world .
 Hundreds of thousands of children leave us and go to other countries . It gives us that compelling force that will help us pass any test and overcome any obstacles .
 We need to protect their future, we need to build a country where they would like to live and work . We need a country that they would want to live, work and work, says David Cameron .
 We must gather all our national forces together and redistribute them to overcoming poverty, corruption and injustice . We must unite to fight injustice, poverty and corruption, we must do so .
 Ukrainians have to be cleansed of everything that prevents us from living happily . We, the Ukrainians, have been cleansed. We need to be clean. We must be clean of everything.
We need to unite and no longer allow anyone to divide us by territorial, linguistic, political, and religious characteristics . We need to united, we need to no longer be divided by territorial and linguistic, linguistic and political characteristics .
 We will stabilize the current situation and pave the way for the further rapid development of Ukraine, says Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin . We will stabilise the situation, says Putin .
 My goal is to build a state where everyone will find their place, their success, their stability and their peace . My goal was to build the state where people can find their places and their stability .
 Where everyone can live happily, rather than heroically fight every day against the callous, corrupt ruling circles, is a place where everyone can fight .
 The New Course for Ukraine is the real path to the revival, says Ukrainian specialists . It is paved by a large team of Ukrainian specialists.
 Hundreds of experts, lawyers, economists, representatives of Ukrainian civil society have been working for more than four years on the New Course for Ukraine .
 No one will ever destroy our spirit, our soul, our will and our national intellectual level, no one will destroy us . No one would ever destroy us, our spirit and our will, our intellectual level. No one can destroy our soul or our spirit .
 Ukrainians, the Ukrainians, can and we must offer ourselves and the world a fundamentally new way of life for people. We, the Ukrainian people, can, can. We must offer themselves and the World a fundamentallynew way oflife for people, says the author .
 The way which will allow everyone to fully, freely and directly live up to their potential. The way that will allow people to fully live freely and freely, free and directly, will be revealed today . The way to live freely will be known as "the way that
 Most Ukrainians believe that the country faces a new genocide according to a rigorous external plan . Most Ukrainians think that they face the new genocide.
 New COURSE for UKRAINE is a clear step-by-step plan to put an end to disorder and to get on the path of Ukraine’s development .
 New STRATEGY for PEACE and SECURITY is a real path to peace and restoration of our territorial integrity, says the author .
 The main goal is the peaceful life and security of every Ukrainian citizen . The main aim is to be peaceful and secure for every citizen .
 NEW PEOPLE’S CONSTITUTION will eliminate the corrupted system of oligarchic clans and return the country to people .
 Everyone will be able to directly influence their own lives and the life of their country, making decisions and monitoring their implementation .
 New ECONOMIC STRATEGY is the transition from the out-dated resource economy to the economy of innovation development with a strong middle class .
 NEW SOCIAL DOCTRINE is a gradual attaining European standards for wages and living conditions over five years . New SOCial DOCTrINE is the first time European standards have been attained .
 NEW YOUTH POLICY is the creation of conditions for the full realization of the country’s main potential the youth .
 Ukrainian army is to restrain the aggressor and build up its forces . The task of the Ukrainian army will be to restrain aggressor .
 The task of Ukrainian diplomacy, headed by the President, is to take offensive and seek collective international measures to force the aggressor to peace and return Crimea and Donbass .
 In 1994, Ukraine refused the third largest nuclear arsenal in the world . It was the request of the entire civilized world .
 The United States, Great Britain and Russia gave us official international guarantees of inviolability of our borders and non-use of military aggression against us . We dared to do that because the strongest countries in the world, the U.S. and Great Britain gave us international guarantees.
We have the right to demand strong and effective actions from countries that gave us these guarantees . Now we have theright to demandStrong and effective action from countries who gave us this guarantees .
Only those guarantees on which the interested party insists are respected and fulfilled . In the modern world, only those guarantees are respected .
 President of Ukraine has refused to demand implementation of international guarantees . Since the war began, Ukraine has not been able to implement international guarantees.
 Ukraine will have a strong stand and will be able to achieve peace, says U.S. ambassador . Ukraine has fulfilled all its obligations, he says . Only in this format of negotiations, Ukraine will get peace, he adds .
 We will demand a collective use of measures that are sufficiently effective to force the Russian Federation to peace and liberation of Crimea and Donbass .
 We will insist on significant strengthening of international militarytechnical assistance . We will need to create an effective air defence system, says the UK .
Ukrainian army is to strengthen the Ukrainian army. That is why one of the foundations of our strategy for peace and security is to strengthening the army .
 In today's rigorous and aggressive world, it is impossible to secure state independence, the inviolability of borders and the sovereign right to manage one’s life without a strong army .
 The war that the aggressor country is leading against us today is a tragic proof of this. The war is the most brutal in the world, the author says .
 The country needs a professional army that is morally and materially motivated, well-trained, equipped, and well-armed, built on powerful motivations of soldiers .
 The foundation of a strong army is people, respect for the soldier and trust in the commander, says the army chief .
 Our task is to make sure that the defining sense of every soldier defending our country was a sense of confidence . We need to ensure that every soldier's sense ofconfidence is a sense.
Confidence that the state appreciates and respects its military business. Confidence that state appreciated and respects military business .
 Confidence that in the rear his family is settled and protected by the state. Confidence in the back of the family is in good spirits, says the state .
 Confidence in the reliability of the weapon given to him by the state, confidence in commanders, commanders, headquarters and the home front . Confidence is in the confidence of his state, commanders and headquarters .
 Confidence that a soldier living, wounded or dead will not leave on the battlefield and will not be forgotten in captivity . Confidence is based on the fact a soldier is not killed or wounded in captivity.
 Ukraine will carry out a full modernization of the Armed Forces of Ukraine according to NATO standards . Ukraine will increase its military potential to the level of strong armies in the world .
 Ukraine will always need a strong army, as a factor of stability and stability . Ukraine’s interests must be considered, according to the government .
 De-occupation and reintegration of the temporarily occupied Ukrainian territories are not successive stages, but parallel, interconnected processes that need to be addressed today .
 The key task of this program is to destroy the wall of fear, misunderstanding and hatred that is being artificially raised between Ukraine and the occupied territories .
 The key task of this program is to bring millions of people out of stress . The program is aimed at bringing millions out of stressed people .
 Two million Ukrainians forced to flee the war did not go to the aggressor country, not to Europe and not to America .
 It was they who refuted the myth about non-Ukrainian Donbass or Crimea . The myth was that they refuted the myths about the region .
 Internally displaced persons and patriots who endured in occupation are our mainstay and the main personnel reserve for the restoration of Ukrainian power in the Donbass and Crimea .
 Supporting and protecting the rights of internally displaced persons is a matter of dignity for Ukraine and an investment in achieving sustainable peace . supporting and protecting rights of externally displaced people is a matters of dignity.
Today, the state must stop discrimination of displaced persons, give them the right to vote, provide affordable housing and work, and restore confidence in the future . Today, the State must stop Discrimination of displaced people .
 The state will create all guaranteed conditions for the unrestricted and safe return of Ukrainians to their homes in the de-occupied territories . The state would create all guarantees for the free return of Ukrainian citizens .
 A new contract for service in the Armed Forces of Ukraine will be approved . The International Fund for Donbass Restoration and Development will be established . It will involve international donors and investors.
 An important part of the new contract will be a motivational package approved by law . The new contract includes guaranteed housing and guaranteed housing .
 If a military signs a 15-year contract to serve in the army, the state provides him/her with an apartment at the beginning of service . The state provides guaranteed medical insurance, decent pension insurance and other important issues .
 The wage of a common contract soldier will be one and a halftimes higher than the average wage in the country .
 The entire system of payment for military business will depend on the level of responsibility, qualifications of the soldier, as well as the degree of risk to life .
 For each year of soldier’s serving in the operation zone, a required increase in wages will be introduced up to 20% annually . The increase is required for each year.
 We are ready to make exhaustive efforts to bring the Russian Federation as an aggressor state to legal accountability . We are prepared to make an exhaustive efforts.
 The purpose of such efforts is to obtain compensation for damage caused to Ukrainian citizens, Ukrainian business and the Ukrainian state . The purpose is to get compensation for the damage caused by such damage .
 We will defend in the courts the rights of the state and citizens that have been violated by the aggressor country the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is the most aggressive country in the world .
Ukraine's army is dressed and armed not by presidents, ministers and deputies, but by Ukrainian taxpayers . Every citizen has the right to demand that every penny is used for making enhancements to defence, and not stolen or kept offshore .
International experts will carry out an integrated, comprehensive, unbiased investigation of illegal corrupt plundering schemes in the defence sector . Money laundering through arms trade and blood money ‘at war’ will be investigated .
Only a modern, capable army and a full membership of Ukraine in NATO collective security and defence system of the global peace can be the guarantee of security of our country and every Ukrainian family .
 NATO spends one trillion dollars a year on military defence of its member countries . NATO spends $1.5 billion a year in military defence.
 Ukraine can at any moment become an easy target for any military invasion . With such expenditures for the army and such a state of it as today, Ukraine can be a target for military invasion.
 The war that the aggressor country is currently running against us is proof of that. And the war is being run against us, he says .
 Ukrainians will choose in a referendum to decide whether to vote in the referendum . It provides for the construction of a society where there will no longer be oligarchic clans . The referendum is a way of life where no one will ever be able to violate their rights and freedoms
Ukrainian citizens are not masters in their country . Ukrainian citizens are also not masters.
 The fifth article of the Constitution states that the Ukrainian people is the only source of power in Ukraine . The Ukrainian people are the bearer of sovereignty, the fifth article says .
 The real authority in Ukraine is the corrupt clanbased structure the oligarchy, and all of us, Ukrainians, are their labour force .
 The thirteenth article of the Constitution states that the land, its minerals, water and other natural resources are the property of the Ukrainian people .
 The rights and freedoms of people are well specified in the Constitution . But they are blatantly ignored by senior officials and civil servants .
 Peace judges and judges of local courts will be elected by the people, but without political advertisement . Peace judges will also be elected in local courts .
 Courts will be completely separated from any political and power influences . Courts will have to be completely separate from politics and power .
 Citizens will be granted the right to a legislative initiative in the form of petitions . Citizens will also be granted a right to vote on a bill in a form of petition .
 Public organizations, nation’s moral and spiritual leaders will necessarily be directly involved in the governance of the country .
 National Strategic Centre of Ukraine will be the driving force for the country’s innovation development .
 The parliamentary opposition will be endowed with all rights of parliamentary control . The opposition will have the right to control the parliament .
 It will appoint members and heads of the Accounting Chamber, temporary investigative commissions, and special parliamentary prosecutors . The Accounting Chamber will also appoint members of the accounting chamber and special prosecutors .
 It will be entitled to apply directly to the court for the results of inspections . The court will also be able to apply for inspection results of inspection .
 The New Constitution will provide strong rights and opportunities to local communities . It will also provide opportunities for local communities to improve their lives .
 Communities will be able to completely dispose of land within their borders . Communities will have to dispose of their land within the borders .
 We will be exporting only finished high-tech products instead of exporting raw materials . We will only be exporting finished products, rather than raw materials.
We will not allow anyone to use Ukraine as a raw-material appendage of the developed world . We will not let anyone use Ukraine to make a raw material .
 A person, its creativity, intelligence, entrepreneurial initiative and innovative technologies should become the centre of development of the Ukrainian economy . The Ukrainian economy should become a centre of the country's development .
 Yulia Tymoshenko nPE3EHTAlilfl nPOfPAMU HO BUM EKOHOMIHHMM KYPC YKPAIHli 12.26:21 PM .
 Based on the New Constitution, we will eliminate the structure of oligarchic clans and demonopolize all sectors of our economic life . We will create equal opportunities for the development of all entrepreneurial initiatives in our country .
Administrative rule of terror against entrepreneurs will be immediately and severely stopped . The administrative rule of terrorism against entrepreneurs to be immediately stopped .
 New Constitution will place civil society under real mandatory control of civil society . Power structures will no longer “cover’s corporate raiding, extortion, smuggling, and illegal deals, according to the new Constitution .
 All-Ukrainian associations will be involved in the governance of the country . They will invest their experience and intelligence in the public administration system .
 On the basis of the New Constitution, a court system will be established, so that Ukrainian citizens and foreign investors will never have doubts in its justness .
We will restore confidence in the banking system, support the creation and development of Ukrainian banks . We will restoreconfidence in the bank system, say Ukrainian authorities .
 For small businesses and farmers, a loan insurance system instead of collateral will be developed and introduced . The system will be introduced for small businesses.
 The National Bank of Ukraine will change its policy in the field of monetary, currency, currency and banking regulation .
 The work of the Deposit Guarantee Fund will be uncompromising and indepth . The work will be unimpromising and uncompromising .
 We will restore justice for those who have lost their bank deposits and property during an illegally organized precipitous fall in the hryvnia exchange rate. We'll restore justice.
 Any official who is guilty of destroying the country’s financial sector will be prosecuted . The Ministry of Finance, the National Bank and other financial institutions will be prosecution .
Green technologies for production of electricity and heat are being introduced . This means the priority and unhindered lending, the introduction of green technologies for energy production .
 We will eliminate all bureaucratic obstacles to the development of green energy for small and medium businesses . We will also eliminate all bureaucracy obstacles to green energy.
 A fully-fledged electricity market will be introduced, which will create competition and reduce electricity tariffs . The market will create real competition, reduce tariffs and create competition .
 We will fully demonopolize gas imports and provide open trade in all kinds of energy resources in Ukraine . We will allow transparent prices and will help to reduce energy costs .
 In order to ensure energy security, we will rapidly develop our own coal industry instead of importing expensive foreign coal . We will be able to protect our energy security from energy security .
 All entrepreneurs will be able to supply imported natural gas to Ukraine freely and without any restrictions on the Ukrainian power exchange . All the entrepreneurs will have access to natural gas without restrictions .
 This will significantly reduce the price of gas for industrial consumers . This will reduce the cost of gas to industrial consumers. This will be a significant reduction in gas prices .
 We will build LNG terminals for liquefied gas import of non-Russian origin, which will be the second step for reducing the price of gas for industry . The terminals will be built for non- Russian origin gas imports .
 Within five years, we will organize large-scale extraction of our own natural gas . We will fully meet our needs within five years .
 Russia will not have to count on gas supplies from Russia . That is how we will fill our gas transportation system with gas for export, and we will not be counting on gas .
 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR and LAND RELATIONS REFORM will create conditions for intensive development of the agrarian sector .
 We will define development and comprehensive state support of farms, small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises as the main strategy of agricultural policy . We will focus on developing and supporting farms and small businesses .
 Today, 2. million farms operate in Poland, thus creating a strong Polish middle class . Today, the country has a strong middle class of 2 million farms .
Every year sees a decrease in the number of working farmers because of raiding, overtaxing, lack of loans and access to market outlets .
Family farms will have decent state support, social and pension assistance . Family farms will be able to provide state support and social and pensions .
 Immediately after the presidential election, a law on the introduction of a single tax per hectare of land for farmers will be adopted .
 Affordable medicine first aid stations or OPD with modern equipment and necessary medicines will be available in every village . OPD will have modern equipment, modern medicines and modern equipment .
 We will restore interest-free lending for housing construction in the countryside, especially for young people, teachers and medical staff .
 As a result, pensioners in rural areas will receive significantly increased pensions . The increase is due to increase in pensions for rural areas .
 We will provide the state or community with the opportunity to buy shares at market price from villagers willing to sell them . We will give the state and community the chance to purchase shares at a market price .
 We will make a complete inventory of agricultural land and adopt a strategy for its effective use . We will also adopt a Strategy for itseffective use .
 The agricultural land that has been stolen from the state or people will be returned . The land will also be returned to the public .
 The barbaric exploitation of agricultural land will be stopped and effective control over crop rotation and land processing technologies will be introduced . The barbaric exploit of agriculturalLand will be stop and effective controls will be implemented .
Ukraine will introduce criminal responsibility for the deliberate destruction of the quality of agricultural land in order to preserve the most precious resource of the country .
 We will protect the right to own or lease land, and punishment for raiding will be harsh and inevitable . We will also protect the rights to own and lease land .
 Farmers will be granted an exclusive right to purchase the land they lease at market price on the basis of long-term preferential loans . Farmers, small and medium-sized agricultural producers who live and work on their land.
 We guarantee the owners of land shares a fair quasi rent, as well as the right to land for community workers of the village and ATO veterans . We will introduce a long-term lending to farmers without collateral covered by risk insurance at 3 per cent interest per annum .
 Laws will be adopted to stimulate the development of agricultural co-operation, organic fruit and vegetable production, animal husbandry, as well as processing of agrarian raw materials .
 Accounting, registration and control will be greatly simplified for family and smallscale farming . Accounting, registered and control and control to be simplified for small scale farming .
Small and medium-sized agricultural producers will get easier access to trade networks, guaranteed by law . Farmers, small and small-sized agriculture producers will be able to access trade networks by law.
 Special attention will be paid to organic production. Special attention to organic produce .
 The lands used for organic farming will receive a special status, and farmers will receive state support and tax incentives .
 The Tax Militia will reorganize tax authorities and completely liquidate the Tax Militia . The Militia will be completely liquidated .
 We will liquidate 37 corruptogenic quasitaxes giving officials the opportunity to pressure the business, in particular, state and court fees .
 These 37 quasitaxes constitute only 0.5% of budget income, while the work of entrepreneurs becomes dependent on officials .
 Access of citizens to justice and property rights cannot be limited due to lack of the necessary amount of money . Access to justice, property rights can't be limited because of lack of money.
 We will introduce digital governance and prohibit the tax authorities from contacting taxpayers at the legislative level . We will also prohibit tax authorities of contacting taxpayers.
We will simplify the taxation system and drastically reduce aggregate business rates . We will simplify taxation system. We will reduce aggregatebusiness rates and reduce taxes .
 In the global world, the boundaries have long been absent . The boundaries have been absent.
 If a talented person wants to live and work in any country in the world, it’s possible to do so quickly and freely. If you want to work in a country, you can do so fast and freely .
 The world’s biggest competition now is the one for strong and smart people, and as of today, Ukrainians have lost it .
 The average wage level in Poland is expressed in dollars within the following five years . EUROPEAN WAGES aims to gradually achieve the average wage levels in Poland .
After the Orange Revolution from 2004 to the end of 2009, the average wage expressed in dollars has increased by 3. times . At this moment you think that this is impossible, but you should open the statistics of Ukraine in previous years .
 In the current system, an employer makes much larger contributions to a pension fund over a person’s whole working life than this person receives in the form of a pension .
 Under the new system, pension contributions will be deposited to a private personal account of each person in the state bank during the entire period of employment .
 All these accumulated retirement money will belong to a person and will be kept exclusively on his or her private account at the state bank .
 Each person’s retirement savings on the account at the state bank will be indexed annually . The deposit interest will be constantly accrued .
 This will lead to an increase in the amount of pension money on each person’s retirement account during the entire period of employment . This will increase the number of pension funds in each person's retirement account .
 The state will guarantee preservation of private retirement accounts with all its resources . State will also guarantee the state's resources .
 After retirement, a person will be able to dispose of his private retirement account at his or her own discretion .
 If a person fails to spend money on his or her retirement account within the lifetime, the amount remaining will be inherited by members of his or his family .
 Private retirement accounts of people who have already retired or served out the required part of their work experience will be opened immediately after the adoption of the law on the new pension system .
 These accounts will include all pension contributions for the entire period of employment . The accounts will also include all pensions contributions.
 These contributions will be adequately indexed with the definition of the terms of use . The contributions will also be adequately indexed with thedefinition of the term of use.
 Such a pension reform will at least double pensions for those whose social welfare is unfair . Such a pensions reform would be at least two times more than those whose welfare was unfair .
 The so-called "medical reform" that was conducted is another form of reducing the Ukrainian population .
In 2020, compulsory medical insurance will be introduced at the expense of employers’ funds . In 2020, it will also reduce the tax burden on enterprises .
 Medical insurance will include the full provision of every citizen with highestquality medical services at all levels, medicines, as well as disease prevention .
 The state will make health insurance contributions for underage children, pensioners, people with special needs and disabled persons . State will also make contributions for people who have special needs, disabled persons.
 Emergency medical services will be provided completely free of charge for each call . European model says emergency medical services to be provided free of charges .
 An ambulance car will be equipped with all the necessary medicines and professional physicians, and not with paramedics . This means that an ambulance car is not equipped with paramedics, but with medical professionals .
 In five years, we will increase the wages of physicians to the level of wages in Poland . Poland will also increase the wage of physicians in five years .
People in rural areas will be provided with affordable high-quality care . People in rural regions will be given high- quality care .
 It will not be telemedicine, but care provided directly by a qualified medical officer in a modern outpatient clinic or medical and obstetric centre .
State regulation of prices will be introduced by setting manufacturer’s marginal prices and maximum margin levels for resellers . For the most important medicines, state regulation will be set by state regulation .
 We will eliminate non-market margins on medicines and arrange drug advertising . We will eliminated non- market margins on medicine and arrange drugs advertising .
 This will significantly, by times, reduce the price of medicines in Ukraine . This will reduce the cost of medicine in Ukraine, according to Ukrainian authorities .
 A network of laboratories for state monitoring over the quality of medicines in pharmacies will be created . State monitoring over quality of medicine in pharmacies.
 Severe criminal liability will be introduced for manufacturing and selling medicines of substandard quality . Severe criminals will be charged with manufacturing andselling medicines.
 A special support program for our Ukrainian pharmaceutical manufacturers will be implemented . The program will include special support for our pharmaceutical manufacturers .
 This is a question not only of patient safety, but of the state’s national security . The state's national security is a concern for patient safety .
 Within five years, a national program “Barrier-free space’ will be implemented for people with special needs .
 We will introduce mechanisms of powerful motivation of entrepreneurs to employ people with special needs . We will also introduce mechanisms to help entrepreneurs employ people who have special needs.
 A tax rate reduction scale will be introduced depending on the number of people with special needs working at the enterprise . The number of special needs workers will be affected by the scale .
 Enterprises created by people with people with special needs and employing people with disabilities will be exempt from taxation . People with disabilities are exempt from taxes .
 People with disabilities will be provided with guaranteed social benefits at the level of average wages . The benefits will be at the same level as those with disabilities .
 We will establish free medical insurance for people with special needs at the expense of the state . We will provide the whole spectrum of medical services at the highest level .
 Seriously ill people with special needs will be provided with round-theclock foster care services at the place of residence at public expense .
 Laws that guaranteed social protection until 2014 to Afghans, Chernobyl victims and other groups of people will be restored . The laws were cynically repealed in 2014-2018, but will be reinstated .
 The state budget for 2019 will be amended to allocate funds for the financial support of these updated provisions . The budget will also be amended for the state's 2019 budget .
Education and science is the major priority of the New Course for Ukraine . Education and science are the main priority for Ukraine's new course .
 The state's financial resources and organizational capabilities will be secured by the state’s financial resources . This strategic priority is to secure the state's resources and capabilities .
 Education in Ukraine, from primary to higher education, will be free, as in all developed European countries . Education in Ukrainian schools will also be free as in other developed countries .
 The access of children and young people to all levels of education cannot depend on the wealth of the parents . The access to education can't depend on parents' wealth.
We will ensure the absolute equality of all children in access to the most modern and high-quality educational institutions . We will ensure that all children will be able to access the best schools and schools .
Financing of education will be carried out on the basis of a system providing for a single school tax for legal entities and individuals . Financing of school tax will be based on a system that provides for a school tax.
 At the same time, this will not become a burden for entrepreneurs, as the overall tax burden on them will be reduced . The overall tax burdens on entrepreneurs will also be reduced.
 Taking into account the collected funds, we will introduce a single standard for payment for education .
 It doesn't matter where children are going to study, in a private or state institution, money will follow them . It doesn’t matter where kids are going. It's not where children will study, it's where money follows them .
 We will resume free extracurricular programs for children through the introduction of new standards for financing of education . We have enough of our own gas for our own needs, we say .
 There is nothing more important than the overall development of our children, says the author . The author says there is no need to focus on the development of children .
 The state will have special programs for development and education for especially gifted children . The program will be available to children with special needs .
 In five years, we will raise the wages of educators, namely tutors, teachers, librarians and lecturers .
 This is one of the major priorities of the educational program, which will restore respect for the profession of teacher, lecturer and scholar . The program will attract the best specialists to the pedagogical activity .
 We will introduce a separate, multipurpose financing system for science to stimulate the development of university-based innovation clusters .
 Such a system will contribute to the efficient use of scientific research and innovative technologies for rapid economic growth, says the author . Such a systems will help the economy grow faster, he says .
 Medical facilities will be restored in all educational institutions, thus ensuring control and protection of children’s health . Medical facilities to be restored.
 This is our Ukrainian world, which requires special and careful attitude, protection and development . This is Our Ukrainian world. This isOur Ukrainian world .
 Ukrainian national code identifies us as Ukrainians in the world . This is our unique national code, a cultural code that identifies us in the World .
 Ukrainian culture will be funded not by residual principle. We will finally do what the cultural figures are dreaming about Ukrainian culture . We will do what we want.
 The Ukrainian Institute will provide sufficient and reliable funding for the newly established Ukrainian Institute . It will expand powerful centres of Ukrainian presence and culture in the world .
 The Fund for financing foreign language translations of the best Ukrainian literary works . It will support the best foreign specialists in translating them into world languages .
Ukrainian culture will finance Ukrainian culture at the level of UAH 8-9 billion annually, says the government .
 Ukrainian cinema, books, Ukrainian content on radio and television. We will continue the practice of allocating sufficient funds for financing Ukrainian cinema and books .
 The Ukrainian language will be financially supported in all spheres without exception, says the government .
 The Ukrainian state will support the Orthodox Church of Ukraine which unites Ukrainians and will necessarily receive patriarchate . The Orthodox Church will be supported by the Ukrainian state .
 We will foster understanding and tolerance among representatives of different religions and denominations . We will protect our church by law, in particular by law. We will also foster understanding, tolerance among different religions .
For the first time in the history of independent Ukraine, we will place the state’s emphasis on the policy of active development of tourism .
 The entire civilized world is now shifting towards green transformation and introduction of the circular economy . The whole civilized world has now shifted towards green.
 All industrial and household waste is reused or recycled using the latest, environmentally friendly technologies . This means that, without exception, all industrial and Household waste is recycled .
 circular economy provides additional income for countries, as well as clean air, water and land . The functioning of the circular economy gives extra income for nations .
Ukrainian economy will be transferred into a circular model after the presidential election . It will ensure economic growth without harming the environment .
 An international audit of all sources of air, water, water and land pollution in our country will be immediately conducted .
 All enterprises polluting the environment will receive preferential long-term loans at an annual interest rate of 3% for upgrading emission control systems and installing online monitoring sensors .
 If such modernization is not carried out within the minimum time, such enterprises will be closed or subject to significant fines . Such enterprises will have to close or face significant fines.
 We will create a branching network of laboratories for monitoring the quality of drinking water and food . We will also create a network of labs for monitoring quality of food and drinking water .
 In a short time, genetically modified products, unsafe water and low-quality food will be removed from the market . In the short time.
 We will not allow anyone else to poison us and our children with inconsumable junk, we will not let anyone else poison us or our children . We will also not allow any other people to poison our children.
 We will introduce criminal liability for those who produce or sell low-quality water or food . We will also introduce a criminal liability.
 The state will provide a person with compensation for losses associated with deteriorating health at the expense of those who violate these environmental standards . In case of non-compliance with environmental norms, the state will give the person with compensations .
 We will introduce a moratorium on deforestation at the legislative level . We will renew the afforestation program, which was in operation in our country until 1991 .
 The amount of greenhouse gas emissions will be significantly reduced through the use of “green” technologies in all sectors of the economy . The involvement of international climate finance will help reduce emissions .
 New standards will be set to reduce the maximum permissible content of carbon monoxide in exhaust gases of automobiles . The “green transport’s strategy will be supported, according to the government .
 We will introduce a sorting and environmentally friendly, non-waste, profitable waste recycling technology across our country to exempt it from landfills .
 The government's priority will be popularization of green energy among the population and small and medium businesses .
 We will stimulate the development of energy cooperatives and increase financing of state programs for energy-efficient modernization and winterization of people’s houses . We will also increase financing for energy co-operatives .
We will introduce the best European environmental standards and implement the UN sustainable development goals in Ukraine . We will introduce best European Environmental Standards and implement UN Sustainable Development Goals in Ukraine.
 The New Economic Strategy for Ukraine will boost production and help create millions of new jobs with decent wages, including for young people .
 Substantial tax incentives will be granted to employers who give jobs to graduates of educational institutions .
 Professor Muhammad Yunus received the Nobel Prize for inventing and developing the microcredit system . Professor Yunus was awarded the award for the work on microcredit .
Every commercial bank of Ukraine will be obliged to establish a microfinance department and create data bank of tens of thousands of business plans .
 Anyone willing to engage in entrepreneurship will be able to choose a ready-made business plan at the bank, open a credit line and start working . Such microcredits will be provided on a long-term basis, without collateral under mandatory risk insurance .
 All financing will be carried out exclusively by targeted transfers according to the components of the business plan under the complete control of the bank . The bank's business plan will be completed by the end of 2014 .
The return of microcredit and accrued interest under the control of the bank begins when the new enterprise becomes profitable . The return ofMicrocredit and the accrued interest will begin when the bank becomes profitable.
 The microfinance program will allow in the short term to create millions of jobs and restore the middle class of entrepreneurs in Ukraine . The program has been fully destroyed over the last five years .
 AFFORDABLE HOUSING does not mean cheap, low-quality housing .
 A monthly installment for the mortgage repayment will be affordable for the family . If family members who are repaying the mortgage have temporarily lost their jobs, then no one will have the right to immediately take the apartment .
 It will take some time to search for a new job, and at this time, the mortgage repayment will be suspended . Adequate time will be provided for finding a new jobs .
 We will “liberate’ the construction sector by removing bureaucratic shackles. We will also remove the “bureaucratic shackles’s’. The construction sector will be freed by the government .
 builders are forced to hand over up to 50% of the cost of the object to corrupt officials . The cost of a building is up to 60% of its cost .
 We will stop it by adopting a relevant law together with the builders, which will enable them to work without corruption . We will immediately stop it.
 For this purpose, first and foremost, we will bring back benefits for the birth of a child that we had before . We will also bring back benefit for birth of child that they had before, first.
 The state will provide many families with special comprehensive support programs . The state is set to provide many Families with special support programs.
 The NSD/FARA Registration Unit. Received by N SD/Fara Registration Unit .
 The UKRAINE’s ACCESSION to NATO is the top 10 most common reasons to be a strong person . The list includes a list of seven things to help you understand .
 NEW ECONOMIC STRATEGY 17 FINANCIAL STABILITY and AFFORDABLE CREDITING 18 NEW ENERGY POLICY 18 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR and LAND RELATIONS REFORM 19 RESTORATION . NEW QUALITY
 New SOCIAL DOCTRINE 25 EUROPEAN WAGES 25 FAIR PENSIONS 26 AFFORDABLE MEDICINE 26 CARE for people with SPECIAL NEEDs 27 FAIR TARIFFS 28 HIGH-QUALITY and AFForDABLE EDUC