 You have written a great deal about how Russia and the West are embroiled in a new Cold War . You have also written about how the West is embroiled in the new Cold war .
 I would like to emphasize that my definition for the new Cold War is far from universally accepted in our field. First of all, I would want to emphasize the definition of the new cold War is not universally accepted .
 I think the new Cold War began the moment we went over the cliff, and that happened with the Ukraine crisis . I think it began when we went on the cliff. I think that's what happened with Ukraine crisis, I think .
 Edward Lucas and Mark MacKinnon argue we have been in the new Cold War since Putin came to power . I don't agree with other Cold War theorists like Edward Lucas .
 I think that view misunderstands either the Cold War or Russia's relationship with the West . I think it misunderstands both Cold War and the West's relations with Russia .
 Russian annexation of Crimea and Russia's support for separatism in the Donbas . I trace this qualitative shift to be a result of what happened in Ukraine, says author .
 Going over the cliff did not happen suddenly though, it happened as a result of a series of steps that cover most of the post-Cold War period .
 No one, including Washington, Moscow and Berlin, recognized the phases we were in, he says . I see it as a phased process, in which no one including the leadership of Washington,Moscow and Berlin recognized it .
 The new Cold War developed gradually over the post-1991 period . You mention that the new Cold war developed gradually.
 Obama's reset was the fourth time the U.S. has tried to reset relations with Russia . It is important to note that Obama'sreset was the fifth time the United States has tried.
 The ups and the downs in the past had elements among the downs that were pushing in this direction . The downs were pushed in the direction of the current direction .
 Under Primakov, Russia began to have serious concerns about U.S. policy towards Russia . This was often synthesized with considerable optimism about the future .
 Russia's resistance to America's use of power in a way that undermined Russian interests came with Primakov's depictions of a multipolar world . But the origins of Russia's opposition to U.S. power in the past came from Primakov.
 In 1998, it was not clear whether Primakov believed that the multipolar world was a reality that the Americans simply didn't recognize, or whether it was a hope he wanted to promote .
 Russia's diplomacy with China and India went nowhere, and Russia was not realistically looking at this time to supplant the U.S. In the end, Russia's diplomats with India and China went nowhere .
 There was another flow against the relationship in 1999 during the Kosovo War, when the Russians took a critical stance against NATO .
 George W Bush's presidency definitely started with a reversal of previous trends with 9/11, the Crawford ranch NATO-Russia council and the abrogation of the ABM agreement . The Crawford ranch has been in the midst of a series of controversies .
 Russia's opposition to the Iraq War gave way to tensions, with Russia's support for the war . But that quickly gave way.
 The domestic scene in Russia after Beslan began to trouble the Americans, causing Bush to openly display his discontent with Putin . Bush's anger with Putin caused him to publicly express his discontent.
 Russia's democratic breakdown featured as an issue in the Slovakia 2005 summit . Russia's political breakdown featured in the 2005 summit in Slovakia .
 In 2007, Putin delivered a scathingly critical speech towards the U.S. Putin pulled all the complaints and frustrations of the Russians together .
 The war in Georgia sunk the US-Russia relationship to a new low point. And then the war in Russia sunk the U.S. relationship with Georgia to a low point .
Russia's relationship with the West by then was dead in the water and was being dominated by many negative factors . Russia's relationship to the West was beingdominated by manynegative factors .
 Even during the Obama period, there was attempt at a revival, and for a period of reset, it was working . Even during Obama period.
 START II was a highlight as was the creation of a northern distribution network with Afghanistan . START II is a highlight of the start of the northern distribution system .
 The agreement to tighten sanctions on Iran in Resolution 1929 was a benchmark the Obama administration set .
 The International Security Conference on Fissile Raw Material was also a success . The international Security Conference was held in London .
 The failure to make serious progress on missile defense was the first sign of trouble at the Lisbon-NATO summit, which Medvedev attended .
 In Libya, the Russians were upset about regime change but abstained from the mission for reasons of principle . The Russians are upset about the regime change and abstained.
 I would argue that by 2011-12, with the anti-Americanism coming out of the presidential elections, hostilities had boiled over . I'd argue that with the election coming out, hostilities would have boiled over.
 Putin told Obama in 2012 that the problems were simply a consequence of electoral politics . Putin in 2012 told Obama that the problem was simply a result of elections .
 Obama did not accept Putin's argument as an adequate explanation . But it turned out to be much more than electorally motivated, and Obama didn't accept it .
 Everything that has characterized the current Russia-US tensions was in place before Ukraine, it was before Ukraine .
 Anti-Western sentiments have been a regular feature of Russian public opinion since the 1990s . But support for these views has varied considerably over time .
 In August, a survey asked Russians if they believed the U.S. was pursuing a strategy to weaken Russia . 44% of Russians said yes, 44% said definitely or entirely agreed with the statement . Only 7% disagreed with it .
 In 1998, 75% said yes and 15% said no, so the idea that the U.S. is operating against Russian interests to stifle and undercut Russia has featured prominently .
 The Ukraine crisis is the point in which the West and Russia indisputably entered a new Cold War. You mention that you regard the Ukraine crisis as the point of which the U.S. and Russia have entered anew Cold War .
 There is a considerable debate on whether the Russian annexation of Crimea was a planned operation dating back to 20 years or a knee-jerk reaction .
 I do not think Crimea annexation was the implementation of a pre-conceived plan that was in place and they simply seized the opportunity to execute it . I don't think that the Crimea annexed was the Implementation of aPre-Conceived plan .
 I think it was event-driven; the contingencies for it have been in place for a long time . I believe it wasEvent-driven. I think the contingency for it has been in the place for long time, I think .
 Yuri Luzhkov's rhetoric as Mayor of Moscow during election campaigns and other Russian politicians attest to this .
 The decision of February 21, 2014, came after violence the night before and negotiations of a deal with Poland, France and Germany for Yanukovych to hold elections by December and restore the 2004 constitution .
 When Yanukovych fled, the chaos in the Rada created an interim government . When that deal failed and Yanukovych fled.
 Moscow saw this interim government as not unjustifiably anti-Russian in its outlook . The interim government was seen as not unfair to Russia .
 Russia did not fear that Ukraine would join NATO, as Ukraine would not be accepted . The interim government intended to push Ukraine as close to NATO as possible without being a member .
 Putin and his coterie of allies were vacillating, and Putin eventually decided to secure Russia's position in Crimea . Putin's coteria of allies was vacillated, and he decided to move to Crimea .
 The justification was that an anti-Russian government in Kiev would push the Russian fleet out of Sevastopol, and destroy Russia's position in the Black Sea . The justification for the move was that the Kiev government would push out the fleet .
 The decision to move the referendum up and to annex Crimea was a separate decision that was not just about the Black Sea fleet . The Crimea referendum was a different decision.
 It was about Russia trying to put serious spokes in the wheels of whatever happened in Ukraine . It was not about Russia, but it was about the Ukraine crisis .
 Putin's March 18, 2014 speech by Putin justifying the annexation of Crimea . That first features in the official rhetoric in the March 2014 speech .
 The Novorossiya project was sparked by restlessness in Eastern Ukraine that occurred in reaction to events in Kiev .
 Maybe there would be a problem for the Russian diaspora in the Eastern provinces that needed to be stirred up .
 Russia was trying to change calls for more representation for Ukraine's eastern provinces into separatist movements . Russia began supporting those who wanted to organize separatism .
 Russia thought it would get more support than the rump portions of Donetsk and Luhansk . It was a bad decision to support separatism, as Russia wanted more support .
 Kiev responded very early in a clumsy but militarily harsh way. That resulted in a war; Kiev responded in a harsh way . Kiev responded to the war very early, but it was very early .
 The Russians were involved militarily in open conflict and it became clear that unless it escalated into something much more serious than the Russians would tolerate, it would result in a ceasefire .
 Effectively a ragged stalemate like Minsk II, which was good from their point of view. Effectively, it was a ragging stalemate.
Last May, even separatists regarded the Novorossiya project as unrealistic .
 The Russians have conceded that the territory they hold now is as far as they will go in Ukraine for now . The Russian government has said they will not leave Ukraine until now .
 Russian involvement in Ukraine is not random or extemporaneous, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Russian involvement is event-driven, but events driving them are not random, he says .
 U.S. strategy promoting regime change in many places, including Ukraine, is driven by strategic calculations, says CNN's John Sutter .
 U.S. regime change efforts would spread across the region, and to Russia itself, according to this theory .
 Russia saw Maidan as part of a much larger geopolitical game, that did not just focus on Ukraine's international orientation but had profound impacts for the regime in Russia .