 Russia's new Internet censorship legislation is dominating media coverage of Russia . Its existence reflects the regime's fear of its own people, it says .
 In Russia, ISIS recruitment shifts to ethnic Russian converts, likely as these are less connected with wider Muslim communities that see ISIS for the toxic rabble it is .
 ethnic Russians outside Russia are unwanted as they are needed to provide for the Volksdeutsche meddling game . Russia’s demographic collapse to be addressed by bringing in non-Russian immigrants .
 Egypt to procure 20 x Su-35S FLANKERs. Much on Russian meddling in Europe, Africa.
 Prof Blank explains the risks in Ukraine developing and deploying genuine IRBMs and long-range GLCMs .
 We still do not know whether Pres Poroshenko was referring to the Sapsan TBM and Korshun GLCM, or newer longer ranging systems .
 Russia announces the deployment of a squadron of Tu-22M3 BACKFIRE C in Crimea . The deployment is ostensibly to counter the United States BMD system in Romania .
 The new M3M is armed with the digital Kh-32, itself an upgrade to the classic Kh-22 Burya / AS-4 KITCHEN, the Kh-47M2 Kinzhal hypersonic cruise missile, and other modern Russian PGMs .
 Crimea is problematic as a FOB for the VKS due to its exposure, and challenges in resupply. Notably, Crimea is a problematic as an FOB.
 President Vladimir Putin signed laws punishing online media and individuals for spreading “fake news’s considered insulting to Russian officials .
 Publishing “unreliable socially significant information’s’ can lead to big fines . Publishing ‘unrelable socially significant info’ is a risk of big fines.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin signed a law allowing Moscow to punish and potentially imprison citizens who spread misinformation on the internet . Putin signed the law allowing Russia to punish people who spread online misinformation .
 Critics have labeled the legislation ‘direct censorship’ and yet another step toward autocracy .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has signed into law a series of bills that would criminalize the spreading of "fake news" Critics say the bills are intended to chill free speech critical of the government .
 Some of them are convinced that the new arrivals will drive down wages and increase unemployment . Some are also convinced that they will increase unemployment.
 Maslennikov says Moscow will not be able to attract highly skilled workers it hopes for . But only more of those with fewer skills at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid .
 Oleg Ivanov says the newcomers will create a dangerous ‘demographic imbalance’ He says many won’t be able to fit it .
 The immigrants will be from Central Asia and the Caucasus, not Ukraine and Belarus as the Kremlin imagines . The former know Russian less well and are significantly more culturally different .
 Leonty Byzov of the Moscow Institute of Sociology says it will be extremely difficult to acculturate let alone assimilate these people . He says it is difficult to assimilate people in Russia .
 There will be more such places if the Kremlin’s plan goes into effect, says the Kremlin . The Kremlin's plan is expected to go into effect .
 Norway has electronic proof that Russian forces disrupted global positioning system signals during recent NATO war games . Norway has demanded an explanation from its eastern neighbor, the country's defense minister said .
 Both Norway and Finland protested to Russia, which dismissed those allegations when they were first made . Both countries have dismissed the allegations .
 Czech publication Respekt has just published a story which provides more detail on a recent successful intelligence operation carried out by country’s BIS counterintelligence service . The agency has been criticized for incompetence by President Miloš Zeman .
 These companies got their equipment delivered by vehicles under Russian diplomatic cover . The equipment was delivered by Russian vehicles under diplomatic cover.
 The weekly says that BIS shut down a group of Russian hackers, who were part of a wider international network, in early 2018 .
 Czech President Miloš Zeman attacked the Security Information Service . He said that the counterintelligence was incompetent and had not revealed a single Russian or Chinese spy .
 Viktor Orban facing calls for greater scrutiny of his government's spending of EU funds . Tensions between the Hungarian prime minister and the EU near breaking point .
 Egypt and Russia have signed a $2 billion dollar contract for the purchase of more than 20 Russian Su-35 multi-role air-defense fighters and air-launched weapons . The deal is part of a $1 billion dollar deal between Egypt, Russia and Egypt .
 The Ethiopian National Defense Force is operating at least one Russian-made Pantsir-S1 anti-aircraft defense systems, footage shows .
 Russia’s main arms exporter Rosoboronexport declined to comment when asked about the Pantsir-S1 delivery to Ethiopia .
 Ethiopia ordered some number of modern and upgraded air defense systems and radars in Russia and Ukraine to increase the capability of its Armed Forces .
 Pantsir-S1 air defense missile/gun system is designed for air defense of small military, administrative and industrial installations and areas against enemy aircraft, helicopters, cruise missiles and precision-guided weapons .
 The Pantsir missile system is a family of self-propelled, medium-range surface-to-air missile systems . For reference, the Pantsir missiles are a family.
 Pantsir-S is a combined short to medium range surface-to-air missile and anti-aircraft artillery weapon system produced by KBP of Tula, Russia .
 The system is a further development of 2K22 Tunguska and represents the latest air defense technology . It uses phased array radars for both target acquisition and tracking .
 Petro Poroshenko recently advocated building intermediate-range ballistic missiles and cruise missiles to target and presumably use against Russia .
 No doubt Poroshenko calculated that he might gain a political advantage during the final days of a tough campaign for reelection by adopting this hawkish stance .
 Russia has been fighting Russia for five years with little overt progress. It appeals emotionally to a population that has been battling Russia for 5 years withlittle overt progress . It appeals to the population of Russia that have been fighting for years.
Since this advocacy casts Poroshenko as an aggressive patriotic defender of Ukraine, this posture might conceivably yield him political dividends .
 It would be a disastrous decision for both strategic and operational reasons . However, it would be disastrous decision to make such a decision .
In 1993-94 during the height of the controversy over whether or not Ukraine should seek control over the Soviet nuclear weapons it inherited, I argued that doing so would pose an intolerable threat to any Russian government .
 Ukraine did not threaten Russia then, but there was an invitation to Russia to preempt Ukraine and take out those weapons . The possession of nuclear weapons there constituted a threat as well as an incitement .
 Ukraine is under attack by Russia, but today's situation is vastly different . Any Ukrainian effort to build intermediate-range ballistic missiles would almost certainly drive Russia to attack it preemptively .
 No one in Europe would do anything to prevent Moscow from doing so given the weakness that characterizes too much of Europe's defense policy .
 The U.S. backed out of the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty, invites a much greater strategic disaster . Thus strategically, building such missiles, even though it is understandably emotionally satisfying and perfectly within Ukraine’s right, is the right .
 Operationally too, this would be a misguided decision because it responds to the wrong threat while overlooking the existing threat .
 The correct response to the current threat is in Ukraine’s hands, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: A conventional invasion using land and sea forces is in the hands of Ukraine .
 Ukraine has the means to decide to build these capabilities or to obtain them from abroad . Ukraine has to decide whether to build them or to get them in Ukraine .
 Moscow has steadily reinforced its ground and naval forces confronting Ukraine . Moscow has been steadily reinforcing its ground, naval forces.
 The so-called separatists, in reality Russian forces, are now wholly assimilated into the Russian army . The separatists have now been completely assimilated.
 Russia has also built up twenty-eight tactical battalion groups, naval, and air forces in Crimea . Russia may well be contemplating a new offensive as we approach spring .
 If the upcoming Ukrainian election turns out to have negative consequences for Moscow’s interests, a new offensive becomes more likely .
 Ukraine undoubtably needs major upgrades to its defensive capability to ward off any possible offensive on land or sea . We cannot be sure that Moscow will attack.
 Ukraine needs land-based short-range missiles, anti-ship, and anti-air missiles . It also needs radar and counter-battery mortars along with command and control and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance equipment .
 The combined arms defense of Ukraine’s maritime frontiers should begin with land-based shore defenses and then extend into anti-air and anti-ship capabilities . Russian Navy would impose high costs on the Russian Navy if it attacked .
 Russia would go far to negate Russia’s ability to launch this offensive. Producing such capabilities or acquiring them from external powers like the U.S. would be a big mistake .
 Kyiv is only now taking possession of two U.S. cutters that have been sitting for years in the Baltimore harbor . Ukraine's government of Ukraine’s obstruction and malfeasance has caused them to sit for years .
 Such incompetence is intolerable, especially during war, says author . Such incompetence, especially in war, is intolerable during war.
 Poroshenko or his successor if he loses the election must make defense reform a priority . If he loses, Poroshenko will be the next president .
 The Ministry of Defense and Ukraine’s defense industrial sector must produce the right capabilities needed to impose severe costs upon Moscow and blunt any possible Russian offensive .
Chasing after chimeras like intermediate-range ballistic missiles achieves nothing operationally or strategically for Kyiv . Chasing after chasing after Chimeras achieves no operationally, or strategically.
 Moscow may play well in Kyiv or Odesa, but strategy should be made of sterner stuff, says author .
 He is the author of numerous foreign policy-related articles, white papers, and monographs focused on the geopolitics and geostrategy of Russia and Eurasia .
 He also promised to restore the occupied territories through political and diplomatic means . He also said he would restore occupied territories by political, diplomatic means.
 Ukraine intends to develop new missile weaponry after Russia and the U.S. withdraw from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty . Ukraine's President Poroshenko announced that Ukraine will develop new missiles .
 Kyiv is “no longer bound by any missile range limitations,’ the president emphasized . The president emphasized that the president is not bound by missile ranges .
 This will make the aggressor more restrained, and our defense more reliable, says the author . "This will make us more reliable," he says . The author says .
 Poroshenko: "For me, the safety of Ukrainians is of utmost importance,” Poroshenko remarked .
Ukrainian army will receive as many as 20 new models of domestically produced weapons . He said that the Ukrainian army will be given 20 new model of weapons .
 In autumn 2018, the Vilkha missile system with adjustable ammunition was adopted into Ukraine’s armament . In October 2018, Ukraine's armament was fitted with an adjustable ammunition .
 The missile aircraft are capable of destroying any target in Europe, says Russia's State Duma Defense Committee chairman .
 The Russian Tupolev Tu-22M3 strategic bombers were deployed in occupied Crimea . Interfax reported citing Chairman of Russia's State Duma Defense Committee Vladimir Shamanov .
 Russia deployed the Tupolev Tu-22M3 supersonic strategic bombers on the peninsula . Russia also deployed Iskander mobile short-range ballistic missile system in Crimea .
 Two Tupolev Tu-22M3 strategic bombers carried the flight over the neutral waters of the Black Sea .
 Russia has deployed in the annexed Crimea Tu-22M3 supersonic long-range missile-carrying bombers . The bombers are capable of striking sea and ground targets with guided missiles and aerial bombs .
 A 3,700-mile endurance, roughly translating into an 1,850-mile range, could allow the upgraded Backfires to strike targets in the mid-Atlantic . The Backfires could be able to travel up to 1,800 miles .
 Tu-22M3Ms could pose a new threat to U.S. ships and other targets . New weapons could also pose a threat to American ships and others .
 Russia is finalizing the trials of a sophisticated cruise missile designated as Kh-32 . It is intended to equip the Tupolev Tu-22M3 supersonic long-range bomber fleet .
 The cutting-edge missile is virtually invulnerable to ground-based air defenses and interceptors of a potential adversary .
 The Raduga Design Bureau climbs to an altitude of 40 km, to the stratosphere, to dive on the target at a steep angle . Once launched, the product of the Raduga design bureau climbs to 40 km .
 According to famous human rights defender, leaving Crimea is “political hara-kiri’s for Putin .
 Mustafa Dzhemilev, former Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People, Ukrainian MP and presidential envoy for the affairs of Crimean Tatari people, stated that Russian President Vladimir Putin expresses regret in his immediate entourage and wishes he hadn't ordered to occupy
In his immediate entourage he is already speaking about that. By the way, in his immediateEntourage he has already spoken about that .
 Dzhemilev: "We made a mistake with the Crimea, though we won’t admit it,’ he says . He says – we made a mistakes, but we won't admit it.’
 Putin says leaving Crimea is “political hara-kiri’ for Putin as he chose the role of “the gatherer of the Russian lands’s lands” He added that leaving Crimea was ‘political har-kir’
 Mustafa Abduldzhemil Dzhemilev is former Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People . He is a member of the Ukrainian Parliament since 1998 .
 He is the recognized leader of the Crimean Tatar National Movement and a former Soviet dissident . He is a former Russian dissident. He is also a former Ukrainian dissident and former Soviet leader .
 Dzhemilev was born on 13 November 1943 in Ay-Serez, Crimea, at the time under Nazi German occupation .
 He was only six months old when his family was deported by Soviet authorities in May 1944 . The rest of the Crimean Tatar population, with the rest of his family, was deported .
 Between 1966 and 1986, Dzhemilev was arrested six times for anti-Soviet activities . He served time in Soviet prisons and labor camps and lived under surveillance .
 Dzhemilev is also remembered for going on the longest hunger strike in the history of human rights movements . Dzemilev was also known as the first hunger strike of the human rights movement .
 Dzhemilev was re-elected into parliament after being in the top 10 of the electoral list of Petro Poroshenko’s Bloc .
Former chairman of Mejlis of Crimean Tatars and MP of Ukrainian Parliament . Dzhemilev is well known for fierce support of his people in the Russian-occupied Crimea .
 Crimean Tatar leaders strongly condemned the illegitimate ‘referendum’ in March 2014 . They demanded that Russia leave the peninsula . He and other leaders of the Crimean Tatari people strongly condemned.
 As he was only six months old, he and his family were deported to Central Asia, along with other Crimean Tatars . Years after that, he returned to his native Crimea, where he was born, and returned .
 Russia annexed Crimea in Crimea in March 2014 . Human rights defender is once again banned to enter the peninsula .
 The president also commented on Putin's statement claiming no prospects for any ‘positive result’ in Kyiv-Moscow relations under the current leadership in Ukraine .
 The United States, the European Union and other Western countries will periodically impose new sanctions against Russia if it does not stop its aggression against Ukraine . The U.S. and European Union will periodically imposed new sanctions on Russia .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker says Washington could sell to Kyiv more Javelin anti-tank guided missiles . Volker: Washington could also sell toKyiv moreJavelin missiles .
 The Special Representative also notes the need to boost Ukraine’s air and coastal defenses . Ukraine's air and coast defenses need to be boosted, he says .
 US Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker expressed such a conviction at a video press conference on Monday . Volker is the US special representative for Ukrainenegotiations .
 It would be a military catastrophe that would lead to the loss of thousands of people, the U.S. representative says .
 He underscored the need for restoration of the territorial integrity of Ukraine by diplomatic means, as well as the return of Crimean Tatars to their historic homeland .
 The West cannot be blamed for this, says Kurt Volker . Volker: Progress in achieving peace is insufficient, and the West can't be blamed .
 Russia continues to control military operations . Russia exercises absolute command control through its regular officers .
 It pays money to contract servicemen involved in military operations, it says . It finances the leadership of civilian administrations, which it created, the U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations said .
 NATO remains a reliable partner of Ukraine in gaining its membership in the Alliance . Ukraine is the only member of the NATO alliance in Ukraine .
 Ukraine will be ready to apply for membership in the European Union and NATO by 2023 . The country is expected to be ready for membership by the next year .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko says Russian divisions deployed along the Ukraine border are ready to invade . He says Russia is prepared to invade Ukraine .
 UN Secretary-General António Guterres strongly supports the UN General Assembly resolution . It points to the regional security threats posed by the Russian militarization of Crimea .
 Jeremy Hunt calls on Russia to put an end to illegal control over Crimea . Hunt condemns illegal annexation of Crimea and attempts to redraw European borders .
 The UK will never recognise Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea . Calls on Russia to end attempts to redraw the boundaries of Europe .
 Japan’s position on non-recognition of the annexation of Ukrainian Crimea by Russia remains unchanged . The country's position on the annexation remains unchanged.
 Australia imposed sanctions against Russian citizens involved in seizure of Ukrainian vessels and sailors that were attempting to pass through the Kerch Strait on November 25, 2018 . Australia also imposed sanctions on “leaders’ of separatist-held areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
 Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin has said the Minsk agreements on resolving the situation in the east of Ukraine are in a “coma, which only Russia can end .
 The OSCE will see peace only when Russia stops violating Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, the U.S. Mission to the OSCE says .
Refat Chubarov noted the change in the mood of the population in the occupied Crimea five years into the Russian occupation .
 The general attitude of Crimeans to the occupation forces is dramatically different from what it was five years ago . The head of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar people said .
 The economy of the world’s biggest energy exporter is more than 10 percent or $150 billion smaller compared with what might have been expected at the end of 2013 . The world's biggest energy exports are more than $150billion smaller than expected .
 Commander of Ukraine's Joint Forces Serhiy Nayev says Ukraine's victory will depend on the Ukrainian people’s unity and international partners’ consistency .
 The Russian army has advantages in terms of personnel and military hardware . The Russian Army has advantages on personnel and hardware .
 The command of the Joint Forces Operation checked the combat readiness of close support aviation of the Ukrainian Navy . The Ukrainian Navy is in close support of the Navy .
 During joint drills in the Sea of Azov, the vessel crews repelled a simulated attack from the air .
 The warships scrambled on alert and reached the designated area in the sea . They performed various maneuvers, too, including maneuvering .
 Russia's hybrid military forces mounted three attacks on Ukrainian army positions in Donbas, eastern Ukraine . One Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action .
 According to intelligence reports, two enemy troops were eliminated and another two were wounded . Two enemy troops are eliminated, according to reports .
 The strike was carried out from an anti-tank missile system, resulting in two militants being eliminated .
 Ukrainian military brought down self-made Russian drone in Donbas near the positions of Joint Forces Operation .
 Invaders had tried to spot the location of defensive lines of the Ukrainian forces .
 The attacks at Ukrainian strong points also involved anti-tank missile systems, various types of missiles .
 Russia's hybrid military forces mounted 10 attacks on Ukrainian army positions in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, in the past 24 hours . One Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action and another two as wounded in action .
 According to intelligence reports, three enemy troops were eliminated and another four were wounded . According to the reports, four of them were wounded.
 President Petro Poroshenko thanked Canada for the decision to extend Operation UNIFIER, the Canadian Armed Forces military training mission in Ukraine .
 A total of 2,955 Ukrainian servicemen have been killed over the period of Russian aggression against Ukraine, President Petro Poroshenko says .
 Local authorities of Luhansk region will appeal to Prime Minister of Ukraine Volodymyr Groysman and National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine concerning the situation with the possible blackout of mines in the region .
 Regional commission on technogenic environmental issues and emergencies. Decision made on the results of the session of the regional commission . Local authority reported.
 Yury Klymenko informed the administration and coal enterprises about possible stop of energy supply to the Pervomaiskvugillya and Lysychanskvugilya mines .
 The proper enterprises do not have it, and the complete blackout can take place . Considering the fact that the proper enterprises don't have it.
 The most difficult situation is at Pervomaiskvugillya, where blackout can lead to flooding of the mines from objects situated from another side of the demarcation line .
 First Deputy Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine Iryna Gerashchenko has reiterated that people living in temporarily occupied territories are Ukrainian citizens .
Ukrinform. Ukraine has only one army, and no private armies can exist . Ukrinform is a Ukrainian army .
 Ukraine does not have and will not have any private armies, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko says .
 Turkey has provided Ukraine with unmanned combat aerial vehicle Bayraktar . Earlier Turkey has given Ukraine with an unmanned combat vehicle . The vehicle was used by Ukraine's military forces .
 Testing of new military combat drones will take place on Wednesday, March 20 .
 Ukraine buys advanced Turkish strike drones. “The power of the Ukrainian army increase every day, as every week we get new military equipment.’s power is increasing,’ says one official .
 Turkey has provided Ukraine with unmanned combat aerial vehicle Bayraktar . Turkey has given Ukraine with an unmanned combat aircraft .
 Ukraine purchases Bayraktar TB2, the combat drones developed by Turkish designers . The combat drones can carry missiles and are capable of engaging the naval targets .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has said newly appointed Deputy Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine Serhiy Kryvonos is preparing a bill to reform Ukraine’s state-owned defense giant Ukroboronprom .
 The NSDC has already made a decision on a full audit at Ukroboronprom enterprises . The president stressed the NSDC had already made the decision .
Ukroboronprom state concern has stated that it has not been exporting weapons and military equipment to Russia since 2014 . The estimates of the volume of exports from Ukraine in 2014-2018 are incorrect and do not correspond to the reality, state concern says .
 Ukraine’s state-owned defense giant Ukroboronprom has denied earlier reports claiming Ukraine supplied weapons and military equipment to Russia after the start of Russian military aggression against Ukraine in 2014 .
 Allegations were voiced following a report by Stockholm Peace Research Institute . Obozrevatel wrote .
 The engine manufacturer is a private Zaporizhia-based company Motor Sich . The company is not a member of the Ukroboronprom Group of companies .
Contracts for the supply of engines were concluded in 2006, while the actual delivery took place in 2009-2014 . In addition, contracts for the supplies of engines was concluded in2006, while actual delivery was in 2009.
 SIPRI research state that engines were supplied until 2014, when the ban on arms and military equipment exports to Russia was introduced . Most likely, most likely, the engines were supply until 2014 .
 SIPRI Ukroboronprom also commented on the reported “deliveries’ to Russia of the An-140-100 and An-148-100E aircraft . SIPri Ukroborsprom also comment on the reports of ‘
 The An-140 and An-148 aircraft were produced in Russia under a license granted by Antonov State Enterprise . In addition, the An-138 and an-148 were produced under the license granted.
 SIPRI views them as imports from Ukraine, since there is a legal contract concluded between the parties,’s statement reads .
 Ukroboronprom also reported on the naval gas-turbine installations DS-71, produced by the Zorya-Mashproekt .
 The delivery was carried out before the ban on the export of weapons and military equipment to the Russian Federation . The delivery of the weapons and equipment was done before the export ban .
 The delivery date for the engines and power units is determined by SIPRI experts . The aircraft and ships have been transferred to the Russian armed forces, rather than the actual date of delivery of individual components .
 European races could offer a taste of what the U.S. can expect in 2020 . European races this year could offer an insight into the United States.
 Yulia Tymoshenko is a leading candidate in the country's March 31 presidential election . She has defended her support for Kyiv's decision not to use military force to resist Russia’s annexation of Crimea .
 Tymoshenko also slammed incumbent Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko . She accused him of embezzling defense budget through illegal deals with the aggressor .
 Fictitious firms have been depositing money with PrivatBank, Ukraine’s largest bank, to buy votes in favor of Petro Poroshenko in the upcoming presidential election .
 The team of Volodymyr Zelensky will keep a parallel count of the votes in the upcoming presidential election . The Ukrainian entertainer is running for president .
 The presidential elections in Ukraine on March 31 will be held in line with the standards of the European Union . President Petro Poroshenko has stated that the presidential elections will be in line.
 An unprecedented number of non-governmental organizations were registered as observers in Ukraine’s upcoming presidential elections . The Central Election Commission official Natalia Bernadska says the number is unprecedented .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker hopes Hungary and Ukraine will settle the issue of Hungarian minority rights in the context of education . Volker wants Hungary andUkraine to settle issue in thecontext of education.
 The diplomat expects Hungary to take up a position of full support for Ukraine amid the ongoing Russian aggression .
 The United States and EU ambassadors, as well as the IMF mission, are asking to postpone consideration of bills regarding illegal enrichment . The bills are being considered by the Verkhovna Rada Committee .
 Ukrainian Finance Minister Oksana Markarova says her ministry has fulfilled all the benchmarks of the program of cooperation with the International Monetary Fund .
 Ukraine has become the first country in the world to diversify the sources of nuclear fuel supply . Ukrinform is the name of Ukraine's nuclear fuel production .
Ternopil region caves to the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites . It is proposed to add Optymistychna Cave, the length of discovered paths of which is 2114 km .
 Ecology Minister Ostap Semerak announced the news as the ministry's press service reports .
 Ternopil caves in the UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Semerak: "I do not think there is a need to persuade anyone that such natural sites belong to more than one country, that they are a natural heritage of mankind"
 The ministry held preliminary consultations with the Institute of Geological Sciences of Ukraine and Ternopil Region State Administration .
 Optymistychna Cave is second only after the Mammoth-Flint Ridge Cave System in the U.S. The Cave System is in the United States .
 President Petro Poroshenko praised the high number of parishes who have already made their decision to join the new church independent of Russian influence .
 Volyn region remains Ukraine’s transition leader with a number of parishes that have switched to the OCU having already exceeded a hundred .
 The total number of registered religious communities of the former Moscow Patriarchate is one of the largest in Ukraine . More than 600 religious communities are registered in the region .
 Many parishes also decided to move to the OCU in Vinnytsia, Khmelnytsky, Zhytomyr, Rivne, and Lviv regions .
 President Petro Poroshenko praised the high number of parishes who have already made their decision to join the new church independent of Russian influence .
 Jaroslav Skira talks to Marta Dyczok about the background and significance of the newly created Orthodox Church of Ukraine .
 David Udo Hague and Cole Davis Brodovsky were arrested in Novorossiysk on March 1, 2019 . They are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints .
 The Mormons were initially detained in Novorossiysk for violating Russian immigration laws . The Mormons had been detained for violating Russia's immigration laws.
 Court heard they said they intended to do missionary work in Russia . They allegedly taught English while not having pedagogical education .
 Russian law dictated that they could only do so only in specially designated areas . They preached and distributed leaflets on the streets .
 He claimed that he did not preach on the streets of Novorossiysk, but only talked with pedestrians . He said he only talked to pedestrians .
 The U.S. citizens are being held in a temporary detention center for foreign citizens in Gulkevichi, Japan .