 This report does not include areas controlled by Russia-led forces in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine or Russian-occupied Crimea .
 At the end of this report is a section listing abuses in Russian-occupied Crimea . The report also lists abuses in Russia's Crimea .
 On April 21, Volodymyr Zelenskyy was elected president in an election considered free and fair by international and domestic observers . On April 20, Zelensyy waselected president in a free and free election .
 On July 21, the country held early parliamentary elections that observers considered free and fair . The elections were also considered free, fair .
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs is responsible for maintaining internal security and order . The ministry is responsible.
 The Security Service of Ukraine is responsible for state security broadly defined, nonmilitary intelligence, and counterintelligence and counterterrorism matters . The Security Services of Ukraine are responsible for the security of the country .
 The Ministry of Defense protects the country against foreign and domestic aggression . It exercises control over the activities of the armed forces.
 The State Fiscal Tax Service exercises law enforcement powers through the tax police and reports to the Cabinet of Ministers .
 The State Migration Service under the Ministry of Internal Affairs implements state policy regarding border security, migration, citizenship, and registration of refugees .
 Civilian authorities generally maintain effective control over security forces in the territory controlled by the government .
 Human rights groups and the United Nations noted significant deficiencies in investigations into alleged human rights abuses committed by government security forces .
 Russia-induced and -fueled conflict in Donbas region, Russia-led forces reportedly engaged in killings of civilians, torture and abductions .
 Russia-led forces have restricted freedom of expression, the press, and the internet . Human right issues included harsh and life-threatening prison and detention center conditions . The absence of judicial independence was also a major issue .
 Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or Politically Motivated Killings. There were reports of possible arbitrary or unlawful killings .
 Oleksandr Komarnitsky allegedly refused to serve as a witness in a criminal case . For example, a police officer approached him at a bus stop and beat him, reports say .
 State Bureau of Investigations charged one officer with abuse of power and unlawful violence . On June 22, one officer was charged with abusing power, unlawful violence.
 Several top officials of Vinnytsia Oblast police, including its chief, were suspended or fired in connection with the case .
 There were reports that state actors ordered or took part in targeted attacks on civil society activists and journalists . In some cases, some cases resulted in death .
 Vladyslav Manger, head of the Kherson regional legislature, was arrested and charged with organizing the 2018 fatal acid attack on public activist and advisor to Kateryna Handziuk . The Prosecutor General’s Office arrested Manger on February 11, and
 The Prosecutor General’s Office is investigating the deputy governor of Kherson Oblast, Yevhen Ryshchuk, for involvement in Handziuk's killing .
 In March investigative reporters at Slidstvo.info published allegations by one of the men who allegedly carried out the attack that Ryshchuk had sought to hire him to “punish” Handziuk .
Authorities downgraded 2018 charges against former parliamentary aide Ihor Pavlovsky from complicity in murder to concealment of a crime . Authorities allege that he worked to cover up responsibility for the killing of Handziuk .
 Pavlovsky repeatedly refused to appear at court hearings, citing unsubstantiated health concerns . According to October press reports, Pavlovski repeatedly refused.
 Five persons accused of carrying out the killing on charges of causing grievous bodily harm resulting in death . They were convicted on June 6 .
 They were sentenced to terms of three to six-and-a-half years in prison . They are sentenced to term of three-to-six-year prison terms .
 Prosecutors had not charged anyone for ordering the killing. As of late September, prosecutors had not been charged .
 Human rights defenders and Handziuk’s supporters alleged that authorities failed to investigate the crime fully . Human rights activists say authorities did not investigate the case fully .
 In July 2018, an unknown person poured concentrated sulfuric acid on Handziuk, resulting in serious chemical burns to more than a third of her body . The woman was hospitalized in July 2018 .
 There were reports of politically motivated killings by unknown actors . There were also reports of political killings.
 Vadym Komarov is known for his investigative reports on corruption . He was attacked by an unknown assailant on the morning of May 4 .
 The assailant hit him on the head several times with an object police believed to be a hammer . The assailant broke his skull with the object .
 As of October a police investigation continued, but no arrests had been made . No arrests were made .
 Among the individuals reportedly under investigation for involvement in the crime was the father of a local deputy mayor .
 Belarusian-Russian journalist Pavel Sheremet was killed in December . Police arrested five suspects in connection with the killing of the journalist .
 All suspects had previous military experience as volunteers in the conflict with Russia-led forces .
 Law enforcement agencies continued to investigate killings and other crimes committed during the Euromaidan protests in Kyiv in 2013-2014 .
 The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine noted little progress had been made in investigating killings of protesters .
Human rights groups criticized the low number of convictions despite the existence of considerable evidence . Human rights groups have criticized the lack of convictions .
 Amnesty International alleged law enforcement bodies “resisted and obstructed justice’s’ in Euromaidan cases . A February 19 statement by Amnesty International said the bodies ‘resisted’
 Of 58 cases, 58 cases resulted in court decisions including 48 convictions, but only nine custodial sentences were handed down .
 A Kyiv court authorized the release of one former Berkut officer on bail . A court removed the requirement that he wear a monitoring bracelet, which observers believed made him a flight risk .
 A court acquitted a former Berkut officer and current police officer of torturing two Euromaidan activists . On August 31, a court acquitted the former officer and police officer .
 On August 8, the prosecutor general dissolved two units responsible for the majority of investigations into crimes committed during the Euromaidan protests . The Prosecutor General’s Office is reforming the Special Investigation Department .
Human rights experts saw the decision as another step endangering investigations into Euromaidan-related crimes . Human rights experts said the decision was another step in the way to end investigations .
 The National Anticorruption Bureau and the SBI, two newly-created bodies, did not have the necessary processes or personnel to fulfill the task . The Prosecutor General’s Office transferred the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
Former Berkut officers Pavlo Abroskin, Oleksandr Marynchenko, Serhiy Tamtur, Oleh Yanishevsky were charged with killing 48 protesters and wounding another 80 in Kyiv in 2014 . The country released into the custody of proxy authorities in Don
 The HRMMU did not note any progress in the investigation and legal proceedings in connection with the 2014 trade union building fire in Odesa that stemmed from violent clashes between pro-Russian and Ukrainian unity demonstrators .
 Preliminary hearings had begun against three high-ranking Odesa police officers . Two officials charged with abuse of authority, forgery, and dereliction of duty in protecting people from danger .
 civilian casualties in connection with Russian aggression in Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts . There were civilian casualties.
 There were reports of politically motivated disappearances in connection with the Russian aggression in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 The constitution and law prohibit torture and other cruel and unusual punishment . There were reports that law enforcement authorities engaged in such abuse .
 There were reports that police and other law enforcement officials abused and, at times, tortured persons in custody to obtain confessions . Courts cannot legally use as evidence in court proceedings confessions and statements made under duress to police by persons in Custody .
 The HRMMU continues to document cases of abuse by government agents . In the Donbas region, theHRMMU documents cases of torture and arbitrary arrests .
 There were reports that Russia-led forces in the “people’s republics” of Donetsk and Luhansk Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . U.S. Department of State: 6 systematically committed numerous abuses, including torture .
 The Prosecutor General’s Office and SBI in Transcarpathia announced the opening of a criminal investigation into reports of torture by police in Uzhhorod .
 Police detained Ihor Harmatiy and Ivan Bukov, who were reportedly ethnic Roma, on September 13 . They were detained on suspicion of involvement in a theft .
 According to Harmatiy, police took him to the police station, chained him to a radiator, beat him to coerce a confession . He hung him in stress positions until he lost consciousness .
 He was hospitalized with two broken arms, a ruptured spleen and bladder, and pelvic displacement . He was subsequently hospitalized with three broken arms .
 Bukov managed to loosen his handcuffs and jumped out of a fourth-story window to escape abuse . Bukov was hospitalized for injuries sustained in the fall .
 UN special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment said he had received allegations of torture and ill-treatment at the hands of the police . The report was released on January 17 based on a May-June 2018 visit to the country .
 The special rapporteur further found that lawyers, police officers, prosecutors, and judges lacked basic knowledge to investigate and document allegations of torture and mistreatment adequately .
 Victims of torture or other mistreatment generally did not get help from state authorities . As a consequence of torture, victims of torture did not receive help from the state .
 Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group says law enforcement officers intimidated them or their relatives . Law enforcement officers forced them to withdraw complaints, group says .
 Physical abuse, lack of proper medical care and nutrition, poor sanitation, and lack of adequate light were persistent problems . Physical abuse and poor sanitation were also persistent problems.
 Overcrowding remained a problem in some pretrial detention facilities . Human rights organizations reported that overcrowding at such centers decreased as a result of reforms .
 There were reports that juveniles and adults were often not separated in some pretrial detention facilities . Authorities generally held adults and juveniles in separate facilities .
 Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group visited Prison #26 in Zhovti Vody in March . Prison administrators called in special forces, allegedly to prevent a riot, according to experts .
Experts identified seven inmates with signs of serious physical abuse . Eight other inmates were transferred to a prison facility in Kryvy Rih after the incident .
 Inmates alleged that prison staff beat them, restrained them with tape, put plastic bags on their heads, threw them in prison trucks, and transported them to a different facility . Inmates allege they were transported to different facilities .
 Prison administrators claimed inmates had inflicted bodily injuries on themselves . Prison administrators said inmates had been injured by themselves .
 Police opened an investigation of the incident that continued as of mid-October . Police are investigating the incident.
 In March an inmate of a Berdyansk Prison raped an inmate, allegedly at the direction of the prison administration . For example, in March, an inmate at the prison was raped, according to reports .
 The victim was reportedly a 23-year-old veteran serving time for going absent without leave . The victim reportedly was reportedly serving time.
 Authorities at the facility denied allegations that the rape occurred at the direction of prison administrators .
 Police opened an investigation, but no arrests had been made as of October . No arrests have been made .
Local military prosecutor and police repeatedly approached victim and demanded that he sign documents stating that he did not hold prison authorities responsible for the attack .
 According to human rights defenders, the facility had a reputation for torture .
Most detention facilities were old and needed renovation or replacement . Most detention facilities in the United States were old or needed renovation .
 Some cells and facilities had very poor sanitary conditions, according to the UN SRT .
 Some detainees reported that their cells were poorly ventilated and infested with insects . Some detainees said they were ill-ventilated with insects. Some detainees also reported that they were infested by insects .
 In Odesa the UN SRT reported remand prison cell walls were covered with mold and that sanitary facilities were clogged . In Odesa the UN S RT reported that remand cells were covered in mold .
 Conditions in police temporary detention facilities and pretrial detention facilities were harsher than in lowand medium-security prisons . Conditions were harsher in police Temporary detention facilities.
 Temporary detention facilities often had insect and rodent infestations and lacked adequate sanitation and medical facilities . Temporary detention centers often had insects and rodents.
 The Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture expressed concern that prisoners in pretrial detention were not offered any out-of-cell activities other than outdoor exercise for an hour per day .
 Inmates received three meals a day, according to the UN SRT report . In most places the food was described as “inedible,’ leading inmates to rely on supplementary food .
 In some pretrial detention centers, detainees did not have consistent access to food and water, the CPT says . The CPT: In some prisons, detainees didn't have regular access to water and food .
 Most hygienic products including toilet paper, soap, and feminine hygiene products were not provided . detainees relied on supplies provided by family or donated by humanitarian organizations .
 In some facilities cells had limited access to daylight and were not properly heated or ventilated . In some cells cells were not fully heated or Ventilated .
 UN and other international monitors documented systemic problems with the provision of medical care . UN, other monitors documented problems with medical care provision .
 The CPT observed a lack of medical confidentiality, poor recording of injuries, and deficient access to specialists, including gynecological and psychiatric care . The Cpt observed a poor record of injuries.
 There was a shortage of all kinds of medications with an overreliance on prisoners and their families to provide most of the medicines .
 Bureaucratic and financial impediments prevented the prompt transfer of inmates to city hospitals, resulting in prolonged suffering and delayed diagnoses .
 The condition of prison facilities and places of unofficial detention in Russiacontrolled areas continued to deteriorate . The conditions of prisoners in Russia are deteriorating .
 There was an extensive network of unofficial places of detention in the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts . The Justice for Peace coalition says there was a network of illegal detention places .
 There were reports of severe shortages of food, water, heat, sanitation, and proper medical care .
 The lack of access to detainees raised concerns about the conditions of detention and treatment . The detention of detainees has raised concerns over treatment and detention .
 The East Human Rights Group continued to report systemic abuses against prisoners in the LPR . The LPR used prisoners as slave labor to produce goods that, when sold, provided personal income to the leaders of Russia-led forces .
 forced labor was used in Sukhodilsk Prison in Luhansk Oblast, says HRMMU .
 Those who refused to work were punished through beatings or solitary confinement . Those who did not work were also punished by solitary confinement or beatings .
Human rights groups reported that legal norms did not always provide for confidentiality of complaints . Human rights groups said legal norms were not always providing for confidentiality .
Authorities did not always conduct proper investigations of complaints, officials say . The organization conducted monitoring visits of places of detention .
 Some families had to pay bribes to obtain permission for prison visits to which they were entitled by law . Officials generally allowed prisoners, except those in disciplinary cells, to receive visitors .
 The government generally permitted independent monitoring of prisons and detention centers by international and local human rights groups . The CPT, the Ombudsman’s Office, and the HRMMU. d.
 The constitution and law prohibit arbitrary arrest and detention and provide for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of his or her arrest or detention in court .
 Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees may detain a suspect for three days without a warrant . A judge must issue a warrant authorizing continued detention .
 Authorities in some cases detained persons for longer than three days without a warrant . Authorities detained people for more than 3 days without warrant .
 Prosecutors must bring detainees before a judge within 72 hours . pretrial detention should not exceed six months for minor crimes and 12 months for serious ones .
 Prosecutors may detain suspects accused of terrorist activities for up to 30 days without charges or a bench warrant . The law says suspects may be held without charges.
 citizens have the right to be informed of the charges brought against them . Under the law citizens have a right to know if they are charged with any crime .
 The CPT expressed concern about a widespread practice of unrecorded detention . In a report on its 2017 visit to the country, the CPT noted that they encountered allegations of physical mistreatment .
 Authorities occasionally held suspects incommunicado, in some cases for several weeks . Authorities sometimes held suspects in some instances for weeks .
 The Association of Ukrainian Human Rights Monitors on Law Enforcement says detainees were not always allowed prompt access to an attorney of their choice .
 The HRMMU and other human rights monitors reported a continued pattern of arbitrary detention by authorities .
 HRMMU reported SBU arbitrarily detained a man from August 7 to 12 without officially arresting him . In one case the SBU arrested a man without officially arrest him .
 On August 7, the man was detained at the Petropavlivka checkpoint in Donetsk Oblast .
 Police took him to police stations in Petropavlivka and Sieverodonetsk, registered him as a visitor, interrogated him without a lawyer . He was forced to take a polygraph test, and filmed him making a forced confession .
 On August 8, two SBU officers took him to an unknown location and questioned him again without a lawyer . On August 9, he was questioned again by two officers .
 The next morning they drove him to Sieverodonetsk, questioned and detained him in an apartment . The next day he was arrested and detained by police .
 The man was taken to the prosecutor’s office where he met a free legal aid lawyer . The man has been charged with murder in the case .
 The judge of the Sieverodonetsk City Court scheduled a court hearing for August 12 without ordering his detention . The same day, the judge scheduled a hearing for the same day .
 SBU officers continued to detain him arbitrarily, holding him in a rented flat in Sieverodonetsk for two nights . After the hearing, when his lawyer had left, he was detained for two days .
 On August 12, a Lysychansk city court ordered that he be detained for 60 days . He was ordered to be detained by the city court .
HRMMU documented 11 cases of arbitrary detention in the context of conscription into the armed forces . The HRMMU had documented 11 such cases .
Eight staff members of the local military commissariat detained a man, placed him in a vehicle, and brought him to the district conscription office where he was detained for a night .
 The next morning, they brought him to the preassignment unit and threatened him with 20 years of imprisonment if he refused to refuse military service . The next day, he was brought to the unit and sentenced to 20 years in prison .
 On May 30, they released the man after he posted his story on social media .
 During preventive arrests detainees were held incommunicado and denied access to lawyers and relatives . During preventive arrest detainees were denied access.
 The HRMMU continued to report the Ukrainian security services’ persistent use of extended pretrial detention of defendants in conflictrelated criminal cases as a means of pressure to force them to plead guilty .
HRMMU documented 34 cases in which defendants spent more than four years in pretrial custody . The HRMMU also documented 34 people who spent four years behind bars .
 In September the Constitutional Court found unconstitutional an article of the criminal code that made pretrial detention compulsory in conflict-related criminal cases . The Constitutional Court said the article was unconstitutional .
 The HRMMU viewed the ruling as a positive step and noted that in some conflict-related cases, courts replaced pretrial detention with house arrest .
 While the constitution provides for an independent judiciary, courts were inefficient and remained vulnerable to political pressure and corruption .
 corruption among judges and prosecutors remains endemic. Despite efforts to reform the judiciary and the Prosecutor General’s Office, corruption remains endemic .
 Civil society groups continue to complain about weak separation of powers between the executive and judicial branches of government .
 Some judges claimed that high-ranking politicians pressured them to decide cases in their favor, regardless of the merits . Some judges said they were pressured by politicians to make decisions .
 Judges and prosecutors reportedly took bribes in exchange for legal determinations . Some judges and prosecutors allegedly took bribes .
 Other factors impeded the right to a fair trial, such as lengthy court proceedings, including inadequate funding and staffing, and inability of courts to enforce rulings .
 The International Commission of Jurists is visiting the country from March 4 to 8 . Attacks on lawyers are often associated with their defense of clients in politically sensitive criminal cases .
ICJ concluded such attacks undermined the ability of lawyers to adequately perform their duties and protect the rights of their clients . The ICJ concluded that such attacks undermine the ability to adequately do their duties .
 In one such case, an unknown person shot lawyer Oleksandr Ivanov near a pretrial detention center in Kropyvnytsky .
 The National Bar Association said it believed the killing was in response to Ivanov’s professional activities . The killing was believed to be a response to his professional activities.
 The HRMMU expressed concern about intimidation of judges, defendants, and defense lawyers by members of violent radical groups .
HRMMU noted three documented cases in which members of these groups disrupted court hearings by verbally abusing judges and defendants . The HRMMU also noted three cases of verbal abuse by defendants .
 In one case they beat a defendant in a conflict-related case outside the courtroom, but police did not stop the beating .
 A single judge decides most cases, although two judges and three public assessors who have some legal training hear trials on charges carrying the maximum sentence of life imprisonment . The maximum sentence for life imprisonment is life imprisonment.
 The law presumes defendants are innocent, and they cannot be legally compelled to testify or confess . High conviction rates are called into question the legal presumption of innocence .
 Defendants have the right to be informed promptly and in detail of the charges against them, with interpretation as needed . Defendants have a right to have adequate time and facilities to prepare a defense .
 The law allows defendants to confront witnesses against them, to present witnesses and evidence, and to appeal . The law also allows the defendants to present evidence and present witnesses .
 Trials are open to the public, but some judges prohibited media from observing proceedings . Some judges have banned media from watching proceedings .
 Prosecutors seldom met this requirement . Trial trials must start no later than three weeks after charges are filed .
 Human rights groups reported officials occasionally monitored meetings between defense attorneys and their clients . Human Rights groups said officials sometimes monitored the meetings .
HRMMU documented violations of the right to a fair trial in criminal cases related to the Russia-led conflict in Donbas . The HRMMU also documented violations in the case .
 Authorities failed to effectively investigate and prosecute perpetrators for interfering in investigations and manipulating court proceedings . Authorities also failed to properly investigate and prosecuted perpetrators for interference in investigations .
 HRMMU reported persistent allegations that during pretrial investigation in conflict-related criminal cases, ammunition or other incriminating evidence was planted in suspects’ homes to strengthen weak cases .
 Russia-led forces terminated Ukrainian court system functions on territories under their control in 2014 . Russia-backed forces terminated Ukraine's court system in 2014.
 The "DPR" and "LPR" did not have an independent judiciary, and the right to a fair trial was systematically restricted . The “DPR” and “LPR’s” didn’t have anindependent judiciary, according to the
 The HRMMU reported that in many cases individuals were not provided with any judicial review of their detention and were detained indefinitely without any charges or trial .
 In cases of suspected espionage or when individuals were suspected of having links to the Ukrainian government, closed-door trials by military tribunals were held .
 There were nearly no opportunities to appeal the verdicts of these tribunals . There were almost no opportunities for the judges to appeal.
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 United States Department of State . U.S. State Dept. of State reports on human rights practices for 2019 .
 HRMMU reported that de facto authorities generally impeded private lawyers from accessing clients . Court-appointed defense lawyers generally made no efforts to provide an effective defense and participated in efforts to coerce guilty pleas .
 Some human rights groups considered to be subjected to politically motivated detention . Political Prisoners and Detainees were among those detained .
 As of mid-September the trial of Zhytomyr journalist Vasyl Muravytsky continued .
 Muravytsky was charged in 2017 with state treason, infringement of territorial integrity, incitement of hatred, and support for terrorist organizations based on statements deemed pro-Russian . He was also charged with support for terrorists based on Statements deemed pro.
 Some domestic and international journalist unions called for his release . They claimed the charges were politically motivated .
 A December 29 prisoner exchange affected this number, but the SBU had not issued a revised estimate as of year's end .
 The constitution and law provide for the right to seek redress for any decisions, actions, or omissions of national and local government officials that violate citizens' human rights .
 Individuals may appeal to the human rights ombudsman at any time and to the European Court of Human Rights after exhausting domestic legal remedies . Individuals may also appeal to a human Rights ombudsman.
 The country endorsed the 2009 Terezin Declaration but has not passed any laws dealing with restitution of private or communal property . The country has been dealt with partly through regulations and decrees .
 15 successful cases of restitution cases have taken place as a result of tacit and behind-thescenes lobbying on behalf of Jewish groups . F.F.C. F.C.'s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
 The SBU and law enforcement agencies sometimes conducted searches without a proper warrant . The SBu and law Enforcement agencies sometimes conduct searches without warrants .
 Citizens have the right to examine any dossier in the possession of the SBU that concerns them . Citizens can also recover losses resulting from an investigation .
 Many citizens were not aware of their rights or that authorities had violated their privacy . There was no implementing legislation, and authorities generally did not respect these rights, and many citizens did not know their rights .
 There were some reports the government had accessed private communications and monitored private movements without appropriate legal authority .
 The head of the SBI claimed that he found a listening device in his office . For example, on September 20, he said he found the device in the office .
 There were reports that the government improperly sought access to information about journalists’ sources and investigations .
 The Russian government controlled the level of violence in eastern Ukraine . The conflict intensified when it suited its political interests .
 Russia-led forces throughout the conflict methodically obstructed and threatened international monitors, says the U.S. State Department . Russia did not have the access necessary to record systematically ceasefire violations or abuses committed by Russian forces .
Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, and HRMMU issued periodic reports documenting abuses in the Donbas region . The U.S. Department of State issued the reports for 2019 .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe fielded 1,305 persons supporting a special monitoring mission . The mission issued daily reports on the situation in most major cities .
 More than three million residents have left Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts controlled by Russia-led forces . More than 3 million people have left areas of Donetsk.
 The HRMMU noted that hostilities continued to affect the lives of 3. million civilians residing in the conflict zone . TheHRMMU said that 3.m. civilians were killed in the war .
 Regular exchanges of fire across the line of contact exposed those residents to the constant threat of death or injury . Property and critical civilian infrastructure continued to be damaged .
 As of mid-June the HRMMU reported that since the start of the conflict, fighting had killed at least 13,000 persons in Ukraine .
 The HRMMU noted the continued use of indirect and explosive weapons by both sides of the conflict remained the primary concern . Both government forces and Russia-led forces were present in areas where civilians resided .
 The UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights reported presence of military personnel and objects within or near populated areas on both sides of the line of contact .
 The HRMMU also regularly noted concerns about the dangers to civilians from landmines, booby traps, and unexploded ordnance .
 17 miles of territory controlled by Russia-led forces in Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts needed humanitarian demining . According to the Ministry of Defense, 2,700 square miles of government-controlled territory and 3,500 square Country Reports on Human Rights Practices .
Between February 15 and August 15, 18 civilians were killed in mine-related incidents and the handling of explosive remnants of war . The HRMMU says the incidents occurred between February 15-August 15 .
 Of these deaths, nine were in government territory, and nine in territory controlled by armed groups . Of those deaths, 9 were in the government territory .
 On July 25, a woman died after she stepped on a mine near the village of Zaitseve on territory controlled by government .
 On February 22, two civilians died and three were wounded when a bus ran over a mine near the checkpoint Olenivka on territory controlled by Russia-led forces . The bus hit a mine on the Russian-controlled territory of OlenIVka .
 More than 1,000 bodies in governmentcontrolled cemeteries and morgues remained unidentified, mostly from 2014 . According to human rights groups, the bodies remained unidentified . The bodies were held in government controlled cemetersies.
 1,165 persons have gone missing in connection with the conflict in eastern Ukraine from April 2014 through June 2019 .
 In Kyiv as well as in Russia-controlled territory in Donbas, the WGEID perceived little interest in pursuing cases unless the perpetrator is identified as someone supporting the opposite side .
 As of February 15, the family of a man reportedly detained by the SBU in November 2018 had no information about the man’s whereabouts .
 Two men wearing camouflage and masks detained a Russian citizen in Kyiv . They took him to an unknown location .
 Police opened a criminal investigation but closed it five days later . The man's wife reported his disappearance after he was reported missing .
 In December 2018 the prosecutor’s office instructed police to reopen the investigation . The investigation was reopened in December 2018 .
 Human rights groups report that Russia-led forces routinely kidnapped persons for political purposes, to settle vendettas, or for ransom .
 Civilians most often detained by Russia-led forces at entry-exit checkpoints along the line of contact . Civilians were most often arrested by Russian forces at checkpoints .
 As of mid-May, HRMMU documented five cases in which individuals were detained while attempting to cross the line of contact .
 In such cases, relatives could not obtain information about the whereabouts of the detained persons .
 There were several cases in which individuals were held incommunicado for more than one month .
State security representatives reportedly detained a man travelling to visit his friends in Stanytsia Luhanska . For example, on February 23, representatives of the “ministry of state security’s” “LPR” reportedly detained an
 A witness informed the victim's mother about the incident, she turned to the “ministry of state security’s ministry . The ministry claimed to have no information about the victim .
 The mother received information that her son had been detained by the “ministry of state security” under the ‘preventive arrest procedure,’ which allows incommunicado detention for up to 60 days .
 Observers noted that an atmosphere of impunity and absence of rule of law compounded the situation . Observer: "There is a lack of justice in the country"
 The HRMMU continued to receive allegations that the SBU detained and abused individuals in both official and unofficial places of detention in order to obtain information .
 The number of reported cases was considerably lower than in previous years . In previous years, the number of cases was significantly lower than last year .
 HRMMU suspected such cases were underreported because victims often remained in detention or were afraid to report abuse due to fear of retaliation or lack of trust in the justice system .
 The SBI launched an investigation into torture allegations made by an Armenian national regarding abuse at the hands of SBU officers in December 2018 .
 On March 15, two men who identified themselves as SBU officers reportedly forced the man into a car, purportedly to sign documents . They reportedly seized his passport, wallet, and phone, and his phone .
 They took him to the border with Moldova, forced him to make a video statement . They made him walk over the border, and threatened to hurt his family if he returned .
 SBU officers reportedly entered the man's house in Svitlodarsk, searched it without a warrant, seized electronics and documents . They threatened him and his family with deportation, placed a bag over his head, and transported him to a basement location .
Officers reportedly interrogated him, beat him for several 20to 30-minute periods . They coerced him at gunpoint to make a confession of espionage, according to reports .
 He was then taken to an apartment in Kyiv, where he was again severely beaten for two days . He was later taken to another apartment in the city of Kyiv .
 Officers took him to a hospital for treatment for his injuries, registering him under a fake name . He was then taken to a nearby hospital, where he was taken to hospital to be treated for injuries .
 SBU officers took him to another apartment and held him there for approximately two weeks . Instead of hospitalization, the SBU officer held him for about two weeks.
 The officers finally released him in late December . They told him to keep silent about his ordeal .
 HRMMU: Lack of effective investigation into previously documented cases of torture and physical abuse remained a concern .
 There were reports that Russia-led forces committed numerous abuses, including torture, in the territories under their control .
 According to international organizations and NGOs, abuses included beatings, forced labor, psychological and physical torture, public humiliation, and sexual violence .
 A man argued with representatives of the “ministry of state security” when crossing the line of contact in Olenivka by car by car .
 The incident started when several vehicles were allowed to cut the line . The incident began when several cars were let to cut line .
 The man objected to this and was taken into a booth and abused verbally . The man was taken to a booth by a man who objected .
 20 armed men reportedly beat him until he was unconscious . When he resisted, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 Department of State said .
 When he regained consciousness, he realized he was handcuffed on the floor . He realized he had been handcuffed on a floor .
Militants took him outside, handcuffed him to a fence, and threatened to kill him . The militants took the man outside, handcuffing him and threatening him with a knife .
 As of late August, the Prosecutor General’s Office identified 3,500 individuals who had been illegally incarcerated and tortured in the ‘DPR’ and “LPR” since the start of Russia's aggression against Ukraine . The Prosecutor General's Office has identified 3
HRMMU refused access to places of deprivation of liberty in territory controlled by Russia-led forces . HRMMU was not able to assess fully conditions in facilities .
 A 2017 HRMMU special report on sexual and gender-based violence in the conflict noted that both sides committed abuses . The majority of cases occurred in the context of detention, the report says .
 Beatings and electric shock in the genital area, rape, threats of rape, forced nudity, and forced nudity were used as a method of torture and mistreatment .
 The HRMMU noted that women were vulnerable to sexual abuse at checkpoints along the contact line . Women were also vulnerable to sex abuse at checkpoint checkpoints .
 The HRMMU report says sexual violence was used to compel individuals deprived of liberty to relinquish property or perform other actions demanded by the perpetrators . In the territory controlled by Russia-led forces, the report says .
 The HRMMU continues to receive testimonies indicating that such practice still occurred on both sides of the contact line and in Crimea . The majority of these incidents dated back to 2014-2015 .
 In areas controlled by Russia-led forces, the Justice for Peace in Donbas Coalition indicated that sexual violence was more prevalent in “unofficial’s detention facilities, where in some cases women and men were not separated .
 The report stated that at least one out of every four detainees in these irregular prisons was a victim or witness of sexual violence . At least one of every 4 detainees in the irregular prisons (both women and men) was a victims or witness.
 The reported forms of abuse included rape, threats of rape and threats of castration, intentional damage to Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
 Risks were particularly acute for persons living in towns and settlements near the contact line as well as for the approximately 35,000 persons who crossed the contact lines daily .
 The Netherlands’ chief public prosecutor announced the results of the Joint Investigation Group looking into the 2014 downing of Malaysian Airlines flight MH17 in the Donbas .
 The Prosecutor General’s Office issued indictments against three former Russian intelligence officers and one Ukrainian national .
 Russia-led forces in Donetsk Oblast banned Ukrainian government humanitarian aid and restricted aid from international humanitarian organizations . Russia- led forces in the region also restricted aid to international humanitarian groups .
Prices for basic groceries were reportedly beyond the means of many people remaining in Russia-controlled territory .
 Human rights groups report severe shortages of medicine, coal, and medical supplies in Russia-controlled territory . Human rights group also report severe shortage of medical supplies .
 Russia-led forces continued to receive convoys of Russian “humanitarian aid,” Ukrainian government officials believed . Ukraine believed they contained weapons and supplies for Russia.
 The HRMMU reported the presence of military personnel and objects within or near populated areas on both sides of the line of contact .
 The constitution and law provide for freedom of expression, including for members of the press. Freedom of Expression, Including for the Press.
 The government banned or blocked information, media outlets, or individual journalists deemed a threat to national security . The government believed that authorities believed undermined the country's sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Other problematic practices continued to affect media freedom, including selfCountry Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
 In the Donbas region, Russia-led forces suppressed freedom of speech and press through harassment, intimidation, abductions, and assaults on journalists and media outlets .
 Ukrainian and independent television and radio programming in areas under their control . They also prevented the transmission of Ukrainian andindependent television andRadio programming .
 With some exceptions, individuals in areas under government control could generally criticize the government publicly and privately and discuss matters of public interest .
 The law criminalizes the display of communist and Nazi symbols as well as the manufacture or promotion of the St. European Union .
 George’s ribbon, a symbol associated with Russia-led forces in the Donbas region, is a symbol of Russian forces .
 On July 16, the country’s constitutional court upheld the ban on displaying communist and Nazi symbols .
 Police issued 27 administrative offense citations in Odesa, Mykolaiv, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhia, and Donetsk Oblasts . Several individuals were detained for carrying banned Soviet symbols .
 A court in Kryvy Rih convicted a local resident of wearing a T-shirt with the state symbol of the USSR in a public place .
 The man reportedly wore the shirt at a shopping center on June 14 .
 He was given a one-year suspended sentence and another year of probation . He was also given a year of Probation .
 Privately owned media often presented readers and viewers a “biased pluralism,’s views of their owners, favorable coverage of their allies, and criticism of political and business rivals . The most successful media were owned by influential oligarchs .
 The 10 most popular television stations were owned by businessmen whose primary business Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . The U.S. Department of State's Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 23 was not in media .
 Independent media had difficulty competing with major outlets that operated with oligarchic subsidies . Independent media was struggling to compete with major media outlets that operate with oligarchs' subsidies .
 There were reports of continuing state pressure on the National Public Broadcasting Company . It was created as a result of a 2014 law to provide an independent publicly funded alternative to oligarch-controlled television channels .
 UA:PBC announced the removal of the channel’s director, Zurab Alasania, on January 31 .
 Observers alleged the decision was made because the channel broadcast anticorruption investigations in the pre-electoral period that had been unflattering to Petro Poroshenko .
 Following public outcry, board announced Alasania would remain in place until May 6 .
 Kyiv court ruled the board's decision was illegal . Alasania challenged the board’s decision in court, and on June 19, a court ruled .
 The SBI and SBU jointly raided the premises of UA:PBC, several of its regional affiliates, and the home of Alasania, apparently in connection with the allegations of financial mismanagement .
 Monitoring by the IMI of national print and online media for jeansa indicated a wide range of actors ordered political jeansa, including political parties, politicians, oblast governments, and oligarchs .
 IMI recorded a 22 percent increase of jeansa in the national online media before the parliamentary elections in 13 popular internet media outlets . The IMI record a 22 per cent increase in jeansa before the elections .
 Human rights groups and journalists criticized what they saw as government inaction in solving crimes as giving rise to a culture of impunity .
 As of September 1, there had been 20 reports of attacks on journalists, compared with 22 cases and no killings during the same period in 2018 .
 As in 2018, private, rather than state, actors perpetrated the majority of the attacks . The majority of attacks were carried out by private actors, according to CNN.
 As of September 1, there were 33 incidents involving threats against journalists, as compared with 24 during the same period in 2018 .
 The IMI and editors of major independent news outlets also noted online harassment of journalists by societal actors . A growing Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
 There were multiple reports of attacks on journalists by government officials . There were also reports of assaults on journalists .
 Radio Liberty reporter Kateryna Kaplyuk and cameraman Borys Trotsenko were attacked by officials in the village of Chabany near Kyiv on March 6 . Trotsko suffered a concussion and broke his camera .
 The journalists were attempting to interview a village official for an investigation into allegations that officials were allocating state lands for private use . Two deputy mayors of the village, Yuriy Bondar and Volodymyr Chuprin, began shoving and punching them .
 No charges had been brought as of November, police say . They filed a police report, but no charges were brought .
 The Committee to Protect Journalists says two unidentified individuals attacked blogger Ihor Stakh in Chernihiv on August 30 .
 Stakh was later treated for a concussion and required stitches for a cut on his face . Stakh suffered a cut in his face after a concussion .
 The National Union of Journalists made statements indicating that the attack was in retaliation for Stakh’s reporting on local corruption .
 There were reports that government officials sought to pressure journalists through the judicial system, often to reveal their sources .
 The Pechersk District Court granted the Prosecutor General’s Office access to internal documents and email correspondence of the independent news outlet Novoye Vremya .
 Prosecutors were seeking to identify a source who spoke to the Novoye Vremya for a 2016 story revealing corruption by a high-ranking prosecutor . They allege that the source violated investigatory secrecy rules .
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 United States Department of State . 25 Journalists received threats in connection with their reporting .
 The State Committee on Television and Radio Broadcasting maintained a list of banned books seen to be aimed at undermining the country’s independence . The banned books include books aimed at inciting interethnic, racial, religious hostility and promoting terrorist attacks .
 Both independent and state-owned media periodically engaged in self-censorship when reporting stories that might expose political allies to criticism or might be perceived as insufficiently patriotic .
Local media observers express concern over high monetary damages awarded for alleged libel . The law limits the monetary damages a plaintiff can claim in a lawsuit .
 Bohdan clarified on August 23 that he was suing over Schemes’ reports about his repeated travel to visit oligarch Ihor Kolomoiskyy abroad . He asserted that the reports were false .
 Authorities took measures to prohibit, regulate, and occasionally censor information deemed a national security threat . In the context of the continuing conventional conflict in the Donbas, as well as continuing Russian disinformation and cyber campaigns.
 The government continued the practice of banning specific works by Russian actors, film directors, and singers . The government also imposed sanctions on pro-Russian journalists .
 Among them were two widely used social networks based in Russia and major Russian television channels . Other Russian TV channels operated independently of state control .
 There were reports that the government used noncompliance with national security-related content bans to pressure outlets perceived as having a pro-Russian editorial policy .
 NewsOne TV broadcasts from late 2018 to early 2019 revealed “calls for aggressive actions, incitement of national, racial, or religious hatred, and justification of aggression against the territorial integrity’ of Ukraine .
 NewsOne cancelled a planned July 12 joint live television program with the state-owned Russian television channel Rossiya 24 . The channel is banned in the country, because of threats of violence .
 The proposed program, announced the day before on Russian state-owned television, was to be called We Have to Talk . The program would have linked up two studios in Kyiv and Moscow for a purportedly “apolitical” discussion .
 The program's announcement sparked public outrage, a protest outside NewsOne's offices, and widespread condemnation from officials .
On July 8, the prosecutor general called the program “attempted treason” and announced that NewsOne’s leadership had been called in for interrogation . The SBU issued a warning letter to NewsOne, while the SBU issues a warningLetter to
 Derzhkomteleradio announced it would hold an unscheduled inspection of NewsOne on July 9 . The inspection was conducted on July 24 .
 The OSCE representative on freedom of the media expressed concern about the decision . A coalition of independent media watchdogs issued a statement of support of Derzhkomteleradio’s decision .
 The Supreme Court upheld a 2018 ban by the Lviv Oblast Council on all Russian-language books, films, and songs . The ban was in order to combat “hybrid warfare’ by Russia .
 The Zhytomyr and Ternopil Oblast Councils mirrored this measure on October 25 and November 6, respectively, in 2018 . The two councils mirrored each other in October and November .
 Media professionals continued to experience pressure from the SBU, the military, and other officials when reporting on sensitive issues .
 Authorities continued to deport and bar entry to foreign journalists on national security grounds . Authorities continue to bar and deport foreign journalists .
Radical groups committed attacks on journalists, according to reports . There were reports that radical groups committed attacking journalists .
 A dozen members of the radical group Tradition and Order broke down the door of the state-run Ukrinform news agency in Kyiv . They disrupted a press conference by parliamentary candidates who were alleging fraud in the July parliamentary election .
 Three Ukrinform staff members attacked and injured three staff members . They poured water and threw eggs around the room . They attacked and hurt three members of the staff .
 Police opened a criminal investigation into the incident, but as of November no arrests had been made .
 Based on HRMMU media monitoring, critical independent media on the territory controlled by Russialed forces was nonexistent . Based onHRMMU's monitoring, independent media was nonexistent.
 CyberLab Ukraine, an independent digital forensic analysis organization, says authorities blocked more than 50 Ukrainian news outlets .
 HRMMU reported that journalists entering Russia-controlled territory of the “DPR” had to inform “press center’s “ministry of defense” about their activities on a daily basis . They were arbitrarily required to show video footage at checkpoints .
Stanislav Aseyev was convicted of espionage on behalf of Ukraine . He was sentenced to 15 years in prison .
 Human rights defenders maintained that the charges were baseless and brought in retaliation for his independent reporting on events in territory controlled by Russia-led forces .
 Aseyev was released December 29 as part of a Ukraine-Russia prisoner and detainee exchange . He was released in a prisoner and prisoner exchange .
 President Poroshenko endorsed new sanctions approved by the National Security and Defense Council on March 19 . He extended sanctions on the Russian company Yandex until 2022 .
 CyberLab Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . 29 Ukraine, internet service-provider compliance with the government’s orders to block sites varied greatly .
 On July 22, the National Security and Defense Council announced it would continue the policy of blocking Russian social networks .
 A district administrative court in Kyiv dismissed a lawsuit brought by the For Free Net Ukraine Coalition against the Ministry of Information Policy . The lawsuit asked the government to disclose the government’s criteria and methodology .
 The owner of enigma.ua stated that he believed the blocking of his site was in retaliation for its publication of material critical of the country's security services .
 There were reports of the disclosure of personally identifiable information of persons to penalize expression of opinions .
 Portnov invited anyone who comes across these vehicles to “give a stiff rebuff’ to drivers . He also suggested that a driver whose personal data he disclosed was also under surveillance and could be exposed to physical harm .
 Portnov’s actions were apparently in response to an investigation by Schemes into his relationships with officials currently in the government .
 The Myrotvorets database published the personal data of journalists and public figures who had been critical of the country's security services . The site reportedly maintained close ties to the country’s security services.
 On December 10, the database announced it was shutting down its servers to public access . Some officials would continue to have access to the database .
 There were reports of cyberattacks on journalists who reported on corruption .
 Schemes reported repeated attempts to hack their social network and messenger accounts . For several weeks in Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, for several weeks, the report was published .
 Freedom House says internet freedom has improved very slightly after two years of decline . In its annual Freedom on the Net report published in November, Freedom House concluded that internet freedom had improved .
 The digital environment is otherwise vibrant, despite efforts by political actors to manipulate debates through disinformation and paid content . Implementation of these blocks was lax on both sides, and the digital environment was otherwise vibrant .
 These efforts intensified ahead of the presidential election, held in March and April . The presidential election will be held in April and March .
Arrests of users were commonplace, primarily as an extension of continuing hostilities between the government in Kyiv and Russian-led forces .
 There were reports that the government prosecuted individuals for their posts on social media . The government has not commented on the reports .
 The SBU searched the home of a man in Odesa, whom they alleged had written posts supporting Russia-led forces in eastern Ukraine on social media . They seized computer equipment, mobile devices, and material with banned communist symbols .
 There were reports the government investigated academic personnel for their research . Academic Freedom and Cultural Events were held at the University of Cambridge .
 The Lviv regional branch of the SBU announced a check into what it called a “provocative survey” by the respected research institute Kyiv International Institute of Sociology . For example, the Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group said .
 The opinion poll was commissioned by the independent media outlet Dzherkalo Tyzhnya . It asked residents of “Galicia,” a historical region that spans parts of Ukraine and Poland .
 The government maintained a list of Russian or pro-Russian musicians, actors, and other cultural figures that it prohibited from entering the country on national security grounds . The list includes musicians, artists, musicians and actors .
 The constitution provides for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association . The government generally respected these rights .
 The constitution provides for the freedom of peaceful assembly, and the government generally respected this right .
 There are no laws regulating the process of organizing and conducting events to provide for the right . Authorities have wide discretion under a Soviet-era directive to grant or refuse permission for assemblies on grounds of protecting public order and safety .
 Organizers are required to inform authorities in advance of demonstrations . Organizers must inform authorities about demonstrations in advance.
 During the year citizens generally exercised the right to assemble peacefully without restriction in areas of the country under government control .
There were occasional reports of police using excessive force to disperse a protest . There were occasional Reports of police use excessive force.
 Police beat demonstrators, sprayed tear gas, and detained approximately a dozen persons . Police also detained approximately 12 people .
 The detained individuals were met by a crowd of supporters, who allegedly attempted to storm the police station and attacked and used tear gas against police .
 An investigation into the actions of both police and demonstrators continued as of September . The investigation continues into the events.
 Large-scale LGBTI events including pride marches in Kyiv, Odesa, and Kharkiv took place in largely peaceful manner . Thousands of police officers were present at the events .
 Police at times did not adequately protect participants from attack before or after Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
 organizers of a pride festival in the city of Kriviy Rih cancelled a planned march on July 24, citing the inability of police to guarantee the event’s security around the time of parliamentary elections .
 Rivne City Council voted to ban the holding of pride marches on December 24 .
 Events organized by women's rights activists or the LGBTI community were regularly disrupted by members of violent radical groups .
 A group of 10 members of C14 disrupted the gender issues festival Find the Balance in Kryvy Rih on May 8 . The group put up homophobic posters, and insulting the organizers .
 The HRMMU also noted the only demonstrations permitted in these areas were those in support of local “authorities’s” Russia-led forces .
 In June the Constitutional Court invalidated a much-criticized law requiring assets to be reported for civil society organizations and journalists working on anticorruption matters .
 Some civil society organizations saw the decrease in reported attacks as underreporting by civic activists . Some activists opted not to submit complaints because they viewed it as a futile gesture .
 International and domestic human rights NGOs remained concerned about the lack of accountability for attacks on civil society organizations . They believed that the attacks had created a climate of impunity .
 There were reports government targeted activists for raids, arrests, or prosecution in retaliation for their professional activity .
 Police raided the home of human rights activist Oleh Tsvily, the head of the NGO Alliance for Ukrainian Unity .
 They allegedly intentionally banged his head against the steps while bringing him up to his apartment . They handcuffed him near his apartment and allegedly banged him on the steps .
 Police raided Tsvily's apartment, seized his computer and other devices containing information, but did not arrest him . Police raided his apartment.
 Tsvily’s lawyer maintained that law enforcement officials had no court warrant for the search . Lawyer: Law enforcement officials have no court warrants for search .
 During raid police claimed they were investigating Tsvily for purportedly selling drugs on the internet .
 Tsvily maintained the search and attack was in retaliation for his work exposing torture and abuse in the penitentiary system . He maintained that the search was in response to his work expose torture and abused in the prison system .
 A former head of the State Penitentiary Service posted a video of Tsvily’s arrest on his Facebook page with a comment calling him ‘animals’ and predicting he would be sent to prison for selling drugs . The former chief of the
 There were reports that unknown actors made death threats against activists because of their work .
 unknown persons left a coffin, funeral wreath with his name, a note, and an axe wedged into the door of Roman Likhachov, a lawyer and head of the Chuhuiv Human Rights Group .
 Likhachov believed the threats to be linked to his work with a network of anticorruption centers in Chuhuiv . The threats were linked to the sale of alcohol without a license in a local cafe owned by a city council member .
 HRMMU: In territories controlled by Russia-led forces, domestic and international civil society organizations, including human rights defenders, could not operate freely . Human rights defenders were not allowed to operate freely.
 Residents informed the HRMMU they were being prosecuted by the “ministry of state security’s” for their pro-Ukrainian views or previous affiliation with Ukrainian NGOs .
 If human rights groups attempted to work in those areas, they faced harassment and intimidation . Human rights groups faced significant harassment, intimidation .
 The HRMMU also noted civil society organizations run by Russia-led forces, which appeared to require certain persons, such as public-sector employees, to join .
 The constitution and law provide citizens with freedom of internal movement, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation .
 The government restricted these rights, particularly in the eastern part of the country near the zone of conflict . The government, however, restricted the rights, especially in the east .
 The government and Russia-led forces strictly controlled movement between government-controlled areas and territories in the Donbas region controlled by Russia-controlled forces .
 The government adopted new regulations establishing a list of goods prohibited for transfer across the line of contact on July 17 . The new regulations provide more flexibility for people to bring items from both sides .
 Public passenger transportation remained prohibited . Private transportation was available at high prices and was generally unaffordable for the majority of people crossing .
 Five crossing points existed, but only four were in operation for much of the year . Only four crossing points were used in the year.
 Between May and August, an average of 39,000 individuals crossed the line daily, HRMMU says .
 The HRMMU reported that individuals crossing the line of contact had to spend several hours standing in line . The elderly and persons with medical issues had to stand for several hours .
 The government required those seeking to cross into government-controlled territory to obtain a pass . The government requires those seeking a pass to obtain the pass .
 The pass system imposed significant hardships on persons crossing into government-controlled territory . Those seeking to receive pensions and government benefits were not distributed in the territory controlled by Russia-led forces .
 The government attempted to reform a pass system involving an online application process to control movement into government-controlled territory . The government tried to reform the system involving online application processes .
 All passes issued after March 28 had no expiration date . Many persons in Russia-controlled territory did not have access to the internet to obtain such passes .
 Russia-led forces continue to hinder freedom of movement in the eastern part of the country . Russia-Led forces continued to hinderfreedom of movement.
 The government and Russian occupation authorities subjected individuals crossing between Russian-occupied Crimea and the mainland to strict passport controls at the administrative boundary .
 Authorities Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . 35 prohibited rail and commercial bus service across the administrative boundary . People must cross on foot or by private vehicle .
 Civil society, journalists, and independent defense lawyers report that the government made efforts to ease requirements for entering Crimea . The government also improved previously lengthy processes to obtain required permissions .
 As of late September more than 1.4 million people were registered IDPs due to Russia’s aggression in eastern Ukraine and its occupation of Crimea .
 Some NGOs and international organizations estimated the number to be lower . Some people returned to their homes after registering as IDPs, while others registered while still living in the conflict zone .
 The largest number of IDPs resided in areas immediately adjoining the conflict zones, in government-controlled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts .
 Many resided in areas close to the line of contact in the hope they would be able to return home . Many lived in areas near the line-of- contact with the government .
 The government granted social entitlements only to persons who had registered as IDPs . The government grant only to those who registered as IDs .
 Local departments of the Ministry of Social Policy regularly suspended payment of pensions and benefits to IDPs pending verification of their physical presence in government-controlled territories . The process requires recipients to go through a burdensome reinstatement process .
 According to the HRMMU, the government applied the IDP verification procedure broadly .
 The suspensions affected the majority of IDP residents in governmentcontrolled territory as well as most residents of Russia-controlled areas . effects were especially acute for the elderly and disabled .
 The government often suspended payments without notification, and IDPs reported problems having them reinstated .
 Humanitarian aid groups had good access to areas under government control . Humanitarian groups were able to get access to parts of the country.
 IDPs were unable to vote in local elections and for single-mandate district seats in parliamentary elections unless they changed their registration to their new residence . IDPs can't vote in parliamentary election unless they change registration to new residence.
 IDP integration remained impeded by the lack of a government strategy and the absence of financial resources, according to the HRMMU . IDPs’ economic and social marginalization, leading to the marginalization of IDPs .
 UN agencies reported the influx of IDPs led to tensions arising from competition for scarce resources . UN agencies said the influx was due to competition for resources .
 According to the law, the government should provide IDPs with housing, but authorities did not take effective steps to do so .
 A shortage of employment opportunities and the generally weak economy particularly affected IDPs . Many IDPs live in inadequate housing, such as collective centers and temporary accommodations .
 Other IDPs stayed with host families, volunteers, and in private accommodations, although affordable private accommodations were often in poor condition . OtherIDPs stayed in host families and volunteers .
 Some IDPs, particularly those in government-controlled areas of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts, lacked sufficient sanitation, shelter, and access to potable water . Some of the IDPs lacked access to water, sanitation and shelter, including some in the government
 Romani activists expressed concern that some Roma could not afford to flee conflict areas . Others had no choice but to leave their homes .
Banks continued to restrict services for Crimean IDPs even after a court ruling that they should be considered residents of the country .
 The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection and assistance .
 There were reports that the government did not provide for protection against the expulsion or return of some asylum seekers . There was reason to believe their lives or freedom would be threatened on account of their race, religion, nationality or political opinion .
 There were also allegations that officials deported some individuals to countries where they were at risk of imprisonment without providing Country Reports on Human Rights Practices .
 Azerbaijani blogger Elvin Isayev was removed from Ukraine to Azerbaijan for allegedly violating migration laws . For example, on December 12, Elvin is removed from Ukrainian to Azerbaijan .
 ECHR invoked Rule 39 halting extradition of Isayev from Russia to Azerbaijan after his Russian citizenship had been revoked . The Russian citizenship was revoked in September . ECHR invoking Rule 39 halted extradition to Ukraine on September 10 .
 Belarussian anarchist Aleksandr Frantskevich was detained in Kyiv on June 18 . The SBU detained him when he came to the State Migration Service to extend his residence permit .
 Frantskevich, who had lived in Kyiv since 2015, was considered by human rights groups to be a former Belarusian political prisoner .
 SBU officers reportedly forced him into a van, beat and strangled him, and took him to the border with Belarus . They handed him a document saying his activities were in conflict with the interests of Ukraine’s national security, sovereignty, territorial integrity, and constitutional order .
 The number of refugees and asylum seekers has decreased, according to the State Migration Service . The state Migration Service says the number of asylum seekers is decreasing .
 The country is a transit and destination country for asylum seekers and refugees . It is principally from Afghanistan, the Russian Federation, Bangladesh, Syria, and Iraq .
 Human rights groups noted that the refugee law falls short of international standards due to its restrictive definition of a refugee . The law has been criticised for being too restrictive .
 In other instances, government officials declined to accept initial asylum applications without legal basis . In some instances, asylum seekers are left without documentation and vulnerable to frequent police stops, fines, detention, and exploitation .
 Refugees frequently have a hard time finding employment due to lack of qualifications and language proficiency . Refugees often struggle to find employment because of lack of skills and language skills .
 The national plan on the integration of refugees adopted by the government did not allocate resources for its implementation . The plan did not include resources for the implementation .
 Some reports indicate the government did not always provide payment . Some reports indicated the government didn't always provide payments .
 refugees could receive residence registration at homeless shelters for up to six months . The State Migration Service says refugees could get residence registration for six months.
 UNHCR noted a lack of educational programs and vocational activities for those in detention for extended periods .
 The government also provided temporary protection to individuals who may not qualify as refugees . As of August 1, authorities had provided complementary protection to 41 persons .
 Stateless Persons UNHCR estimated there were 35,600 stateless persons in the country . Stateless persons are estimated to be at least 35,000 in the world .
 Persons who were either stateless or at risk of statelessness included Roma, homeless persons, current and former prisoners, and persons older than 50 who never obtained a Ukrainian personal identification document after the fall of the Soviet Union .
 The law requires establishing identity through a court procedure . It requires more time and money than some applicants had .
 UNHCR reported Roma were at particular risk for statelessness . Many did not have birth certificates or any Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
Homeless persons had difficulty obtaining citizenship because of a requirement to produce a document testifying to one’s residence . Homeless persons had difficulties obtaining citizenship.
 The country’s presidential election was held across two rounds on March 31 and April 21 .
 The election “was competitive, voters had a broad choice and turned out in high numbers,’ says the European Parliament .
 In the pre-electoral period, the law was often not implemented in good faith by many stakeholders . The law negatively impacted the trust in the election administration, enforcement of campaign finance rules, and the effectiveness of election dispute resolution .
 Candidates could campaign freely; yet, numerous and credible indications of misuse of state resources and vote buying undermined the credibility of the process .
 The media landscape is diverse, but campaign coverage in the monitored media lacked in-depth analysis and was often biased .
 Election Day assessed positively overall and paves the way to the second round . Election Day was assessed positively. Election Day is assessed positively Overall .
 The newly elected president disbanded the parliament to call for an early parliamentary election . The election was held on July 21 .
 Ukrainian voters are hoping for reforms and changes in politics . The electoral administration was competent and effective despite short time available .
 The campaign was marked by widespread vote-buying, misuse of incumbency, and the practice of exploiting all possible legislative loopholes . Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 is published .
 Voting did not take place in either election in Crimea or in parts of Donbas under the control of Russia-led forces .
 No laws limit the participation of women or members of minorities in the political process, and they did participate . No law limit the Participation of women and members of minority groups .
 The proportion of women in the parliament increased from 12 percent to 20 percent after the July parliamentary election .
 The law provides criminal penalties for corruption . Corruption and Lack of Transparency in Government is a criminal offence .
 Authorities did not effectively implement the law, and many officials engaged in corrupt practices with impunity . Many officials engage in corrupt Practices with impunity, according to the report .
 corruption remains pervasive at all levels in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government . While the number of reports of government corruption was low, corruption remained pervasive in all levels .
 The HACC's creation completed the country’s system of bodies to fight high-level corruption . It complemented two previously created anticorruption agencies, the National Anticorruption Bureau and the Special Anticarruption Prosecutor .
 The new independent anticorruption bodies faced political pressure that undermined public trust . It raised concern about the government's commitment to fighting corruption .
 On February 26, the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional an article of the criminal code proscribing criminal liability for illegal enrichment .
 The decision led NABU to close 65 corruption cases it had been developing against high-level officials . The decision was made by the U.S. government .
 elimination of illicit enrichment from the criminal code was a serious setback in the fight against highlevel corruption, legal experts say .
 President Zelenskyy signed a law reinstating criminal liability for illicit enrichment of government officials . The law was signed on November 26 .
 Ihor Hladkovskyy is the son of the former first deputy secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine . He is accused of large-scale embezzlement . NABU initiated an investigation into Hladovskyy on March 5 .
 Hladkovskyy reportedly procured military equipment from Russia . The equipment was then sold to Ukraine’s state-run defense enterprise, Ukroboronprom .
 Odesa mayor Hennadiy Trukhanov was acquitted of embezzlement on July 9 . The Malynovsky District Court of OdesA acquitted Trukhhanov of em bezzlement .
 The court moved quickly to hold hearings prior to the establishment of the HACC . Experts maintained that experts maintained that the court was moving quickly to move quickly .
 The law mandates the filing of income and expenditure declarations by public officials . It sets penalties for either not filing or filing a false declaration .
 The National Agency for the Prevention of Corruption is responsible for reviewing financial declarations, monitoring the income and expenditures of high-level officials .
 Observers increasingly questioned whether the NAPC had the capacity and independence to fulfill this function . The N APC was formed in 2007, but has not been formally established since then .
 In October the NAPC reported that First Deputy Minister of Culture Svitlana Fomenko declared false information in her 2015 asset declaration .
 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights . A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without government restriction .
 Authorities in Russia-controlled areas in eastern Ukraine routinely denied access to domestic and international civil society organizations .
 The constitution provides for a human rights ombudsman, officially designated as parliamentary commissioner on human rights .
 In March 2018 parliament appointed Lyudmila Denisova parliamentary commissioner on human rights . The Russian parliament appointed her as a parliamentary commissioner in March 2018 .
 The Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner on Human Rights cooperated with NGOs on various projects to monitor human rights practices in various institutions . The projects include detention facilities, orphanages and boarding schools for children .
 Denisova took a proactive stance advocating on behalf of political prisoners held by Russia . Denisova also advocated for Crimean Tatars, Roma, IDPs and persons with disabilities .
 During the year the OHCHR and human rights groups documented fewer incidents of xenophobic societal violence and discrimination, compared with a spike in these incidents .
 Civil society groups remain concerned about the lack of accountability for crimes committed by radical groups in 2018 .
 The HRMMU noted that the failure of police and prosecutors to prevent these acts of violence, properly classify them as hate crimes, created an environment of impunity .
 There were continued reports that the government provided grant funds to or cooperated with radical groups . There were also reports that government funds were given to radical groups.
 Ministry of Youth and Sport awarded 845,000 hryvnias to groups that have committed violence against minorities . For example, National Corps and C14 ran “nationalpatriotic education projects’ for children .
Amendment to criminal code increasing liability for sexual, domestic, and gender-based violence came into force on January 11 .
 The amendments expanded the definition of rape and introduced stricter punishment for sexual coercion by up to three years of prison and forced abortion or sterilization by five years .
 Police issued approximately 44,000 domestic violence warnings and protection orders during the first nine months of the year .
 Punishment included fines, emergency restraining orders of up to 10 days, ordinary restraining orders from one to six months, administrative arrest, and community service .
 Human rights groups noted that the ability of agencies to detect and report cases of domestic violence was limited .
 Human rights groups say law enforcement often don't consider domestic violence to be a serious crime . But they say police are starting to take the problem more seriously .
 According to press reports, in early March an intoxicated man stabbed his 25-year-old former wife in Podolsk .
 The woman managed to run to a hospital, despite being pursued by her former husband . The woman was chased by her ex-husband.
 The conflict in the Donbas region led to a surge in violence against women across the country, says La Strada .
 IDPs reported instances of rape and sexual abuse . Many claimed to have fled areas controlled by Russia-led forces because they feared abuse .
 As of late September the government operated 24 shelters for victims of domestic violence and child abuse . 21 centers for social and psychological aid across the country for domestic violence victims .
Legal experts say safeguards against harassment are inadequate . Law prohibits coercing a person to have sexual intercourse, legal experts say .
 The law puts sexual harassment in the same category as discrimination and sets penalties ranging from a fine to three years in prison .
 Women’s rights groups reported continuing and widespread sexual harassment, including coerced Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
 There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization . No reports of forced abortion or forced sterilization.
 Women experienced discrimination in employment. While the law provides that women enjoy the same rights as men, women experienced discrimination .
 Women on average received 30 percent lower salaries than men, according to the government commissioner on gender policy . Women onaverage received 30 per cent lower salary than men .
 The Ministry of Health maintained a list of 50 occupations that remain prohibited for women .
 Either birth in the country or to Ukrainian parents conveys citizenship . Ukrainian parents are eligible for citizenship .
 A child born to stateless parents residing permanently in the country is a citizen . The child was born to a stateless parent living in the United States .
 The law requires that parents register a child within a month of birth . Failure to register sometimes resulted in denial of public services, the law says .
 Registration of children born in Crimea or Russia-controlled areas in Donbas remained difficult . Registration of kids born in Ukraine or Crimea remains difficult .
 Russia-backed "authorities" routinely kept such paperwork if parents registered children in territories under their control . It's difficult for the child to obtain a Ukrainian birth certificate, making it difficult for them to get it .
 Authorities did not recognize documents issued by Russian occupation authorities in Crimea or “authorities’ in territories controlled by Russia-led forces .
 Crimea and parts of Russiacontrolled Donbas had to turn to Ukrainian courts with birth or death documents issued by occupational authorities in order to receive Ukrainian documents .
 The courts were obliged to make rulings in 24 hours . These decisions were then carried out by the registry office . The courts had to make their decisions in 24 Hours .
 Ukrainians living in regions occupied by Russia and Russia-led forces faced serious difficulty obtaining Ukrainian documents . Due to the lack of judges in local courts, Ukrainians face serious difficulty getting Ukrainian documents.
 Penalties for child abuse range from three years to life, depending on severity . Penalties range from two years to three years, according to severity .
 The law criminalizes sexual relations between adults and persons younger than 16 . Violations are punishable by imprisonment of up to five years .
 A January 11 amendment to the criminal code qualifies sexual relations with a person younger than 14 as rape . The amendment is part of a January 11 amendments to the law .
 45 Human rights groups noted authorities lacked the capability to detect violence against children and refer victims for assistance .
 Authorities did not take effective measures to protect children from abuse and violence and to prevent such problems . Authorities didn't take measures to prevent children from abusing and violence .
 The ombudsman for human rights noted the imperfection of mechanisms to protect children who survived or witnessed violence . Children who witnessed violence committed by their parents were not protected .
 According to the law, parents were the legal representatives of their children, even if they perpetrated violence against them .
 There is no procedure for appointing a temporary legal representative for a child during the investigation of alleged parental violence .
 Police officers in Zhytomyr Oblast learned that a child was missing on May 27 . The child was reported missing from the home of local residents .
 Police uncovered that a few months earlier, the stepfather had hit a child, who fell and died as a result .
 Authorities detained the parents detained on charges of first-degree murder . They removed two other children from the family and placed them in a rehabilitation center .
 A court may grant a child as young as 16 permission to marry if it finds marriage to be in the child’s interest .
 Romani rights groups reported early marriages involving girls younger than 18 were common in the Romani community . Romani women are more likely to marry younger girls than 18 .
 The law prohibits the commercial sexual exploitation of children . It also prohibits the sale of children, offering or procuring a child for child prostitution .
 Molesting a child younger than 16 is punishable by imprisonment for up to five years . Molesting children under 16 is also punishable by up to 5 years in prison .
 The same offense committed against a child younger than 14 is punishable by imprisonment for five to eight years . The same offenses are punishable by five-to-eight years in prison .
 Domestic and foreign law enforcement officials reported that a significant amount of child pornography on the internet continued to originate in the country .
 The International Organization for Migration reported that children from socially disadvantaged families and those in state custody continued to be at high Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
 A Kyiv resident allegedly produced and disseminated pornography of his two children . For example, the Pechersk District Court in Kyiv authorized the arrest.
 The child welfare system continues to rely on long-term residential care for children at social risk or without parental care . The number of residential-care institutions continued to drop .
 Government policies to address the abandonment of children reduced the number of children deprived of parental care . Government policies reduce number of kids deprived of parent care .
 A government strategy for 2017-2026 calls for the transformation of the institutionalized child-care system into one that provides a family-based or family-like environment .
 Human rights groups and media outlets reported unsafe, inhuman, and sometimes life-threatening conditions in some institutions .
 Officials allegedly complicit or willfully negligent in the sex and labor trafficking of girls and boys under their care . Officials of several state-run institutions and orphanages were allegedly complicit .
 On August 15, press outlets reported that 20 children from the Batiovo Orphanage in Zakarpattia Oblast reported physical violence and sexual abuse .
 According to the Association of Jewish Organizations and Communities, there were approximately 300,000 persons of Jewish ancestry in the country .
 Before the conflict in eastern Ukraine, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . About 30,000 Jews lived in the Donbas region .
 Jewish groups estimated that between 10,000 and 15,000 Jews lived in Crimea before Russia’s attempted annexation .
 No cases of suspected anti-Semitic violence were recorded as of October 1 . National Minority Rights Monitoring Group says in 2018, no cases were recorded .
 The last recorded anti-Semitic violence against individuals occurred in 2016 . The last record was in 2016.
 The NMRMG recorded approximately 10 cases of anti-Semitic vandalism as of October 1, compared with 11 incidents during the same period in 2018 . The N MRMG recorded 11 incidents in the same time in 2018, compared to 10 in October .
 NMRMG: Drop in violence and anti-Semitic vandalism was due to better police work and prosecution of those committing anti-Semitism acts .
 Graffiti swastikas continued to appear in Kyiv, Lviv, Poltava, and other cities .
 A memorial to more than 55,000 Jews murdered in Bohdanivka in Mykolaiv Oblast was vandalized on September 15 .
 Jewish organizations expressed concern about continued existence of Krakivsky Market and new construction atop a historic Jewish cemetery in Lviv .
Several anti-Semitic incidents targeting Babyn Yar memorial reported during the year . There were several anti-Semitism incidents targeting the memorial .
 Authorities continued to rename communist-era streets, bridges, and monuments . In line with the country’s 2015 decommunization and denazification law, authorities continue to rename streets and bridges .
 Some were renamed in honor of 20th century Ukrainian nationalists, some of whom were associated with anti-Semitism . Some of the names were also associated with the anti-Semitic.
 The law prohibits discrimination against persons with physical, sensory, intellectual, and mental disabilities . Persons with Disabilities is prohibited by the law .
 The law requires the government to provide access to public venues, health services, information, communications, transportation, and judicial system . The law also requires access to the judicial system and opportunities for involvement in public, educational, cultural, and sporting activities for persons with disabilities .
 Advocacy groups maintained that despite legal requirements, most public buildings remained inaccessible to persons with disabilities . Most public buildings remain inaccessible to people with disabilities, they said .
 Patients in mental-health facilities remained at risk of abuse, and many psychiatric hospitals continued to use outdated methods and treatments . Many psychiatric hospitals still use outdated techniques and treatments.
Patients of a psychiatric institution in Bilopillia in Sumy Oblast complained about cruel and humiliating treatment by staff . Staff allegedly beat and verbally abused them and left them naked for several days .
 The facility's administration reportedly forced patients to work on the institution's cattle farm . The facility’s administration reportedly made patients work on it .
Law enforcement generally took appropriate measures to punish those responsible for violence and abuses against persons with disabilities . Law enforcement generally take appropriate measures.
 NGOs noted that many of those employed to satisfy the requirement received nominal salaries but did not actually perform work at their companies . Many of the people employed to meet the requirement were not actually performing work .
 A law adopted in 2017 guaranteed every child with a disability the right to study at regular secondary schools .
 It called for the creation of inclusive groups in preschool facilities, secondary and vocational schools, and colleges . It also called for an inclusive group in preschools and secondary schools .
 12,000 children with disabilities went to regular schools within the program of inclusive education . The president’s commissioner for the rights of children said the program was in place .
 Persons with disabilities in Russia-controlled areas in the east suffered from a lack of appropriate care . People with disabilities were not able to care for others with disabilities .
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities Mistreatment of members of minority groups and harassment of foreigners of nonSlavic appearance remained problematic .
 As of October 1, the number of xenophobic incidents totaled 61, compared with 89 during the same period in 2018 .
Human rights organizations stated the requirement to prove actual intent, including proof of premeditation, to secure a conviction made it difficult to apply Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
An unknown assailant in Zaporizhzhia attacked Romani rights activist Anzhelika Belova with a knife on October 24 .
 The attacker followed her home from a supermarket into her apartment building, where he stabbed her .
 In one such case, there was an arson attack on a Romani camp on the outskirts of Ivano-Frankivsk .
 Ten men dressed in black attacked the settlement and hurled Molotov cocktails at the camp . The camp was set up in a settlement in the area in the early 1990s .
Members of some radical groups disrupted gatherings related to the rights of Roma . There were multiple reports that members of someradical groups disrupted groups related to Roma .
 A man carrying an ax, two knives, and other weapons attempted to disrupt a briefing of human rights activists about violence against members of the Romani community .
 He broke into the room and started verbally insulting Romani individuals present . He broke in and verbally insulted Romani people present .
 A press center guard threatened those present with two knives and pepper spray . When the guard intervened, he threatened the crowd with knives and spray .
 Human rights activists were concerned about the lack of accountability in cases of attacks on Roma . Roma attacks were documented in 2018 .
 Lviv district court found two high school students guilty of hooliganism for participating in an attack on a Romani camp that resulted in the killing of a man in June 2018 .
 The court did not consider racial motivations or hate crime provisions . The court didn't consider racial motivation or hate crimes .
 Kyiv Oblast Prosecutor’s Office appealed a November 2018 decision against C14 leader Serhiy Mazur . The alleged perpetrator in another attack against a Romani settlement in Kyiv in April 2018 .
 Human rights NGOs voiced concerns that impunity for past attacks fueled more violence . Human rights groups voiced concerns about impunity for previous attacks .
 50 Roma continued to face governmental and societal discrimination and significant barriers accessing education, health care, social services, and employment . The Roma face discrimination and barriers accessing health care and social services .
 60 percent of Roma were unemployed, 40 percent had no documents, according to Council of Europe experts . Only 1 percent had a university degree .
 Romani women’s foundation, Chirikli, erected barriers to prevent issuing national identification documents to Roma .
 Authorities hampered access to education for persons who lacked documents and segregated Romani children into special schools or lower-quality classrooms . Authorities hampered the education for those who had been excluded from special schools .
 During the year many Roma fled settlements in areas controlled by Russia-led forces and moved elsewhere in the country .
 Approximately 10,000 Roma were among the most vulnerable members of the country’s IDP population .
 Acts of Violence, Discrimination, and Other Abuses Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. There were reports that police used laws on human trafficking or prostitution as a pretext to target LGBTI persons .
 LGBTI rights organization Nash Mir says police officers burst into the nightclub at around 1m. Police officers forced all those present to lie down on the floor for three hours . They seized all mobile phones and the club's equipment .
 Officers reportedly behaved in an aggressive and homophobic way, made jokes related to sexual orientation . Two foreigners in the club were forced to sing loudly the anthem of Ukraine .
 There was societal violence against LGBTI persons often perpetrated by members of violent radical groups . Authorities often did not adequately investigate these cases or hold perpetrators to account .
 The HRMMU noted that attacks against members of the LGBTI community and other minorities were rarely classified under criminal provisions pertaining to hate crimes, which carried heavier penalties .
 Crimes and discrimination against LGBTI persons remained underreported, according to LGBTI reports .
 51 men beat two participants in the Kyiv Pride March who were heading home after the event, spraying them with pepper spray, kicking them, and insulting them . For example, on June 23, four unknown Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 were released .
Radical groups consistently tried to disrupt LGBTI events with violence or threats of violence, according to Nash Mir .
Members of radical groups Tradition and Order and Katechon attacked participants of the European Lesbian Conference in Kyiv .
 Perpetrators broke into the premises and sprayed tear gas, injuring 10 persons .
 Police intervened and detained the attackers, but no charges were filed . The attackers were subsequently released .
Lead politicians and ministers have condemned attacks on LGBTI gatherings and individuals . Officials sometimes made public statements that were homophobic or that called for violence against LGBTI persons .
 The labor code prohibits workplace discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity . It also prohibits discrimination on a basis of gender identity.
 discrimination was reportedly widespread in employment, housing, education, and other sectors . No law prohibits such discrimination in other areas, however, and discrimination is reportedly widespread .
 Transgender persons reported difficulties obtaining official documents reflecting their gender identity . This resulted in discrimination in health care, education, and other areas, they said .
 HIV and AIDS Social Stigma Stigma and discrimination in health-care centers were barriers to HIV-positive individuals’ receiving medical services . HIV andAIDS Social Stigmatism and discrimination were barriers.
 UNICEF reported that children with HIV/AIDS were at high risk of abandonment, social stigma, and discrimination .
 Authorities prevented many children infected with HIV/AIDS from attending Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 52 kindergartens or schools .
 Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective Bargaining The constitution provides for freedom of association as a fundamental right . The constitution establishes the right to participate in independent trade unions .
 The law provides the right for most workers to form and join independent unions, to bargain collectively, and to conduct legal strikes . The law gives the right to form, join and form independent unions .
 Legal recourse is available for reinstatement, back wages, and punitive damages . Observers describe court enforcement as arbitrary and unpredictable .
 The law contains several limits to freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining .
 A number of laws that apply to worker organizations are excessively complex and contradictory . The laws apply to workers in the U.S. are too complex, according to the law .
 The status of trade unions under two laws provides they are considered legal entities only after state registration . For example, the status of the trade unions is under two law .
 A trade union is considered a legal entity upon adoption of its statute . Under another law, a trade union can be a legal entities upon adoption .
 The inherent conflict between these laws creates obstacles for workers seeking to form trade unions . The conflict between the laws and the law creates obstacles to forming unions .
 Unions report significant hurdles in registration process, including payment of notary fees and requirements to visit as many as 10 different offices .
Independent unions have reported multiple incidents of harassment by local law enforcement officials . They have reported atypical and irregular requests for documentation and membership information .
 The legal procedure to initiate a strike is complex and severely hinders strike action . The legal process to start strike action is complex, says the lawyer .
 The legal process for industrial disputes requires consideration, conciliation, and labor arbitration . Parties can draw out the process for months for months .
 Only after completion of this process can vote to strike, a decision that courts may still block .
 The right to strike is further restricted by the requirement that a large percentage of the workforce must vote in favor of a strike . A strike may be called before it is called .
 The government is allowed to deny workers the right to Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . 53 strike on national security grounds or to protect the health or “rights and liberties of citizens.
 The law prohibits strikes by broad categories of workers, including the Office of the Prosecutor General, the judiciary, the armed forces, the security services, law enforcement agencies, the transportation sector, and the public-service sector .
Independent unions are not affiliated with the Federation of Trade Unions of Ukraine . They can't take part in tripartite negotiations, participate in social insurance programs, or represent labor at national and international levels .
 The legal hurdles resulting from an obsolete labor code hindered the ability of smaller independent unions to represent their members effectively .
 Worker rights advocates continue to express concerns about independence of unions from government or employer control .
 Independent trade unions alleged that the country's largest trade union confederation, the FPU, enjoyed a close relationship with employers and members of some political parties .
 Authorities deny unions not affiliated with the FPU a share of disputed trade union assets . The dispute dates back more than two decades .
 Independent union representatives continued to be the subjects of violence and intimidation . Local law enforcement officials frequently ignored or facilitated violations of their rights, according to reports .
 Worker advocates reported an increase in retaliation against trade union members involved in anticorruption activities at their workplaces . Worker advocates said the increase was due to retaliation against union members .
 Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor. The law prohibits most forms of forced or compulsory labor . The law also bans forced or forced labor .
 Penalties for violations were sufficiently stringent to deter violations, but resources, inspections, and remediation were inadequate to enforce the law sufficiently .
 During the year the IOM responded to numerous instances of compulsory labor, to include pornography, criminal activity, labor exploitation, begging, and sexual and other forms of exploitation .
 IOM Ukraine reported it assisted six children (four female and two male) Three of them were subjected to forced labor or begging . IOM Ukrainian reported it helped six children, including four female and one male .
 Annual reports on government action to prevent use of forced labor in public procurement indicated that the government has not taken action to investigate its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . 54 supply chains own supply chains for evidence of modern slavery .
 IOM identified victims of trafficking received comprehensive reintegration assistance, including legal aid, medical care, psychological counseling, financial support, and other types of assistance based on individual needs .
 Observers reported that the provision of assistance was problematic due to funding shortfalls and high turnover of trained staff . The provision of help was also a problem, according to experts .
 The government continues to rely on international organizations and NGOs with international donor funding to identify victims and provide the vast majority of victim protection and assistance . The government continued to rely upon international organizations.
 The minimum age for most employment is 16, but children who are 14 may perform undefined ‘light work’ with a parent’s consent . The Minimum Age for Employment is 16 .
 The law prohibits the worst forms of child labor . It does not always provide inspectors sufficient authority to conduct inspections .
 From January to October, the State Service on Labor conducted 2,516 inspections to investigate compliance with child labor laws . The State Service of Labor conducted the inspections from January-October .
 The inspections identified 41 organizations engaged in child labor activities . The inspections identify 41 organizations involved in child labour activities .
 Of these, 14 were in the service sector, five in the industrial sector . Five in the agricultural sector, and 17 in other areas, were in other sectors .
 The inspections uncovered 57 cases of undeclared labor and 15 minors receiving undeClared wages . The inspections also uncovered 15 minors who received undeclaring wages .
 Increased child labor in amber mining was a growing problem, according to reports by labor groups .
 The most frequent violations of child labor laws concerned work under hazardous conditions, long workdays, failure to maintain accurate work records, and delayed salary payments . Most frequent violations concern work under dangerous conditions and long work days .
 The government established institutional mechanisms for the enforcement of laws and regulations on child labor . The government set up institutional mechanisms to enforce child labor laws .
 The limited collection of penalties imposed for child labor violations, however, impeded the enforcement of child labor laws . The limitedCollection of penalties impose for child labour violations, though, is not enough .
 Penalties for violations of the child labor laws were insufficient to deter violations. Penalties were insufficient for violations.
 Discrimination with Respect to Employment and Occupation prohibits workplace discrimination on the basis of race, color, political, religious and other beliefs, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, and sexual orientation .
 The government did not effectively enforce the law, and employment discrimination reportedly occurred with respect to gender, disability, nationality, race, minority status, sexual orientation or gender identity, and HIV-positive status .
 The agriculture, construction, mining, heavy industry, and services sectors had the most work-related discrimination . The agriculture and construction, construction and mining sectors were the most discrimination .
 The law provides for civil, administrative, and criminal liability for discrimination in the workplace . The law is designed to protect employees from discrimination .
 Women received lower salaries due to limited opportunities for advancement and the types of industries that employed them . Women receive lower salaries because of limited opportunities.
 According to the State Statistics Office, men earned on average 23 percent more than women . Men earned 23 percent on average more than men, the Office says .
 Women were more likely to work in lower-paid sectors of the economy and in lower positions . Women were also more likely.
 Women held fewer elected or appointed offices at the national and regional levels . Women held less elected orappointed offices at national or regional levels.
 In July government research on women and men in the energy sector was presented to identify possible ways to resolve the problem of gender imbalance .
 Women still constitute only 25 to 27 percent of the national oil and gas industry workforce . Women in the sector are still only 25-27 percent in the workforce, according to research .
 The country’s annual budget establishes a government-mandated national minimum wage . The minimum wage is above the poverty level .
 The labor law provides for a maximum 40-hour workweek, with a minimum 42hour period of rest per week and at least 24 days of paid vacation per year .
 Employers must meet occupational safety and health standards. But at times they ignored these regulations due to the lack of enforcement or strict penalties .
 Employers in the metal and mining industries often violated the rule and retaliated against workers by pressuring them to quit . Employers often violate the rule.
 A lack of legal remedies, bureaucratic wrangling, and corruption in public and private enterprises, blocked efforts to recover overdue wages, leading to significant wage theft . The problem is not clear whether or not there are legal remedies for missing wages .
 Total wage arrears in the country fell during the year through September 1 to 2. billion hryvnias from 3. billion in September 2018 . The figure was 3.2 billion in 2018 .
Arrears and corruption problems exacerbated industrial relations and led to numerous protests . Arrears, corruption and other problems led to many protests .
 The Ministry of Social Policy transferred responsibility for employment, labor, and labor migration to the Ministry of Economic Trade, Development, and Agriculture . This resolution changed the laborrelated authorities of the ministry .
 The State Labor Service (Labor Inspectorate) has also been transferred to the Ministry of Economic Trade, Development and Agriculture .
 In 2017 the government adopted a new procedure for state control and supervision of labor law compliance . The new procedure extends the powers of labor inspectors, amends the procedure for imposing fines .
 The labor inspectorate, however, lacked sufficient funding, technical capacity, and professional staffing to conduct independent inspections effectively . The labor inspectionorate, though, lacks sufficient funding and technical capacity .
 Labor inspectors may assess compliance based on leads or other information regarding possible unreported employment from public sources .
 The service learns about potential violations from other state agencies . This includes information the service learns concerning potential violations .
Tax authorities may refer the case to labor authorities who will determine compliance with labor laws . For example, tax authorities may find a disparity between a company's workforce and its production volumes .
 labor inspectors may enter any workplace without prior notice at any hour of day or night . While performing inspection visits to check potential unreported employment, labor inspectors can enter any workplaces without prior notices .
 The law allows inspectors to hold an employer liable for certain types of violations . It also allows them to issue an order to cease the restricted activity .
 Labor inspectors may also visit an employer to monitor labor law compliance and inform the company and employees about labor rights and best practices .
 In May a court overturned the inspection decree because it found that the Cabinet of Ministers had adopted it in violation of the procedure .
 The government thereafter adopted a new decree, which once again allowed labor inspectors to carry out labor inspections without notice . The decree was adopted by the government thereafter .
 The procedure expands the list of possible grounds for labor inspections by the State Labor Service, its territorial bodies, and municipalities .
 It also allows the labor inspector not to report on the inspection visit if there is a suspicion of undeclared work . The labor inspector will also not report on a inspection visit.
 When inspectors find cases of labor violations, they are authorized to hold the perpetrator liable . If there is clear evidence of labor inspection violations, inspectors can hold the culprit liable .
 In September 2018, the Cabinet of Ministers approved a regulation that increased regulatory oversight to monitor and counter “shadow’s employment in the informal economy. The regulation is aimed at countering the widespread practice of paying for labor without an employment contract .
 The regulation compels the State Labor Service, the State Tax Service, and the State Pension Fund to review their Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . The regulation is aimed at combat shadow employment .
 Agencies are also required to conduct public awareness campaigns to inform employers of the new procedures . Agencies must also conduct awareness campaigns for employers to inform them of new procedures.
 Penalties for violations of workplace safety standards were insufficient to deter violations . Penalties were insufficient for workplace safety violations .
 Inspectors limited in number, funding, and authority to enforce existing regulations . Inspectors were limited in numbers, funding and authority for enforcement .
The absence of a coordination mechanism with other government bodies was also significant . The absence of the coordination mechanism is also significant.
 Mineworkers, particularly in the illegal mining sector, faced serious safety and health problems . The illegal mining industry faced serious health and safety problems .
 Lax safety standards and aging equipment caused many injuries on the job . Lax Safety Standards and Aging Equipment caused many injury injuries on job .
 Despite active fighting close to industrial areas in the Donbas region, enterprises continue to operate .
 Fighting resulted in damage to mines and plants through loss of electricity, destruction of transformers, and alleged intentional flooding of mines by combined Russia-led forces .
 The loss of electrical power also threatened the operability of mine safety equipment that prevented the buildup of explosive gases . The loss was also threatened by the loss of power .
 In March 2014 Russia announced the peninsula had become part of the Russian Federation following a sham referendum that violated Ukraine’s constitution .
 The UN General Assembly’s Resolution 68/262 on the ‘Territorial Integrity of Ukraine’ of March 27, 2014, and Resolution 74/168 on “Situation of Human Rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the City of Sevastopol�
 Russian law has been applied in Ukraine's Crimea since the Russian occupation and purported “annexation’ of the peninsula .
 Sergey Aksyonov is “prime minister’ of the “state council of the republic of Crimea” administers occupied Crimea . The occupation authority was installed by the Russian government and led by Sergey AKSyonov .
 The "state council" is responsible for dayto-day administration and other functions of governing . The “state council’s’S’State council is responsible.
 Russia’s nationwide parliamentary elections included seats allocated for purportedly annexed Crimea . The move was widely condemned by the international community and contravened the Ukrainian constitution .
 Russian government agencies, including the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Federal Security Service and the Federal Investigative Committee, applied and enforced Russian law in Crimea as if it were part of the Russian Federation .
 U.S. authorities took few steps to investigate or prosecute officials or individuals who committed human rights abuses, creating an atmosphere of impunity and lawlessness .
 There were several reports of killings of Crimean Tatars by unknown individuals .
 At least four Crimean Tatars were found dead during the year . There were no reported investigations nor indications that occupation authorities took action to apprehend perpetrators .
 His body washed up on the shore of the Black Sea near the village of Nikolayevka on July 9 . His weight was tied to his neck .
 Occupation authorities did not adequately investigate killings of Crimean residents from 2014 to 2015 . Crimean residents were killed in 2014 and 2015 .
 12 Crimean residents who had disappeared during the occupation were later found dead . The Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs says the 12 residents were found dead.
 Occupation authorities did not investigate other suspicious deaths and disappearances, sometimes categorizing them as suicide .
 There were reports of abductions and disappearances by occupation authorities .
 Crimean Tatar Edem Yayachikov was arrested during mass raids on Crimean homes that took place on March 27 . As of November his whereabouts were still unknown .
 Relatives filed a missing-person’s report, which was reportedly under investigation . Human rights defenders sought to find him in the detention facilities holding others arrested that day .
 UN report says 42 people were victims of enforced disappearances . The UN secretary-general cites data from the HRMMU .
 Occupation authorities did not adequately investigate the deaths and disappearances of people in Occupation .
 Human rights groups say police often refused Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor UKRAINE 61 to register reports of disappearances .
 Ukrainian government and human rights groups believed Russian security forces kidnapped the individuals for opposing Russia’s occupation to instill fear in the population and prevent dissent .
 There were widespread reports occupation authorities in Crimea tortured and otherwise abused residents who opposed the occupation .
 Human rights monitors reported that Russian occupying forces subjected Crimean Tatars and ethnic Ukrainians in particular to physical abuse . Human Rights monitors said that Russian occupation forces subjected Tatars, ethnic Ukrainians and Tatars to abuse .
 FSB agents detained Crimean Tatar activist Raim Aivazov when he attempted to cross the administrative line from Crimea into government-controlled Ukraine .
 FSB officers beat him, put him in a car, and took him to a forest, his lawyer says . They carried out a mock execution by shooting several times next to his head, lawyer says.
 Aivazov was charged with terrorism and remained in pretrial detention in Simferopol as of October . He was arrested on suspicion of terrorism and charged with murder .
Occupation authorities demonstrated a pattern of using punitive psychiatric incarceration as a means of pressuring detained individuals . Occupation authorities used punitive psychiatric detention as a way to pressure detained individuals.
 Arsen Abkhairov, Eskender Abdulganiev and Rustem Emiruseinov were on trial for allegedly belonging to the Islamic organization Hizb ut-Tahrir . They were transported to a Simferopol hospital for a forced psychiatric evaluation .
 Their lawyer viewed the authorities’ move as an attempt to break his clients’ will and intimidate them . Their lawyer views the move as a attempt to intimidate them.
 occupation authorities threatened individuals with violence or imprisonment if they did not testify in court against individuals whom authorities believed were opposed to the occupation . Human rights monitors reported that occupation authorities also threatened people with violence.
 There were reports of attacks on opponents of the occupation by unknown individuals .
 Two unknown assailants attacked Crimean Tatar activist Risa Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . Asanov known for his support of Crimean political prisoners, while he was filming for a documentary .
 He reported the attack to police but claimed he received no confirmation of his report . He reported it to the police but said he was not given confirmation .
 Prison and detention center conditions reportedly remained harsh and life threatening due to overcrowding and poor conditions .
HRMMU reported inhuman conditions in official places of detention in Crimea . The HRMMU said there were "unacceptable conditions"
 The Simferopol pretrial detention facility was heavily overcrowded . The average number of prisoners has reached more than 1,300 during the past few years .
 Overcrowding forced prisoners to sleep in shifts in order to share beds .
 detainees complained about poor sanitary conditions, broken toilets, and insufficient heating . The Crimean Human Rights Group says detainees were held in the Simferopol pretrial detention center .
 Detainees diagnosed with HIV, as well as tuberculosis, and other communicable diseases were kept in a single cell .
 There were reports that detainees were denied medical treatment, even for serious health conditions . There were also reports of detainees being denied medical care .
 Edem Bekirov, 58, has an amputated leg, diabetes, and a serious heart condition, Human Rights Watch says . He was denied essential heart surgery and was not provided essential medical supplies to care for an unhealed wound .
 The European Court of Human Rights ruled that he be urgently hospitalized for examination and treatment . occupation authorities refused to do so, claiming they could not verify the facts in the court’s ruling .
 He was transferred to a hospital on August 27, after his condition worsened . He was released to mainland Ukraine on September 7 as one of the subjects of a “prisoner exchange” between Ukraine and Russia .
 As of September 1, 61 Crimean prisoners have been transferred to the Russian Federation . The occupation began in 2014 .
 Crimea has a lack of specialized penitentiary facilities in Crimea, requiring the transfer of juveniles, persons sentenced to life imprisonment and prisoners suffering from serious physical and mental illnesses .
 prisoners considered Russian citizens by the Russian Federation were denied Ukrainian consular visits . Some Crimeans were transferred to prison facilities in Russia without Ukrainian passports .
 The Crimean Human Rights Group says a prisoner was injured in the Simferopol pretrial detention center and later died at a hospital .
 Prison authorities reportedly retaliated against detainees who refused Russian Federation citizenship . They reportedly placed them in smaller cells or in solitary confinement .
 Occupation authorities did not permit monitoring of prison or detention center conditions by independent nongovernmental observers or international organizations .
 Occupation authorities permitted the “human rights ombudsman’s’ visit prisoners . But human rights activists regarded Lubina as representing the interests of occupation authorities .
 Arbitrary Arrest or Detention Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees. See the Country Reports on Human Rights for Russia .
 Arbitrary arrests continued to occur, which observers believed were a means of instilling fear, stifling opposition, and inflicting punishment .
 Security forces regularly conducted raids on Crimean Tatar villages, accompanied by detentions, interrogations, and often criminal charges .
 Crimean Resource Center recorded 69 detentions and 97 interrogations that were politically motivated as of June . The Crimean Resource Centre recorded 69 Detentions, 97 interrogators .
 The HRMMU noted that justifications underpinning the arrests of alleged members of “terrorist’ or “extremist’s groups often provided little evidence that the suspect posed an actual threat to society by planning or undertaking concrete actions .
 The HRMMU noted the prevalence of members of the Crimean Tatar community among those apprehended during police raids .
 The Crimean Tatar Resource Center says 69 people were detained between January and June . 57 were Crimean Tatars, according to the center .
 The HRUMMU noted raids were often carried out on the pretext of purported need to seize materials linking suspects to groups which are banned in the Russian Federation .
 The FSB raided 25 houses of Crimean Tatars in the city of Simferopol on March 27, according to HRMMU .
 Security forces had no warrant for the raid, human rights groups say . Security forces denied detained individuals access to lawyers .
 FSB agents searched every house in Strohanivka seeking, unsuccessfully, four Crimean Tatars who were not at their own homes during the searches the previous day .
 Occupation officials cordoned off the village and set up checkpoints to examine all vehicles .
 On March 28, three of the men were detained in Rostov-on-Don in Russia .
 The rest were charged with participating in the activities of a terrorist organization . The rest face up to 20 years in prison for participating in a terrorist group .
 The men were transferred to Russia for pretrial detention, where they remained as of October . All of the men are now in custody in Russia .
 Jehovah’s Witnesses were also targeted during the year for raids and arbitrary arrests .
 Six members of the group, which is banned in Russia as an extremist organization, were detained for questioning .
 Two Crimean Tatar female activists were detained May 30 . They were detained by occupation authorities from the “ministry of interior’s” “center for combating extremism”
 Crimean Human Rights Group says activists were interrogated for several hours . Authorities refused to inform their lawyers where they were detained or grant them access to their clients .
 A court fined them 1,000 Russian rubles and 2,000Russian rubles respectively . A court also fined them for $1,000 each .
 Denial of Fair Public Trial under the Russian occupation regime was neither independent nor impartial .
 Judges, prosecutors, and defense attorneys were subject to political directives from occupation authorities . The outcomes of trials appeared predetermined by government interference, according to reports .
 The HRMMU noted that lawyers defending individuals accused of extremism or terrorism risked facing similar charges themselves . Lawyers defending people accused of terrorism risk similar charges.
 Crimean occupation authorities filed a complaint in January with the Crimean “bar chamber’s’ “ministry of justice” seeking his disbarment . The occupation authorities’ " ministry of justice" filed the complaint .
 Trial Procedures Defendants in politically motivated cases were increasingly transferred to the Russian Federation for trial . The Russian Federation is the largest country in Russia .
 The Russian government applied and enforced Crimea's laws and procedures in occupied Crimea . See the Country Reports on Human Rights for Russia for a description of the relevant Russian laws .
Occupation authorities interfered with defendants’ ability to access an attorney . Occupation authorities interfere with defendant’s access to attorney .
 The August UN secretary-general’s special report says defendants facing terrorism or extremism-related charges were often pressured into dismissing their privately hired lawyers in exchange for leniency .
 As of August, 93 Crimeans were being deprived of freedom in occupied Crimea or in Russia on political or religious charges . 66 of whom were Crimean Tatar Muslims prosecuted on terrorism charges, according to the Crimean Human Rights Group .
 Charges of extremism, terrorism, or violation of territorial integrity were particularly applied to opponents of the occupation, such as Crimean Tatars, independent journalists, and individuals expressing dissent on social media .
 Occupation authorities and others engaged in electronic surveillance, entered residences and other premises without warrants, and harassed relatives and neighbors of perceived opposition figures .
 Crimean Tatar Resource Center says authorities conducted 73 searches between January and June . 55 of the searches were in the households of Crimean Tatars .
 Russian authorities had widespread authority to tap telephones and read electronic communications . Human rights groups say authorities had established a network of informants to report on suspicious activities .
 Authorities reportedly encouraged state employees to inform on their colleagues who might oppose the occupation . State employees were reportedly encouraged to inform their colleagues about the occupation.
Human rights advocates say eavesdropping and visits by security personnel created an environment in which persons were afraid to voice any opinion contrary to the occupation authorities .
 The FSB is pressuring Crimeans working at local internet service providers to provide information about internet users suspected of having pro-Ukrainian views .
 The FSB reportedly demanded the service providers’ employees gather and turn over personal data, information about social media use, and other private information on certain users .
 The Russian government applied and enforced in occupied Crimea . The U.S. Department of State reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 .
Occupation authorities significantly restricted freedom of expression and subjected dissenting voices to harassment and prosecution . Occupation authorities also subjected dissenters to harassment.
 Human rights groups report FSB engaged in widespread surveillance of social media, telephones, and electronic communication . FSB routinely summoned individuals for “discussions’ for voicing or posting opposition to the occupation .
 Occupation authorities often deemed expressions of dissent “extremism’s’ and prosecuted individuals for them .
Valeriy Bolshakov is the head of the Sevastopol Worker's Union . He was sentenced to two years and six months of suspended imprisonment for ‘public calls to extremist activities’ for his criticism of occupation authorities .
Authorities arrested Prykhodko during a raid on his home on October 9 . They purportedly “found’s explosives in his garage, which human rights defenders maintained were planted there .
Authorities charged Prykhodko with terrorism and possession of explosives . On October 28, authorities charged him with terrorism .
 Occupation authorities deemed expressions of support for Ukrainian sovereignty over the peninsula to be equivalent to undermining Russian territorial integrity .
 Crimean Tatar Mejlis member Iskander Bariyev is charged with calling for the violation of the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation . He called for the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 United States Department of State . The U.S. Department
 Occupation authorities detained and prosecuted individuals seeking to film raids on homes or court proceedings .
 Crimean Tatar activist Iskender Mamutov was sentenced to five days in prison for “minor hooliganism’s” He filmed security services as they raided Crimean homes, reports say .
 During the year occupation authorities prosecuted individuals for the content of social media posts written before Russia began its occupation of Crimea .
 Seyar Emirov, a resident of Sudak, was detained for a video posted on a social network in 2013 . For example, on July 2, police detained a resident in Sudak for video posted online .
 The video was of a local meeting of Hizb ut-Tahrir, which is legal in Ukraine .
 There were reports that authorities prosecuted individuals for their appearance in social media posts that they did not author .
 Crimean Tatar activist Luftiye Zudiyeva fined 2,000 rubles for being tagged in social media posts in 2014 . Authorities alleged the posts also contained banned symbols .
 Most independent media outlets were forced to close in 2015 after occupation authorities refused to register them . Most of the media outlets had been forced to shut in 2015 .
 Crimean Human Rights Group says many local journalists have left Crimea or abandoned their profession .
Civic activists were a major source of information on developments in Crimea . There were no independent media outlets left in Crimea and professional journalists facing serious risks for reporting .
Security forces or police harassing activists and detaining journalists in connection with their civic or professional activities . There were numerous cases of security forces orPolice harassing activists .
Security forces reportedly harassed, abused, and arrested journalist Yevgeniy Haivoronskiy . For example, during the year security forces allegedly harassed and abused Haivorskiy.
 Haivoronskiy initially supported the Russian occupation, but in recent years came to oppose it . In recent years he has expressed publicly that he opposes it .
 Police raided Haivoronskiy’s home and seized computers and documents on March 6 .
 Primechania's work will no longer carry his work due to his Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . He is a pro-Ukrainian position .
 Haivoronskiy was arrested on March 26 after he gave an interview criticizing occupation authorities . He called for control of the peninsula to be returned to Ukraine .
 Police alleged he had been using drugs . Judge sentenced him to 12 days in jail and to undergo drug treatment .
 Haivoronskiy denied he used drugs and maintained the charge was an effort to frame him in retaliation for his political views . Haivorskiy said he was being framed for political views and was not using drugs .
 A court sentenced him to a further 10 days in jail for refusing a medical examination during the March prison stay . He was sentenced on May 7, a court said .
 Haivoronskiy reportedly beat and slammed his head into the side of a police car during detention .
 The same day a court sentenced him to 15 additional days in jail for failing to complete the drug treatment program ordered by the court in March . He was also sentenced to 15 more days in prison for not completing the program .
 Russian occupation authorities forcibly removed Haivoronskiy from Crimea to mainland Ukraine . Haivorskiy was removed from Crimea on December 31 .
 The August UN secretary-general’s special report stated, “In order to avoid repercussions for independent journalistic work, frequently selfcensored, used pseudonyms and filtered their content prior to publication.
 There were reports occupation authorities sought to restrict access to or remove internet content about Crimea they disliked .
 YouTube notified the Center that if it did not delete the material, it could be forced to block it . The Center said if it didn't delete it, it would have to do it .
 Amnesty International released a statement urging YouTube not to block the video, and YouTube did not do so . On February 7, Amnesty International said that YouTube didn't do so.
 Occupation authorities banned most Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar-language broadcasts . They replaced the content with Russian programming .
 Crimean Human Rights Group monitoring says authorities jammed the signal of Ukrainian radio stations by transmitting Russian radio stations at same frequencies .
Ukrainian singers are banned from playing on Crimean radio stations . Ukrainian singers are forbidden from playing songs by Ukrainian singers . Ukrainian authorities continue to forbid them from playing .
 The Russian Federal Financial Monitoring Service included prominent critics of the occupation on its list of extremists and terrorists .
 Inclusion on the list prevented individuals from holding bank accounts, using notary services, and conducting other financial transactions .
 Authorities frequently use the threat of “extremism,” “terrorism,’ or other purported national security grounds to justify harassment .
 A court authorized the in absentia arrest of independent Crimean Tatar journalist Gulsum Khalilova, according to press reports . Khalilov was arrested for allegedly joining an armed battalion in Ukraine .
 Khalilova, who moved to mainland Ukraine, denied having any dealings with armed groups . She characterized the case as fabricated in retribution for her independent reporting on the peninsula .
Security services routinely monitored and controlled internet activity to suppress dissenting opinions . Security services routinely monitor and control internet activity, according to reports .
 More than 30 Ukrainian online outlets were among the hundreds that authorities blocked in Crimea . Several sites that were not on the Russian federal internet block list were not.
 Academic Freedom and Cultural Events Occupation authorities engaged in a widespread campaign to suppress the Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian languages . The campaign was carried out by Academic Freedom of Cultural Events.
 The Russian government applied and enforced in occupied Crimea . Russia's laws and procedures are described as relevant Russian laws .
 Crimean Tatar activist Kemal Yakubov filed application to hold public celebration of Muslim holiday Kurban Bayram . Zarechenskoye village council denied application on August 9 .
 Crimean Human Rights Group reported Crimeans were regularly charged with administrative offenses for peacefully assembling without permission . Crimeans are regularly charged for peacefully assemble without permission.
 Igor Savchenko had organized a demonstration on August 14 against illegal construction on the Meganom Cape . Savchenko was convicted on August 21 of holding an unauthorized demonstration and fined him 20,000 rubles .
 Occupation authorities brought charges for “unauthorized assemblies’ against single-person protests . Russian law imposed on Crimea does not require preauthorization for individual protests .
 There were reports that authorities used a ban on “unauthorized missionary activity’ to restrict public gatherings of members of religious minorities .
 Three administrative cases were initiated against members of the Hare Krishna faith who gathered in Sevastopol park to sing mantras .
 Students, teachers, and civil servants were forced to attend a commemoration event on the day of deportation of Crimean Tatars . The event was organized by occupation authorities in Simferopol on May 18 .
 occupation authorities charged and fined individuals for allegedly violating public assembly rules in retaliation for gathering to witness security force raids .
 Freedom of Association See the Country Reports on Human Rights for Russia for a description of the relevant Russian laws and procedures that the Russian government applied and enforced in occupied Crimea .
 Occupation authorities broadly restricted freedom of association for individuals who opposed the occupation .
 Crimean Human Rights Group documented multiple cases in which police visited the homes of Crimean Solidarity activists to threaten them or warn them not to engage in “extremist’s activities’
 At least seven Crimean Solidarity activists were given such “preventative warnings” on the eve of the May 17 anniversary of the 1944 deportation of Crimean Tatar people .
 The Spiritual Administration of Crimean Muslims was closely associated with Crimean Tatars . 73 Occupation authorities placed restrictions on the Spiritual Administration.
 Russian security services routinely monitored prayers at mosques for any mention that Crimea remained part of Ukraine .
 Russian security forces also monitored mosques for anti-Russian sentiment and as a means of recruiting police informants .
 The Crimean Tatar Mejlis was banned in 2016 as an “extremist organization’s” occupation authorities . occupation authorities banned gatherings by Mejli members and prosecuted individuals .
 Freedom of Movement Occupation authorities did not respect the right to freedom of movement. Freedom of movement is not allowed to be a movement .
 Occupation authorities maintained a state border at the administrative boundary between mainland Ukraine and Crimea .
 The absence of public transportation between Crimea and mainland Ukraine continued to undermine freedom of movement to and from the peninsula, affecting mainly the elderly, individuals with limited mobility .
 There were reports occupation authorities selectively detained and at times abused persons attempting to enter or leave Crimea .
Human rights groups say authorities routinely detained adult men at the administrative boundary for additional questioning . They say authorities threatened to seize passports and documents, seized telephones and memory cards .
 FSB detained activist Gulsum Alieva at the administrative borderline when she was entering the peninsula .
 The activist was brought to the police Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for the 2019 United States Department of State . The activist is from the town of Armyansk .
 Authorities charged Alieva with extremism and released her later the same day . Her lawyer says authorities charged her with extremism .
 Authorities issued entry bans to Crimean Tatars attempting to cross the administrative boundary from mainland Ukraine . In other cases, authorities issued entry ban to Crimea Tatars trying to cross administrative boundary .
 Crimean Tatar Rustem Rashydov was seeking to visit his family in Crimea . The Crimean Human Rights Group says he was detained at the administrative boundary .
 Occupation authorities launched criminal cases against numerous high-profile Crimean Tatar leaders .
 Ukrainian legislation restricts access to Crimea to three designated crossing points . It imposes penalties for noncompliance .
 Crimean residents lacking Ukrainian passports often faced difficulties crossing into mainland Ukraine . Crimean residents only possessed Russian-issued Crimean travel documents not recognized by Ukrainian authorities .
 Russian occupation authorities required all residents of Crimea to be Russian citizens . All residents in Crimea were required to be Russians .
 Those who refuse Russian citizenship could be subjected to arbitrary expulsion . Those who refused Russian citizenship may be subject to arbitrary expelled .
 Residents of Crimea who chose not to adopt Russian citizenship were considered foreigners . Residents who did not adopt Russia were considered foreign citizens .
 Russian citizens without Russian citizenship were deprived of key rights . They could not own agricultural land, vote or run for office, register a religious congregation, or register a vehicle .
 Authorities denied those who refused Russian citizenship Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 . The U.S. Department of State will provide 75 access to government employment, education, and health care .
 Crimean Human Rights Group says Russian authorities prosecuted private employers who continued to employ Ukrainians .
 Fines could be imposed on employers for every recorded case of employing a Ukrainian citizen without a labor license . Fines would be imposed for all recorded cases.
 In some cases, Crimean residents were compelled to surrender their Ukrainian passports . Many countries did not recognize “passports’ issued by Russian occupation authorities .
 Approximately 33,000 residents of Crimea registered as IDPs on the mainland . About 33,00 residents of the Crimea are IDPs .
 The Mejlis and local NGOs, such as Krym SOS, believed the actual number could be as high as 100,000 . Most IDPs remained unregistered .
 Many fled due to fear that occupation authorities would target them for abuse because of their work as political activists or journalists . Many fled because of fear they would be targeted by occupation authorities for abuse .
 Muslims, Greek Catholics, and Evangelical Christians who left Crimea said they feared discrimination due to their religious beliefs . Muslims, Greeks, and Greek Catholics said they were afraid of discrimination .
 Crimean Tatars made up the largest number of IDPs in the country . They said they left because of pressure on their community, including arbitrary searches .
 Many professionals left Crimea because Russian occupation authorities required them to apply for Russian professional licenses and adopt Russian procedures in their work .
 Russian occupation authorities prevented residents from voting in Ukrainian national and local elections since Crimea's occupation began in 2014 .
 There were multiple reports during the year of systemic corruption among Crimean “officeholders,’s officeholders . There were several reports of embezzlement of state funds allocated to support the occupation .
 Crimean authorities detained the mayor of Yevpatoriya, Andrey Filonov, on April 3 .
 Most independent human rights organizations ceased activities in Crimea following Russia’s occupation . Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights .
 Occupation authorities refused to cooperate with independent human rights NGOs . They harassed human rights monitors and threatened them with fines and imprisonment .
 Russia continues to deny access to the peninsula to international human rights monitors from the OSCE and the United Nations . Russia continued to denied access to international rights monitors .
Under both Ukrainian law and laws imposed by Russian occupation authorities, either birthplace or parentage determines citizenship . Under both Ukrainian and Russian law, both laws are imposed by occupation authorities .
 Registration in the country requires a hospital certificate, which is retained when a birth certificate is issued . The hospital certificate is kept when a baby is born .
 New parents could only obtain a Russian birth certificate and did not have access to a hospital certificate . Under the occupation regime, new parents could not obtain a birth certificate .
 In 2016 the Ukrainian government instituted a process whereby births in Crimea could be recognized with documents issued by occupation authorities . The process was instituted in 2016 .
 occupation authorities continued to permit kidnapping of orphans in Crimea and transporting them across the border into Russia .
 An estimated 10,000 to 15,000 Jews lived in Crimea, primarily in Simferopol .
 The August UN secretary-general’s special report noted a “narrowing of space for manifestations of Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar identities and enjoyment of the respective cultures in Crimea .
 There were reports that government officials openly advocated discrimination against Crimean Tatars .
 Crimean Tatars were harassed for speaking their language in public and forbade speaking it in the workplace . Occupation authorities harassed Tatars for speaking the language .
Teachers prohibited schoolchildren from speaking Crimean Tatar to one another .
 Crimean Tatars were prohibited from celebrating their national holidays and commemorating victims of previous abuses . Tatars are prohibited from commemorating previous abuses.
 Residents of the town of Oktyabrske asked to hold a car rally for Crimean Tatar Flag Day . occupation authorities denied the request .
 Police arrived at the gathering, informed them the event was unauthorized, and video-recorded those present . The gathering was held in New York .
 Ukrainian as a language of instruction was removed from university-level education in Crimea by the end of 2014 .
Occupation authorities have not permitted churches linked to ethnic Ukrainians to register under Russian law . The Orthodox Church of Ukraine and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church are not allowed to register .
 Occupation authorities harassed and intimidated members of the churches and used court proceedings to force the OCU in particular to leave properties it had rented for years .
 The church was shut down after repeated refusals by the authorities to allow it to register . The church had been allowed to register for the first time.
 Occupation authorities allegedly selectively seized property belonging to ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars .
 Crimean Tatars affiliated with the Mejlis are prohibited from registering businesses or properties as a matter of policy . Russian occupation authorities prohibited Crimean Tatar Tatars from registering business or properties .
 Most LGBTI individuals fled Crimea after the Russian occupation began, LGBTI activists reported .
 Those who remained in fear of abuse due to their sexual orientation or gender identity. Those who remain lived in fear for their sexual identity .
 NGOs working on access to health care among vulnerable groups have found it impossible to advocate for better access to healthcare for LGBTI persons due to fear of retaliation by occupation authorities .
 Occupation authorities prohibited any LGBTI group from holding public events in Crimea . The Crimea region has been under occupation by the Crimea government .
 LGBTI residents of Crimea faced difficulties in finding a safe environment for gatherings because of occupation authorities' encouragement of an overall hostile attitude towards the manifestation of LGBTI identity .
 The theater company Territoria apologized for producing a play that showed two women kissing during a statesponsored theater festival .
 Russian law prohibits “propaganda’ of “nontraditional sexual relations” to minors . High-ranking members of the Russian government called for the company to be prosecuted under the law .
 Ukrainian authorities announced the labor laws of Ukraine would not be in effect after 2016 . Only the laws of the Russian Federation would apply .
 Occupation authorities imposed the labor laws and regulations of the Russian Federation on Crimean workers . They created barriers to freedom of association, collective bargaining, and ability to strike .
Trade unions are formally protected under Russian law but limited in practice . Trade unions are also formally protected by Russian law .
 As in Ukraine and Russia, employers were often able to engage in antiunion discrimination and violate collective bargaining rights . As in both Ukraine and Russian, employers often engage inAntiunion discrimination .
 Pro-Russian authorities threaten to nationalize property owned by Ukrainian labor unions in Crimea . The pro-Russian government has threatened to nationalized property in Ukraine .
 Ukrainians who did not accept Russian citizenship faced job discrimination in all sectors of the economy . Ukrainians who were not accepted Russian citizenship face job discrimination. Ukrainians who didn't accept Russia's citizenship faced discrimination in the economy.
 Only holders of Russian national identification cards were allowed to work in “government’s and municipal positions . Only holders were allowed in ‘government” and ‘maintain’ positions .
 Labor activists believed that unions were threatened in Crimea to accept “government policy without question’s “ government policy without questions’.
Experts estimated there was growing participation in the underground economy in Crimea . No official data was available .