 State policy regarding the use of civilians for the defence of the country deserves special attention, given the difficult political and economic situation in the country .
 Ukraine's experience on territorial defence can serve as an example for other countries and alliances to avoid similar mistakes and use them in the future for their own defence .
 Russia Modern armed forces are impossible to imagine without high-precision weapons, aircraft, tanks, artillery . Ukraine, territorial defence, Crimea, Donbas, hybrid warfare, and hybrid warfare are all difficult to imagine .
 No item, how automated it would not be, will not replace the human . No item will be automated, but no item will not be .
 The experience of recent armed conflicts XX – early XXI centuries shows that the regular army is powerless to successfully operate guerrilla groups . The experience shows that, where the regular Army is powerless, it is not easy to operate guerrilla Groups .
Today, virtually all countries of the world pay special attention to issues of territorial defence .
 This term is a modern interpretation of the well-proven in the past, people's militias and guerrilla movements . The term is used to refer to people's militia and guerrilla movement .
 Since time immemorial, when still only laid the foundation of regular armies, militias have existed . The militias have been in existence since the beginning of the era .
 The peasants were formed mainly of peasants, in spite of the poorly armed (often military weapons became agriculture implements – pitchforks, scythes, etc.) and the lack of proficiency demonstrated bravery and courage in defence of their native land .
 Where regular troops turned to flee, the enemy met Draught ordinary men or even runaway serfs, ready to give their lives for their land .
 In many states, the experience of guerrilla warfare is counted and multiplied . In some states, guerrilla warfare has been counted and multiply .
 The formation of the territorial defence system became one of the most important decisions that allowed stopping the advance of military operations deep into the territory of Ukraine .
 Ukraine was not ready to conduct military operations against fighters supported by the Russian army in the Donbas and Crimea . Some of its divisions are on the eastern borders of the country .
 The concept of a hybrid war is actively used by the Russian Federation against the Ukrainian government on its south-eastern borders .
 Hybrid warfare, in fact, is a mixture of classic warfare with the use of irregular armed groups .
 The state leads hybrid war makes a deal with non-performers – the militants, local community groups, organizations . The relationship is formally completely denied .
 Every State is obliged to comply with the terms of the Geneva and the Hague Conventions on the Laws of War on Land, as well as agreements with other countries .
 All the dirty work in such a situation can be passed on to non-State actors .
Inter-ethnic hysteria was artificially created by inter- ethnic hysteria, says the author . The author says it was initially provided by the media and abundant financing mercenaries with weapons and instructors .
 Ukraine has tightened around 40,000 Russian soldiers in recent months . The border with Ukraine has been tightened by the Russian army .
 Ukraine is a strong pressure in the event of incorrect or inappropriate policy actions can be a full-scale intervention of the troops . Ukraine is under strong pressure.
In Ukraine there are groups that are managed from Russia . On the other hand, in Ukraine there is a group that is managed by Russia .
 When the boundary of the adjacent state crosses the boundary, everything is clear, but in this case nothing is done . In this case, nothing has been done .
 Russian Federation under supervision of Russian Federation . Instead, it is silent annexation, with involvement of militants and ethnic groups on ground .
First Russian annexation of Crimea in the spring of 2014 the Autonomous Republic of Crimea . Russian troops in the eastern regions of Ukraine are seen as a new type of war .
 America and Europe will always continue to say that they do not recognize the annexation of Crimea to Russia . That is, it will be another frozen conflict, the same as Nagorny Karabakh .
 Crimea became part of Russia, and Vladimir Putin got what he wanted . But legally we do not recognize, the de facto annexation of Crimea happened .
 The international community is saying We do not recognize, but the fact of accession has already taken place . The internationalcommunity is saying we do notrecognize, but that we don't recognize .
 In the short term this is a very successful tactic when it will be possible to capture new territory without firing a shot . In the long term this tactic is a successful tactic.
 The purpose of hybrid warfare is not the conquest and destruction, but the economic destruction of the country . As for the events in the Donbas, the purpose is not to conquest, but to destroy the country.
 destruction of the country is an acceptable goal, that this area became no man's land of chaos . Destruction of the nation is anacceptable goal, according to experts .
 Victory in this war – a long-term instability and the ongoing process of the war – is the result of this war .
Over time, over time, should enable the "Moderator War" to get the approval of the international community in the role of peacemaker. That should happen over time .
 In modern conditions of hybrid warfare, it's quick and cheap way to destroy the country, or complete submission of its foreign interests . In modern times of hybrid war, it is quick and inexpensive way to attack the country .
 The terrorist army is cheap, fairly numerous, and most importantly effective, because it does not adhere to its own legal norms and international agreements . The terrorist Army is cheap and fairly numerous .
 This army does not belong to anyone, therefore no way to strike back strike on the aggressor . This army doesn't belong to any of the world's most powerful forces .
 One thousand trained fighters rapidly cheaper than a dozen trained soldiers armed with modern tools for combat . It is cost effective – one thousand trained fighter fighters are rapidly cheaper .
 The difficulty of doing hybrid war is that in the ordinary course of the war the army is fighting against the army . In the course of a hybrid war fighters under the banner of protecting the rights of the people of the region, they are fighting in their territory .
 No army is unable to protect the state from the territory of a gang formations, without causing loss and damage to their populations . In such circumstances, when the share of the population supported the militants, no army is able to protect them .
 The town is destroyed and killed civilians, militants and militants . It is the target of the "moderator" goal – the destruction of the country.
 Events in the south and east of Ukraine raises the question of revaluation in society views on the effectiveness of taken at the beginning of the century .
 The level of threats to national security is one of the main factors that affect the content of the regular army . The format of the army is also a key factor in how the army's content is written .
 In peacetime combat capability of the armed forces is reduced, usually by reducing their numbers . The relevance of the territorial defence of the country should significantly increase and intensify .
 It should be noted that the preservation of defence capabilities is a rational combination of these, interconnected, constituting the state's defence capability . The implementation of which is based on the national historical and socio-economic opportunities, the author says .
 The core of Defence of Ukraine were and will be the Armed Forces .
 The more the army becomes a high standing for the budget, that is, high-tech, mobile and professional . But due to the significant investment remains small in number, the stronger must be the state policy .
 The formation of the territorial defence system will prevent the development of a military crisis in the region and strengthen the position of the Ukrainian military . State policy regarding the use of civilians for the defence of the country is particularly noteworthy .
 The anti-terrorist operation conducted in eastern Ukraine has been ongoing for years . Ukrainian public is focused on the activities of volunteer battalions, organize themselves in support of the National Guard of Ukraine .
Multi-million society patriotic citizens alone has equipped and equip combat volunteer group . Thousands of volunteers working in real time fundraising for the purchase, transport and delivery to ATO zone necessities .
 The General Staff began the formation of volunteer battalions3. The action plan of the General Staff in the case of intervention and effective combat-ready army.
 On Approval of the Instruction on the organization of the implementation of the Regulations on passing military service by citizens of Ukraine in the Armed Forces of Ukraine .
 By the formation of the battalions of the territorial defence of Ukraine Armed Forces of Ukraine were involved activists of Self-Defence Maidan . The Ukrainian Armed Forces were involved in forming the battalion .
 In the following months it was formed volunteer battalions ""Donbas"", ""OUN"", "Right Sector" "Azov" "Dnepr"" was formed in September .
 Many civilian people sincerely concerned about the fate of the country. Information, sometimes quite contradictory, about the activities of volunteer battalions .
 And find out where the true reality is displayed, and where not quite, quite difficult .
 territorial defence forces need to pay much more attention than has been done until now . The territorial forces are responsible for the fulfilment of a number of important tasks .
 Analysis and generalization of practice of application of territorial defence battalions in the area of the fighting in the east of Ukraine gives grounds to assert that these military units carried out non-core functions .
 At that time, senior government officials had a distorted view of the place and role of territorial defence battalions in the system .
In most cases in real combat soldiers territorial defence forces were not ready to carry out their tasks . They just plugged the hole and used as a conventional military units .
 The 24 territorial defence battalions "Aydar" were formed in the Lugansk region in early 2014 . This unit can only formally be considered a battalion of territorial defence .
 Battalion ""Aydar"" was formed from volunteers coming from different regions of Ukraine . Many fighters in the past have had the experience of taking part in the hostilities .
 The Battalion "Aydar" from the outset not performed support functions, as provided for by law, and participated in the fighting as an ordinary assault unit .
 Ukraine is practically no experience in organizing and targeted use of the territorial defence forces . In this regard, it can be argued that today in Ukraine is virtually no experience.
 Military experts believe that there is still no comprehensive security sector reform started . Military experts say that one of the main problems is that there are still no complete security sector reforms .
 Interior Ministry says on the ground it is necessary to create a municipal police . Ministry of Defence initiatives in the Interior Ministry say it is needed to create the police .
 State Service for Emergency Situations of the reform is in preparation for the reform . It wants to establish rapid response teams in emergencies . Also in preparation of the state's emergency services .
 It is not known whether these three types of troops somehow coordinate their activities . It is unclear whether they are in the same structure .
In light of the announced large-scale administrative reform and decentralization, it can be assumed that the question of maintenance will be entrusted mainly to local authorities .
Ukraine's territorial defence system in Ukraine is being renovated . Ukraine's territorial defense system is being overhauled to enhance its effectiveness and functioning . It is worth noting the need to find new ways and mechanisms for renovation .
 Hybrid warfare makes revision plan of formation of the armed forces . Mobile military units must differ from stationary military units .
This requires a change in thinking and in relation to the type of future conflicts and threats counteraction to select tracks . This requires a new approach to how to respond to threats and threats .
 Ukraine's territorial defence system should become one of the most efficient and expedient way to achieve and maintain a high level of the state's defence capability . The improvement of Ukraine's defence system in Ukraine should become a most efficient way.
 Ukraine must prepare citizens of Ukraine to carry out territorial defence tasks in the administrative-territorial units . Training for the Armed Forces of Ukraine and other military forces personnel must be targeted .
 Also require a legislative definition of the way the citizens of motivation to undergo military service in the reserve . Also need to improve organization of service in military reserve .
 The current military-political situation in which our country is the subject of a hybrid war by Russia shows that rethinking approaches to the understanding of national security have an important task .
 Ukraine needs to harmoniously combine state policy on development of professional, mobile, high-tech regular Armed Forces to development of territorial defence . Ukraine must also combine its own policy on the development of pro-pro-military forces .
 A condition in which Ukraine turned out to Ukraine and its actions in specific situations gives reason to assert the importance of the study of modern practices and conduct opposition hybrid warfare .
 Ukraine's experience on territorial defence can serve as an example for other countries and alliances to avoid similar mistakes and use these tools to improve its own defences .