Russia's intervention in Crimea and Donbas was open violation of security assurances given by great powers to denuclearized Ukraine . Russia's intervention was open violated of security guarantees given by Great powers .
 It undermined credibility of great powers and created dangerous precedents for South Korea, Japan, and other U.S. allies in Asia . It undermined the credibility of the United States and created a dangerous precedent .
 It increased tension in the East and South China Seas as well as in the Korean Peninsula, making Pyongyang rely more on nuclear weapons .
 Trying to avoid Western sanctions and isolation, Russia moved closer to China . Russia moved to China to avoid sanctions.
Asian markets to Russia have limitations due to security concerns of U.S. allies and present sanctions . But this rapprochement and opening of Asian markets to Russian markets has limitations .
 Annexation of Crimea and Russia's drift to China increase the role of U.S. commitment to its allies .
 Western sectoral sanctions should be preserved until Minsk-2 agreement is fulfilled and Russian regular troops and "volunteers" leave Ukraine . The sanctions should remain in place until the agreement is completed .
 According to the 1994 Budapest memorandum, Kyiv gave up its nuclear arsenal in exchange for "security assurances" of territorial integrity from the U.S., the UK, and Russia .
 Tire parties agreed to respect Ukraine's borders, to abstain from the use or threat of force against Ukraine . Ukraine is a country where an attempt is made to place pressure on it by economic coercion .
 Russia annexed Crimea in March 2014 in violation of both the Budapest memorandum and the 1997 Russian-Ukrainian treaty . In March 2014, Russia began inter­ vening in Donbas, the east of Ukraine .
 Change of borders by force in Europe created a dangerous precedent for the whole international sys­ tem, including Northeast Asia, and led to Western sanctions against Russia .
Post-Soviet space started to disintegrate geopolitically since 1991 . In this article, we begin with brief analyses on how post- Soviet space has changed .
 Kyiv gradually drifted to Europe. While main­ taining "multi- vector" approach, Kyiv slowly drifted to the European continent .
 Ukrainian political system appeared to be more balanced than the Russian one which created opportunities for democratic opposition .
 It quickly transformed into a protest against the corrupt authoritarian president . It quickly turned into a demonstration against the authoritarian president.
 Russia started undeclared "hybrid war" against Ukraine. Instead, with M oscow 's m ilitary intervention Russia started unprecedented intervention .
 In the final section, we analyze the influence of the crisis on Northeast Asia, namely China, Japan, and two Koreas . The final section is in the last section of the book .
 It increased tension in East and South China Seas as well as in the Korean Penin­ sula making Pyongyang rely more on nuclear weapons . U.S. allies seek additional guarantees from Washington .
 Since the formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States, Moscow and Kyiv held opposite views of its future — "reintegra­ tion" and "civilized divorce" respectively .
 The 1993 free trade agreement between Ukraine and Russia actually was nullified through numerous exemptions introduced by Moscow . The 1993 agreement was actually nullified by numerous exemptions .
Twenty-five years of CIS existence were marked by reorientation toward other geopolitical players . In reality, 20 years of the CIS existence was marked byReorientation to other geopoliticalPlayers .
2 Kyiv has followed a ""multi- vector"" foreign policy . Import from the CIS countries decreased from 46 percent in 2000 to 22 percent in 2014 .
 Ukrainian parliament adopted in 2003 the law on the principles of national security . It stipulates Ukraine's membership in the NATO and the EU as strategic goals .
Before the 2004 Orange Revolution, the post-Soviet space was viewed by many policy-makers as a sphere of Russian influence . Yet, before the 2004Orange Revolution, it was viewed as an area of influence .
 The revolution was non-violent, marked by inter-ethnic and inter-confessional tolerance . It was not violent, but was marked by Inter-ethnic, inter-national and Inter-confessional tolerance .
 The main accomplishments of the Orange Revolution were politi­ cal freedom and free and fair elections . The main accomplishment of theOrange Revolution was politi ­ cal freedom, free and free elections .
 Ukraine was recognized in the ratings of Freedom House as the only ""free country" in the CIS space . Ukraine was also recognized as the "only "" free country"
 The paradox was that Yanukovych benefitted from democratic freedom by exploiting the populist opposition niche . The paradox is that Yanukovychbenefitted from democracy by exploiting a populist niche .
 Yanukovych made a huge geo-strategic concession. In the wake of mounting Russian pressure, Yanukovych made the huge concession . The Russian president made the concession to the West .
 Moscow agreed to decrease the price of gas sold to Ukraine by one-third in exchange for leasing the Russian naval base in Sevastopol, Crimea .
 Kyiv was disappointed with the lack of reciprocity in the eco­ nomic, especially energy, spheres . However, these concessions did not meet Moscow's expectations, according to Kyiv .
 Kyiv did not abandon plans to sign the association agreement with the EU . The agreement includes a deep and comprehensive free trade area and to introduce a visa-free regime .
 Moscow declared that if Ukraine joins the Customs Union, it would be given more preferential treat­ ment. Immediately, Moscow declared.
 Moscow started economic and psychological warfare against Yanukovych to prevent signing of AA planned for November 2013 . In the summer of 2013, Moscow startedEconomic and psychological Warfare against Yanukovych .
 Armenia declared under Russian pressure that country would join Customs Union . The ominous sign came in early September 2013 when Armenia planned to initial AA with the EU .
 According to the 1996 Ukrainian Constitution, there should be no foreign bases on Ukrainian soil . The 1996 Constitution says there should not be foreign bases in Ukraine .
 Because of Sevastopol base, "transitional clauses" of the Constitution contained the special article on "temporary" foreign bases .
 When Yanukovych responded with violence, Euro­ maidan quickly moved beyond its initial slogans and demanded the president's resignation .
 Ukraine became the only country where in the center of a capital people died under EU flags .
 The parliament reinstated the 2004 constitutional reform which was among the main demands of Euromaidan . In this context, according to the agreement signed on February 21, 2014 between the opposition and Yanukovych .
 The West started sanctions against Yanukovych and his entourage only after he had left the country .
 Crimea and Donetsk appointed under Yanukovych quickly recog­ nized the new regime in Kyiv . In the same way as after the Orange Revolution, regional authorities in Crimea, Donetsk and Crimea appointed under the Yanukovych regime quickly Recog­nized .
For good account on Euromaidan and the beginning of Russian intervention, see Andrew Wilson, Ukraine Crisis . For good account, read Andrew Wilson's book, "Ukraine Crisis"
 Russian soldiers without insignia moved from the base in Sevastopol to other strategic points in Crimea .
 Putin denied the involvement of Russian soldiers, but acknowledged it in a documentary . The documentary aired on Russian TV a year later .
 Under armed occupation, the pseudo-referendum was held on March 16, 2014, in contradiction to all Ukrainian laws and international procedures .
 It was a clear violation of the 1994 Budapest memorandum and the 1997 Ukrainian-Russian treaty . The treaty was signed in 1994 and 1997 .
 It raised doubts in the credibility of "security assurances" provided by great powers . It was raised in the wake of nuclear non-proliferation .
 Many commentators compared it to the 1938 German Anschluss of Austria and Sudetenland or the 1990 Iraqi occupation of Kuwait . Many commentators compare it to Austria and the 1990 Iraq occupation .
 The Russian Federation Sent to Crimea Detachments of Military Intelligence Directorate and Marines to Disarm Ukrainian Military .
 Crimean Tatars, deported from Crimea by Stalin in 1944, were not allowed to come back until 1990 . They were allowed to return to Crimea in 1990 .
 Crimean Tatars are not allowed to return to Crimea once again . After the annexation in 2014, leaders of Crimean Tatar are not permitted to return.
 Mustafa Cemilev spent 15 years in Soviet prisons and then was head of Mejlis, Crimean Tatar self-government, for 25 years . Among them is Mustafa. Cemilesv, who spent 15. years in Russian prisons . He was
 There was hope that nations which fought for independence could understand Ukraine's struggle against terrorism, armed separatism and direct foreign aggression .
 India, China, Vietnam, Pakistan, and Afghanistan were among 58 countries abstained . But 24 countries were absent, including India and China .
 Kazakhstan's decision not to vote against Russia may interpret as a sign of disagreement with Russia . Kazakhstan and other Central Asian countries are under pressure from Russia .
 Russia's first reaction was to cancel the G8 Summit in Sochi, to freeze Russia's participation in G8 . Russia also suspended talks with the EU on visa issues and on new EU-Russia agreement .
 After "referendum" in Crimea, Western countries introduced visa bans for individuals and froze assets of individuals and legal entities involved in annexa­ tion .
Ban was imposed on import from Crimea, investment into Crimea, and export of certain goods and technology . It con­ cern the transport, telecommunications and energy sectors .
 Putin repeats "Crimean scenario" in other Ukrainian southern and eastern regions . Putin's response looked weak for Putin and he decided to repeat it .
 Putin's view that Ukrainians and Russians are "one nation, one ethnos""10 was a huge mistake .
 His plans to either control all of Ukraine or at least split it have failed, he says .
 The contemporary Ukrainian state pro­­ claimed in 1991 is based more on the territorial, "inclusive" nationalism . The contemporary state pro ­claims in 1991 are based on the territory of Ukraine .
 Ukraine, compared to Balkan Peninsula, Caucasus, and Russia, avoided ethnic conflicts until 2014 . Ukraine, unlike the Caucasus and Ukraine, avoided Ethnic conflicts until 2013 .
 Despite the war in Donbas, Putin's aggression cemented Ukrainian political identity . The paradox is that despite the war, the conflict cemented Ukraine's political identity.
 separatism did not have support from the south and east of the country . But even there its supporters were in minority .
 The majority favored decentralization, but not federalization, according to polls in Donbas .
 By August 2014, pro-Russian fighters were on the verge of collapse . The map below clearly shows that it was not a civil war, and by August 2014.
 The invasion of regular Russian troops was part of Moscow's undeclared "hybrid war against Ukraine" They were saved only by the invasion ofregular Russian troops .
 The occupied areas of Donbas comprise only 3 percent of the Ukrainian territory . However, even after that, the occupied areas comprise only three percent of Ukraine .
 Russian-speakers and locals from Donbas comprise substantial part of the Army and volunteer battalions fighting in Donbas for integrity of Ukraine .
 The nationalist center-right Svoboda also did not overcome the barrier . The nationalist party did not win the election .
 The Area Controlled by Russia's Proxies by August 24, 2014 . Putin's aggression contributed to a dramatic shift in the Ukrainian society .
14.14 As the non-bloc status introduced under Yanukovych did not prevent Ukraine from Russian aggression, it has been cancelled by tbe new parliament in December 2014 . Previously, in Ukraine, supporters of NATO membership were always a minority .
Ukrainian politicians and experts say NATO and EU membership are not on the agenda right now .
 Ilemocratic Initia lives Foundation, "Support for Joining NATO Considerably Increases in Ukraine — Poll" August 3, 2015, h ttp://d.ua/en/m ass_ media/support-lor-joining-n.htm .
 Russia's military infiltration in Donbas led to West's sectoral sanctions, designed to hit financial, energy and military sectors of Russia . Three hundred civilians on MH17 flight shot down on July 17,2014 in the separatist-controlled area .
 Export licenses are prohibited for deep water oil and arctic oil explo­ ration and production, and shale oil projects .
 The EU and U.S. sanctions were joined by Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, and Switzerland . The United States was also joined by the EU and the United States .
 The EU imports one-third of its consumed gas from Russia . U.S. sanctioned Gazprom .
 Hungary, the Czech Republic, Austria, Greece, Cyprus, and Luxembourg were against restrictions due to strong trade, financial and energy ties . Poland, Romania, Sweden, Denmark, and the Baltic States demanded strong reaction . Italy did not consider security threat from Russia to be seri­ o
 There were strong business lobbyists in Germany and France who were against sanctions .
 France, Germany, Germany and Great Britain decided to go ahead (evolution of German Chancellor 15.5)
 The Polish Institute of International Relations is based in Warsaw, Poland . It is based on the Warsaw-based institute of international relations .
 France cancelled delivery of two Mistral aircraft carriers to Russia . France cancelled the delivery of the two aircraft carriers .
 Moscow views sanctions as part of regime change in Russia but uses it as a pretext for further authoritarian consolidation and for intensification of its anti-Western rhetoric .
 EU agro-exports grew by 5% to U.S., +30.8% to South Korea, +21.7% to Egypt and EU's Commission assistance to lift trade barriers . 18 Expanded sanctions aggravated Russia's economic problems .
Official exchange rate dollar/ruble increased by 1. times by June 2015 . On "Black Tuesday," Decem ber 16, 2014, ruble depreciated by 20 percent . By June 2015, official exchange rate dollars/rubles increased by1.
 Moscow has agreed with negotiations with the West . Facing increase of sanctions and trying to split the Western allies, Russia has agreed to negotiations .
 The format of consulta­ tions between the U.S., the UK, Ukraine and Russia did not work . The Budapest memorandum was provided by the Budapest memorandum .
 In September 2014 and in February 2015, two Minsk Trilateral Agreements were signed by Ukraine, Russia, and the OSCE,20 supported by the United States and UN Secu­ rity Council .
 The Agreements outlined the ceasefire, exchange of prisoners, withdrawal of foreign troops and illegal military formations from Ukraine, and Ukraine's control over border with Russia . The Agreement, though in a contradictory and compli­ cated way, outlines the ceasefire.
 It will continue to ruin Russia's economy but also exacerbate unfavorable com­ parison of situation in the "people's republics" and Ukraine-controlled territories . It will not only ruin the economy but exacerbate the situation in Ukraine and Russia .
Moscow may use Clause 11 with additional notes imposed on Kyiv by Minsk-2 accords . To achieve it, Moscow may use clause 11 with extra notes .
 In con­ trast to the Ukrainian Constitution, it demands more power to the separatist-held areas in Donbas . Kyiv and the West pay for the recon­ struction of the destroyed Donbas economy .
 Leaders of separatists signed it as well, but neither their position, nor people's republics, were mentioned . Only names were mentioned, only names .
 Kyiv stresses that it can have dialogue only with those representatives of the occupied areas who are legitimately elected .
 Israel, West Germany, and South Korea could be examples for Ukraine,24 if Western economic and security assistance provides a necessary framework . Ukraine, 24, could be an example for Ukraine if Western assistance is needed .
 Despite the Obama administration's decision to withdraw U.S. troops from Afghanistan and Iraq, the wars still continue there . The war in Syria has been intensified, and the war in Iraq has also intensified .
 Russian aggression in Ukraine and the consequent tension between the West and Russia also divert U.S. attention and efforts from Asia .
 Washington was unable to establish clearly defined "red lines" regarding the war in Syria, North Korean nuclear issue, and Chinese behavior in the sea . Washington was also unable to define the Chinese behavior.
 President Obama excluded military support for Ukraine from the start of the conflict . This became even more visible when Obama excluded support from the very begin­ ning of the Ukraine conflict .
 The U.S. reaction to the annexation of Crimea was seen by Russia as "red carpet" for 23 years . The United States reaction to Crimea's annexation was seen as a "red line"
 It definitely increased concerns of the U.S. allies in Asia, full of territorial and border issues . It also increased concerns about territorial andborder issues .
 China Tire inability of the West to react quickly to Russia's actions in Crimea may provide additional opportunities for Chinese policy and increase threats, both real and perceived .
 For many years, the Chinese military advocated the capability to achieve a "quick and decisive victory by winning the first battle" especially in Taiwan .
 China is creating a gray-zone in the East China Sea by sending ships and aircrafts . China is regularly sending ships, aircrafts and planes into the sea .
 The Crimean crisis happened before the Crimean crisis as well as before the crisis, it has been claimed .
 China captured Scarborough Shoal within the Philippines' exclusive economic zone in 2012 . China and the Philippines agreed to withdraw their vessels from the area despite a U.S.-brokered deal .
 Two Chinese coast guard cutters blocked two Filipino transport vessels carrying supplies to the vessel marooned on the Ayungin/Renai Shoal . Another accident happened on March 9,2015 .
China declines any attempt by the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea to resolve China's disputes with the Philippines . China declines any attempts to resolve the disputes .
 China declared the air defense identifi­ cation zone in November 2013 . It covered a large territory of the East China 25.5 million people .
 Chinese officials said that establishing a second ADIZ over the South China Sea would be in the country's interest . Also, they said, that establishing another ADIZ in the South Chinese Sea is in China's interest.
 Washington did not postpone Vice President Joe Biden's trip to Beijing . But despite declared disapproval regarding ADIZ in the East China Sea, Washington didn't postpone the trip .
 The U.S. allies are seeking additional assurances from Washington. Despite some predictions that Asian countries will compete to woo Putin as a result of the crisis .
 Support of Asian allies for the U.S. position on Crimea may also help Washington's policy in Asia . Support of the Asian allies could also help the United States.
 The role of allies for U.S. policy in the region has also increased, according to the United States .
 Fjodor Lukjanow, "Wenn Russen und Chinesen Gemeinsam Marschieren" Die Welt, March 30, 2015.
 Beijing is afraid of Western support to Chinese dissidents which in perspective could lead to regime change . Beijing is also afraid of support for Chinese dissidents .
Russian argumentation of Western involvement in "regime change" in Ukraine followed Russian argumentation.
 Russia can support China's steps towards Taiwan, but the U.S. position is not Russian, but United States position . In return, Russia can help China move towards Taiwan .
 China needs to be cautious about references to "self-deter­ mination of Crimean people" Because of the debate over proclamation of independence of Taiwan, and the problems of Tibet and Xinjiang .
 Beijing had to freeze its economic projects in annexed Crimea . It was sticking to the principle of territorial integrity, Beijing said .
 Russia's isolation in the West and Russia's potential transformation into "younger partner" of China. Beijing is much more important for Beijing in practical terms .
 Russia can definitely blackmail the West by its rapprochement with China. In its turn, Russia can also blackmail the U.S. in its turn .
 This rapprochement started long before the Crimea crisis, but since the crisis began, it has moved to another level . The Crimea crisis began long before it began .
 Kremlin presented it as a failure of Western sanctions, but in reality China managed to secure prices for Russian gas, lower than what Russia's European customers pay .
 The exports will start not earlier than 2019 (with five billion cubic meters in the first stage) and will require at least USD 55 billion of investment on the Russian side .
 Russian companies paid special attention to Hong Kong and Shanghai Stock Exchange . Because of Western sanctions, Russian firms paid special Attention to Hong Hong Kong .
 Moscow initiated a shift to bilateral trade with China in national currencies . Moscow initiated the shift in bilateral trade.
 Russia and Ukraine are the largest sup­ pliers of modem weapons and military technologies to China . Also, Russia andUkraine are the biggest sup­pliers of modems and military technology to China.
 Moscow hopes that problems in the war-tom Ukrainian economy could increase the role of Russia in this sector . Ukrainian producers are not under sanctions, but Moscow hopes to increase their role .
 President Xi Jinping visited Moscow on May 8-10, 2015 . He participated in the celebration of 70th anniversary of Nazi Germany's defeat .
 Russian soldiers participated in the parade in Beijing as previ­ ously did Chinese soldiers in Moscow's May 9 parade . The parade was held in Moscow on May 9 .
 Most major Western leaders as well as Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko did not visit Moscow's military parade because of Russia's intervention in Ukraine . Most Western leaders and Ukraine's president didn't visit Moscow because of Russian intervention .
 Ukraine's president appeared in the same group with Western leaders and Japan who decided not to attend the memorial parade in Beijing because of China's activity in East and South China Seas . The reasons for Ukraine's absence were different.
 The latest summits of these two organizations symbolically coincided in Ufa, the capital of Bashkortostan in Russia on July 9-10, 2015 .
Economic crisis heightening in Russia, its interna­ tional isolation, and the decline in energy prices could lead to dimin­ ishing Russia's influence in the BRICS group .
When India joins the Shanghai Cooperation Orga­ nization, it could not only increase the role of the SCO in Asia, but also diminish the cen­ trality of Russia in this organization .
 Umland: Three sets of factors, according to Umland, limit Russian-Chinese rapprochement . Umland says three factors, including Russian- Chinese rapprochment, limit Chinese-Russian relations .
 The first one is declining political and economic weight of Russia which in connection with erratic political behavior, makes the country a more unpredictable partner for the West . Japan, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Israel are also more unpredictable partners .
 Xia Yishan, "China Visit Good Opportunity to Relieve Ukraine's Internal Woes," "The Global Times"
 Russians may consider themselves as separate civilization laying both in Europe and Asia but not as part of "Greater Asia" Dmitri Trenin plays with this idea as a substitute of ""Greater Europe" for Russia .
 Alexander Nevsky fought with Catholic German knights while being loyal vassal to the Asian-born Golden Horde .
 Kirill stresses that Western influence was "hypocritical," undermining Russia's spiritual strength . Kirill says Western influence is more dangerous than the Golden Horde .
Russkii mir with an accent on Asia will inevitably lose Slavic Ukraine and Belarus . That is, historic Kyiv Rus' — which is considered in Russia, rightly or wrongly, as the background for Russian identity .
 Thirdly, Russia and China will intensify their latent competition in the Far East and more openly in Central Asia controlled by Russia for centuries . The two countries will intensify its latent competition.
 Russia had already lost its centrality in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization created in 2001 . Russia, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Uzbekistan had lost their centrality .
 Kiril personally presented "Alexander N evsky" in 2008 TV project ""The Name of Russia" Prince Alexander appeared on the first place in the list .
 In the first half of 2015, the mutual trade com­ prised USD 21. billion, which is only 74 percent of that of the firsthalf of 2014 . The Russian-Chinese trade is 10 billion less than Russian- Chinese trade .
 import from CIS countries fell from 54 percent in 2000 to 42 percent in 2014, while export dropped from 27 to 13 percent . For Kazakhstan, import from the CIS countries dropped from 54% to 42% in 2014 .
 import from the CIS countries fell during the same period from 34 to 11 per­ cent . export only remains at the level of 13 percent .
 Belarus and Kazakhstan refused to support Russia's counter-sanctions on food against the EU . Russia and Kazakhstan exchanged retaliatory measures between EEU partners .
 From 2003 to 2012, it grew annu­ ally by 26. percent and in 2010 China became Russia's second trade 40. percent . In 2010, it became China's second Trade 40.
 In the first half of 2015, bilateral trade decreased by 31. percent and comprised only USD 31 billion . However, in the second half of the year, the trade was only $31 billion .
 contraction of Russia's export to a great extent is connected to the drop of oil prices . contraction is explained by the economic crisis in Russia, according to analysts .
 Western sanctions also hit the Russian economy and prevented active cooperation with Chinese commercial banks . Moscow allowed Chinese to buy minority shares in strategic raw fields of oil, gas, etc. and infrastructure projects .
 There is a danger that China emerges as a monopolist in buying Russia's goods, first of all, energy resources . Also, there is a risk that China will become a monopoly in buying Russian goods, says CNN.
 Moscow started its strategic shift to Asia in 2014, too many competitors were already in the market . The sanctions and overly cautious approach by the U.S. allies significantly complicated this process .
 Russia claims that about forty states and international organizations are interested to liberalize trade with the EEU . Russia currently conducts consultations on FTA with Egypt, India and Iran .
 Beijing proposed to negotiate a less ambitious trade and economic cooperation agreement . Instead of Moscow's suggestion to conclude FTA between China and the EEU, Beijing suggested to negotiate less ambitious agreement .
How China's Economic Difficulties Threaten Russia. How China's economic problems threaten Russia .
 First, after Fukushima nuclear accident in 2011, Japan badly needed new energy supplies . First, the first one resumed operation in August 2015 .
 Russia could become an im portant partner for Japan in offsetting the rise of China . Second, Russia could be an important partner. Second, Japan could become a partner for Russia .
 In July 2013, Abe arrived in Moscow for the first state visit to Russia by a Japanese leader in a decade . Abe is the first Japanese leader to visit Russia in 10 years .
 Abe visited the opening ceremony of Sochi Olympic Games on February 7, 2014 . Abe visited Sochi, despite the absence of major Western leaders .
 Shigeki Hakamada, chairman of the academic Council on National Security Problems, said Putin's line regarding "northern territories" hardened . He said Putin had hardened his stance on the region .
 Hakamada describes it as a clear ""revision"" of history and joint declarations . HakamADA describes it is a clear "revision" of history .
 Japan as a member of the G7 could not avoid some sanctions, but at first immediately after the annexation of Crimea, Tokyo only intro­ duced light sanctions against Russia .
 Moscow noted Japan's caution and in turn, did not introduce a food embargo against Japan . Moscow noted the country's caution .
 Yoko Hirose suggests this soft approach regarding Russia's annexation of Crimea was inconsistent with the Japanese policy to recover the entire Northern Territories . Hirose says Putin and 47.
 Russia on Kuril Islands are narrowing not because of sanctions, but because of the rise of chauvinism in Russia after the annexation of Crimea . However, opportunities for dialogue with Russia are narrowing, as some Russian analysts suggested .
 The second factor which complicates Russian-Japanese relations is Moscow's rapprochement with Beijing . The third factor that complicates Russia-Japan relations is Russia's relationship with China .
Russian and Chinese navies held joint maneuvers in the East China Sea in May 2014 and in 2015 . Russian and Chinese naval maneuvers took place in May and May 2014 .
 Russian air forces exceeded the Chinese ones in terms of the number of incidents that created dangerous situations . Japanese air forces flew for their interception due to the violation of Japanese airspace .
 Tokyo eased the ban on military related exports to stimulate joint arms develop­ ment with allies and arms exports . The ban was lifted after rapprochement between Russia and China .
 Abe made the first ever visit to Ukraine as the Japanese prime minister in June 2015 . On June 6, 2015, Abe visited Ukraine for the first time .
 Japan decided to provide Ukraine with USD 1. billion of financial aid when Kyiv fulfills IMF demands . Kyiv must fulfill IMF demands of $1. billion in aid when it meets IMF demands.
 Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu announced on June 9 that Moscow would accelerate the construction of 48 military facilities .
 Russia's prime minister's trip to Kuril Islands in August 2015 complicated the situation . Both sides still have plans for Putin's visit to Japan before the end of 2015 .
 If it happens while Russian troops are still in Ukraine, it may become a symbolic success of Russian diplomacy and a wrong message from Japan's side .
 Korean Peninsula Seoul condemned Russia's aggression in Ukraine . Seoul decided to provide USD 500,000 humanitarian assistance to Ukraine .
 Moscow hoped relations with Republic of Korea would not suffer as much as its relations with Japan . Seoul would continue its own game aimed at the unification of the country .
 President Park and President Putin were the highest officials to attend the m ilitary parade in Beijing on September 3, 2015 .
 Moscow decided to invest in major gas pipeline that will run from Sakhalin Island through the Korean Peninsula .
 South Korea showed interest in this project and in other initiatives connecting its transportation network to the Trans-Siberian Railway . South Korea has shown interest in the project and other initiatives .
 Russian coal was delivered for the first time to South Korea by rail from Khasan via the North Korean port of Rajin in late 2014 .
 The underlying idea was participation of South Korean business in the projects in the Far East . It could become a platform for trilateral cooperation with North Korea .
 South Korea has no other choice than to certify additional U.S. assurances and to join Western sanctions . Dmitri Trenin believes that as in the case of the U. S.-Japanese relations, South Korea can't choose to join the West .
 Crimea's annexation presented to North Korea additional arguments to stick to its nuclear weapons . Crimea is now part of North Korea's annexation of Crimea .
 annexation of Crimea was seen in North Korea as a chance to increase the margin of provocations in the Peninsula . Crimea was also seen in N. Korea as an opportunity for North Korea to annexate Crimea .
 North Korea raised stakes for the debates to restore the six-party talks, and prospects of these talks deteriorated even further . North Korea's actions raised stakes.
 U.S. deploys two Navy destroyers equipped with missile defense systems and the second X-band missile defense radar in Japan . In reaction to elevated tension in East Asia, the United States announced the decision .
 The U.S., Japan, South Korea and South Korea had a summit meeting on the sidelines of the Nuclear Security Summit in the Netherlands . The summit was held in the Dutch capital, the Netherlands, on Tuesday .
 The summit was held on March 24, 2014, with Japan pledging to return to the United States in January 2015 . The summit is scheduled to be held on January 19, 2015 .
 Russia will likely continue to adhere to the status quo on the Korean Peninsula . At the same time, Russia is likely to remain in the same position .
 A domestic crisis in the North could lead to de facto Chinese control over the North . A hypothetical emergence of united Korea would be strong, more assertive and pro-American .
 South Korea has been disappointed by Washington's lack of lever­ age over Beijing . South Korea is disappointed by the lack of leverage over Beijing.
 Moscow will continue to play in Pyongyang to have more leverage for dealing with the U.S. and South Korea . China in dealing with South Korea speculates that red lines are not clearly defined by the United States .
 Pyongyang-Moscow relations cannot be restored, but the two countries moved closer to each other . Clearly, the previous level of Pyongyang- Moscow relations can be restored .
 Russia and Democratic People's Republic of Korea declared from May 2015 to May 2016 . On the symbolical level, "year of friendship" between Russia and Korea was declared from 2015 to 2016 .
 During last year, the num ber of visits of high-level Russian officials to Pyongyang was higher than that over the whole previ­ ous decade . Last year's visits to Pyongyang and vice versa were higher than last year's .
 The peak had to be Kim Jong-un's first ever trip abroad — for May 9 parade in Moscow . It was his first ever visit abroad .
 Pyongyang is interested to diminish dependence on China which comprises 70 per­ cent of the North Korean trade turnover . Pyongyang wants to diminish China's dependence on North Korea which includes 70 per cent of its trade turnover.
Political interests from both sides are not supported by the weak North Korean economy . The lack of financial resources from the Russian side to provide politically motivated support is also not supported .
 North Korea's trade with China is growing, but with Russia has been gradually shrinking for two decades .
 Russia's desire to use conflicts in other parts of the world for playing global chess with the West is a result of Russia's confrontation with West over Ukraine . Russia has been involved in a series of conflicts with Ukraine in recent years .
 Putin raised suspicion that it may synchronize tensions in other regions with offensive in Ukraine to lessen Western ability to react .
 Russia is being used by Russia to demonstrate its importance for both the West and China and to bargain over Ukraine in an attempt to reduce Western sanc­ tions .
 Putin has started to play in late September 2015 when Russian air forces appeared in Syria . The Russian air force is in reality supporting the Assad regime against Syrian opposition .
 Despite Russia's attempt to present 2013-2014 Euromaidan as a "Western plot," it was a domestic mass protest to prevent president Yanukovych from sliding into authori­ tarianism and into Russia-led Customs Union .
 Russia's intervention in Crimea and Donbas was open violation of international obligations and security assurances given by great powers to Ukraine . Subsequent Russia's Intervention in Crimea, Donbas were open violation to international obligations .
 Russia turned into a strategic rival. From strategic partner, first of all in energy sphere, Russia turned to strategic rival .
 This crisis undermined the credibility of great powers' guarantees to denuclearized states, writes David Frum . Frum: This crisis has created dangerous precedents for both Koreas, Japan and other United States allies in Asia .
 First sanc­ tions introduced after Crimea were weak. There was a need for a strong Western response but first sanc ­ tions were introduced after Ukraine was weak .
 Nevertheless, increased and increased and sectoral Western sanctions, although belated, started to work . Still, the sanctions continued to work, with some of them still working .
 In the Asia-Pacific region, sanctions were joined by Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada . The sanctions were also joined by Canada and Japan .
 These sectoral sanctions are conditioned on full implementation of Minsk-2 agreement which includes demand for withdrawal of foreign troops and "volunteers" from Ukraine .
 Moscow tries to bargain globally with the West, using rapproche­ ment with China and the situation in the Korean Peninsula, Syria, and Iran .
 Opening of Asian markets to Russia has limitations due to security concerns of U.S. allies and current Western sanctions . Opening of Asia markets also has limitations because of security concerns .
 New opportunities for Beijing increase the role of U.S. commitments to its allies in Asia . New opportunities increase the necessity of alliance with Washington .
 South Korea has not joined economic sanctions, nevertheless it is viewed in Ukrainian social media as an example of how to "live with the enemy" and successfully modernize its economy, anny, and political system .
Http: //w w w w . eurasiancom m ission.org/ru/act/acts/integr_i_m akroec/dep_stat/trades tat/ analytics/express/June2015.pdf .