 Ukraine&apos;s government constantly swung back and forth between supporting Russia and supporting the West . For the first two decades after its post-Soviet independence, Ukraine &apos.
 These swings were driven by cultural and political divisions in the country that were used and manipulated by foreign powers .
 The 2014 Euromaidan uprising was unprecedented in its intensity and its polarizing effect on the country . The movement caused a political and psychological transformation within Ukraine .
 In effect, the Ukraine crisis ended the country&apos;s initial post-Soviet phase of stable oscillation between Moscow and the West . The Ukraine crisis cast it on an entirely new path, domestically and internationally .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 was a watershed moment in history . The collapse was the biggest collapse in the history of the USSR .
 Not only did it formally end the Cold War, but it also reshaped the 15 former Soviet republics into independent states . The 15 ex-Soviet republics became independent states.
 The collapse was difficult for Russia, which had to deal with the loss of its empire on the international stage . Russia had to grapple with a chaotic transition to democracy and market capitalism .
 The change was also extremely challenging for the other former Soviet republics, which had not experienced sustained independent rule for decades or, in some cases, centuries . The change is also extremely difficult for the former Soviet Republics .
 The process was particularly difficult for Ukraine, which for most of its modern history had been disputed and geographically divided between Russia and West .
 The borders that Ukraine gained at independence encompassed areas such as Lviv and western Ukraine . The borders were historically ruled by European powers including Poland and Austria .
 Other areas in southern and eastern Ukraine had much closer links with Russia . Other areas had close ties with Russia.
 Ukrainian is spoken in western and central Ukraine, while Russian is predominantly spoken in the south and east . These divisions are reflected in cultural and linguistic differences within the country .
 In every presidential election since Ukraine&apos;s independence, each victor has had a clear bent toward either the West or the East . In fact, in every election since the independence, the winner has been in the West .
 The country&apos;s first president, Leonid Kravchuk, hailed from the western province of Rivne . He steered Ukraine on a nationalist course .
 Leonid Kuchma was from the eastern province of Dnipropetrovsk . He tried to direct the country closer to Russia . His successor, Leonid, was from a province in the east .
 Viktor Yushchenko came next, coming to power during the 2004 Orange Revolution and hailing from the central Ukrainian-speaking Sumy province .
 Yushchenko&apos;s successor, Viktor Yanukovich, came from Donetsk, the eastern industrial heartland of the country . He shifted the country back toward Russia .
 Ukraine&apos;s domestic and foreign policy agendas. Each leader had his own idiosyncratic way of ruling, but the geographic origins of each clearly shaped each .
 The transition to current President Petro Poroshenko from Yanukovich in 2014 was also a first in Ukraine&apos;s post-Soviet history . The transition was one year ahead of scheduled president elections .
 Euromaidan demonstrations descended into violent confrontations between protesters and police . Yanukovich&apos;s ouster and the formation of a pro-Western government that Russia viewed as illegal and illegitimate .
 The change in government spurred a series of events, including Russia&apos;s annexation of Crimea . The armed conflict between Ukrainian security forces and Russia-backed separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk has dragged on for the past year .
 The rapid succession of events seems to have upset Ukraine&apos;s balance between the West and Russia, altering its domestic and foreign policies . Russia's foreign policies have also been altered by the events .
 Ukraine has swung back toward the West, and integration with the European Union and NATO has once again become the government&apos;s top foreign policy priority . It was under President Yushchenko and Prime Minister Yulia Timoshenko.
 Ukraine is now in an active war with Russia and it has lost effective control of territory in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . The country&apos;s current circumstances are different from those under the Orangist government .
 The conflict has solidified Kiev&apos;s political, economic, economic and security integration with the West . It has created more willingness on the part of the U.S. and the European Union to support Ukraine .
 Ukraine&apos;s history of regular vacillation between Russia and the West . It is tempting and perhaps logical to label this latest shift as another temporary one .
 Russia&apos;s continued influence in the country through its political, cultural, cultural and security links . It is only a matter of time before Moscow is able to regain a strong position in the nation, or at least neutralize Western integration efforts .
 Ukraine has seen a major psychological shift in popular sentiment, says author . He has traveled to Ukraine several times over the past five years .
 Many believe a political administration allied with Europe will be better able to provide a decent future for their children .
 Ukraine&apos;s actual inclusion in the European Union or NATO is a distant prospect . Their patience with the current government in Kiev and with the powerful role of oligarchs is not unlimited .
 Ukraine could realign itself with Russia anytime soon. But those I spoke with categorically dismissed the idea . But those who spoke with said they would not be surprised by the prospect .
 Of course, this view is not representative of those held across the entire country . Of course.
 People I encountered in Kiev and western Ukraine support the West, people in Kharkiv and Odessa have a different view . People in the two cities have different views of the West .
 In Kiev, I talked to people who viewed the government in Kiev more skeptically and who were less supportive of Ukraine&apos;s security operations against pro-Russia separatists in Donbas . In these cities and their respective provinces, which are normally bastions of support
 The rebels wanted to rebuild economic ties with Russia and maintain ties with friends and family across the border . This was not because they supported the rebels, but because they wanted to maintain ties across the borders .
People&apos;s view of the conflict is more nuanced and complicated than the nationalist fervor that prevails in Kiev or in Lviv . In these areas, people&apo;s views are more nuanced than the nationalists .
 These provinces have decided to remain a part of a country with a decidedly pro-Western government .
 The idea of a major political realignment with Moscow is no longer seen as viable or even possible . Even here, despite the wish to rebuild economic relations with Russia, the idea of an economic realignment is not considered viable .
 Ukraine&apos;s challenges and its political future, it is important to consider Ukraine's future . Ukrainians have an extensive capacity to endure economic hardship, says the author .
 Ukraine&apos;s economy is informal, according to official statistics . The country's major contractions in gross domestic product and increases in unemployment belie the fact that much, if not most, of Ukraine &apos.
 Many people perform odd jobs for cash or do not fully report their incomes for tax purposes . Many employers encourage such a practice .
 Most people have access to a plot of land or a small farm, or know someone who does, and can secure food staples during particularly hard times . Most people are able to access to land or small farms or small farm .
 The country is known for its rich black soil . It has often seemed as if the entire country is one large farm dotted by a few major settlements .
 Russia can use economic pressures to force political change on the country. These factors add to people&apos;s self-sufficiency and also mitigate the extent to which Russia could use economic pressure to force change .
 There are other factors framing Ukraine&apos;s new political and foreign policy trajectory . There are also factors framing the country's new political, foreign policy direction .
 The fall of the Soviet Union is now nearly a quarter century in the past, and a new post-Soviet generation is coming of age .
 Moscow is less capable of projecting power abroad than it has been for a decade, as shown by its inability to foresee or prevent the Euromaidan uprising .
 Russia is still a relatively strong power in the former Soviet space, but its ability to shape and influence the entire region is deteriorating . West is proving more capable and willing to challenge Moscow in Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia .
 Ukraine has entered an unprecedented period in its post-Soviet history . The country has entered a period in a post- Soviet era .
 The Ukrainian military is engaged in an active war with Russia, something most of its residents could not have foreseen just two years ago .
 The only point of consensus that I came across was that everyone thinks the war in the east will be a long one . Now, it's not that everyone believes the war will be long one, says the author .
Anti-Putin T-shirts have replaced the Soviet memorabilia in tourist stands . Ukrainian flags are draped throughout the streets of its major cities .
 Though Ukraine remains diverse and divided, its political spectrum has changed . Ukraine's political spectrum is still divided, but it has become more diverse .
 Overtly pro-Russia parties have become marginalized, while radical organizations such as the Right Sector have been officially integrated into the country&apos;s security apparatus .
Former Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili appointed as governor of Odessa . He is a fervent pro-Western advocate and former Georgian President . SaakASHvili is a former pro-West advocate .
 The appointment underscores that the political reintegration of separatist regions Donetsk and Luhansk is now a distant possibility . The chances are even more remote for Crimea.
 Ukraine&apos;s fundamental shift away from the East should also be considered in the context of the broader standoff between Russia and the West . The Ukraine conflict has brought relations between the two sides to their lowest point since Cold War .
Several cease-fire agreements have been negotiated but never fully enforced . There have been continuous negotiations to address the Ukrainian crisis from the start .
 EU and U.S. sanctions, Russian countersanctions and constant NATO and Russian military drills have only divided the two sides further .
 Ukraine tried to balance between Russia and the West are effectively over, after nearly 20 years . This is not to say that some meaningful progress or broader understanding cannot be achieved eventually .
 There is nothing like a war to harden attitudes and chart a new course in history. After all, there is nothing to be done with the war .