 I'll keep doing what I am doing, and those who have ears will hear, says the author . "I'll keep do what I'm doing," he says .
 Most people were in shock and couldn’t understand how something like this was possible in Ukraine. Most people in shock.
 Many fled because their lives were threatened, and some disappeared to never be heard from again . Many had to flee because their life was threatened .
 Crimea and Sevastopol as two new subjects of the Russian Federation . Later, there will be historic vote by the Duma and decision by the Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The U.S. tried to turn Crimea into its mega-base against Russia in 2014 . In 2014 I wrote about how the United States tried to make Crimea a mega- base against Russia .
 Ecuadorian economy, sovereignty, solvency and more. In it, I calibrate and discuss the country and current leader Lenin Moreno’s calibrations .
 Current calibrations of the country and leader with past leader Rafael Correa and country calibrations several years ago . As a bonus, I also compare current calibrations.
 Slavoj Žižek's interview resonates strongly with what he wrote about Ecuador in his book, he says . "What you’ll hear Slavoj say in the beginning of his interview, is what he says about Ecuador," he says.
 The author's calibrations and analysis go a lot deeper, broader, being more precise and touching upon many things never discussed in the media, he says .
 Assange piece is free to post if he gets a good support from followers and readers . I’ll also consider posting free the Assange piece and perhaps more excerpts .
 Back in 2014-15 on FT I dubbed what was happening under Poroshenko and the junta the Crazy Asylum called Ukraine . Back in 2013 on FT, I dubbed it a 'Crazy Asylum'
 Boiko, as I wrote in a previous report on Ukraine elections, is in 4th-5th position in the polls .
 Rabinovich and Muraev recently had a squabble with the rest and left, thus weakening and splintering the electoral base of the party . Other two very prominent founding members of this alternative political force, Rabinovic and Murasev, recently had
 It must be stressed that polls are very likely falsified in Ukraine, anyway . But it must be stress that polls in Ukraine are likely to be falsified .
 Medvedchuk is considered the most prominent and well-known name among all those I mentioned above . He is considered one of the best known names in the world .
 He is considered an honest, beyond reproach politician by those who are for friendship between Russia and Ukraine . He is also considered an Honest, beyond Reproach politician .
 Since 2014 Medvedchuk has participated in Minsk process with humanitarian mission . He has negotiated mutual return of Ukraine-Donbass POWs, and became widely respected .
Ukrainian politician is the highest calibrated politician in Ukraine . He is highest calibrated in all active Ukraine politicians .
 The world's lowest head of state QC is at 40, GUILT, as calibrated in his new book . Just compare that to Poroshenko, whose world’s lowest state QC was at 40 .
 Gazprom may offer Ukraine the 25% off discount on gas, plus a guarantee of some percentage of transit to continue flowing through Ukraine after Nord Stream-2 is built .
Ukraine pipe is managed cooperatively by Naftogaz-Ukraine and Russian Gazprom . Ukraine pipe ismanaged cooperatively with Naftogs-Ukraine, Gazprom.
 70% of Ukrainians do not believe elections will be honest . Boiko, as ex-Naftogaz CEO, is in good position to negotiate .
In 2014 I predicted that Ukraine will slowly turn back to Russia, and that Russia will never attack or invade Ukraine . In 2014, I predicted Ukraine would slowly turn Back to Russia .
 Instead, I said that Russia will slowly and carefully re-mold the situation in Ukraine . Instead, he said that Russian will slowly re-Mold the Ukraine situation in Russia .
 The timing is contingent upon several things, including the complete destruction of Ukraine’s economy and the end of construction of the pipelines around Ukraine, including Nord Stream-2 and TurkStream .
 Once the pipelines are complete, Ukraine becomes a lot less valuable to the United States . Germany, Austria and the rest of EU, not to mention Russia, won’t be manipulated any more via the Ukraine gas transit blackmail .
 There is no official announcement yet, but the leak already created a media storm . The leak is not yet official, but it has already created an uproar .
 LDNR officials, self-defence officers and members, police and state security will first be handed out to LDNR officers . They will be given to self-defense officers, members and members of state security .
 I can't even begin describing how long-awaited this news is for many people . I can’t even begin describe how long awaited this news was for many .
 Russia is preparing a series of surprises before Ukraine elections . The first round of Ukraine elections begins on March 31 .
 Ukraine also banned Russian monitors from the elections, a violation of international law . Russia also banned from the election .
 The number of ballots printed exceeds the real number of voters by at least 15 million . At the same time, the number of ballot ballots printed in the United States is at least 14 million .
Millions of the ‘dead soul’ ballots will be entered . This means widely expected violations, when millions of the ballots are entered .
 Russia will disavow the results of Ukraine election, unless Russia sees a marked difference in new president’s approach, many say .
 U.S. and ukro-nazis are both under double pressure from both countries . This is practically impossible due to the double pressure.
 Az is all fired up to do more regular podcasts on various serious topics . The podcast is a weekly podcast on the internet .
 Some of these will be current events, geopolitics and global economy oriented . Some of the world's most important events will be in the coming days .
 Az wants us to record a series on the dirty secrets of the U.S. healthcare and education . Az says he has both his and his insights and insights .
 ESP and my YT Channel to others. We’ll be very grateful if you also pass along the links to ESP .