 Pundits continue to debate whether economic shocks, public discontent at home, and isolation abroad will shake President Vladimir Putin's regime .
 Much of the commentary on Putin’s survival strategies has focused on repression and aggressive military posturing .
 The former treats protest as an instance of undesirable chaos . The latter characterizes it as a legitimate and even desirable expression of public sentiment .
 Higher values indicate more use of the freedom to protest frame . Lower values reflect greater employment of the disorder frame for a given day between October 2011 and December 2013 .
 There are major fluctuations in how the Kremlin-controlled media covered protest in Russia during this period .
 There are four spikes in the overall quantity of news stories about protest . Each spike is indicated by a vertical dotted line labeled S1-S4 .
 The trend line shows a shift toward the freedom to protest frame between S1, the onset of mass protests in December 2011, and S2, the May 2012 Bolotnaya Square mass anti-regime protests . The May 2012 protests triggered an unprecedented wave of repression against the political
 S2 coincides with Putin’s inauguration for a third presidential term . S2 also coincides with the inauguration of Vladimir Putin for his third term .
 During this period, media stories were overwhelmingly concerned with “exposing” and “preventing’s alleged plots of another mass uprising, ostensibly supported by agents of former Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili .
 This can be referred to as “fabricating protest,’ whereby the media deliberately planted misinformation into the public domain about the threats protests pose to public order . This can also be called ‘fabricated protest’
 Following S3, there is a gradual upward shift in the direction of the freedom to protest frame roughly until the fourth spike in protest coverage is reached . This is S4, the October 2013 Biryulyovo anti-migrant riots in Moscow .
 After this period, there is not a significant dip in the direction of the disorder frame. After this time, however, there's not a major dip in.
 The Biryulyovo disturbances featured traits that would fit the disorder narrative well . This is despite the fact that the disturbances had traits that fit the narrative narrative well.
 These include vandalism, right-wing extremist slogans, and public expressions of xenophobia and racism . The list also includes vandalism and extremist slogans .
 Christopher Hutchings and Vera Tolz have analyzed Russian television for an earlier time period . They have analyzed nationalist discourses on Russian TV for a period of time .
Russian state-controlled channels intensified narratives stigmatizing non-Russian migrants and ethnic and religious minority groups, authors say . They observe that beginning in 2012, the leading state- controlled channels intensified the narratives stigmatized non- Russians .
 The Kremlin adapted nationalist rhetoric following the regime’s realization of the unlikely alliance between nationalists and political liberals during the 2011-2012 mass protests . This observation is in line with arguments that the Kremlin adapted nationalistic rhetoric after 2011- 2012 mass protests.
 The tactic of stigmatizing anti-regime political protests is replicated in the Russian government-controlled media's coverage of Ukraine’s Euromaidan protests . The tactic is similar to that used by the government in the past .
 The average framing of Kremlin media is represented by a red line, and the average framing is captured by the black line .
 A significant deviation from the Kremlin’s frame from the frames employed by non-Kremlin media toward the protests-as-disorder narrative is observed only after the fall of the former President Viktor Yanukovych government and his flight from Kiev .
 The framing of protests by state-controlled sources and independent media tended to be in line with each other until mid-February 2014 .
 Only at that point, did framing of protests in Russia’s state-controlled media become more negative .
 The study gained leverage on this question by performing a series of simple key-word searches to identify trends in vocabulary alluding to the plight of ethnic Russians in Ukraine .
 Russia's state-controlled media began to employ legalistic jargon about “federalization,” “referendum,’ and the status of the Russian language and of ethnic Russians .
 The Kremlin promptly abandons these strategies by the end of April .
 This coincides with its disastrous failure to replicate the relatively peaceful Crimea annexation scenario in the Donbas . This is the first time Crimea has been annexed by Ukraine .
 By many accounts, there was a significant minority of residents in Donestsk and Luhansk regions who favored joining Russia .
Public opinion surveys revealed that the majority of Russia's territory was undivided . The majority of those surveyed were in Ukraine, but the majority were in Russia .
 Crimea's annexation has dampen the public euphoria surrounding Crimea’s annexation . In Russia too, an influx of migrants into regions bordering Ukraine and war casualties served to dampen euphoria .
 The Kremlin media’s abandonment of key terms may also be explained by the fact that protests also began to appear within Russia .
 Russian political opposition's thinly veiled references to the Kremlin’s hypocrisy inherent in fomenting separatist sentiment abroad . These demands represented the political opposition’'s thinly- veiled references.
 Kremlin-controlled media have altered coverage of public discontent at home and abroad in ways meant to undermine dissent, or cater to public sentiment . Putin regime has increased citizen support for the Putin regime .
 Rather than being witness to a grand strategy, tactical shifts are implemented, abandoned, or altered rapidly as events unfolded .
 Media analysis could be a useful tool for exploring shifts in Russia’s domestic and foreign policy .
 It may help ascertain not just the sources of regime strength, but also its weaknesses and vulnerabilities . It may also help ascertain the sources and vulnerabilities of the regime .
 Tomila Lankina is Associate Professor at The London School of Economics and Political Science . She is also an associate Professor at the University of London .
 The information presented and arguments made are based on in-depth analysis of media data using a methodological tool developed by The London School of Economics and Political Science .
 Kohei Watanabe, Katerina Tertytchnaya and Yulia Netesova are among those to thank for their help .
 We obtained 28,531 news stories in total for the period between January 1, 2011, and December 31, 2013 . We obtained a total of 28,500 news stories for the time of the period .
 Russian-language dictionary of media framing of protest . With the help of these stories, we developed a Russian- language dictionary .
 The dictionary-generation process involved human coding of news by three native Russian-speakers to capture the tone of media coverage of rallies .
 A computer program that we created can “learn’ from human coders what scores to assign to words found in thousands of media stories on protest . It also involved a machine analysis component .
 For the analysis of non-Kremlin-controlled media under protests in Ukraine, we did a similar analysis of stories on protest in Russia . For the same analysis, we looked at stories on protests in Russia.
 The total number of news stories harvested for the period November 1, 2013 to December 31, 2014 is 22,568 .