 King is one of the most tenacious detectors of "things that don't add up" in the world today .
 Jeff Rense is the producer and host of his own talk radio program . Rense has worked in many key positions in broadcast journalism, including news reporter, news director, anchorman .
 It has been quite a journey and all during that times I really never stop wanting to know the realities of news stories, large and small .
When applying timeless questions towards the crucial subject of History, I have seldom been satisfied with the 'official explanations' for my inquiries and questions .
 'NWO Forbidden History' caught my attention for a number of reasons . I am generally cautious in bestowing blessings upon the work of others .
 King's mastery of the subject, formidable writing talent, and unique ability to break down the complex into simple bites were already known to me . Through his writings submitted to Rense.com and also from his ‘tour d' force' guest appearance on my show, King's
 I was pleased when I learned of his project to reformat his Internet Classic into a hard copy version . The Internet Classic is now a hard copies of the original version .
World situation becomes gloomier by the day, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is only through a clear understanding of the past, that we can truly understand the present, says the author . The author says we can only understand the future that is being planned for us .
 ‘Planet Rothschild’ serves as the perfect reference guide to help you navigate through the sea of lies which have been fed to us since childhood, and continue to befed to us each day .
Politicians are the actors and the TV talking heads are the narrators . The politicians are the politicians and the television talking heads.
 The audience is humanity itself — most of which, unfortunately, have no idea that a rigged show has been, and still is, playing out before their eyes . Most of the audience is Humanity itself .
It is a global monster-scam of unimaginable dimensions in which humanity is the target . It is a 'global monster- scam of unprecedented dimensions' in which humans are the target.
 It is a unique "blurb by blurb" chronological and photographical review that will enrich your depth of historical and economic knowledge like no other work of its kind .
 This life-changing work is ideal as a permanent reference & study guide. This work is a life- changing work .
You won’t be able to refute any of it; and nor will you ever look at world events in the same light ever again. But you won”t be can’s able to refuted any of the world events .
 German Foreign Minister Ribbentrop and Russian Foreign Minister Molotov sign the MolOTov-Ribbentrop NonAggression Pact . To alleviate the threat in the east, Ribbentro and Molotova sign the pact .
 Hitler hopes that if he can at least keep the peace with the USSR, the scheming warmongers of Britain and France can be prevented from drawing the USSR into a war against Germany . Hitler understands what kind of monster Stalin is, but he hopes he can keep
Western Globalists are annoyed with Stalin over this pact with Germany . Western Globalists want to know more about the deal .
 Germany and the Anglo-French Alliance to weaken each other first . Germany's Red Army can take all of Europe if it wins all of it, says Red Army chief .
 Western cartoons mock the idea of a Hitler-Stalin pact AUGUST 25, 1939 . The Polish-British Common Defense Pact contains promises of British military assistance .
 This builds upon a previous agreement between the two countries, and also with France, by specifically committing to military action in the event of an attack . This builds on the previous agreement, which also builds upon an earlier agreement .
 Zionist-Globalist forces in the UK have trapped the reluctant Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, as well as France . With this agreement, Zionist- globalist forces have trapped Neville Chamberlain .
 Marshal Edward Rydz-Smigly is under the protection of Polish-Jewish border thugs . He is trying to provoke Germany into action and get the war started .
 On the nights of August 25 to August 31 inclusive, there are many violent attacks on German civilians and German officials . The nights of the night are August 25-31 inclusive .
 Under heavy pressure, Chamberlain was manipulated into a UK-Poland Defense pact . Chamberlain was under heavy pressure to make the pact .
 Hitler is prepared for war with Poland but is still attempting to preserve peace, especially with France and Britain .
 I have never overlooked the grave responsibilities which are imposed upon those who are in charge of nations . I, too, have never overlook thegrave responsibilities that are imposed on those in charge .
 I have tried to remove all matters that might cause conflict between our two peoples. Guided by this attitude and experience, I have been trying to remove any matters that may cause conflict . I have also tried to take on the attitude of the two peoples .
 The German people hold no ill feelings, much less hatred, for its one-time brave opponent .
On the contrary, the pacification of our western frontier led to an increasing sympathy, he says .
 Europe today and for twenty-five years could enjoy a condition of deepest peace. I am deeply convinced that if England at that time had started a wild campaign against Germany in the press, instead of launching rumors of a German mobilization, it would have been reasonable .
 Polish public opinion was excited by a lie about German aggression. As things were, Polish public Opinion was excited about the lie .
 Polish public opinion, convinced that England and France would now fight for Poland, began to make demands one might possibly stigmatize as laughable insanity were not so tremendously dangerous .
 At that point an unbearable terror, a physical and economic persecution of the Germans . More than a million and a half began in the regions ceded by the Reich .
 Poland feels herself as unassailable, now that she enjoys the protection of her guarantees. I see no way of persuading Poland to accept a peaceful solution, I say .
 If our two countries on that account should be destined to meet again on the field of battle, there would still be a difference in the motives .
 Hitler wrote to French President Edouard Daladier a letter which The Times cannot now deny . The front page carried the full text of the thoughtful and logical letter .
 Marshal Smigly allows Polish-Jewish partisan terrorists to cross the border and attack a German radio station in Germany . William Joyce, Irish defector to Germany AUGUST 31, 1939 ‘The GLEIWITZ’ BORDER ATTACKS.
 It is actually the latest in a string of deliberate border instigations against Germany . It is not the first time Germany has been involved in a row with Germany .
 The "Poles" then broadcast a message urging others to take up arms and start killing Germans . The ""Poles"" then broadcast the message to others .
German police quickly arrive and retake the station, killing one of the Red terrorists . German police quickly return the station.
 Modern fake historians claim that the Gleiwitz incident was staged by Germans dressed as Polish terrorists . They claim that Germans dressed up as terrorists were behind the incident .
 Reichstag Fire conspiracy theory is a theory that ignores the outrageous and repeated pattern of provocations directed at Hitler's Germany ever since 1933 . Hitler’s sincere attempts to negotiate a resolution to the Corridor and Danzig controversies are not supported .
 The Gleiwitz radio station was attacked and calls to kill German residents of Poland were broadcast .
 "It lived in Germany during the 1980's when many people who lived during the war were still alive. For more information on Germany's history of the war, click here .
I sought out anyone who lived near Poland in 1939 and was lucky enough to meet several people . I sought out people who lived close to Poland and met many of them .
 customs official said it was so bad on the border they were armed and also had grenades in their office ready for attacks . One customs official who said the border was 'so bad' said it had been so bad they had to be armed .
 Another told me his farm animals were often stolen by Polish terrorists . Another said his animals were stolen by terrorists .
 Another told of his niece being raped by a Pole who crossed the border . Another said his niece was raped by the Pole who crosses the border.
 Heydrich told me in 1940 they caught the man and showed him a copy of the death order signed by HeYDrich . HeydRich ordered the man be put to death, in which he ordered him to die .
German civilians witnessed border incursions just like had happened in 1919-1928 . This is just one of many stories told to me by German civilians who witnessed these border incursion .
 Poland openly attacked Germany right after World War I, which led to many border battles . Many people fail to see that Poland attacked Germany in the aftermath of the war .
 Once Germany started pressing Poland to work out a solution to the corridor, the attacks started again .
 George H Ohio, USA Hitler has had about all he could take from Poland . Germany did not make up these attacks, he says .
 As the German army advances eastward, the badly GERMANY INVADES beaten Polish forces POLAND withdraw rapidly .
 British Duke Arthur Wellesley was the great grandson of the famous Duke of Wellington who defeated Napoleon . He was the son of the British Prince of Wales .
 The Saar Offensive is a French ground invasion into Saarland, Germany .
 The large scale assault is to be carried out by 40 divisions and 40 tank battalions . The assault will take place in 40 divisions.
 The French Army was to gain control over the area between the French border and the Siegfried Line of German defense . According to the Franco-Polish military convention, the French Army would gain control.
 The full 40-division all-out assault never materializes in Poland . Much to the dismay of the fools in Poland, the full 30-division assault never Materializes .
 The empty promises of empire were just an Allied trick just to get stupid Marshal Smigly to start the fight with Germany . The empty promise of empire was just a Allied trick.
 A limited invasion and occupation of Germany’s Saar region does indeed occur. But a limited invasion of the region does not occur, it is claimed .
 The German army now reinforced with troops returning from the Polish campaign . On October 16 & 17, the German army conducts a counter-offensive .
 The Anglo-French Allies not only instigated the war, they also drew first blood upon Germany . So you see, dear reader, the Anglo- French Allies were the first to declare war .
 The Katyn Forest Massacre in which 10,000 Polish Army officers are shot in the head is the most infamous . The advancing Reds carry out massacres, most infamous being the Katyn forest Massacre .
 The Soviets will eventually take all of Poland . Other than the pre-Versailles German areas which Germany reclaims, the Soviets will also take Poland .
 In a shocking double-standard, the anti-German, FDR, France & the UK remain oddly silent about this brutal Soviet aggression .
 Poland appeals to Britain and France for help, citing the Poland-British Defense Pact just signed a few weeks ago . Poland appeals.
 The Polish ambassador in London contacts the British Foreign Office pointing out clause 1 of the agreement concerned an "aggression by a European power" on Poland .
 The UK Foreign Secretary responds with hostility, stating that it was Britain's decision whether to declare war on the Soviet Union .
 Hitler used his troops to instigate Hitler so they could have their war . They only used its stupid ultra-nationalist leader to instigate Hitler .
 The Soviets massacred 10,000 Polish officers after the rat Smigly abandoned his armies . The Soviets killed more than 100,000 officers in the fall of the Soviets .
Within a few weeks, the German-Polish War is already over . The war is over .
 England would have said about a similar peace solution at its expense or how America or France would have accepted it . I do not know what England would've said about the similar solution .
 I submitted this attempt to the Polish rulers in the form of verbal proposals . I submitted a proposal to Polish rulers. I submitted it to the rulers in form ofverbal proposals .
 Thereupon wild terror was initiated, and my request to visit the Polish Foreign Minister to visit him in Berlin was refused .
 The German-Polish War has ended quickly. The war ended quickly .
 The French actually invade Germany on September 7th, advancing 8 km before stopping . The French advance 8km before stopping.
 Hitler pleads for the Allies to withdraw their war declarations during this time . During this time, Hitler plead for the allies to withdraw war declarations .
 Hitler’s pleas for peace are ignored as allies begin to mobilize more than 2,000,000 troops in Northern France .
 Plans are openly discussed to advance eastward upon Germany, via “neutral” Belgium and Holland, as well as establishing operations in Norway and Denmark, with or without their consent .
 Hitler will send no warning — so always carry your gas mask . During his speech of October 6, 1939, Hitler pleaded for peace .
 The British government shamelessly frightened its own people with idiotic tales of imminent German gas attacks . Meanwhile, the British government is shamelessly frightening its own citizens .
 The Neutrality Acts prohibited the U.S. from selling arms to warring nations . It also prohibited the United States from selling weapons to warrings nations .
 The purpose of these acts was to prevent the United States from again becoming involved in Europe's wars . The purpose was to stop the U.S. from again being involved in European wars .
 FDR and his Zionist advisor Bernard Baruch had unsuccessfully tried to amend the previous Neutrality Acts . During the 1930's, FDR had also been an advisor to Woodrow Wilson .
 FDR urges Congress to repeal the Neutrality Acts . Germany and Poland began fighting after FDR urged Congress to do so .
 FDR has taken a big step towards involving America in a war that his Zio-Globo handlers have long been agitating for . The scheming FDR is taking a step towards involvement in the war .
 Jewish Money King Bernard Baruch and his puppet FDR undid the previous Neutrality Acts .
 The Patria is carrying 1800 Jewish émigrés . British authorities are deporting from Palestine to Mauritius because they lack entry permits .
 The Zionist "Haganah" terror-military group claims that the passengers blew up the ship as a suicide protest against British refusal to let them arrive in Palestine .
 Haganah planted the bomb which sank the ship in just 15 minutes . The truth eventually comes out and it is revealed that the bomb was planted by the bomb maker .
 Hard core Zionists would rather see Jewish passengers die than be relocated to Mauritius . The hard core Zionist would rather be relocated than relocated .
 The propaganda value of a "mass suicide protest" would outweigh the value of even Jewish lives, says the author . The propagandavalue of a “mass suicide Protest’s” would outweigh that of Jewish lives .
 The "official story" is that Haganah only wanted to cripple the ship, not sink it . The " official story" today is that the ship was not sunk .
 Stalin breaks another 1932 non-aggression pact he had agreed to with Poland . The Soviet-Finnish Non Aggression Pact of 1932 .
 The invasion is massive, with 21 Soviet divisions consisting of 450,000 Red Army troops . The invasion of the Soviet Union is massive .
 Stalin expects to overwhelm Finland in a matter of weeks and install a government of Finnish Communists currently waiting in Moscow . The brave and outnumbered Finns stage a heroic defense of their homeland .
 A treaty is signed the following March, but the Finns are forced to give up some territory . The Finns have a treaty to sign a treaty that will be signed in the following month .
 The "International Community" verbally condemns the Soviet invasion and makes some symbolic economic gestures . There are no calls for boycotts, nor any declaration of war against the USSR .
 Hitler is forced to remain silent about Stalin’s actions because he does not want a two-front war . Hitler is also forced to keep quiet about Stalin's actions .
 The brave Finns put up a fierce resistance against the Soviet aggressors . The Finns fought back against the Soviets.
 Allied plan is to disrupt Germany’s iron ore imports from Sweden by illegally mining Norwegian waters .
 Plans are also made for imposing a base of operations in Denmark, Germany’s neutral neighbor to its north .
 Quisling informs Hitler of the Anglo-French plot to wage war from the two Scandinavian countries . The two Scandinavian nations are part of the European Union .
 Germany moves quickly to secure the Norwegian port of Narvik just before the British can place their mines, and also to occupy Denmark . Germany moves fast to secure Narvik, Norway, and Denmark .
German diplomats assure leaders of both Scandinavian nations that Germany seeks neither conquest nor interference in internal affairs . German diplomats assure both countries that Germany wants neither conquest or interference .
 Life under limited German occupation goes on quietly for the Scandinavians during the war .
 Quisling’s name is now a dictionary word in the English language, synonymous with ‘traitor’ — a totally unfair characterization . The word is now synonymous with the word "traitor"
 It begins on May 10, 1940, with British troops disembarking in the Capital City of Reykjavik .
 The British quickly move inland, disabling communications networks and securing landing locations . The British move inland and quickly move ashore, disabling communication networks .
 The government of Iceland protests the violation of their neutrality, but to no avail . Iceland's government is protesting the violation.
 The force is then augmented to a final strength of 25,000 . This force is subsequently augmented, to a total strength of 20,000. This force then increases to 25,00 .
 Rothschild Britain is the true aggressor of the coming war in Western Europe, says David Cameron . The recently thwarted British occupations of neutral Denmark and Norway, and the successful occupation of neutral Iceland, show that Rothschild Britain was the real aggressor .
 30,000 U.S. troops will relieve the British and occupy Iceland in spring of 1941 . FDR promises that America will remain non-belligerent until December 1941 .
 Neville Chamberlain is finally pushed aside as the lunatic, drunken, cigar chomping Winston Churchill takes his place .
 Churchill, and his wealthy London Zionist backers, have been advocating for war with Germany for the past 6 years . Churchill, who has been in the UK for 6 years, has been supporting the war in Germany .
 Churchill portrayed as some sort of wise prophet. But now, with the Zionist press of Britain misrepresenting the facts surrounding the GermanPolish War, Churchill is portrayed as a prophet .
 Hitler now knows that the Phony War is about to become very real . With Chamberlain gone and Churchill now in power, Hitler knows for certain that the war will become real .
 Churchill and his criminal crew of Kingsley Wood & Anthony Eden are now out in the open as UK’s ruling war party .
 Hitler's pleas for peace have been repeatedly ignored as 400,000 British and at least 2,000,000 French troops mass in northern France .
 Germany takes the fight to the Allies before they can bring it to German soil . The UK invades Iceland as an act of national self-defense .
 The German Blitzkrieg quickly overtakes the smaller nations (known as the Low Countries because of their geography) and pushes the Allied armies into a full retreat towards northern France .
 The Allied force on Germany’s industrial frontier is conveniently ignored, as is the undeniable and extensive collaboration between the “neutral” Low Countries and the Allies .
 The western press and modern court-historians have buried these allegations . The western media have buried the allegations .
 The medieval and non-strategic German town of Freiburg is located 20 miles from the French border .
 New Prime Minister Churchill and his French allies waste no time in murdering civilians . In the opening hours of the war in the west, new PM Churchill and French allies wasted no time.
 About 60 bombs are dropped on or near Freiburg; 50 civilians are killed . 20 children were playing outside when the bombs were dropped .
Court historians have long promoted the ridiculous lie that the Germans accidentally bombed their own town and then blamed the event on the Allies in order to cover up the mistake . In order to whitewash this horrific deed from the pages of history, they are trying to maintain the historical myth that it
 Subsequent terror bombings of German civilians will dispel any doubt that Churchill was indeed capable of deliberately exterminating civilians .
 Hitler proposes generous peace terms to Britain . Hitler, via a Swedish third party, proposes generous terms .
 The Germans contact the British ambassador in Sweden, Victor Mallet, through Sweden’s Supreme Court Judge Ekeberg, who is known to Hitler's legal advisor, Ludwig Weissauer .
 Hitler's peace proposal demands nothing of Great Britain and implies that the states currently occupied by Germany would be de-occupied . Germany's occupation was only due to the present war situation .
 The discussion soon moves to that of Italian mediation between the Allies and Germany . The discussion will soon move to that.
 Halifax responds very favorably to the idea and takes it to the British War Cabinet . Halifax takes the idea to the UK War Cabinet.
 Halifax reports to the War Cabinet, summarizing his meeting with Bastianini . He urges his colleagues to consider Italian mediation .
 Halifax continues to press for the Mussolini mediation . For several days, Halifax has continued to press.
 Churchill states he doubts whether anything would come of an approach to Italy . But that the matter was one which the War Cabinet should consider .
 Never did Churchill even consider Mussolini's offer to mediate peace between Britain and Germany .
The matter eventually dies after Churchill outmaneuvers the peace-seeking Halifax . The matter eventually died after Churchill Outmaneuvered the Halifax .
 Germany’s stunning advance, the Allies are trapped on the beaches of Dunkirk, France .
 The entire force can be easily captured, but Hitler issues a halt order . Hitler issues an order to stop the entire force from capturing .
 Hitler believes the British will be more likely to make peace if they can escape with their dignity intact . Hitler believes that the British are more likely.
 A massive boat lift involving British fishermen ferries the troops across the English Channel back to England .
 Winston Churchill vows to keep fighting as he frightens the British people with tales of imminent German invasion .
 He compared the British Empire with the Catholic Church saying they were both essential elements of stability in the world . He compared British Empire to Catholic Church.
 He said all he wanted from Britain was that she should acknowledge Germany's position on the Continent . He said that all he wants from Britain is that she must acknowledge the German position .
 The Reds annex the tiny defenseless Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia .
 Western Globalists only remain obsessed with attacking Germany, whose leader, just like the Kaiser had two decades earlier, continues to plead for peace .
 Stalin swallowed up the tiny Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia in 1940 . Mussolini, the opportunistic, ego-driven Leader of Italy, ends Italy's neutrality and allies himself with Germany .
 Mussolini hopes to restore a new Roman Empire in North Africa . Unlike Hitler’s defensive war, Mussolini dreams of conquest .
 In September, Italy invades Egypt, which has been occupied by the British since a 1936 Treaty to protect the Suez Canal .
 Mussolini bites off far more than the unimpressive Italian military can chew . Mussolini is known to bite off more than any other Italian military.
 The superior British land and naval forces dominate their Italian adversaries, giving Churchill a potential continental opening to invade Italy .
 Italian land Eritrea Sudan Colonial Italy clashed with colonial Britain over Africa .
 Though a solid anti-Communist, Mussolini's imperialist ego will cost Germany & Italy dearly. Though a good anti-communist, it will cost the country dearly .
 The Germans enter undefended Paris on June 14 ' 40 .
 The new government is headed by World War I hero Marshal Philippe Petain . Petain agrees to make peace with Germany . The new German government will be the first in the country since the war .
 Germany continues to occupy northern France as a defensive measure against a British invasion of the continent . Unlike the brutality of the Versailles Treaty, this Armistice is very light .
 The new French government has its administrative offices in the southern city of Vichy . The new government is based in the city of Vichy.
 France remains a sovereign nation . Other than the strategic occupation in the north, France is a sovereign country .
 German soldiers establish an excellent reputation for good behavior, and charm with the French ladies . German soldiers are known for their good behavior .
 Churchill and Charles De Gaulle fume over Marshal Petain’s refusal to continue fighting . Meanwhile in the UK, Churchill and French General Charles de Gaulle.
 Hitler wants Petain to ally his country with Germany, but Mussolini’s war declaration upon France leaves such a bad taste in the mouths of Frenchmen that they cannot possibly join a German-Italian alliance .
 There is one thing that will bring him down, and that is an absolutely devastating, exterminating attack by very heavy bombers from this country upon the Nazi homeland . We have no Continental army which can defeat the German military power .
 Hitler is forced to declare that any more British bombings of civilian areas will be met with a similar response . In September, Hitler will be forced to announce that any British bombings will be followed by a similar reaction .
 Winston Churchill has again deliberately brought on the deaths of innocent men, women, and children in order to achieve political goals . As he had done with the orchestrated sinking of the Lusitania in 1915, he has again intentionally killed innocent men.
 Germans were killed and left homeless by Churchill's heavy terror bombers .
 Hitler responds to Churchill’s bombs by dropping mass quantities of leaflets over London .
 The 4-page broadsheet contains an English language summary of Hitler’s recent speech before the Reichstag .
 "I consider myself in a position to make this appeal, since I am not the vanquished, begging favors, but the victor speaking in the name of reason," he says . He says he's "not the vanquished" but the winner speaks in the names of reason .
 Churchill said that it is merely born of fear and of doubt in our final victory . Possibly Mr Churchill again will brush aside this statement of mine by saying that it was merelyborn of fear .
 The British respond to Hitler’s sincere plea with mockery, threats, and more bombs .
British soldier laughs as he reads Hitler’s air-dropped leaflet .
 For centuries, Europeans and Jews have had problems living together .
 Hitler was content to leave them alone and live as resident aliens of Germany . Hitler was happy to leave the Germans alone and leave them to live as residents of Germany.
 The 1933 ""Transfer Agreement’ between the German government and the Zionists facilitated that . The 1933 "Transfer Agreement" between the Germans and Zionists enabled that .
 About 40% of Germany's Jews immigrated to Palestine with all of their wealth intact . From 1933-1940, about 40 per cent of German Jews moved to Palestine .
 World War II prevents further cooperation between the Germans and Zionists . It becomes clear that a new “final solution’ is needed .
 Hitler envisions a homeland for the Jews on the beautiful island of Madagascar, off the coast of southern Africa . One million Jews per year under German protection and supervision .
 The idea of a Jewish homeland on Madagascar had actually been circulating throughout Europe since the 1880s . The idea had been circulating in Europe since then .
 The Madagascar Plan is scrapped when the British invade the island in 1942, taking control away from Vichy France after the Battle of Madagascar .
 Madagascar would have been a win-win solution for Jews and Europeans . It would have spared the poor Palestinians, and other Arab nations, all of the horrors they would endure after the illegitimate founding of Israel in 1948 .
 The Transfer Agreement reveals the full extent of the cooperation between the Germans and Zionist émigrés .
 Hitler’s ‘Final Solution’ was to relocate the Jews to a homeland of their own, not kill them .
 FDR continues to secretly prepare for entry into the Globalists' World War . FDR says American boys "will not be going to foreign wars"
 The unlucky draftees are told that they will serve a 12 month term, based in either the Western Hemisphere, or a United States territory .
 By the summer of 1941, the deceitful FDR is planning to trick America into the war by way of a Japanese provocation .
Outraged draftees protest FDR's broken promise and threaten to desert when their 12 months are up . Outraged draFtees are protesting FDR's break-up .
 Most will obey the order and continue to serve past the promised October 1941 release date . But most will serve past October 1941, and right up until the "surprise attack" upon Pearl Harbor in December 1941 .
 The 1940 Postcard mocks FDR for laughing as he signs Draft Bill .
 Germany and Japan are suspicious of FDR’s true intentions .
 Japan, Germany, and Italy agree to assist one another with all political, economic and military means if one of the contracting nations is attacked by a nation at present not involved in the European War or in the JapaneseChinese conflict .
 The defense pact will end up actually facilitating FDR’s scheme to draw America in .
 The 5 Billionaire Rothschild Brothers of the 1800's were to the European branch of the New World Order . The 5billionaire Rockefeller Brothers will be to the American branch .
 Former CFR Director, Founder of the Tri-Lateral Commission 1The Third Generation . Former CFR director, Former CFR Chairman and Chairman of the TLC .
 The Soviets have already annexed parts of anti-Communist Romania . The Soviets had already annexed part of Romania .
 The Red Army now sits dangerously close to the Ploesti oil fields upon which Germany depends . Germany depends on the oil fields.
 German troops arrive to protect the oil fields from the Soviet threat . With the approval of Romania, German troops will arrive in Romania .
 Churchill and Stalin will play their "chess games" against Germany . It is from this area of Europe that the pair will play the games .
 British politicians reach out to international Jewry for help during World War I . As they had during their losing days of World War II, British politicians reached out for help .
 During World War I, Britain's ‘Balfour Declaration’ promised Palestine to the Jews in exchange for bringing about United States entry .
 There is no chance of British victory unless the U.S. can be dragged into the conflict . But there are no chances of victory in the conflict.
 The promise of a 'New World Order' is clearly intended to further encourage American Jewish support for entering the war . The promise is clearly meant to encourage U.S. Jewish support.
Arthur Greenwood member without portfolio in the British War Cabinet assured the Jews of the United States that when victory was achieved an effort would be made to found a New World Order . Italy had occupied tiny Albania in the spring of 1939 .
 Greece has good relations with Germany, but Mussolini wants to claim the Ionian Islands . Greece has a good relationship with Germany but wants to claims Ionian islands .
 Italy's invasion of Greece is completely unrelated to Germany’s war . It creates unexpected problems for Hitler, says Hitler .
 Churchill now has an opening on the European mainland from which he can move north towards Germany and eastward towards Romania and the crucial oil fields which supply Germany .
 Republicans warn that FDR is plotting to bring the U.S. into war .
 FDR reassures voters that the “isolationists’ are misrepresenting his intentions . The public is strongly opposed to entry in another war .
 The peace-seeking Vatican and peace- seeking Germany remained in contact as the war raged . The war raged as the Vatican and Germany were in contact .
This was not even a deal worked out through a process of hard negotiation . This was not a deal working out through the process of a hard negotiation.
 Hitler's opening gambit was so generous and pragmatic that it would be very tempting to anyone who genuinely wanted peace . It was Hitler's first gambit.
 His offer of such remarkable concessions was an extremely threatening development . His offer was anextremely threatening development, he said .
 Neither the Pope's prayers nor his emissaries could soften the black hearts of Churchill and his gang of warmongers .
 The first units of the German 'AfrikaKorps' arrive to rescue the collapsing Italian war effort in February of 1941 . The first German units arrived in February 1941 .
 General Erwin Rommel, known as the Desert Fox, commands the German force in North Africa . The Desert Fox is a German military force in the region .
 Rommel will eventually establish the upper hand in Africa . But this diversion of manpower and resources to Africa proves to be a costly hindrance for Germany .
 Kaufman calls for the complete extermination of the German people through forced sterilization and total dismemberment and reapportionment of German territory . Kaufman also calls for a complete extermination. Kaufman: The German people should be sterilized and removed from German territory.
 Germany Must Perish is read throughout Germany . Though not widely distributed in America, Germany must be read in America .
 Kaufman's evil work openly calls for the extinction of the German people and the absorbing of all German territory . Kaufman's works openly call for the death of the Germans and theabsorment of German territory.
 Churchill will not listen to reason because, behind the scenes, FDR is reassuring him that the U.S. will support the UK at all costs .
 Britain will eventually receive $31 billion worth of war supplies . Roosevelt calls for action to \s Aid Britains.
 Mussolini’s foolish adventure in Greece has already created a big problem for Hitler .
 British troops begin arriving in Greece to help the Greeks in their fight against the Italians .
 Hitler offers to mediate peace between Italy and Greece, but Greeks won't come to the table . More British troops keep arriving as more British troops arrive .
 In response, British intelligence immediately triggers an orchestrated coup . In response to British intelligence, British officials immediately trigger a coup .
 Stalin’s Yugoslavian Communists take to the streets in support of the new government .
 If he does not act now, the "soft underbelly of Europe" of Europe will be flooded with British troops destined for southern Germany, as well as the Romanian oil fields upon which Germany depends .
 The still small numbers of British troops are forced to evacuate . Churchill's scheme to inflame southern Europe and invite the Soviets in to help .
 Rudolf Hess is Germany’s Number 2 in command and a close friend of Hitler . He is Germany's Number 1 in command.
Hess typed out the dictation for Hitler’s Mein Kampf .
 In May of 1941, Hess flies a solo mission over Scotland and parachutes in, carrying an offer of peace . Hess flies solo mission, carrying offers of peace in the air .
 Duke of Hamilton is hoping to link up with Germany's desire for peace . He had befriended the Duke ofHamilton at the 1936 Berlin Olympics .
On Churchill's orders, Hess is held in solitary confinement for the duration of the war . Hess is being held for a period of time .
 Hess is "tried" at Nuremberg and then sentenced to life in East Berlin’s Spandau prison .
With the liberalization of the USSR in the 1980s, there is talk of finally releasing him . There is also talk of releasing him.
 His family believes that the 93-year-old Hess was murdered so that the details of his peace mission would remain buried forever . Hess' family believes he was murdered in order to keep the peace mission a secret .
 Hess's peace mission to Britain ended with Churchill jailing him for life . Hess was jailed for life for his role in Britain's war with Britain .
 FDR had waged a silent war against Germany before the German-Polish conflict .
 FDR is even more desperate to drag America into Britain's war with Germany . Germany is now in control of the European situation, FDR says .
 U.S. impounds German ships, sinks German subs, freezes German, Italian, and Japanese financial assets . British Navy assists British Navy in spotting and sinking The Bismarck .
 Hitler bears the humiliating provocations quietly, knowing that U.S. entry into the war would be disastrous for Germany . Hitler bears it quietly; knowing that United States entry would beastrous for Germany.
 FDR further instigates the Japanese. Realizing that Hitler will not take his bait, FDR instigated the Japanese .
 Stalin quietly gathers his massive Red Army along Germany’s eastern frontier, near Romanian oil fields that supply Germany .
 Stalin broke a nonaggression pact and pounced on Poland while the Poles were pre-occupied with Germany . He recalls how Stalin broke the pact and attacked Poland while Poland was pre- occupied .
 Soviet invasions of the Baltic States and eastern Romania all combine to offer still more proof that Stalin is up to something .
 Stalin threatens all of Europe. Now, with Germany and Britain distracted, Stalin threatens the whole of Europe .
 Hitler had hoped to remove the Soviet threat in April, but plans were delayed by Mussolini’s misadventures in Africa and Greece .
 The Red Army is caught flat-footed and bunched up in offensive positions . “Operation Barbarossa’s” is launched, the Army says .
 Millions of Soviet troops are taken prisoner, and the loss of weaponry and equipment leaves the Red Army neutralized . The loss of equipment and weaponry leaves the Army neutralizing .
Up to 65% of all Soviet tanks, field guns, machine guns, and anti-tank guns are either destroyed or captured . Up to 65%.
 The Germans rout the Reds all the way back to Moscow, liberating many cheering Ukrainian, Baltic, and even Russian people along the way .
Only the onset of the brutal Russian winter forces the Germans to pause their stunning offensive .
 2 month delay due to Mussolini's folly in Greece may have saved Stalin's regime from collapse in 1941 .
Liberated from the Stalin & Kaganovich death cult, happy Ukrainians cheer the invading German soldiers .
 When the German offensive almost reaches Moscow, Stalin is forced to flee eastward .
 Germany had only a few divisions in the provinces bordering Soviet Russia during a period when Germany had few divisions . I have already told the nation of the build-up of Soviet military power in the East .
 Only a blind person could fail to see that a military build-up of worldhistorical dimensions was being carried out . A blind person can't see that the military build up of world historical dimensions is happening .
 He unfreezes Soviet assets that had been frozen after Stalin’s attack on Finland in 1939, enabling the Soviets to immediately purchase 59 Fighter aircraft .
 The Germans would probably have finished off Stalin after the spring thaw of 1942 . Without this American aid, the Germans would have died off Stalin .
 S Says, Pledging Russ All Out Help Pace 2 Newer Wee Neatral,” Saye Gen. S Says.
 The Soviets consider the Volga Germans as potential collaborators after the German invasion in 1941 . Recruited as immigrants to Russia in the 18th century, they had always been allowed to maintain their culture and language .
 On August 28, 1941, Stalin dissolves the VolgaGerman Republic and orders immediate relocation of ethnic Germans .
 About 400,000 Volga Germans are stripped of their land and houses . They are transported eastward to Soviet Central Asia, and Siberia .
 By 1942, nearly all the able-bodied German population will have been conscripted to the NKVD slave-labor columns .
 The German soldier is the best behaved and honorable soldier of Europe . Volga Germans were forced from their homes and herded onto cattle cars bound for slave camps .
 Every soldier receives a copy of ‘The German Soldier’s 10 Commandments and is expected to follow them to the letter or face serious punishment .
 The German soldier will observe the rules of chivalrous warfare while fighting for victory .
 Combatants will be in uniform or will wear specially introduced and clearly distinguishable badges . Combatants are expected to wear special badges or uniforms .
 No enemy who has surrendered will be killed, including partisans and spies, including spies . No enemy will be dead, including partisan and spies .
Personal belongings will not be touched . arms, maps, and records will be taken away from them .
 Dum-Dum bullets are prohibited; also no other bullets may be transformed into Dum- dum . Dum-dum bullets can be used in the United States .
 Medical personnel and army chaplains may not be hindered in the execution of their medical or clerical activities . The execution of medical and clerical tasks is not hindered by the military .
Landmarks of historical value or buildings serving religious purposes, art, science, or charity are to be especially respected . Landmarks of historic value and buildings serve religious purposes or other purposes .
 Neutral territory will never be entered nor passed over by planes, nor shot at . It will not be the object of warlike activities of any kind .
 If a German soldier is made a prisoner of war he will tell his name and rank if asked for it . If asked for his name he will say it if asked if he is a soldier .
Under no circumstances will he reveal to which unit he belongs, nor will he give any information about German military, political, and economic conditions .
 The German went to great lengths to keep the Jewish inmates well-fed, well-housed and even entertained .
 Officials from the International Red Cross visited the camps regularly and right up until the end of the war . The Red Cross says the camps were used by the Red Cross for more than 20 years .
 There were weddings, Bar Mitzvahs, and even maternity wards for pregnant women . There were also maternity wards.
 It was only during the final year of the war that conditions began to deteriorate as typhus epidemics spread and supplies diminished .
 Because of the contagious nature of typhus, the corpses were cremated, not buried near groundwater . The corpses were not buried in groundwater .
 The destruction of so much of Germany’s critical infrastructure contributed to the deaths . Germany's critical infrastructure was destroyed by the collapse of its infrastructure .
 As the camps were liberated, many healthy and seemingly well-fed ‘Holocaust survivors’ were seen and photographed .
Brave men from every nation in Europe volunteer to fight the Soviets . Brave men from all nations in Europe are willing to fight for their country .
 The anti-Communist Waffen SS are motivated by a vision of a greater European family .
For the European SS, the Europe of jealousies, border disputes, and economic rivalries is petty . For the EuropeanSS, the EU of jealousyies and border disputes are petty .
 By war's end, half of the SS commanders will have been killed in action . By the end of the war, 50% of the commanders will be dead .
 By the end of the war, 40% of the Waffen SS will have been killed or gone missing . The SS will be killed or go missing by the end.
 Waffen volunteers. Were it not for the tenacity and sacrifice of the heroic Wafen volunteers, all of Europe would have been lost to the Soviet hordes .
 The "SS" is still vilified in the Globalist press. It is not surprising that to this day, the ""SS" has been vilified . "SS"" is stillvilified.
Waffen-SS.com Waffen SS banner includes emblems from every nation of Europe . It includes emblemets from every country of Europe.
Hitler was not fanatically anti-Jewish as much as he was anti-Marxist . There was large overlap between the two groups .
About 60,000 half-Jewish, and 90,000 quarter-Jewish soldiers fought for Hitler’s Germany .
 Among these were decorated soldiers, officers, and even Generals and Admirals . Among these are decorated soldiers.
 Jewish doctor Eduard Bloch treated his mother's cancer stricken mother . Bloch was Jewish doctor who had treated his cancer stricken mom .
 Bloch inquired about him when he returned to liberated Austria in 1938 . Bloch's kindness, and his kindness, was noted in his letters to him .
When interviewed by the OSS towards the end of the war, Bloch spoke very well of the young Hitler he had known .
 Hitler never forgot Eduard Bloch, the Jewish physician who had treated his dying mother . Bloch's mother was Jewish .
 Tokio Asks for Parley continue arming the Chinese . Parley chose to end the war in Asia.
 FDR is plotting to involve America in the war, according to JEWS . FDR and JEWs of PLOTTING to drag the United States into the war .
Lindbergh's speech accurately describes what is happening behind the scenes . Lindbergh’s speech in Iowa accurately describes the events behind the Scenes .
 FDR imposes devastating oil and trade embargoes on Japan . He denies her ships access to the neutral Panama Canal, and orders U.S. battleships to undertake "pop up" cruises through Japanese territorial waters .
On November 26th of '41, FDR sends an impossible ultimatum to Japan, implying a military threat . FDR demands that Japan withdraw all of its troops from China and Indochina as a pre-condition for lifting the oil embargo .
 The two traitors are dangling at Pearl Harbor, in the U.S. territory of Hawaii .
 Japanese high command decides to strike as damaging a blow to the U.S. Navy as possible . The Japanese high-command, in the hopes of gaining an early advantage, decided to strike .
 FDR and Churchill both have advance knowledge of the impending ‘surprise attack’ No specific warning is sent to the Commanders at Pearl Harbor .
 The attack kills 2402 U.S. sailors, and ignites press frenzy and a wave of patriotic fervor .
 America First Committee disbands. The "isolationists" are silenced for good and the America First committee disbands . The "Isolationists"" are silenced.
 The Great Deceiver plays innocent while addressing the nation . Pes RLaner 1 the Great De receiver plays innocent.
 The day after Pearl Harbor, Congress declares war on Japan . The day before Pearl Harbor was the day after the Pearl Harbor .
 Congress then follows with additional declarations upon Germany and Italy . Congress then followed with additional declaration upon Germany, Italy .
 Henry Stimson’s immediate and “dominant feeling” was not one of sorrow or outrage over the lost lives at Pearl Harbor, but rather of relief .
 We hereby declare war upon the United States of America and the British Empire . The U.S. and British Empire are at odds .
To cultivate friendship among nations and to enjoy prosperity in common with all nations has always been the guiding principle of our Empire's foreign policy . To cultivate friendship with nations and enjoy prosperity among nations is a key principle of Empire's Foreign policy .
 It has been unavoidable and far from our wishes that our Empire has been brought to cross swords with America and Britain . It has truly been unavoidable. It has really been unavoidable, far from ours wishes.
 More than four years have passed since China failed to comprehend the true intentions of our Empire . China has taken up arms since it was forced to take up arms .
 The regime which has survived in Chungking, relying upon American and British protection, still continues its fratricidal opposition . Japan had effected neighborly intercourse and cooperation .
 Eager for the realization of their ambition to dominate the Orient, both America and Britain, have aggravated the disturbances in East Asia . Eager to be able to dominate East Asia, both U.S. and Britain gave support to the Chungking regime .
 The two powers, inducing other countries to follow suit, increased military preparations on all sides of our Empire .
 "They have obstructed by every means our peaceful commerce and finally resorted to a direct severance of economic relations," he says . The Empire is " menacing greatly the existence of our Empire"
 Patiently have we waited and long have we endured, in the hope that our Government might retrieve the situation in peace. Patiently, we have waited for a long time .
 Our adversaries, showing not the least spirit of conciliation, have unduly delayed a settlement . But our adversaries show not the most spirit of Conciliation, says the writer . In the meantime they have intensified the economic and political pressure to compel our Empire to submission .
 This trend of affairs would, if left unchecked, not only nullify our Empire's efforts of many years for the sake of East Asia, but also endanger the very existence of our nation. This trend would also nullify the Empire's attempts to stabilize East Asia .
 In public he hypocritically claimed to be interested in peace while at the same time he threatened every country that was ready to pursue a policy of peaceful understanding by blocking credits, economic reprisals, calling in loans, and so forth .
 Reports of Polish ambassadors in Washington, London, Paris and Brussels provide shocking insight .
 I will overlook as meaningless the insulting attacks and rude statements by this so-called President against me personally . I'll overlook the insults and rude comments by the President against him personally .
 That he calls me a gangster is particularly meaningless, since this term did not originate in Europe . Such characters are uncommon in Europe, but in America, where this term is uncommon .
 Mr Roosevelt, like his predecessor Woodrow Wilson, is mentally unsound, says Mr Roosevelt . He says he doesn't feel insulted by Mr Roosevelt because he regard him as mentally unsounds .
 Jewish man has operated against Japan in the same way, with Jewish supporters . We know that this man, with his Jewish supporters, has worked against Japan .
 This man first incites to war, and then he lies about its causes and makes baseless allegations . This man is first incite to war and then makes baseless claims, he says .
 He repugnantly wraps himself in a cloak of Christian hypocrisy, while at the same time slowly but very steadily leading humanity into war .
 As an old Freemason, he calls upon God to witness that his actions are honorable . And finally, as a Freemason he calls on God to Witness that his action is honorable .
 His shameless misrepresentations of truth and violations of law are unparalleled in history . He has been accused of lying about the facts of his crimes . He is accused of a series of crimes against people who are innocent .
 The Japanese government finally had its fill of being treated in such a humiliating way . After years of negotiating with this deceiver, the government finally has its fill.
 All of us, the German people and all other decent people around the world as well, regard this with deep appreciation . I believe, all of us. All of them, theGerman people and, all others .
 It is the same eternal Jew that believes that his hour has come to impose the same fate on us that we have all seen and experienced with horror in Soviet Russia . It is also the same Eternal Jew that thinks that his day has been the same.
 Millions of Germans have personally seen the land where this international Jewry has destroyed and annihilated people and property . Millions of German soldiers have personally witnessed the land.
 Even if we were not allied with Japan, we would still realize that the Jews and their Franklin Roosevelt intend to destroy one state after another .
 The German Reich of today has nothing in common with the Germany of the past . The German Republic of today is not the same as Germany of today .
 For our part, we will now do what this provocateur has been trying to achieve for years . We will now try to achieve what we've been trying for years, we'll now do it .
 Germany and Italy have the insight and strength to realize that in this historic period the existence or non-existence of nations is being determined, perhaps for all time .
National Socialist Germany of the past to starvation, and they seek to destroy the National Socialist Germany . They were able to bring the democratic Germany to starvation . They are now trying to destroy them .
 Churchill and Roosevelt want to one day build a new social order, that's about the same as a bald-headed barber .
 Rather than incite war, these gentlemen should have concerned themselves with their own unemployed people, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They have enough misery and poverty in their own countries to keep themselves busy insuring a just distribution of food there . It's not enough for them to keep their own country busy.
 German nation is concerned, but it doesn't need charity, it does demand its rights .
 The Manhattan Project is an effort, led by the United States with participation from Britain, which will result in the first atomic bomb . It will do what it must to insure its right to life .
 The effort had started out on a small scale later that year, and by war's end will eventually employ 130,000 people at 30 locations . The effort has started out in small scale, but by the end of the year, it will be in 30 locations.
Physicist Gregory Breit quits in 1942 because of concerns over lax security procedures . Breit, an important researcher, quits because of security concerns .
 J Robert Oppenheimer is appointed to head the secret weapons lab at Los Alamos, New Mexico . The Jewish Communist Physicist takes over Breit's research, and is then appointed to lead the lab .
 As Oppenheimer "looks the other way" Red spies pass America's secrets into Stalin's hands . Red spies passed America's secret to Stalin.
Many years later, the declassified “Venona Intercepts’ will confirm the full extent of the treason which took place at Los Alamos .
 FDR's Executive Order 9066 condemns 110,000 Americans of Japanese ancestry to serve the rest of the war years in prison camps .
 GermanAmerican and Italian-American families are also interned in camps, though in lesser numbers .
 The increased productivity and decreased unemployment associated with a wartime slave economy benefit only the industry bosses who own the factories and the bankers financing the new spending .
 The goods that are churned out do not benefit the working public because they have to be shipped to the soldiers overseas . In many cases, the goods are destroyed .
 World War II was a time of great sacrifice for both the American men who were compelled to fight, bleed and die, as well as for “Rosie the Riveter” on the home front .
 The women who were herded into buzzing factories faced shortages of everything from metals to quality food and clothes .
 The U.S., British, and Soviet armies sucked up the manufactured “goods’ while Americans struggled . U.K. and British armies suck up the produced ‘goods' while Americans struggle .
 Propaganda posters everywhere told Americans it was their patriotic duty to work like animals and to go without .
 Nimitz, decisively defeats the Japanese, inflicting irreparable damage upon the Japanese fleet . Nimitz is the first time Nimitz has defeated the Japanese .
 After Midway, Japan’s Pacific defense perimeter of islands steadily shrinks . Japan cannot replace its lost ships and aircraft as fast as the United States can .
 Midway marks a turning point, but U.S. will sustain much more casualties as the Japanese tenaciously defend their Pacific perimeter for many months to come .
 combined deaths of nearly 2 million will go down in history as the bloodiest battle ever . The battle will be the most bloodiest ever .
 Stalin’s refusal to pull the Red Army out of the city leads to a long siege and great suffering for the hungry residents .
 The Lend Leaseequipped Red Army wears the Germans down with bloody house-to-house fighting . After the German offensive captures most of the city.
Much of the city’s civilian population fiercely resists the Germans as well .
 As intended, this “false flag’s terror enflames the civilian population against the Germans. As intended.
 The losses suffered by the Germans will make victory in Russia impossible. The losses will make it impossible for the Germans to win Russia .
 The politically appointed and grossly unqualified General Dwight D Eisenhower is given command of the Allied force which sails from England . The politically appointed and grosslyUnqualified General Eisenhower has been given command.
 General Patton's military genius bails out the incompetent and envious Eisenhower . But it is the military genius of General George Patton that ultimately bails him out .
 By May of 1943, the Germans will have evacuated Northern Africa as they prepare to defend the "soft underbelly of Europe" in southern Italy .
 Patton vs Rommel vs. Rommel: Italy now vulnerable to invasion . Patton vsRommel: North Africa vs. Italy: Italy is vulnerable to invade .
 FDR announces a policy of “unconditional surrender’ for Germany, Italy, and Japan .
 The Allies expect the Axis nations to not only stop fighting, but to also hand over complete political, educational, military and media control to the invading armies . Unconditional surrender means the Allies expects the Axis countries to stop fighting and hand over control of the Allied armies .
This brutal hard-line policy of complete subjugation inspires the Japanese and Germans to fight harder and longer . This brutal hard line policy inspires the German and Japanese and Japanese to fight hard and longer.
 Giraud, FDR, de Gaulle, and Churchill demand "Unconditional Surrender" The opening months of 1943 mark the turning point in the war .
 General Friedrich Paulus requests that Hitler allow the 6 Army at Stalingrad to surrender . Paulus asks for Hitler to surrender. Paulus: Hitler should be allowed to surrender 6 Army .
 Hitler, knowing what the stakes were for Germany and Europe, and knowing that Stalin would kill any prisoners, orders Paulus to hold firm . Paulus: "The stakes are for Europe and Germany and Germany, and the stakes are very high"
 In February, the cowardly general finally surrenders his army to the tender mercy of the Stalin-Kaganovich death cult .
 About 35,000 of the men under Paulus’s command had already been evacuated from the front .
 Paulus eventually sells out to the Soviets altogether, joining the ‘National Committee for Free Germany’ and urging German troops to defy orders and surrender .
After testifying at the post-war Nuremberg show-trials for the Soviets, he was released and spent the rest of his life as a mouthpiece for Communist East Germany .
 Germany is now limited to playing defense as the Allies slowly tighten the Globalist noose around Hitler’s Reich .
 Betrayed by their General, cold, tired and hungry Germans surrender at Stalingrad .
 The Firebombing of Hamburg creates a tornado of fire so intense that it lifts people off of the streets and into the fire .
 Those who are not burned to death suffocate in shelters as the fire above sucks up all the oxygen . The fire above is sucking up the oxygen.
 Hundreds of U.S. and UK aircraft feed the inferno with wave after wave of incendiary bombings . Hundreds of United States and UK planes feed inferno.
 The demonic planners of the genocide of Hamburg actually code named the arson attack ‘Operation Gomorrah’ after the Hebrew Bible story of the cities which God destroyed by fire.
 One million refugees flee the city in which 250,000 homes were destroyed . One million people fled the city of Berlin .
 The women, children, and elderly of Hamburg were suffocated or charbroiled alive by Churchill and Roosevelt .
 In the prior year, when Japan occupied Burma, an important rice exporter, the British bought up massive amounts of rice and hoarded it .
 Churchill then orders the diversion of food away from India and toward British troops around the world .
 Wheat from Australia could have been delivered to starving Indians . It is instead transported to British troops as well .
 Churchill hates Indians almost as much as he hates Germans, mainly because India wants its independence from Britain . British colonial authorities actually turn down offers of food from the United States .
 Axis troops evacuate to the Italian mainland . Within four weeks of the initial air and sea assault, Axis troops are evacuated .
 Italian Leader Benito Mussolini is removed from power by his own Grand Council . Mussolini was the leader of Italy for 30 years .
 The new government arrests him, makes peace with the Allies, and switches sides . The newgovernment arrests him.
 Germany has the sole task of halting Patton’s push up the Italian peninsula . This leaves Germany with the soletask of halting the German leader's push up Italy .
 In August of 1943, the British Royal Air Force begins heavy bombing of the Ploesti oil fields of Germany .
 The German-occupied parts of Italy are also heavily bombed by the Allies, resulting in the deaths of 60,000 Italian civilians . The Germans-occupied part of Italy is also heavily bombed.
 Adolf Hitler has a great appreciation for art and culture . A talented painter himself, Adolf Hitler is a great artist himself .
 He sees Churchill and FDR as uncultured barbarians with merciless disregard for innocent life, architecture, and works of art . He also sees Churchill, FDR as unultured Barbarians .
 Hitler too orders the protection of artworks throughout the combat theatres of Europe .
 The task of protecting the art is handed over to Air Force Marshal Hermann Goering .
 As Allied terror bombing ravages Europe, thousands of paintings and sculptures from Italy, France, Belgium, Russia, Romania, and Poland are gathered and meticulously inventoried by the Germans .
 American Art Looting Investigation Unit issues 13 reports on the German “looting of artworks.’s ‘looting’ of art works .
 OSS also accused Germans of using dead Jews to make ‘shrunken heads’ and “lamp shades’ Allegations that are today universally acknowledged as false .
 ‘Monuments Men’ starring George Clooney and Matt Damon is a war propaganda lie .
 An Allied advance on the Balkans through Yugoslavia and Greece would be disastrous for Germany . Germany would have been disastrous for the Germans .
 From Italy and the Balkans, the Allies can then launch a final push upon Germany itself from the south and southeast . The Allies can also launch a last push on Germany from Italy and Balkans .
 Inexplicably, Allied Commander Dwight Eisenhower and Army Chief of Staff George Marshall insist upon making preparations for an invasion of heavily fortified Northern France .
 The bizarre "blunder" prolongs the war, buys the Soviets much needed time to march westward, and eventually enables Stalin to steal Eastern Europe . This bizarre “bluger’s’tonging’ll buy time for the Soviets to march
After the war, Stalin will break with the Globalists and move towards a form of Nationalistic Communism . The ideological conflict had bitterly divided Stalin and Trotsky during the 1920s .
Anti-Communist soldiers of the Russian Liberation Army wore German uniforms with a Russian patch .
 The RLA fought valiantly, mainly in key rear guard support roles against Communist partisans . The R LA fought with Communist partisans.
After the war, the RLA will attempt to surrender to the western allies . The RLA has been fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan for years .
 Eisenhower will turn down their offers and forcibly repatriate those who were already in U.S. custody .
General Vlasov and his freedom fighters will then be handed over to the brutal Soviets . Despite pleading with the Americans for political asylum, General Vlasova will be handed to the Soviets .
 Vlasov and 11 of his senior officers are hanged in Moscow in August, 1946 . The two men were hanged in August 1946 .
 In May ’44, the Allies finally succeed in taking Monte Cassino from German control .
 The Moroccans are allowed to run wild, slitting the throats of prisoners, looting homes, and raping every Italian woman they can get their hands on . The Morocans are also allowed to kill prisoners, loot homes and rape women .
 One dies from the abuse, and the other will spend the rest of her life in a mental hospital . One will spend her life at the hospital .
 eal Italian actress Sophia Loren starred in "Two Women" about a mother and daughter savagely raped by France's Moroccan conscripts . The Moroccans go unpunished by their “Free French’s Commanders"
 Allied armies based in England launch ‘D-Day’ and successfully cross the English Channel . The 6"" day, of the 6"" month of 1944, was the 6 hour of the6"" day.
 The cost of Operation Overlord is high as nearly 10,000 men are killed storming the fortified beaches of Normandy .
 From this base in northern France, the Allies will be reinforced for the push towards Germany . The Allies will also be reinforced from this base .
 At the same time, the Soviet Red Army, armed to the teeth with state-ofthe-art American weaponry, advances upon Germany from the east .
Instead of exploiting the "soft underbelly" of Italy, Allies storm fortified French beaches .
Life in Northern France goes by peacefully for French civilians . The German occupation was intended to be only temporary .
 Normandy invasion (June 6, 1944), the peace and security of France is shattered into a million pieces . But with the Normandy invasion, the peace of France was shattered .
 To support the cross-channel invasion, and then push the Germans eastward, the Allies unleash a ferocious aerial bombardment campaign . The Allies launch a ferocious bombardment campaign to back the German invasion .
 Cultural icons and works of art are destroyed, 65,000 French civilians are killed, 150,000 are injured, and at least 500,000 left homeless . At least 50,000 people are left homeless.
 The Allied occupation and subsequent economic collapse bring new nightmares for the women of France .
 Under Allied occupation, American troops rape 1000's of French women, and turn many 1000's more hungry women into sex-for-food prostitutes .
 It will take years for these areas of France to recover from the tragedy. It will be a long time to recover.
 Churchill, FDR, and the French traitor de Gaulle have imposed upon France . Such is the glorious "liberation" that Churchill and FDR have imposed on France, says historian .
 The Allied ‘liberators’ left death, trauma and homelessness in their wake . So Ot Ane pee ime biyaey eee .
 The Red Army advances on Germany from the east from the East . TommyGuns, planes, trucks, jeeps, and even food and blankets.
 By July ’44, the murdering and raping Reds have rolled into Poland, threatening Germany’s eastern flank . The murder and rape of the Reds has threatened Germany's eastern flank.
 Frightened German civilians begin fleeing westward by land and also via the Baltic Sea . German civilians flee by land, also via Baltic Sea.
 The top British delegate is the legendary Fabian Socialist (possible secret Communist) and homosexual pedophile . John Maynard Keynes is the most famous British delegate .
 Keynes suggests the creation of a World Currency, to be issued by a Global Central Bank .
 The world is not ready for such a radical step towards The New World Order . But the world is still not ready to take such a step towards the new world order .
 Each nation will link the value of its currency to the United States Dollar, which will serve as the international medium of exchange . The U.S. Dollar will be used as a global currency, not a currency .
 Both the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are conceived at Bretton Woods . Both the IMF and World Bank were conceived at the Woods .
 Soviet agent White & Fabian Marxist pedophile Keynes crafted the world’s debt-based monetary system . Keynes devised the World Bank and IMF schemes .
 There are still some naive fools among the German military establishment who believe that the western Allies can yet be reasoned with and peace obtained in the western front .
 Churchill and FDR have already pledged to Stalin that they will not seek a Separate peace with Germany . Unbeknownst to them, they have already promised to Stalin they won't seek a separation .
 Stauffenberg attends a conference with Hitler . He also attends the conference in Germany .
After a few minutes, Stauffenberg receives a planned telephone call and leaves the room . After a couple minutes, the room is empty .
 When the bomb detonates, it demolishes the conference room, killing three officers and the stenographer . The bomb also kills a stenographer.
 The conspiracy is unraveled and the conspirators are soon executed by firing squad . The conspirators will be shot by firing squads .
Decomposing typhus corpses can also spread the disease into local groundwater . Decomposing corpses can be found in local groundwater, according to experts .
 During and after the World War I, as many as 5 million Poles and Russians died of the deadly disease .
With the situation in Germany deteriorating fast, deadly typhus epidemics break out in Germany’s internment camps .
 Allied bombardment of railroads and medicine factories contributes greatly to this medical crisis . The Allied bombardment has contributed greatly to the medical crisis.
 In spite of Germany’s well-documented efforts to stop the typhus epidemic, deaths in the concentration camps continue to mount throughout ’44 & ’A45.
 Allied propaganda will falsely portray typhus deaths as evidence of a deliberate extermination program aimed at the Jews . After the war, Allied propaganda would falsely portray the typhus death as evidence.
 The only crime was in making peace with Germany, or to have fought against the Soviets on the eastern front as members of the German SS units .
 The de Gaullist ‘liberals’ will murder as many as 40,000, and imprison 100,000 of their countrymen .
 French women who dated German soldiers during the occupation are humiliated by having their heads shaved bald or stripped naked .
 Petain has no choice but to reduce his sentence to life in prison . After the war, he will be sentenced to death for “treason’s’.
 French women who had fallen in love with German soldiers were shaved bald and paraded by Red Frenchmen and other ‘patriotic’ ignoramuses .
 The propaganda claim of “6 million Jews’ being in jeopardy of dying appeared in print in 1900 .
 Lestchinsky had been accused by Latvia and Germany of spreading false atrocity propaganda . As far back as 1933, LestChinsky was accused by both Latvia andGermany of spreading fake propaganda .
 The most "prestigious" newspaper in the world gave a huge boost to a big lie . The most 'prestigigious' newspaper in world thus gave a HUGE boost to the lie .
 Lestchinsky is a known Communist liar, but there is another problem with the story . He is also known to be a known communist liar .
 The Red Cross at the time neither questioned the figure nor complained about German cooperation with regard to Camp inspection .
 The “6 million’s’ number, which evidently has some symbolic significance, has been around for a long time . As it turns out, the ‘6million’Number, which apparently has some symbolism, is around for years .
 As the raping and murdering Soviets push eastward, millions of German refugees flee west by land and sea .
 The doomed ship is sighted by Soviet Submarine commander Alexander Marinesko soon after leaving port .
 The Soviet killer then fires three torpedoes into the ship’s port side .
 In panic that follows, many passengers are trampled to death as they flee to the decks .
 The murderous firebombing of the beautiful city of Dresden is therefore as cruel as it is unnecessary .
 The ZioGlobalists chose the day of "Ash Wednesday" to literally turn Dresden into ashes .
 For two straight days, wave upon wave of Allied air sorties drop phosphorus and incendiary bombs upon a defenseless population .
 Thousands of fires merge into one huge firestorm, sucking oxygen to feed itself . Thousands of German elderly, women and children suffocate or burn alive .
 The fire is so massive that pilots report that their cockpits are actually illuminated by the great flame .
 Survivors are later strafed during the daytime with machine gun fire from low flying American & British fighter planes .
 The dead of Dresden were stacked in huge piles and cremated before mass disease could set in .
 The Firebombing of Tokyo is just as deadly in its initial death toll as the subsequent atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki . It will later be overshadowed by the later atomic bombs dropping on Hiroshima .
 The genocidal terror bombing involves the same type of incendiary explosives dropped on Dresden one month earlier, and yields similar horrific results . The same kind of explosives were used in the Dresden bombing .
 The charred bodies of 100,000 dead civilians litter the streets and 250,000 buildings and homes are destroyed . The bodies of the dead are littering the streets .
 The Tokyo firebombing was just as deadly as the atomic bombings of Japan .
 The polio-stricken FDR will not live to see the end of the bloody war that he helped unleash upon the world .
 FDR intends to take a few weeks rest before his anticipated appearance at the U.N. conference in San Francisco .
 He slumps forward in his chair, unconscious, and is carried into his bedroom . He is carried in to his bedroom.
 Like Wilson in 1919, FDR suffers a massive stroke and dies soon afterwards . Like Wilson, FDR dies soon after his stroke .
 FDR's lasting legacy for America is the class warfare induced welfare state and the brutal foreign warfare state . Both are bankrupting the U.S. and killing innocents abroad .
 FDR's Jewish and Red inner circle will continue to run the show while the ill-tempered little man from Missouri delivers speeches .
 British General Bernard Montgomery argues that there is now nothing to stop the Allies from sweeping into Berlin . He argues that the advancing Soviet army can get there .
As FDR's loyal lapdog had done time and time again, "Ike" would find a way to delay the Allied advance so as to buy time for Stalin to advance .
 On March 28, '45, Ike sends a message to Stalin, assuring him that the Allied advance will focus on western Germany .
 On April 15, Ike issues a halt order forbidding Allied commanders from crossing the Elbe River .
 Generals Montgomery and Patton are very upset over the sudden order to halt the advance . They condemn Berlin and all of Eastern Europe, to Soviet barbarism .
 The Goya is a German transport ship carrying 7,000 wounded soldiers and terrified refugees westward . The ship is a transport ship with 7,00 wounded soldiers.
 Soviet Captain Vladimir Konovalov spots the Goya and orders it to be blasted by torpedoes . The Goya is a popular tourist destination in Russia .
 The Goya sinks very quickly, plunging its passengers into the icy Baltic Sea . The ship's passengers are plunged into the Baltic Sea.
 Mussolini attempts to escape to neutral Switzerland . Mussolini's defeat looms in Europe .
 Mussolini's body is then taken to Milan, where it is hung upside down for public viewing and also to provide confirmation of his death . The body of Mussolini is then held upside down in Milan, Italy, to be shown to public viewing .
 There were many positive economic and social developments during his rule . There were also positive economic, social developments .
 "il Duce" and his imperialistic ego put Italy and Germany in very difficult situations . But in the end, "il duce" put Italy, Germany and Italy in very tough situations .
 His reckless adventures in Africa & Greece made Italy a huge burden for Germany to carry and defend . His reckless trips in Africa and Greece made Germany a huge burdens for Germany .
 French & Arab disdain for Mussolini's actions ruined Hitler’s chances to bring France and the Arabs into an anti-British alliance .
 Hitler marries his longtime mistress, Eva Braun . The situation in Berlin is hopeless . Hitler's final testament is his final testAMENT .
 The staff is under orders to burn the bodies and to escape Berlin before the Soviets can capture them . The staff are under orders.
 Hitler had dictated his final Political Testament, in essence, in which he denied any responsibility for starting the war . One day before committing suicide, Hitler had written a suicide note .
 In these three decades, I have been actuated solely by love and loyalty to my people in all my thoughts, acts, and life . In these 3 decades, he has been actuating solely byLove and loyalty.
 They gave me the strength to make the most difficult decisions which have ever confronted mortal man . They gave him thestrength to make most difficult decision which has ever confronted mortals .
 I have spent my time, my working strength, and my health in these three decades . I have been in the hospital for more than 30 years . I've been in hospital for nearly 20 years .
 It was wanted and provoked solely by international statesmen either of Jewish origin or working for Jewish interests . It was also wanted by the Jewish community or by Jewish statesmen .
 I have made too many offers for the control and limitation of armaments, which posterity will not for all time be able to disregard for the responsibility for the outbreak of this war to be laid on me .
After the appalling First World War a second against England, or even against America, should break out . I have never wished that after the appalling first World War, a second World War should be a second .
 Three days before the outbreak of the German-Polish war, I again proposed to the British ambassador in Berlin . This offer also cannot be denied .
Lead circles in English politics wanted the war, partly on account of the business hoped for and partly under influence of propaganda organized by International Jewry . It was only rejected because the leading circles in British politics wanted war .
After six years of war, the German capital will go down one day in history as the most glorious and valiant demonstration of a nation's life purpose, I cannot forsake the city.
 As the forces are too small to make any further stand against the enemy attack at this place, he should like to share his fate with those who have also taken upon themselves to do so .
 The Jewish leader says he does not wish to fall into the hands of an enemy who requires a new spectacle organized by the Jews .
 I believe the position of the Fuehrer and Chancellor itself can no longer be held. I have decided therefore to remain in Berlin and there of my own free will to choose death at the moment . I've decided to remain.
 Adolf & Eva loved each other, and died together . I die with a happy heart, aware of the immeasurable deeds and achievements of our soldiers at the front .
 Hitler's young secretary, Traudl Junge, typed out the dictation for Hitler’s Final Testament .
 Junge lived until 2002, describing Hitler as a loving father figure until the end .
 Pound is an admirer of National Socialism, or "Fascism" as it is called in Italy . Pound is a member of the National Socialist Party in Italy.
 Pound condemned the unjust war and Jewish financiers behind it . Pound was living in Italy during the war .
 You would do better to inoculate your children with typhus and syphilis than to let in the Sassoons, Rothschilds, and Warburgs .
 Ezra Pound was once regarded as America's foremost literary genius .
 Germany has surrendered, jubilant crowds throughout Britain and the U.S. celebrate Victory in Europe Day .
 Admiral Karl Donitz, named in Hitler's final testament as the new President of Germany, signs the surrender agreement .
 Germany's real nightmares are about to unfold as a vengeful GlobalistCommunist Alliance-of-Evil imposes a collective punishment .
 The story tells of mass killing and “gassings’ at the Auschwitz prison camp in Poland . The story is told of mass killings and ‘gassing’
 The timing of the report's release makes it impossible for the falsely accused Germans to refute Stalin’s claim .
 It is a little known fact of history that the Auschwitz “gas chamber’s story originated with a Soviet report (authorized by the known liars and murderers Joe Stalin & Lazar Kaganovich) It is then spread by the "prestigious" NY Times .
 Noted American and European scholars who have since dared to explore the many inconsistencies and contradictions of “The Holocaust’s story have been subjected to harassment, career destruction and imprisonment .
 He must forever be portrayed in the public mind as the most evil and wretched monster who ever lived . It is for this reason that he must always be portrayed as an evil monster .
 Forensic tests on the porous stones proved negative for any trace of chemicals .
 The museum piece "gas chamber" is an admitted reconstruction shown to unquestioning suckers . It is a reconstruction of a museum piece that is shown to be an admission to suckers.
 The U.S. official serving as Secretary General is the Communist agent Alger Hiss . The Communist agent is the Secretary General.
 The United Nations replaces the League of Nations as the foundation of The New World Order . The U.N. replaces the league of Nations with the United Nations .
 All 51 nations signing the original charter agree to be bound by its articles . The original charter was signed by the U.S.
 The all-out propaganda campaign surrounding the UN’s establishment is pervasive and intense . The campaign is pervasive, intense and intense.
 Senator Robert Taft (son of President William Howard Taft) votes in favor of U.S. entry . Taft is a conservative legend, and is the son of President Taft .
 By August ‘45, Japan is trying hard, via ‘neutral’ Soviet channels, to negotiate surrender, just not unconditionally as Truman demands .
 Truman and the U.S. press affectionately referred to ‘Uncle Joe’ breaks the Soviet-Japanese Non Aggression Pact of 1941 and declares war upon an already beaten Japan .
 Stalin's entry to the Asian theater will enable him to arm and materially assist Mao Tse Tung’s Communist takeover of China in 1949 . Stalin”s entry into the Asian Theater, agreed to at the Yalta Conference, will enable his entry to
 Soviet occupation of North Korea will also lead to the Korean divide which results in the North vs. the Soviet occupation .
Ae ee ete Stalin stabbed Japan in the back and brought Communist power to Asia . The Japanese Communist Party came to Asia in the 1950s .
 Truman calls Japan a "Rain of Ruin" Japan has to make a choice between unrestrained civilian genocide at U.S. and Soviet hands .
For the Globalists, the atomic bombings will later serve a strategic purpose . For the Globalist, the bombings will be used in the future. For the globalists, they say .
 The threat of "nuclear war" will, in the coming years, do much to frighten, and then consolidate, the nations of the world into political, economic, and military alliances .
 The iconic V-J Day kiss in Times Square AUGUST, 1945 ‘IKE’ Parties in MOSCOW with ‘UNCLE JOE’ WHILE MILLIONS ARE BEING RAPED and MURDERED by the SOVI
Georgi Zhukov, General Eisenhower's Soviet counterpart in Berlin, met us at Tempelhof Airport for flight to Moscow in Ike's C-54 four-engine aircraft .
 Zhukov, as the official host, was the soul of hospitality and congeniality . He was the host of the Russian state-run TV station, which was based in Moscow .
 By this time the two commanders had become friends, as close of friends as public life permits .
Father was invited to undergo a four-hour ordeal atop Vladimir Lenin’s tomb with Zhukov and Stalin . Significantly, his father was invited.
 One full-length film, authorized by General Eisenhower, shows the homicidal ‘gas chambers’ of Dachau, shrunken heads of inmates . lamp shades were made from human flesh at the request of a camp commander’s wife .
 The film includes images of sworn affidavits of U.S. military officials . To add further credibility to such claims, the film includes photos of the affidavits .
 The lamp shades were made of goat leather, and there were never any homicidal "gassings" at the Dachau camp . Even Jewish "scholars" of the "Holocaust" now openly admit, the shrunken heads were fakes .
 She committed suicide in 1967, just before a scheduled visit from her son . Her son was scheduled to visit her in 1967 .
Across Europe, landscapes are ravaged, entire cities ruined, and millions of people are homeless . Across Europe, landscape is ravaged, and entire cities are ruined .
 Institutions such as the police, the media, transport, local and national government are either gone or badly weakened .
 Crime rates soar; economies collapse and economies collapse, and hungry women and girls turn to prostitution . Europe's population hovers on the brink of starvation, according to experts .
 Communists, liberals and Jews impose a cruel vengeance upon their helpless prey . Communists, liberal and Jewish leaders impose a harsh vengeance on their helpless victims .
 German civilians and their anti-Communist allies are rounded up, raped, sodomized, drowned in cesspools, tortured, mutilated, burned alive, and executed .
 Internment camps are reopened and filled with anti-Communists and Germans . The camps are now filled with pro-Communist and anti-Germans .
Massacres and civil wars follow in Greece, Yugoslavia, Poland, and parts of Italy and France . Massacres, civil wars followed in Greece and Yugoslavia .
 Tens of millions are expelled from their ancestral homelands as Allied occupiers look the other way .
 The 2012 book ’Savage Continent’ describes the horror of the post-war months and years in gruesome detail .
 Stalin’s Jewish chief propagandist, Ilya Ehrenberg, encourages the soldiers to rape and kill German women . As the Red Army rolls into Germany, he encourages soldiers to kill and rape German women.
 The orgy of violence and rape is one of the ghastliest episodes in human history . It is also the worst episode of human history.
 Two million German females ranging in age from 8-80 will be gang-raped, sodomized and beaten badly, often in view of children or family members .
Some are penetrated with broken bottles and bayonets in wild orgies of drunken violence . Some are penetrated by broken bottles or bayonet.
Women who flee to churches and hospitals are hunted down and gang raped . Even the terrified women flee to hospitals and churches.
 Nuns, little girls, and elderly women are infected with venereal diseases . Nuns are infected by little girls and older women .
 There are cases of breasts being cut off and victims set on fire after being raped .
 Thousands of German women commit suicide. Rather than submit to the horror, thousands commit suicide .
 Eisenhower, Truman, Truman and the Zionist Press are fully aware of the monstrous horror that the man they all refer to as ‘Uncle Joe’ is inflicting upon these poor women .
 German women snatched from the streets and gang raped. UNCLE JOE’s HANDIWORK Ignored by the sanctimonious hypocrites of ‘the world community’
We have destroyed what could have been a good race, and we are about to replace them with Mongolian savages . We have destroyed the race, we have destroyed it, and I'm about to replaced them with Mongolia's savages. We have lost the race.
 For the first week after they took Berlin, all women who ran were shot and those who did not were raped . It’s said that for the first day after they take Berlin, they were shot .
 General George Patton 1945 — 46 ‘TKE’ MURDERS 1. I could have taken it had I been allowed, he says .
 More than one year after the German surrender, General Eisenhower still holds millions of German Prisoners-of-War. More than a year after German surrender.
 The men are inhumanely crowded into camps without latrines, exposed to the elements and underfed . The men were underfed and under-fed .
 American guards who attempt to help the prisoners face disciplinary action . American guards are facing disciplinary action for helping prisoners .
 German civilians try to bring food and blankets to the men but are shot at by guards . German civilians are shot by guards who shoot at them .
 Eisenhower issues order stating that Red Cross officials are not to be given access to the camps . Unlike Germany’s wartime internment camps which were open to international inspection, Eisenhower issues an order .
 As disease, exposure, and hunger take their toll, the German losses mount daily . Germany's loss in Germany is estimated to be at least 50 per cent .
 By the end of their cruel incarceration, as many as 1. million German prisoners will have died a slow and torturous death .
 Millions of exposed Germans were packed tightly in Ike's POST-WAR death camps . Millions of expose Germans were crammed tightly in the camps .
 Stalin’s mistreatment of German POWs is heartbreaking. Not to be outdone by Eisenhower, Stalin's mistreatment is heartbreaking, says CNN.com .
 Germans were often summarily executed, paraded like animals and worked to death in Siberia . Up until the 1950s and perhaps beyond, the Germans were sometimes executed .
 German POWS’s were taken to the Soviet Union and paraded through the streets .
 Many died on the long march; many died in the slave camps . A minority returned to Germany years later . Many died in slave camps and a minority returned.
 Estimates of POW’s killed or worked to death in captivity range from 400,000 to 1,000,000 .
 It is mostly transferred to Soviet occupied Poland and to the Soviet Union itself . It is mainly transferred to Poland and the Soviet Republic itself .
 Seven million Germans have been expelled from their homes and forced to migrate west .
 More German territory is given to Soviet occupied Czechoslovakia, with 3 million more Germans expelled . Still more German territory has been given to the Czech Republic .
 The refugees are often attacked and raped by the Red Army as well as Jewish and Communist gangs . The refugees have been attacked by the Army and Jewish and Communists .
 Two million will die during the forced migrations, and about 500,000 more are interned in Soviet labor camps .
Displaced Jews given preference in seizing and occupying stolen homes of German refugees . Displaced Jews are given preference to seize and occupy stolen homes .
 German people are deliberately subjected to hunger, mental trauma, and homelessness . As part of a psychological re-programming effort known as “DeNazification’s’, the German people have been subjected to food and mental trauma .
 German women sell their bodies to American soldiers in exchange for a few cans of food .
 General Eisenhower needed General Patton in order to win the war . Expelled from Prussia from Sudetenland .
 Patton often bucked Ike’s orders to continue holding German prisoners after the war . But the outspoken Patton often complained openly about his halt orders .
 Patton urges superiors to allow his army to evict the weakened Soviets from Europe . Patton urges his superiors to let the Soviets out of Europe .
 In letters to his wife, he expresses his disgust over the cruel extermination of the German people . He describes the Red Army rapes and what he describes as Jewish Communist efforts to advance Soviet influence .
 Patton reveals that upon leaving the Army and resettling in America, he will openly fight against the treason . In one of those letters, Patton says he will fight against treason .
 Patton is hospitalized following a strange, low impact auto accident near Mannheim, Germany . Patton is being treated for a strange car accident .
 The American icon dies in the hospital two weeks later . He is apparently the victim of an assassination order .
 FDR and Churchill had agreed that Russian “traitors’ and SS men should be sent to Stalin in exchange for American & British POWs’s “liberated’ by the Soviets.
Up to 3 million Russian POWs are forced at gunpoint onto trains and trucks that bring them to their Soviet executioners . Up to 3million POWs have been forced to be executed by Soviet soldiers .
 U.S. troops return from drop-off points, report seeing rows of bodies already hanging from trees .
Anti-Communist refugee families are shipped back to "Uncle Joe" They are subjected to special tortures, including rape of the women .
 Stalin holds on to 25,000 American POWs and 30,000 British, sending them to his Siberian Gulags, and even summarily executing some .
 Ike earned a Soviet Medal for delivering the nations of Eastern Europe, and millions of Russian refugees to their death .
 Terrified Russian POWs (declared to be traitors) and Waffen SS men were shipped to the USSR to be murdered .
 Nor is he interested in annexing the USSR to a western-controlled New World Order .
 All the capitals of Central and Eastern Europe's ancient states are located in the ancient states of the ancient countries .
 During the 1943 Tehran Conference, Joe Stalin had proposed executing 50,000 German staff officers after the war .
 The murderous Allies were all in agreement that "trials" of Germany’s top leaders would take place after the war .
 The primary American judge is Francis Biddle, of the Biddle Family . Biddle is the father of the 19th century American Central Bank Chairman, Nicholas Biddle .
 Several hundred prominent American and European political figures, writers, artists and military men, condemn the trials . John F Kennedy, a young Kennedy, is among those who have condemned the trial .
 Of the accused, 11 will hang, and 7 will receive long, or life prison terms . The peacemaking parachutist, Rudolf Hess, will receive life sentences .
 Herman Goering, Head of the Luftwaffe cheats his executioners by taking poison in his jail cell . Goering's executioners take poison in jail cell to kill them .
 It is likely that a sympathetic American guard helped Goering by smuggling the poison into his cell .
 The trapdoor was too small, such that several of the men suffered bleeding head injuries when they hit the sides of the trapdoor while falling . A trapdoor is too small.
 The bodies were cremated and scattered over a river, denying families the right of burial . Adding final insult to injury, the bodies were scattered over the river .
 German political and military leaders were subjected to a ridiculous show trial . The trial was held in Berlin, Germany's capital city .
 Britain is to be betrayed and chased out of Palestine. It was the Brits who had stolen Palestine for the Zionists' sake after World War I .
 The bombing of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem targets the offices of the British Military, killing 91 people .
 In 1948, after the three Allied powers of the War have recognized the new State of Israel, the massacre at Deir Yassin targets innocent Palestinian villagers, scaring them to flee .
 The Irgun terror gang, headed by future Israeli Prime Minister & Nobel Peace Prize winner Menachem Begin, is responsible for both .
 Israel’s brutal dispossession and displacement of the Palestinians is tolerated. Due to sympathy gained from the fictitious “6 million” dead of World War II, Israel”s brutal dispatch and displacement is tolerated .
 Irgun terrorized the British protectors of Palestine as well as the local Arabs . Irgun was used to terrorize the British security forces in Palestine .
 The Marshall Plan is a massive U.S. Foreign Aid scheme for post-war Western Europe .
 The Globalists use every propaganda trick in the book to cleverly sell the expensive scheme to the anti-Communist United States Senate .
 It is the “embryo’ of the coming European Common Market as well as today’s socialist, single currency European Union .
 German school children are taught to hate the great accomplishments of previous generations and wallow in self-loathing .
 Those Germans who are not full of self-loathing are too afraid to speak up, lest the occupation governments of Germany or Austria throw them in jail . Those Germans are not fully self- loathing, but are not afraid to talk up .
 It’s like a woman who has been raped and battered to near death, blaming herself and apologetically groveling before the perpetrator . It's like a women who has suffered a rape and has been beaten to death .
 Angela Merkel grovels before Israeli Minister Shimon Peres . German Chancellor Angela Merkel was in tears .
Beaten by terrorists and arrested 2Author David Irving . Arrested in Austria and deported to Germany or Israel to face trial .
 It was an entirely natural thing for him to stop his car and share his food with young cyclists along the road .
 At midnight he would interrupt his work and prepare food for his dog Blondi . At midnight, he would prepare the food for the dog .
 He could not bear to eat meat, because it meant the death of a living creature . He was not able to kill himself because he could not eat meat .
 He refused to have so much as a rabbit or a trout sacrificed to provide his food . He said he would rather have a trout or rabbit sacrificed than a trout .
 It will engage in covert activities at the request of the U.S. President . It will take place at the requests of the President .
 The CIA's Directors have always been Globalist front men, according to the CIA .
 CIA grows in power and eventually engages in assassinations, election rigging, planting disinformation through its many paid media contacts . The CIA also overthrowing of disobedient foreign leaders.
 The super-secret CIA assassinates political leaders, stages ‘false flag’ terror attacks, manipulates the news and destabilizes foreign governments .
 From the very beginning, this cesspool of "modern art" is a Rockefeller directed organization .
 In 1947, The Rockefeller Brothers Trust Fund begins pouring cash into the promotion of their House of Horrors .
 The Globalists and the Communists use "modern art" to corrupt the western culture that they seek to destroy . The Communists and the Globalists use ""modern art"" to corrupt western culture .
 If “intellectuals’ can be persuaded that junk is “art, they can then be persuaded of any other false realty presented to them. If ‘intellectual’s can’t be persuaded they are ‘art,’ they can
 Zionist/Marxist dominated Hollywood. Hollywood remains to this day a pornographic, sex-obsessed polluter of public decency .
 The British Mandate of 1922 ends as a UN resolution establishes the basis of the modern state of Israel .
 The resolution also contains plans for an economic union between the proposed states, and for the protection of religious and minority rights .
 Zionists have no more intention of respecting Arab rights than they did in 1922 . In 1922, Zionists did not respect Arab rights .
 The Zionist lie that Jews were evicted from Muslim lands because of anti-Semitism has been easier for the world to accept .
 The truth is far more discerning; bigger players in the world stage were pulling the strings . The truth has been revealed .
 We Jews did not leave our ancestral homes because of any natural enmity between Jews and Muslims . We Jews didn't leave their ancestral homes due to any naturalEnmity .
 Jewish author Naeim Giladi’s expose of Israeli false-flag terror against fellow Jews is shocking .
 Some are shot; some have their throats slit open, while others die as hand grenades are thrown into their homes . Some have their throat slit open; others are shot .
 Several villagers are taken prisoner and killed after being paraded through the streets of West Jerusalem .
 The strategic aim of the massacres is to terrorize the Palestinians into fleeing from their villages . European Jews with adopted Hebrew names will then takeover the villages .
Massacres such as Deir Yassin frightened the Palestinians into fleeing from their villages. Massacres like Yassin scared the Palestinians out of their villages .
 Herzl's 1897 plot comes into full fruition when Israel is formally established . Israel was formally established in 1948 .
 Harry Truman's quick recognition of Israel pleases his Zionist donors . His influence will help him to narrowly win the upcoming November 1948 election .
 Truman's diaries reveal his dislike for the Jews who were often pressuring him . Truman's dislike for Jews was revealed in 2003 review of his diaries .
 Several Arab nations come to the defense of their Palestinian brothers . Arab nations have come to defense of Palestinian brothers.
 The Deir Yassin attack of the prior month, along with murderous attacks on Tiberias, Haifa, and Jaffa, put pressure on Arab governments to save Palestine .
 News of the killings arouses such public anger in the Arab world that the governments cannot ignore it . The killings of people killed in Arab countries have sparked outrage in Arab world .
 The Arabs are unsuccessful in their brief war, and in future attempts to liberate Palestine . The Arabs have been unsuccessful in the brief war .
 The Zionist military and its free arsenal of American weapons will soon make Israel the dominant power of the region .
 It was Jewish support and money that narrowly pulled him through in 1948 . It wasJewish support.
 Berlin is located entirely within the eastern, Soviet half of post-war Germany . City itself is divided into a Soviet zone, and a Western zone .
 Berliners are stranded and face starvation unless the U.S. and UK agree to get out .
 The Globalists take a stand against their Soviet partners . Not wanting the Soviets to get too out-of-control, the Globalists took a stand .
 The United States & Britain fly food and other supplies into Berlin, landing on international airstrips . The U.S. and UK fly food, other supplies and supplies into Germany .
 Stalin calls off the hunger blockade after 1 year of the "Berlin Airlift" After 1 year, Stalin says the blockade is off .
 Hungry Berliners cheer the same U.S. Air Force that terror-bombed them just 3 years earlier .
 Hiss took part in the 1945 Yalta Conference where Eastern Europe was betrayed to Stalin . Hiss was an ardent New Dealer .
 In ‘46, he is named President of the Carnegie Endowment for World Peace . He is also named President.
 FDR's widow, Eleanor Roosevelt, also defends the traitor Hiss . Eleanor Roosevelt's widow Eleanor Roosevelt also defends Hiss.
 Hiss’s guilt is clear and he will serve 44 months in jail . In spite of his important friends, Hiss will be jailed for 44 months .
 The declassification of the VENONA intercepts in 1995 will confirm the high-level treason of Hiss \e Hiss was sacrificed . Many other Communists remain undiscovered .
 The military consolidation of the New World Order begins with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . NATO is headquartered in Belgium .
 Members of the US, UK, & France agree to mutual defense in response to an attack by the Soviets . Members, led by the U.S. and France, agree to a mutual defense .
 An attack against one nation in Europe or North America is an attack against all. An attack on one nation is an attacks against all, says CNN.com .
 NATO is an NWO consolidation trap and the Globalist-created ‘Soviet threat’ is skillfully used to build this trap . NATO is a globalist- created “Soviet threat.’s’.
 NATO expands into the former Soviet satellites of Eastern Europe . After the planned takedown of Communism in the ‘90s, NATO expands.
 Defense Secretary James Forrestal ‘falls’ to his death from the 16th floor of Bethesda Naval Hospital .
Before an investigation is even launched, newspapers state that Forrestal committed suicide .
 The media vilified Forrestal for opposing the creation of Israel and Harry Truman’s pro-Red foreign policy .
 Forrestal was a wealthy man who intended to buy a newspaper and work to expose the treason that brought the U.S. into World War II .
 Anti-Communist and Anti-Zionist Forrestal turned against the policies of his boss, Harry Truman . Truman was Harry Truman's boss .
 The Soviets explode their first Atomic Bomb in 1949 . The USSR is the first time the Soviets have exploded their first atomic bomb .
 The physicists who directed the Soviet Project, benefited greatly from espionage efforts, according to the scientists .
 The USSR had obtained vital information on the Atomic bomb project . Sources in Robert Oppenheimer’s Communist-infested Manhattan Project included Klaus Fuchs and Theodore Hall .
 Reports are shown to the head of the Soviet atomic project Igor Kurchatov and have a significant impact on his own team's research . Reports have been shown to KurchAtov and to his team.
 In 1945 Soviet intelligence obtained rough ""blueprints" of the first U.S. atomic device .
 The New World Order uses the psychological threat of nuclear war to scare the "free world" into closer military, political, and economic integration . The threat of a nuclear war is a psychological threat that can be used to make the world more secure .
 The Globalists turned a blind eye to Stalin getting an atomic bomb, the Globalists said .
 The Chinese Nationalists can no longer keep down Mao Tse Tung's Soviet-armed rebel Reds . Due to the inexplicable 1945 Yalta gifting of Manchuria, and its captured Japanese weapons, to Stalin, the Chinese Nationalist can't keep down Stalin .
 Secretary of State Marshall had delivered the final blow to free China by slapping an arms embargo on Chiang Kai-Shek .
 George Marshall’s buddy Mao turns Red China into a mass murderous tyranny that will soon attack and kill American troops in Korea . They set up a free and prosperous state, while George Marshall's buddy Mao turned Red China.
 In just a few years, Eastern Europe has fallen to the Reds, Mao has captured China, the Soviets have exploded an A-bomb, and spies such as Alger Hiss have been exposed .
 The United States had gifted North Korea to the Soviets at Yalta . The Communist North invades South Korea in June of 1950 .
Douglass MacArthur captured the North’s capital of Pyonyang in just three months . The great World War II General and patriot, Douglass MacArthur, stages brilliant offensives .
 With minimal American casualties, it appears that the war is over and has been won very quickly . With minimal U.S. casualties.
 President Truman and the Globalists around him begin to interfere. That is until President Truman's Globalists start to interfere with him .
 Truman immediately became the most unpopular president in U.S. history . He was fired by General MacArthur for “insubordination’s” Truman .
 The Globalists claim that it was MacArthur’s aggressive actions which brought China into the Korean War .
 Truman's treasonous restraining of both MacArthur & Chiang that green-lights Red China. But in reality, it is Truman’s treasonous restrain of both .
 Mao enters the war against the U.S. because he knows that the game is being rigged by the Red agents around Truman . The game is rigged by Red agents in the United States .
 Communists at home and abroad rejoice. With the patriotic and brilliant strategist removed from the field of battle, Communists in the world rejoice .
 The Globalist media is outraged when Senator McCarthy dares to denounce one of their manufactured heroes as a traitor .
 McCarthy masterfully exposes George Marshall's pattern of ‘mistakes’ during a long speech on the Senate floor . McCarthy exposes the mismanagement of World War II, the loss of Eastern Europe to Stalin, and loss of China to Mao's Reds .
 1952 is certain to be a big Republican Election year . With the country dismayed at the socialist domestic policy and disastrous foreign policy of the Democrats, 1952 is likely to be big Republican election year .
 Democrats are so weak that Harry Truman will not even seek re-election . Harry Truman is a much maligned Harry Truman .
Like his father William H Taft, the younger Taft is a conservative patriot . Like his father, he is a Conservative patriot .
Like his dad in 1912, he too will be cheated out of an election. And, also like his dad, he also will be cheating out of the election .
 The Republicans, like the Democrats, are now fully in the grip of the Globalists . The GOP is now in control of the globalists, according to CNN.
 Eisenhower, rumored to be of Swedish-Jewish lineage, will be inducted as an honorary member into Tau Epsilon Phi . He will also help to set up the first RockefellerRothschild Bilderberg meeting in The Netherlands .
 The Globalists trotted out a phony 'war hero' to derail Taft’s candidacy in 1912 .
 Stalin's paranoia often led him to ""purge" any subordinates who grew too powerful in their own right .
 Secret Police Chief Laventry Beria and others likely poisoned the murderous old bastard . Fearing for their own lives, the mad dog may have poisoned him .
 Nikita Khrushchev a murderous assistant to Lazar Kaganovich during his Ukrainian genocide will become the new Soviet Premier by year's end . The former Soviet Premier will take over at the end of the year .
 Khrushchev will later condemn Stalin for his brutality towards his fellow Communists . He will also condemn Stalin's brutality towards fellow Communists.
 By 1951, ABC owns and operates numerous TV stations, but is on the brink of bankruptcy . ABC owns, operates and operates several TV stations .
 Leonard Goldenson steps in with a 25 million dollar cash infusion and becomes Chairman of the new company . Goldenson is a former Zionist Globalist .
 Eisner is later succeeded by the current CEO, the Zio-Globalist Robert Iger .
 ABC joins CBS, NBC, Reuters, The NY Times, and The Washington Post as media giants under Zionist ownership .
 Programs such as the 1970’s mini-series ‘Roots’ incite Blacks and inflict guilt amongst weak-minded Whites .
 Jewish Communists Julius & Ethel Rosenberg executed for passing Abomb secrets to the Soviets .
 Ethel's brother, David Greenglass, had given the secrets to the Rosenbergs while working on the Manhattan Project .
 The "small fry" Rosenbergs are sacrificed; the "big fish" are sacrificed . Globalist traitors go untouched . The Rosenbergs were sacrificed .
 The Rosenbergs had to be sacrificed for Atom Spying OK OX.
 All of the existing guests at the exclusive resorts are required to leave before the ‘Bilderbergers’ arrive in town . The resort is the exclusive resort of the world's most exclusive resorts .
 The Bildebergers are all people of great influence in the fields of politics, banking, intelligence, business, military and media . The Bilderers are in charge of the world's most powerful and influential organisations .
 The Group takes its name from the Bilderberg Hotel in Holland, where the first meeting was held . The Group is based in the Netherlands .
Members of the Rothschild and Rockefeller families have attended every year since its inception . Members of the Rockefeller and Rothschild families have been attending every year.
 The Group has a history of inviting littlke known politicians, and then catapulting them to fame and office within a short time .
 Bill Clinton attended a 1991 Bilderberg meeting in Germany while he was a barely known Governor of Arkansas .
 Egyptian agents are Jewish agents working for Israel . They are actually Jewish agents .
 The "Lavon Affair" ultimately creates such a controversy that it brings down the Israeli government and forces new elections .
 This long since forgotten scandal marks the first known Israeli "false flag" operation aimed at the U.S. for the purpose of framing Arabs .
 In recent years, aging members of the Lavon Conspiracy were honored by the Israeli government .
 McCarthy’s high profile hearings have attracted a huge national following . McCarthy's hearings have drawn a huge following .
 Such popularity poses a threat to the Communists and to their Globalist enablers, says the author .
 McCarthy is inching ‘up the ladder’ towards the bigger players . The media big guns are brought out to stop him .
 CBS legend Edward R Murrow dedicates an entire show to attacking McCarthy . Murrow is a personal friend of CBS CEO Bill Paley . The show airs on CBS.
 The accumulation of TV and newspaper venom aimed at McCarthy takes a toll on his image . McCarthy's image has become a target for the media .
Colleagues begin to ignore him as President Eisenhower plots against him . Colleagues start to ignore the President as he plots against the President .
 This marks the end of his crusade against the Globalist / Communist axis . This is the final phase of his campaign against the globalist / Communists .
 Following his censure, Eisenhower happily quips, in private, "McCarthyism is now McCarthy-wasism"
 The Reece Committee is chaired by Rep. Rep. House of Rep. John Boehner . The committee is also known as the 'Rece Committee'
 It produces its final investigative findings regarding the influence of tax-exempt foundations, such as the Rockefeller Foundation, in the field of education . The Rockefeller Foundation is a tax- exempt foundation .
 The report finds that “philanthropic foundations are using their awesome grant giving power to influence college curriculums and finance leftist groups . The report also finds that "philanthropist foundations" are giving money to finance leftist organizations .
 The goal is to alter public attitudes and belief systems by injecting Globalist propaganda into the educational system . The goal of the Globalist campaign is to change public attitudes, belief systems .
 The Globalist media, and John D Rockefeller III, attack the Committee . “No shred of evidence is presented in the report to show that the Rockefeller Foundation or any of the organizations to which it has made grants has advocated world government.”
Little did the people know that over the coming decades, these seemingly harmless treaties would grow into the powerful European Union .
 The Common Market is the first economic structure to be based on supranationalism . Rothschild's New World Order is a major step towards Rothschild's new world order .
 The Globalists skillfully utilize the Soviet threat, which they themselves created, as a psychological means to frighten the people of the formerly nationalist Europe into close economic, political, and military consolidation .
 McCarthy's influence has faded after his 1954 censure . After his censure, McCarthy has faded .
 The feisty young Senator remains outspoken and continues to rail against Communism and its high level protectors .
 McCarthy had become ill in late April of '57, and was taken to Bethesda Naval Hospital, just like his "suicided" mentor, James Forrestal, had been in 1949 .
 He begins to recover, but strangely falls ill again on the Communist Holy Day of May 1 . He starts to recover. But he begins to suffer again .
 He dies at the young age of 48, on May 2, after an apparent poisoning . He was the victim of a poisoning, according to a friend .
 The great Senator's name continues to be dragged through the mud to this day . The great senator's name is still being dragged by the mud .
 The constant use of the term 'McCarthyism' serves as a reminder to U.S. politicians of the fate which awaits anyone who challenges the New World Order .
 "The individual is handicapped by coming face-to-face with a conspiracy so monstrous he cannot believe it exists"
 The American mind simply has not come to a realization of the evil which has been introduced into our midst. The U.S. mind simply hasn't come to the realization of what is happening .
 The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 is a revolt against the Communist regime of Hungary . It rejects even the assumption that human creatures could espouse a philosophy which must ultimately destroy all that is good and decent .
 Civilians and patriotic soldiers combine to defeat the Jewish dominated Secret Police and Soviet troops . The Jewish dominated the Secret Police.
 The Soviets consider withdrawing all troops as the rebels wait anxiously for the “anti-Communist’s West to send weapons. The Soviets may withdraw all troops .
 Ike pressures Spain and West Germany into canceling arms shipment to Hungarian rebels . Instead, Ike pressure Spain and Germany to cancel shipment to the rebels .
 There is to be no weapons, nor any symbolic words, recognizing the struggle for a free Hungary . There is no weapons or symbolic words.
 Stalin's favorite American General from World War II is green lighting a re-conquest of Hungary . The Soviets re-occupy Hungary with massive force .
 Hungarian freedom-fighters decapitate statue of Ike's 'Uncle Joe' and take a bloody revenge on their Communist masters .
 Peasants are confined to starving villages as the Reds torture and kill those accused of not meeting their grain quota .
 In addition to starvation victims, at least 5 million Chinese are beaten or tortured to death . 2-3 million more commit suicide, according to reports .
 The blood of 50+ million is on the hands of the '45 Yalta traitors . FDR, Hiss & Hopkins, Truman, Marshall, and all the others who engineered the postwar fall of China .
 The huge tax and spending cuts of the late 1940's have finally ended the long Depression, leading to economic growth for professionals and manufacturing workers .
 It is the era of the American "Baby Boom" as war veterans marry and have children .
 Fathers go to work and earn enough money so that the mother can stay home and tend to children .
 "The 50's" still represent an era of decency and innocence. On the cultural front, "the 50's"" still represent a time of innocence .
 Movies, TV shows, and songs are, for the most part, clean and healthy entertainment .
 The divorce rate is very low, and homosexuality is largely unspoken of . Churches are thriving, streets are safe, communities are tight, children are respectful, and children are respected .
 Those who grew up in the ‘50's and most of the 60s know that it was a far happier and healthier time than the current era of economic and moral rot .
Sex-obsessed Globo-Zionist moguls of Hollywood plot to unleash a destabilizing storm of moral and cultural filth which will forever weaken families, communities, and churches .
 TV shows like "Leave It to Beaver" and "Bonanza" reflected the goodness and loyalty of American family life . "Father Knows Best" also reflected the love of family life.
 Globalists are using Communism, Central Banking, wars, moral corruption, and debt to bring about The New World Order, says Welch . Welch believes that the New World order is being brought about by the West .
 Globalists use books, pamphlets, and speaking tours to warn the public about the Globalists . Its enthusiastic members use books and pamphlets.
 JBS membership grows rapidly, attracting brutal media attacks from both the Communists and their Globalist enablers . JBS has been criticized by both Communists and the Globalist.
 The Globalists were worried about Welch's plan to educate the public . The Globalist were worried that Welch's plans to educate public would be dangerous .
 The “blundering” Eisenhower did much to advance the Globalist/Communist Axis . The ‘blugering’s’ was a success for Eisenhower .
 Fidel Castro's final ‘blunder’ is to allow Cuba’s pro-American government of Fulgencio Batista to fall to Fidel Castro .
 Ike ignores repeated warnings from Ambassador Earl T Smith that Fidel Castro is a Soviet-backed Communist . The NY Times & Washington Post smear Batista and glorify Castro as another ‘agrarian reformer'
 The U.S. refuses to ship armored cars purchased by Cuba . Just like Chiang in China, Batista is betrayed when the United States refuses.
 2Ambasador Smith’s book, ‘The Fourth Floor’, gives a firsthand account of how the Eisenhower State Department betrayed Cuba .
 Eisenhower gave a warm White House welcome to Soviet tyrant Nikita Khrushchev . If the enslaved people of Eastern Europe, North Korea, China, or Cuba had any lingering delusion that the United States would stand up, at least symbolically, for the cause of freedom .
 As a Commissar, Khrushchev worked closely with the monsters Stalin & Kaganovich . As a commissar he worked closely.
 Khrushchev had murdered faithfully for Stalin while rising up through the Soviet ranks . Despite his criticism of Stalin, he had killed faithfully for his leader .
 Stalin invited Eisenhower to our Victory Parade and expressed his recognition by presenting him with our highest medal, the Order of Victory . Stalin invited him to the parade and presented him with his highest medal .
 Shirer’s Rise and Fall is heavy on the empty verbiage and page-count . But extremely light on essential facts .
 Weaving truths with half truths and outright lies, while sprinkling in a few seemingly objective, even pro-German nuggets of truth . Shirer skillfully paints a deceptive facade; one which any reader of Planet Rothschild or The Bad War should now be able to easily crack open
 Jewish publishing giant Simon & Schuster publishes the book . The Jewish press hypes it to the stars .
 Presidents and is currently agitating for confrontation with Russia and China . Presidents and are currently agitated for confrontation.
 It is an attempt by the Kennedy administration to overthrow the Communist government of Fidel Castro . It's an attempt to overthrow Fidel Castro's government .
 Dulles will later serve on the Warren Commission, which will cover up the truth of JFK's assassination .
 CIA Chief Allen Dulles set up to fail by CIA chief, says CIA chief . CIA chief Dulles was responsible for setting up the anti-Communist Cubans .
 The main route of escape is through the divided city of Berlin (East Berlin was in the Soviet Zone) Their main route is through Berlin's divided city.
 The Soviet masters of East Germany finally respond to this embarrassing mass exodus by erecting the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall was erected by the Soviet masters.
 The Berlin Wall becomes a hated symbol of Communist oppression over the next 28 years . The Wall is a symbol of communist oppression .
 By 1962, Robert Welch’s John Birch Society has become a force that the Globalists and Communists can no longer ignore .
 Buckley is later rewarded with his own TV show in 1966, PBS’s Firing Line .
 The proposal calls for CIA operatives to commit terrorist acts in U.S. cities to be blamed on Cuba . It would create public support for a war .
 The proposals include the shooting of innocent Americans on the streets, hijackings and bombings . The proposal includes the introduction of phony evidence to implicate Cuba .
 The shocking details of this false-flag plot were not declassified until 1997 . The shocking information was not released until 1997.
 Lyman Lemnitzer wanted American planes to be shot down and American citizens killed in the streets . He also wanted U.S. citizens shot down .
 The Soviets, perceiving American weakness, position nuclear missiles in Cuba . After the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion a year earlier, the Soviets, perceive American weakness .
 When evidence of missiles and military advisors based in Cuba is brought to JFK, a quarantine of the Island is ordered .
 JFK knows he must present a strong image, but is also concerned about how the Soviets might react in Europe if the United States invades Cuba .
Publicly, the Soviets will appear to back down by removing their missiles . Publicly, they appear to be back down.
 The United States also agrees to remove missiles from Turkey as part of this Cold War deal . The deal is unknown to the world .
 Friedan would go on to found the radical National Organization for Women . Friedan is a former member of the National Organization of Women .
 Friedan's movement is a Globalist destabilization campaign aimed at traditional family life . Friedan’s movement is an attempt to change the way family life is lived .
Millions of gullible women swallow Friedan’s Marxist poison . Friedan's book is being super-hyped by the media .
 The "male chauvinist pig" becomes the hated target of the feminist rebellion .
 Broken families and broken people are easier for the Globalists to control. Broken families are easier to control than broken people .
 The FED JFK is concerned that Israel is developing nuclear weapons . The Fed JFK is also concerned about Israel's development of nuclear weapons.
 He fears that this could cause Arab nations in the region to follow suit . He fears this could lead to other Arab nations to follow.
On May 18, 1963, JFK sends a letter to Israeli Prime Minister David Ben Gurion . Israel's Dimona nuclear facility is only for peaceful energy development, not bomb making .
 JFK and his brother, Attorney General Robert, also take on the powerful AFL-CIO Trade Union boss Jimmy Hoffa . JFK's brother, Robert, is the Attorney General of the AFL- CIO Trade union boss .
 JFK issues debt-free currency directly from the U.S. Treasury in 1963 .
 In just over 2 years in office, the charismatic young President has challenged the CIA, the Pentagon, two Israeli Prime Ministers, the AFL-CIO and even the Federal Reserve .
 The media reports that Kennedy was shot from behind by a rifleman hiding in a warehouse .
 This contradicts witnesses who saw, and heard gunfire coming from in front of the motorcade . This contradicts witness claims that gunfire came from outside of motorcade.
 "Zapruder Film" shows Kennedy being shot from the front, once in the chest and once again in the face . The film was released years later .
 Although JFK was part of the Establishment, he was an anti-Communist with a patriotic independent streak .
 During his brief time in office, he had confronted many powerful people within the GlobalistZionist crime network . He had confronted people in the hierarchy.
 JFK, riding with his wife and Texas Governor Connelly, is shot in the face . JFK, who was shot by Texas Gov. Connelly's wife, was killed in a car crash .
 The public is told that it was a "lone gunman" and "Communist" Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald fired the deadly shots from a warehouse located far behind from where JFK' was riding .
 Oswald is shot as he is being transferred from Dallas Police Headquarters to County jail . Two days later, Oswald is silenced when a Zionist mobster named Jack Ruby shoots Oswald .
 Oswald’s claim of innocence, and his killing by Ruby, are captured in full view of TV cameras and are available at YouTube.com .
 The Tonkin Gulf Incident is a fabricated event involving the U.S. and Red North Vietnam . A fabricated event involves the United States and Red Vietnam .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson claims the North's torpedo boats fired upon U.S. ships .
 In 2005, an NSA report was declassified, concluding that there may not even have been any Vietnamese Naval vessels present during the incident . The report was released in 2005 .
 B-57s Crash in Vietnam Defense Secretary McNamara lies his ass off about the fictitious attack which will drag America into the Gulf War . McNamara says the attack will drag U.S. into the war .
 Barry Goldwater won the Republican nomination for President in 1964 . Goldwater was the Republican nominee for President . He won the GOP nomination in 1964.
Goldwater is a true constitutional conservative and an outspoken anti-Globalist . Goldwater is the author of a book, Goldwater's first book, "Goldwater" Goldwater: "I am a constitutional conservative"
 LBJ’s campaign runs a TV ad showing a little girl picking daisies as an ominous voice counts down to an atomic bomb detonation .
 The intensity of the anti-Goldwater hype, coupled with the phony Tonkin incident of three months earlier, rallies the country behind LBJ . LBJ defeats Goldwater in an historic landslide in a landslide .
 LBJ’s ‘Great Society’ will leave a legacy of reckless spending and borrowing that will burden the America's private economy for decades .
 The Voting Rights Act gives illiterates the "right" to vote for their Democrat caretakers . The Act also gives people the right to vote in the House of Representatives .
 The Immigration Act will flood America with third world immigrants . Third world immigrants likely to vote for socialist Democrats .
 Medicare & Medicaid trap the elderly and poor into dependency on the state for health care .
 The Food Stamp Program, Head Start, & Federal aid to schools are also introduced in the suicidal spending spree year of 1965 . In 1965, the Food Stamp program and Head Start were also introduced .
 LBJ's expensive, vote-buying welfare state destabilizes the traditional family by subsidizing unwed pregnancies and making welfare a way of life . LBJ has been criticized for its welfare policies .
 LBJ & FDR to thank for putting us on the socialist road to ruin . America approaches bankruptcy and collapse.
 LBJ’s signing of the Immigration Act is intended to eventually make European Whites a minority and then extinct altogether .
 The Globalists now manage the war in such a way as to prevent any chance of victory . The U.S. is now managing the war to prevent a victory .
 When the rules of military engagement were declassified in 1985, it is confirmed that the Vietnam War, like the Korean War before it, was not meant to be won .
 The Globalists use these wars against Communism as a means to weaken America and "contain communism" without ever defeating it . The Globalist uses these wars to weaken the U.S. and contain communist communism without ever defeating it.
 Some "peaceniks" aren't so peaceful, instigating riots on college campuses and clashes with police . Some of them are violent, but others are peaceful .
 Globalists always target young, idealistic students. Manipulating the YOUNG and IDEALISTIC Globalists target young students .
 Many of this generation believe they are "changing the world" with their embrace of left-wing / "liberal" politics .
 Quigley's observations are not new, but they are very significant . The claims are coming from someone who is actually a willing academic member of the New World Order crime gang .
 Quigley spends the rest of his life claiming that he was quoted out of context . He has spent his life trying to convince people that he is not quoted .
 Mao blames the failure on his own people for the failure of his “Great Leap Forward,’s ‘Great Leap forward’ Mao blames his people .
 Radicalized students are formed into “Red Guards’ who are then loosed upon intellectuals, Buddhists, “counterrevolutionaries, internal political rivals, and other residual “capitalist’ elements.”
 Red Guards drag teachers out of classrooms and publicly torture them to death . Red Guards torture teachers to death in classrooms and public executions .
 Ancient buildings, artifacts, antiques, books, and paintings are destroyed by Red Guards . Mao consolidates power and elevates himself to god-like status .
 Only Mao’s death in 1976 will finally end the insanity of his Revolution and eventually lead to the emergence of a pro-market and peaceful China .
 Mao's "Red Guards" publicly tortured "counter revolutionaries" in the streets . Mao's brainwashed "counter-revolutionists" were brainwashed by the Red Guards .
 He had been sentenced to death but his sentence is overturned when he is granted an appeal . He was sentenced to life in prison after being convicted of murder in 2009 .
 Ruby is now talking about a conspiracy and plans to give new information at his upcoming trial . The trial is set for February 1967 .
 In December of 1966, he suddenly becomes ill, and dies a few weeks later in January of 1967, just one month before his new trial was set to begin . His new trial is scheduled to begin in December of 1967 .
 Dallas Deputy Sheriff Al Maddox says he was tricked into being injected for a cold, but he was actually injected with cancer cells .
 The Jewish Mafia-connected night club owner and assassin of JFK's alleged assassin was assassinated in prison . The assassin was killed in prison.
 The 1947 border was just a foot-in-the-door, just as the 1920 British Mandate had been . But for the Zionists, the 1947 border had been a foot in the door .
 The ultimate plan for a Greater Israel requires much more territory than what was stolen in ‘47-48.’ The ultimate plans for the Greater Israel require more territory, according to the report .
 The 1967 occupation is not the main source of the current Palestinian grievance . It is this 1967 occupation, not the 1947 partition .
 The horrific living conditions in occupied Palestine are kept hidden from the U.S. people .
 PALESTINIAN ned of LAND 1946 to 2005 Israel picks a fight and steals more territory . PALESTinian ned. of Land 1946-2005 Israel picks up more territory.
 The Zionists actually want all of Palestine and parts of Syria and Lebanon too .
 Israeli jets and torpedo boats deliberately attack the USS Liberty . The USS Liberty was attacked during the Six Day War .
 The sustained daytime attack, taking place as the U.S. flag flies visibly, kills 34 Americans, wounds 170, and damages the communications ship . The sustained attack is taking place in the daytime as the United States flag flies .
 The Israelis finally call off the attack when they realize that help may be on the way .
 Israel claims the attack was a case of mistaken identity, but survivors clearly contradict that lie . Israel claims it was a mistaken identity .
 Israel’s intent is to sink the Liberty, machine-gun any survivors, blame Egypt, and thus draw the U.S. into a war on its side . Israel is trying to draw the United States into a conflict with Egypt .
 The Zionist Globalist U.S. media buries the Liberty tragedy in its back pages . The Zionist Globalist United States media buried the tragedy.
 Israeli fighter jets deliberately attacked the USS Liberty in broad daylight . The USS Liberty was attacked by the Israeli jets.
 North Vietnam launches multiple surprise attacks known as the Tet Offensive . The Tet Offensive is known as ‘TET OFFENSIVE’
 The offensive is a disastrous failure for the Communists as their Red Viet Cong guerillas in the South are crushed . The offensive has been a disaster for the Communist Party .
 To say that we are mired in a stalemate seems the only realistic conclusion, it's not the only real conclusion . We have been in a standoff for more than two years.
 Cronkite's false report on Tet was a deliberate act of treason against America. Cronkites' false report was a deliberately act of traitor against America .
 During the 1960's, Marxists agitate relentlessly in the black community .
Government programs such as welfare programs, voting rights for illiterates, and greater Federal control over private industry. This leads to government "solutions" such as expensive welfare programs and voting rights. This is the result of the government's control of private industry .
 The most notorious of the "non-violent" agitators is the prostitute-addict and proven plagiarist . "Reverend" Martin Luther King is one of the most notorious prostitute-addicts .
After the Globalists had finished using the Marxist MLK to achieve their domestic objectives, they decided to kill him . They then capitalize upon his death even more .
 King's mysterious assassination sets off anti-white riots in inner cities throughout America . King's assassination set off riots across the country .
 The Divide & Conquer scheme to promote racial unrest always works to the advantage of the New World Order . The Divide and Conquer scheme is to promote race in the UK .
 The assassination of Robert F Kennedy occurs after he wins the California primary for the nomination for President .
 RFK will never be able to use the power of the Presidency to go after his brother's killers . RFK has never been able to take control of the presidency. RFK's brother was killed by his brother.
 This is very bad for Palestine's image, but it does generate sympathy for Israel. Conveniently, this is very good for Palestine, but this is bad for Israel .
 In 2006, the BBC's Newsnight program presented research revealing that several CIA officers were present on the night of the assassination .
 Three men who appear in films and photos were positively identified by colleagues as former senior CIA officers . The men were identified as former CIA officers.
 In 2007, analysis of an audio tape recording of the shooting indicates that 13 shots were fired, even though Sirhan's gun held only 8 rounds . The shooting occurred in 2007 .
 The ""Days of Rage" are violent actions organized by the Communist terrorist “Weathermen’s"" in 1969 .
 A statue honoring the murdered policemen of the 1886 Haymarket Square Communist attack is dynamited . On October 5"", a statue of the murdered policeman is dynamite .
 At 10.25 pm, Weatherman Jeff Jones gives the signal, and the violence begins . At 10:25 p.m.
 The Reds charge toward the affluent Gold Coast neighborhood, smashing windows as they go .
 Ayers & Jones will visit Obama’s White House and secure cash grants for their educational schemes .
 The 1Weathermen Communist terrorists wanted to instigate rioting in Chicago . The 1 weathermen were behind the riots in Chicago.
 Four dead Communist ‘Weathermen’ lie in the rubble of a Manhattan basement .
 They had been building a bomb, which accidentally detonated prematurely . The bomb was accidentally detonated by a bomb-maker .
 Dynamite pipe bombs, using nails as shrapnel, are later recovered in this bomb factory . The bombs were found in a bomb factory.
 Had the bomb not detonated prematurely, the planned attack on an officers’ dance would have been avoided .
 Dix, NJ would have been the deadliest act of terror in U.S. history at that time .
 The group, led by Bill Ayers, was intending to murder scores of Army officers and their dates . The group was planning to kill scores of soldiers and dates .
 After the blast, Ayers goes into hiding until 1980 . Ayers's girlfriend died in the blast .
Ayers will later ghost write a book for an Illinois State Senator Barack Obama . Ayers will also ghost write for Obama .
Most Americans remain blissfully unaware of the mass murder which Ayers attempted in 1970 . Most Americans remain unaware of his close relations with President Obama .
 Walter Cronkite, who in later years openly admits his support for World Government, narrates the story . It is narrated by Walter CronKite .
 Raise Global taxes, including "carbon taxes" and Erode national sovereignty . Empower private industry and individuals . Prevent energy independence, keep poor nations from developing, keep them dependent on the UN for aid .
 Alinksy believes that America is too strong to be taken down by violent revolution . Alinky believes America is not strong enough to take down America .
 Alinsky advises young radicals to become active in their local communities and to infiltrate the political system . Instead of non-effective violence, Alinsky says young radicals should be active in local communities .
 Community Organizers are highly skilled at political warfare, agitating in black neighborhoods, and organizing vote fraud efforts . Community Organizer is highly skilled in political warfare .
 Alinsky's 1971 classic, Rules for Radicals, is dedicated to Satan . Alinsky was the first revolutionary as Alinsky calls him .
 RFR will be a bible of sorts for inner city agitators, vote fraud organizers, and liberal activists . RFR is a bible for inner-city agitator, vote-fraud organizers.
 It lays out clever strategies for infiltrating the system with the intent of subverting it from within . It laysout clever strategies to infiltrate the system .
 President Barack Obama will actually work as a “community organizer’s in Chicago in the 1990s .
 Alinksy taught the Marxist radicals of the 60s how to infiltrate America's institutions from within . Alinky also taught the radicals how to infiltrate America's society .
 Media-driven environmental hysteria culminates with the establishment of a new government cabinet department .
 As the year pass, unnecessary, excessive, and dictatorial environmental regulations will render many American businesses unable to compete with foreign counterparts . As theyear pass, many businesses will not be able to compete.
 EPA regulations, often based on "junk science" have forced American business to close their operations, or forced them to relocate overseas .
 The EPA is driving up electricity rates, eroding national sovereignty, and killing jobs by waging war on coal industry . The EPA says the hoax of “Global Warming’s” is a hoax .
Under pressure, Nixon greatly expanded the size and destructive power of the Federal government . Under pressure, the supposedly “conservative’s’ power was expanded .
 Nixon shocks economic conservatives when he takes the U.S. completely off the Gold Standard . Nixon takes the United States completely off Gold Standard.
 The government/Fed complex could not borrow or create new currency “out of thin air’ unless it had a certain portion of gold in storage at Fort Knox .
 With the Gold Standard now completely gone, the United States can spend recklessly, and then borrow unlimited counterfeit money from the Zionist owned Federal Reserve . The U.S. can then borrow counterfeit money.
When foreign trading partners see that the dollar is now worth 35 cents, they triple the price of oil to compensate . Arab nations such as Arab nations see the dollar as 35 cents .
 When gas prices triple from 50 cents a gallon to $1.50, "the OPEC nations" are blamed for the recession .
 Mao's gang also murdered U.S. POWs during the Korean War .
 This means nothing to CFR Globalist and “anti-Communist’s’ Richard Nixon, says Richard Nixon . This meansnothing to CFR globalist, says Nixon .
 Mao has served Globalist goals by consolidating Chiang Kai Shek’s China under centralized state control . Mao has been in charge of China for years .
 The oceans of blood he shed in doing so does not concern the Globalists . The oceans he shed do not concern Globalists.
 The time has come to “open up’ China for a gradual future transition into The New World Order. The time is now for China to transition into the new world order .
 Nixon follows up on a secret trip that Henry Kissinger had made to China the year before .
 In a speech before Mao, Nixon expresses his wish to "build a New World Order" which intends to include Mao's China .
Within 30 years, a post-Communist and more market-oriented China will begin to demonstrate independent nationalist tendencies . The Globalists are an intolerable offense to the Globalists .
 Wallace is a nationalist who wants to either win the Viet Nam war quickly, or pull out totally . Wallace wants to both win the war quickly and pull out.
 He is anti-Communist, opposed to foreign aid, and opposed to Globalism . He also opposes foreign aid and is opposed to globalism .
 In January of 1972, Wallace again declares himself a candidate for the Democrat nomination . He enters the field against liberals George McGovern and Hubert Humphrey .
 Arthur Bremer was shot 5 times by a "lone nut gunman" while campaigning in Maryland . He was shot in Maryland on May 15 .
 Governor Wallace's campaign effectively ends, even though he still wins two more state primaries . Wallace is left paralyzed and his campaign effectively ended . Wallace still won two more primaries .
 Wallace was gunned down just before he could win the Democrat nomination in 1968 . Like RFK in 1968, Wallace was killed just before the Democratic nomination .
 At the Paris Peace Accords of 1973, the U.S. agrees to end the Viet-Nam war . The United States agrees to stop the war in Vietnam .
 The negotiators are Rockefeller agent Henry Kissinger for the United States and Le Duc Tho for Communist North Vietnam . The negotiators for the talks are Rockefeller agents Henry Kissinger.
 Kissinger “gives away the store’ to the North. To the delight of the U.S. Media, Kissinger ’s “Gives away’s store” to North .
 The North assured that its troops may continue to occupy the South, but the post-war political arrangement is configured in such a way as to guarantee a Communist take-over of South Viet Nam after the war .
 Kissinger knowingly abandons American Prisoners of War still being held by the Communists . Eager to wrap up the war and win his Nobel Peace Prize, Zionist Kissinger knew it was a mistake .
 Kissinger and Le Duc will receive Nobel Peace Prizes for engineering the Red takeover of South Viet Nam . Kissinger, Le Duc were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their work in South Vietnam .
 The Globalist/Communist complex has never had any regard for human life, whether born or unborn . WADE’s DECISION FORCES all 50 United States States to PERMIT KILLING of UNBORN BABIES .
 Roe vs Wade Supreme Court decision is the latest pro-death / anti-morality success . It ignores states’ rights and makes legalized abortion the law of the land .
 Norma McCorvey, a Texas woman, would later come to regret her decision to abort . She became a fierce pro-life activist .
 The Globalist media NEVER shows the public any images of what an actual abortion really is .
 Most pro-abortion people, upon first seeing actual images or video of what an abortion really is, soon begin to rethink their position on the matter .
 The graphic images of the abortion procedure are concealed from public view . That is why the graphic images are hidden from public views .
 The Trilateral Commission is set up to foster cooperation between the US, Europe, and Japan .
David Rockefeller had proposed its creation at the 1972 Bilderberg meeting . CFR Chairman David Rockefeller had planned its creation .
 The Trilateralists intend to create a worldwide economic power superior to the political governments of the nation-states involved .
 Georgia Congressman and Birch Society leader Larry McDonald calls for an investigation . Georgia Congressman, Birch Society leaders call for investigation .
 The Globo Communist ""left"" is in an uproar over an anti-Marxist coup in Chile .
 General Augusto Pinochet has had enough of Salvador Allende's "democrat’s socialist government"
 Upon assuming power, Pinochet cracks down on the Marxist scum that devastated Chile's economy .
 He downsizes government, slashes taxes, and privatizes state industries . He is a former president of the U.S. Senate .
 The General steps down in 1990. Under pressure from the world community, he steps down .
 As a result of his reforms, Chile is still the most prosperous economy in South America . Chile's economy is still most prosperous in the region .
 The 85 year old Pinochet is arrested for human rights violations committed against Spanish Communists . He was arrested in 1998 while visiting Great Britain for back surgery .
 Cuba's Communist boss, Fidel Castro, whose firing squads have executed thousands, is being honored in Spain at the same time the warrant is issued for Pinochet . Castro's prisons are notorious for torture of political prisoners .
 Pinochet is eventually released, but will be hounded and harassed by Chile's "intellectuals" until his death in 2006 . Pinochet was eventually released.
 The sudden departure of a humiliated USA left its South Vietnamese friends defenseless at the hands of the Communists of the North . The United States left its destabilized South Vietnam friends Defenseless .
 Millions of pro-Americans crowd into leaky boats in order to flee the Communists . The Communists, as they always do, began murdering, torturing, and arresting their enemies .
 The neighboring nation of Cambodia also falls to Communism . Cambodia has been destabilized by Communism .
 The Globalist Henry Kissinger and the Marxist-loving ‘peace activists’ who had so hindered the U.S. war effort shed no tears . The Marxist- loving “peace activists" who had helped the United States.
America had been deceived & betrayed into an unnecessary war, and then deceived into losing it . America had been misled into losing the war, then deceived and betrayed into lost it .
 As was the case in both World Wars and the Korean War, American boys and innocent civilians paid for the Globalist joke with their lives .
Driven in the sea by Kissinger's Communist friends, 200,000+ Vietnamese ""boat people" died. Driven by Kissinger.
Ambitious Republican Governor Nelson Rockefeller dreams of being President . Rockefeller is a former Republican Governor .
 Conservatives like Barry Goldwater will never allow this Globalist to ever win the nomination. Conservatives like Goldwater won't allow him to win nomination .
 'Rocky' literally comes within inches of achieving his dream. But after a series of bizarre events, ‘Rocky’ is eerily similar to the rapid rise of Teddy Roosevelt .
 President Nixon resigns over the media-hyped "Watergate Scandal" Vice President Ford becomes President .
 Ford selects Rockefeller as Vice President with the blessing of the Democrat Congress .
 Rockefeller& Kissinger cause internal factionalism within Ford administration. Rockefeller & Kissinger causeinternal factionalistism within the Ford administration .
 Radical Lynette Fromme aims her pistol at President Ford's head, but is apprehended by Secret Service agent before she can fire .
 Radical Sarah Jane Moore fires her gun at Ford, missing his head by just 6 inches . Moore's gun goes off in front of Ford's car .
 Ford runs for election in 1976, but drops Rockefeller from the ticket after Goldwater and Ronald Reagan threaten to withdraw support . Ford will run for election for the first time in 1976 .
 From 1971-79, the most highly rated show is the sitcom "All in the Family" It was produced by ZionistMarxists Norman Lear and Bud Yorkin .
 Every episode contains political arguments between Archie and some younger liberal character Archie . Archie's arguments are always made in an angry, buffoonish tone and bigoted towards blacks and Hispanics .
 The national audience can't help but laugh at stupid Archie Archie .
 In the subconscious of the public mind, conservative ideals become associated with stupidity and hate . Liberal opinions are associated with education and tolerance .
 In the final year of AITF's decade long run, Archie "matures" into a more liberal minded, and likeable older man . He takes in a Jewish business partner and even adopted a Jewish daughter .
 AITF's unflattering portrayal of Archie, along with his eventual redemption, will gradually turn millions of reactive viewers away from conservative thought, and towards a more Marxist view of the world .
 Nasty “conservative’s’ Archie is always yelling and saying stupid things, he says . Archie is a "conservative" who has a long history of yelling and yelling, says Archie .
Out of nowhere, the unknown Governor of Georgia is media-hyped through the Democrat Primaries . Georgia's governor is a Democrat .
Jimmy Carter is an original member of the Trilateral Commission . Carter is also a member of The Trilateral Committee . He is a former president of the United States .
After Carter's victory, Brzezinski is named as National Security Advisor .
 Angola's Communist regime is strengthened and protected from the anti-Communist rebel forces of Jonas Savimbi . Angola's communist regime is protected from anti- Communist rebels .
 Brzezinski was the main handler of Jimmy Carter MARCH MAY, 1978 . He was also the chief handler of the British Prime Minister, Aldo Moro . Kissinger is very angry with the Italian Prime Minister.
 Moro is in the process of working out a deal with the Communists of Italy . On his own initiative and in defiance of Globalists, Moro has been working with the Communist Party in Italy .
 Moro’s Christian Democrats will form a coalition government which will include Communists . Under the terms of ‘II Compremesso Storico’, Moro's Christian Democrats would form a Coalition government .
 Undoubtedly this would lead to a more neutral foreign policy with regards to the Soviet Union . This would be a moreneutral foreign policy.
 The goal is always the same to subjugate the Eurasian land mass under Globalist control . Whether it is a Czar like Nicholas or a Communist General Secretary like Brezhnev, or a democratic free-marketeer like Putin, the goal is the same .
 Any national leader who gets too close to Russia will have to be punished in one way or another . Anyone who gets close to the country will be punished.
 On March 16, 1978, a unit said to be of the militant Communist group known as the Red Brigades blocks the two-car convoy transporting Moro and kidnaps him . Moro's five bodyguards were killed by the group .
 The resulting anti-Communist backlash scuttles ‘The Historic Compromise’ and brings Italy back into the Globalist anti-Soviet Union sphere . Italy is now part of the anti- Soviet Union sphere.
 The murder of Aldo Moro was very bad for the Communists, but good news for the Globalists . The CJA took out Moro and framing the pro-Soviet Communists for the deed .
 Moro's widow will later recount her husband’s meeting with Henry Kissinger and an unidentified American intelligence official .
 Moro was so shaken by the comment that he became ill and threatened to quit politics . Moro is so shaken that he was forced to resign.
 President Jimmy Carter establishes the Department of Education . The Department of education is set up .
 The UN-connected United States Department of Education grows large and powerful, influencing school curriculums on every local level . The answer reveals itself in the years to come.
 American children today learn next to nothing about America’s founding doctrines or its true history .
 Young students are force-fed Globalist & socialist propaganda, fairy tales about Global Warming, hatred for American ideals, pornographic “sex education, and the joys of homosexuality .
 Globalist DOE deliberately dumbs-down American kids, turning them into non-thinking adults .
 The founders of Neo-Conservatism are self-professed "exMarxists" who claim to realize their error and now wish to embrace American conservatism .
 The first major intellectual to ‘come out’ as a neocon is Irving Kristol “The Godfather’ of the neo-cons . Kristol is the first major neocon to come out as a neoconservative .
 Gullible traditional conservatives welcome the media-hyped, neo-con infiltrators with open arms into their circles .
 It isn't long before these "exMarxist" Zionists hijack true conservatism, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The neo-cons are Globalists that differ from other "liberal" Globalists in one key area . The neo -cons are "neo-cons"
 The neo-con Globalists are hard core, Israel-First Zionists. Whereas Bilderberger / TC Globalists have no special love or loyalty for Israel .
 This internal, and often bitter, divide within the broader New World Order crime family is an extension of Churchill's "Zionism vs Bolshevism" thesis of which he wrote about 60 years earlier .
 Irving Kristol's son, William Kristol, will found the controversial Project for the New American Century which will call for a ""New Pearl Harbor" in later years . Irving Kristal's son will find the controversial project for the new American Century .
 Communism is a tool for overthrowing nationalistic and free market nations. Communism is used to overthrow nationalistic nations, says the author .
 The long range plan is to one day merge the Communistic nations into a New World Order that is a mix of corporatism and communism . But the long range plans are to merge the nations into one day merging .
 The Soviets in Moscow have their own plans of world domination, or at least, world influence .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski develops a plan to draw the USSR into a costly and destabilizing war in Afghanistan . The plan is designed to draw USSR into an expensive war.
 In the same way that the RussoJapanese War weakened Czarist Russia in 1905, Brzezinski's Afghan trap will weaken the Soviet state . The RussoJapanese war weakened the Russian state in 1905 .
 Former director of the CIA said intelligence services began to aid the Mujahedeen in Afghanistan 6 months before Soviet intervention .
 In this period you were the national security adviser to President Carter . In this time you were a national security advisor to the president .
 According to the official version of history, CIA aid to the Mujahedeen began during 1980 . That is to say after the Soviet army invaded Afghanistan, 24 Dec 1979 .
 President Carter signed the first directive for secret aid to the opponents of the pro-Soviet regime in Kabul in 1979 .
 The day that the Soviets officially crossed the border, I wrote to President Carter . The day of the crossing was the first day of Soviet-American relations .
 “i'd Dott Again’s’. ‘I’d Dott again’ – Tans T Aronanistal . ‘i’miew BRZEZINSKI: Brzezinski and the CIA armed Afghan fighters
 Former California Governor Ronald Reagan defeats former CIA boss George HW Bush in a bitter Republican primary . Reagan is a former California Governor .
 Reagan was a Goldwater supporter and an anti-Red informant during his days as a Hollywood actor . He was a supporter of the Goldwater movement and an informant .
 During his campaign, he advocates taking a hard line against the Soviets . He advocates limited government, a gold standard, less spending, and low taxes .
 Reagan's choice for Vice President George HW Bush was his choice for President Bush . But political realities will soon cause Reagan to be maneuvered into surrounding himself with TC/CFR manipulators .
With inflation, taxes, and unemployment all skyrocketing, the charismatic Reagan defeats Carter easily . With inflation, tax and unemployment, Carter defeats him easily .
 Reagan lost control of his Presidency to the Globalists and Zionists who had been placed all around him .
 A policeman, a body guard, and Reagan’s Treasury Secretary are badly injured .
 Reagan himself is hit by a ricocheting bullet that punctures his lung and comes within inches of killing him . The bullet is inches from making George HW Bush the new President .
 Scott Hinckley scheduled to dine at the home of Marvin Bush, one of George Bush's sons .
 The assassination attempt was a much more “moderate’ Ronald Reagan. What did come out of the assassination attempt is more ‘moderate” Reagan .
 Reagan's Presidency will do nothing to reverse America's march towards Globalism and socialism . Reagan's presidency will not reverse America’s march towards socialism and globalism .
 Reagan's Treasury Secretary, a bodyguard, and a DC cop were also seriously wounded . John Hinckley was the Treasury Secretary and the bodyguard .
 Lawrence Patton McDonald, cousin of General George Patton, is on board . He is the son of General Patton, who died last year .
 McDonald's "star quality" has destined him for higher office . Bright, handsome, articulate and articulate, McDonald's ""star quality"" has destined he for higher offices .
 He is also President of the John Birch Society . He is a former member of the Globalists .
 If not for the delays, a decapitation of Congress's three leading anti-Communists would have occurred .
 The U.S. shadow government baited and duped the Soviets into taking out the plane, thus embarrassing the Soviets and taking out McDonalds .
The most dangerous enemy of the Globalists and Communists was eliminated . The most dangerous enemies of the Communist Party were eliminated .
 In the present day, AIPAC is without a doubt the most feared pressure-group in America .
 It’s affluent, and very vocal, 100,000 members pump millions of dollars into both political parties .
 U.S. politicians fail to follow AIPAC's policy line on Israel-Arab issues . The media-hyped challenger will soon find themselves running against a well-funded challenger .
 AIPAC openly boasts about the politicians that have been unseated as a result of their activism . The group also boasts about their political activism .
 Governors, sitting Presidents and Presidential contenders are usually in attendance as well . Governors and sitting Presidents are often in attendance .
 President Obama pays his respects to Israel at the annual AIPAC convention .
 The GloboZionist Axis of Evil seeks to destroy and enslave both nations into the Global system . The GlobZionists seek to destroy both nations in the global system .
 To this end, the U.S. supports Saddam Hussein of Iraq in a long protracted war against Iran . The United States supports Iraq in the long-awaited end of the war .
 Estimates of the final death toll vary extremely, but it is safe to say that 100's of 1000’s -soldiers as well as civilians — are killed on both sides .
 U.S. support for Iraq during the war includes billions of dollars' worth of economic aid .
 This support is not a secret and is frequently discussed in open session of the Senate and House of Representatives . This support has been discussed in the Senate.
 The Council on Foreign Relations will then turn on Saddam Hussein, whom they had used as a tool .
 In 1980 the Mayor of Detroit, Coleman Young, made Saddam an honorary citizen .
 The international Zionist campaign to isolate Libya and its leader, Colonel Muammar Qaddafi, intensifies during an April 1984 anti-Libya demonstration in London .
 As a crowd forms outside the Libyan embassy, shots suddenly ring out towards the crowd .
 A 25 year old British police woman named Yvonne Fletcher is killed . Eleven people are wounded, and a 25-year-old police woman is killed. 11 people are injured, and the woman was killed .
 Media images of her heartbreaking death are broadcast non-stop in the western press .
 Following the shooting, the embassy was surrounded by armed police for 11 days . It was one of the longest police sieges in London's history .
 Despite no evidence of Libyan wrongdoing, the UK ends diplomatic relations with Libya . The UK then ends diplomatic ties with Libya.
 The televised murder of Yvonne Fletcher damages Libya in particular and all Arabs/Muslims in general, while benefiting its Zionist enemies .
 There will be more anti-Libya intelligence operations to follow in the coming years, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The 1986 Berlin Disco Bombing is a terrorist attack on the La Belle discotheque in West Berlin . The club was frequented by U.S. troops stationed in United States occupied West Berlin.
Libya is falsely blamed for the bombing after messages are intercepted from Libya to the Libyan embassy in East Germany . The terrorists are congratulated on a job well done .
 Reagan swallows Israel's bait, and retaliates by ordering airstrikes against Tripoli and Benghazi .
 At least 15 civilians are killed in the airstrikes, including Libyan leader Colonel Qaddafi's 1-year old daughter .
 More than 2,000 others are injured in the bombing raid, engineered by Israel, and carried out by its American puppets and dupes . More than 1,000 people are injured, including more than two,000 Americans .
 Zionists used false flag attacks to target Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi .
 Mikhail Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan team up to end the Cold War . The new Soviet leader wants to also reform the failed Soviet system .
 ‘Gorbachev’s liberalization programs of ‘Perestroika’ and ‘Glasnost’ have little to do with love of liberty or free-market economics .
 Unlike previous leaders who were Soviets First, Gorbachev is a Globalist . Unlike previous Russian leaders, he is a globalist .
 Gorbachev is mega-hyped by the media and wins the Nobel Peace Prize .
 Old line Stalinist supremacists in Russia still haven't figured out who the real bosses of the Global Game really are .
 They oppose Gorby, but it is too late for them to prop up their rotten system . They say Gorby should not have been allowed to do so .
 The Reagan-Gorby talks were hyped by the Globalist media as the "Thawing of the Cold War" The Globalists are known for setting up “controlled opposition’s’. to themselves .
 This allows anti-Zionist resistance movements to be misdirected and watered down . This lets anti-socialist, anti-Globalist, Anti-ZIONist resistance movement to be watered down. This allows the anti-Socialist,Anti-Globalists and anti-global
 False “conservative leaders like William F Buckley were skillfully used for this exact purpose. False ‘conservative’ leaders were skillful used for the exact purpose .
 Rush Limbaugh is the foremost ‘disinfo’ agent of the current day, Rush Limbaugh .
 Limbaugh’s program does indeed expose the lies and the corruption of the Democrats in an enlightening and entertaining manner .
 The false “left-right’ illusion is what keeps the American public enslaved to a “two party system’s” system . Both parties are New World Order controlled, according to the false illusion .
 Limbaugh has been a guest-of-honor in Israel . He has mercilessly ridiculed "conspiracy theorists" who ""buy into" World Government conspiracy theories .
 Anonymous phone calls from “Muslims groups’ claim credit for the terrorist bombing . ‘Muslims groups' claim credit.
 A Libyan named Abdelbaset al-Megrahi is tried and sentenced in Scotland . He is accused of trying to kill a Libyan in Libya .
 Relatives of some of the Scottish victims will later state that they believe al-Megrahi was wrongly accused . Relatives will later say they believe that al- Megrahi had been wrongly accused.
 He will receive a hero's welcome upon returning to Libya after 20 years in prison . He will be welcomed back to Libya by his family .
 Cleat and Corel stents di ina crash Israel framed an innocent Libyan national for the murder of American & British passengers . Cleat, Corel's stents said the Libyan national was innocent of the murder .
 The Globalists continue to pull the rug out from under the very same Communists that they had created in Eastern Europe .
 Massive protests involving the usual suspects capture the world's sympathy . Massive protests have been held across the world .
 Many of these students had studied in the USA where the CIA made good use of their discontent . Many of them had studied at the CIA.
 The “spontaneous’s protests grow larger by the day as thousands of workers, with legitimate grievances, join the students in protests .
 Student leaders of the "democracy movement" are hunted down and arrested . Student leaders are arrested.
 Globalist George Soros's ‘human rights’ organization is forced to pack up and leave .
 China will continue moving towards a more market-based economy, but it is not yet ripe for a Globalist ‘Velvet’ takeover .
 Weakened by a disastrous war in Afghanistan, the USSR can no longer hold the Communist world together . The USSR is no longer the USSR .
 When Communism collapses in Eastern Europe, the common view is that it is due to its own inefficiencies .
 The role of George Soros and the CIA in the "Velvet" is a critical factor . But the role of Globalist Billionaire George Soros is a key factor .
 His Open Society Institute pumps cash into opposition movements and media . The Institute is based in New York, New York .
Soros and the CIA are actually weakening existing political structures in order to eventually consolidate the ex-Communist states into the New World Order .
 Now it is time to ‘pull the plug’ on the Communists and swallow them up into the New World Order .
 Unlike Arab states Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia, the Globalists do not control Saddam’s oil rich Iraq .
 Hussein is a nationalist, and also a defender of the oppressed Palestinians . Like Libya's Qaddafi, Hussein is also a defense of Palestinians .
 This makes Iraq a target of both the Zionist and Bilderberger factions of the New World Order Crime Syndicate . This is a pretext for war, says Peter Bergen .
 President George HW Bush raises eyebrows when he uses certain phrase in citing his reasons for attacking Iraq .
 The Gulf War is brief and limited as U.S. armed forces quickly expel Iraq from Kuwait . The United States quickly expelled Iraq from the country .
 UN economic sanctions will lead to the slow death of as many as 1 million Iraqis over the next 10 years .
 Saddam Hussein was tricked by the Globalists into invading Kuwait . He was then blamed for the war he did not want .
 Boris Yeltsin is a totally inept and drunken autocrat . He was elected President of the New RUSSIAN .
After dissolving the Soviet Union, he hands control of Russia over to internal criminal Zionist Oligarchs and external NWO Globalists . He hands control over to the Russian government to internal Zionist Oligarchs .
 The Yeltsin turns to Harvard economists and Globalist institutions for help in transitioning Russia from communism to a market-based economy .
 The recommended ‘shock therapy’ causes an economic downturn as severe as that of the United States or Germany during the Great Depression .
 Zionist ‘Russian’ businessmen buy up entire State industries for pennies-in-thedollar . ‘Zionist’ businessman buys up entire state industries.
 The plan is to weaken post-communist Russia so much that it can be swallowed up by the New World Order . The plan to weaken Russia is so much so that it could be swallowed by the new world order .
 The families of the missing men are hopeful that the hearings will lead to the return of their loved ones still being held in Vietnamese camps .
 A minor arm scratch was treated with a band-aid, and a buttocks bruise was self-inflicted . A buttocks bruises were self- inflicted .
 He was given preferred treatment by the Vietnamese in exchange for giving information to his captors .
 These two PHONIES stonewall the investigation and humiliate the POW families . The two PHonies stonewal the investigation.
 Kerry & McCain have closed the lid on the POW-MIA betrayal forever .
 The device is intended to knock the North Tower into the South Tower, destroying both and killing thousands of people .
 The mighty tower withstands the basement blast, but 6 people die and hundreds are sickened from smoke inhalation .
 The bombing occurs at a time when Zionists within the government are trying to maneuver President Bill Clinton into a land war with Irag .
 The Towers withstood the massive blast, but will be targeted again in 2001 . The Towers were targeted in 2001 after a massive blast .
 The European Union is a political and economic union of the formerly sovereign nations of Europe . The EU is an economic and political union.
 The EU now emerges as a regional New World Order, whose power will surpass that of its individual member nations . Through patient gradualism, the EU will become more powerful .
 By 2011, the EU will have 27 members, including former Communist states from Eastern Europe, a common currency, a European Bank and a socialist bureaucracy .
 EU officials will now flood the continent with North African and Middle Asian immigrants . To transform Europe into a “multi-cultural society, EU officials say .
 From the post-World War II Marshall Plan to the current socialist super state Rothschild’s dream advances forward .
 Clinton's feminist wife, Hillary Rodham, had served as the Chairman of the Marxist Globalist New World Foundation during the 1980's .
 The long term plan is to expand membership southward into Central & Latin America . The long-term plan will expand membership into Central and Latin America.
 Democrat Clinton signs Globalist inspired NAFTA into law . With strong Republican support, Clinton signs the law .
 South Africa’s system of political separation between its founding White Afrikaner population and the African blacks, serves as a pretext for the Globalists to subvert the anti-Communist, nationalist, and mineral rich nation .
 Nelson Mandela is elected in a landslide by the majority Black population . In its first mixed-race election, the former terrorist and former terrorist Nelson Mandela was elected .
 Afrikaners are permanently dispossessed of the nation that their own forefathers built as socialism and cultural degeneracy is enshrined . Afrikans are permanently displaced from the nation .
Anti-Communist Blacks who oppose Mandela are often tortured and killed by Mandela’s cult-like followers .
 The Globalists do not care at all about the black people of South Africa . But the Globalists don't care about South Africa, they say .
 The once prosperous nation is today marked by high unemployment, an AIDS epidemic, high crime, and vicious anti-white atrocities . Thanks to its Marxist politics, the once prosperous country is now marked by a high rate of unemployment .
 Two years into the unpopular Clinton presidency, there is a national backlash against his radical socialist-Globalist policies .
 The terror attack was falsely linked to American patriots and anti-Clinton critics . The attack was false, according to CNN's Tom Charity .
 Clear evidence of pre-planted explosives in the building is covered up by the Media .
 Clinton’s popularity ratings rebound as the “discredited” Patriot movement all but fizzles out .
 Oklahoma was a false flag bombing designed to frame up American patriot groups . The bombing was designed to Frame up patriot groups.
 This information concerned critical events conceming the early Cold War . It was unknown to the public, and unknown even to Presidents FDR and Truman .
 The intercepts, not made public until 1995, will not only confirm the treason of the Rosenbergs, Harry Dexter White, J Robert Oppenheimer, and Alger Hiss . They also implicate high-ranking officials in the United States Treasury, State Department, the OSS,
 Bill Weisband neutralized the VENONA Project by revealing its existence to his Soviet handlers . The VENonA Project was created in 1945 .
 Statistically, for even a single airplane to suddenly fall out of the sky is a very unusual event .
 At this time, Switzerland was being squeezed very hard by Zionists over allegations of holding gold stolen from "Holocaust victims"
 Protestors in Egypt reject the "suicide" claim and accuse Israel of taking down Flight 990 . Protestors say Israel took down flight 990.
 Numerous witnesses saw the plane catch fire in mid-air before it crashed into a residential neighborhood .
 His 1998 book, The Grand Chessboard, lays out a grand plan for the United States to control Central Asia . The United States will set up bases ringing China and Russia, he says .
 ‘Zbig’ hints of a coming “massive external threat’ and invokes the “shock effect’ of Pearl Harbor . Realizing how difficult it is to get Americans to support foreign adventures, “Z Big” hints of
 Zbig's books are written for snobbish ""intellectuals" and elite policymakers, not for the general public .
 The U.S. embassies in Kenya & Tanzania are bombed simultaneously . The embassies are in Kenya and Tanzania .
 A new "villain" is introduced to the American people, and falsely blamed for the attacks . A new ""villain"" is introduced.
 The public is told that a Saudi Arabian billionaire named Osama Bin Laden and his "Al Qaeda" terrorist network are responsible for the attacks .
 President Clinton orders missile strikes on Sudan and Osama's hideout in Afghanistan . In response, President Clinton ordered missile strikes in response .
 The strike on Sudan destroys a vital pharmaceutical factory, causing hardship for the poor people of Sudan .
 The "truly massive external threat" that Zbigniew Brzezinski had recently foretold has been created, according to a new report .
 This will eventually trigger the occupation of Central Asia and the increased military budget that the Globalists want so badly . This will ultimately trigger the invasion of Central Asian and the increase of the military budget .
 Brzezinski's Central Asian "bogeyman" is introduced to the American public . Brzezzinski's "Central Asian" is the name of his Central Asian 'bogey man'
 Ashton B Carter, Zionist John Deutch and Zionist Philip D Zelikow co-author an article in the Council on Foreign Relation's ‘Foreign Affairs’ magazine .
 In it, they lay out what changes would need to be made within the United States government in the wake of "catastrophic terrorism" The article is also the title of the article .
 The 38-year-old socialite may soon follow in the footsteps of his famous father .
 The sinister forces who killed his father and his uncle must take out John-John before he can start his political career . John- John's father and uncle were killed by his uncle's forces .
 Any chance of JFK's son rising to high office ends when his plane crashes; killing him, his wife, and sister-in-law .
 The media is very quick to proclaim “pilot error’s ‘pilot mistake’ and that visibility was poor . The media also falsely claimed that JFK Jr. was an incompetent pilot .
 By now fully corrupted and intimidated the Kennedy clan, led by the drunken degenerate Senator Ted Kennedy, is forced to remain silent .
 Recall that it was Cronkite who betrayed America's troops, with a false report about the Tet Offensive .
 The World Federalist Association awards the “Global Governance Award’ to the aging news legend . Cronkite’s disloyalty to America is now confirmed .
When I had my own strong opinions, I tried not to communicate them to my audience . When I had his own strong opinion, as I often did, I often tried to communicate it to his audience. When I was younger, I had a strong opinion and tried not
 Every half-educated school child in America knows to equate Einstein with genius .
 Albert Einstein is named "Person of the Century" by TIME magazine . For this, Einstein was named "person of the century"
 The true geniuses of late 19th and 20th century science and invention are, for the most part, fading or forgotten . The truegeniuses of early 19th, 20th and 19th centuryscience and invention.
 The phonograph, motion picture camera, and the first practical light bulb. These include the phonograph .
 Edison was known as "The Wizard of Menlo Park" Remember Thomas Edison the next time to turn on a light, listen to a CD or watch a DVD .
 He was a major contributor to the birth of commercial electricity . He is best known for his revolutionary developments in the field of electromagnetism .
 Tesla, in private letters, dismissed Einstein as a “long-haired crank’ and his space-warping Relativity Theory as the result of “unclear thinking’s proponents were not sane’ Tesla said it was a ‘
 Gottlieb Daimler & Carl Benz German engineers whose separate work led to the development of an internal combustion engine feasible for use in the first automobile .
 Henry Ford would later pioneer mass production of these "cars" Henry Ford's cars would make them much more affordable .
 Wright Brothers American inventors and builders of the world's first successful airplane . The Wright brothers were the first to invent controls that made fixed-wing powered flight possible .
 It is because of him that you can escape the oppressive heat, in your car or at home . It's because he is a good man who can help you escape the heat .
 His work contributed greatly to the development and availability of modern computers and electronics . He also contributed to the creation of the computer industry .
 Wernher von Braun German rocket scientist, aerospace engineer, and space architect . He is also a rocket scientist and aerospace engineer .
 Lister introduced carbolic acid to clean surgical instruments and wounds, making surgery safe for all of us .
 The ringleader of this cabal is William Kristol, son of the Marxist founder of Neo-conservatism, Irving Kristol . Kristol is the son of a Marxist leader of the Neo-conservative movement .
 PNAC's report calls for America to dominate the Middle East and overthrow the government of Iraq .
 Donald Rumsfeld, Dick Cheney, Robert Kagan, and Paul Wolfowitz are also PNAC members . Donald Rumfeld and Dick Cheney are also members of the group .
 Each will assume high office when George W Bush becomes president in 2001 . Each will take over at the same time .
 The super-hyped film resurrects the idiotic myth of Pearl Harbor for a new generation of American suckers .
 PNAC’s written hint for a new Pearl Harbor appears very, very convenient indeed . Zbig Brzezinksi's written mention of the ""shock effect of Pearl Harbor" is very convenient .
Hollywood has long been an instrument of the New World Order . Hollywood has been a key part of the "Hollywood 10" case .
 The creation, and the hyped-up 2001 Summer release, of "Pearl Harbor" is no accident . The creation and release of the 2001 summer release is no accidents, says author .
 Before the dust of the attacks has even settled, "9/11" is blamed on Osama Bin Laden and his “Al Qaeda’s terrorist network.
 Albert D Pastore . establish beyond any doubt that the "official story" of 9/11 is a monstrous lie .
 It is clear that the collaborating factions behind the attacks are the Israelis, the Zionist “Neo-Cons,’ and the Bilderberg/TC Globalists .
 9/11 marks the start of the New World Order’s dual ‘end game’ for global domination . The attacks are used as justification for preplanned invasions of Afghanistan & Iraq, as well as for destabilization plots aimed at other nations .
 Police in nearby New Jersey receive calls complaining of suspicious looking "movers" seen celebrating and filming the destruction of the Twin Towers .
 One van is stopped as it approaches the Lincoln Tunnel linking New Jersey to Manhattan . Another is stopped at the George Washington Bridge as it crosses the New Jersey Bridge .
 Bomb-sniffing dogs detect the scent of explosives in the van . Bridge-bound van is packed with explosives, says dog .
High level forces in the government overrule the local agents on the case . They are held for 40 days in a local prison and finally released in December . They were finally released after high level forces overrule local agents.
 A Jewish magazine later confirms that the men were agents of Israeli's spy agency, Mossad .
 It is a little known fact about 9/11 that the first, and only, arrests made that day were of Israelis, not Arabs .
 "The Dancing Israelis" has circulated worldwide since 2003 . The details are Summarized and sourced in the well-researched Internet essay, "The dancing Israelis"
 Albert D Pastore documented how 5 Israeli agents were linked to 9/11 . He was later released due to Israeli pressure .
 The Brzezinski-Bilderberg plan for Central Asia is set in motion with the invasion of Afghanistan . The Brzeszinski-bilderburg plan is set to be implemented in Central Asia .
 President Bush and the Establishment media tell the public that the invasion’s purpose is to capture Osama Bin Laden .
 There exists a government within a U.S. government within the United States .
 The Globalist Media calls Alan Greenspan "The Maestro" by pumping up the money supply with artificially low interest rates & easy lending standards .
 Home buyers with bad credit, unverified income, and little or no down payment can now purchase homes . Home buyers can now buy homes with little orno down payment .
 The loans make money for Wall Street firms that buy and resell the notes . Until the inevitable correction of the artificial values comes, the loans will make money .
 debtors will no longer be able to afford their monthly payments . When the intro "teaser rates" expire, debtors can no longer afford their payments .
 By '08, a wave of foreclosures will cause home prices to crash, and bankers to lose money . By '8, the price of home prices will fall, and banks will lose money, say experts .
 The NWO bankers will later have their ""investments" bailed out by taxpayers . Home buyers will lose their down payments, but the NWO will have their investments bailed out .
 The "7/7" attacks in London kill 56 people when three subways trains and one bus are simultaneously blown up .
 George Bush and co-conspirators establish the Department of Homeland Security . All were clearly false-flag frame-up jobs carried out by Western / Israeli intelligence .
 The DHS is given massive power to spy upon and harass the American public . The DHS has the ability to spy on and harass American public.
 By 2015, DHS’s annual budget will reach $40 Billion with 250,000 employees .
 The DHS grants billions of dollars to local communities for the purpose of installing cameras to monitor the movements of the people .
 In 2010, the TSA introduced naked scanner machines and full body pat downs at the nation's airports . The TSA is one of the DHS sub-agencies.
 New World Order imagery in the logo for the ’Information Awareness Office’ of Homeland Security / Abuse at the airports 2000's ‘BOMBER-OF-THE-MONTH’ The American public is fed a steady diet of fear-based propaganda .
 The Globalists create a number of "foiled" false flag attacks as well . In addition to the actual "false flag" terror attacks, the Globalists also create a 'foiled' false flag attack .
 Americans are forced to remove their shoes at the airport check-in after the incident .
 A steady diet of some of the goofiest fear propaganda imaginable keeps American & European people under psychological control .
 The Zionist Neo-Con faction of the Establishment finally gets what it wanted out of the 9/11 hoax .
 The United States and Britain kick off a new war against Iraq . After months of scaring the public with fabricated tales of Iraq’s “Weapons of Mass Destruction,’ the U.S. and Britain start a new War against Iraq.
 The nationalist Saddam Hussein will soon be removed from power and executed . He will be executed .
 With this enemy of Israel eliminated, Israel intensifies its brutal oppression of the Palestinians . Israel intensifying its brutal repression of Palestinians with this enemy.
 At least 500,000 innocent Iraqi civilians will eventually lose their lives during the war . More than 7000 U.S. troops and contractors will be deployed in Iraq .
 Iraqi boy's parents were killed and his arms were blown off by U.S. bombing .
 The Republic of Georgia is a former Soviet state . Georgia was a former Russian state .
 Georgia's elected government has good relations with neighboring Russia, which is led by President Vladimir Putin . Georgia's election government has a good relationship with Russia .
 Georgian President Edward Shevardnadze's political allies are successful in the parliamentary election . The election is held in the Georgian parliament .
 The incredibly well organized protests are funded by Globalist George Soros and have all the indicators of CIA orchestration . The protests have been funded by Soros and are organized by the CIA .
 Globalist puppet Mikhail Saakashvili and his mob crash the Parliament carrying roses . The government is forced to step down when the mob crashes the Parliament .
 The pro-Russian government is overthrown by the Rose Revolution, and an NWO puppet state, led by the psychotic Saakashvili, is installed on Russia's southern border .
 The "Rose Revolution" sets up a hostile Globalist base on Russia's border . It is also close to Iran and close to Russia .
 George Bush later visited Georgia, where he was warmly greeted by the new puppet president .
 Obama was groomed for big things, possibly as far back as his High School days . Obama was born the bi-racial child of Marxists .
 A Communist, bisexual "mentor" named Frank Marshall Davis appears to have been young Barry's connection to the New World Order pipeline . The young Barry appears to be young Barry.
 Obama's alleged Ivy League transcripts and bar exam results remain unavailable to this day . The president's alleged transcripts are still available to the public .
Coming from a broken & dysfunctional family of modest means, the question of who paid for these extremely expensive schools is also a mystery .
 During the 1990's, Obama works as an Alinskyite "community organizer" in Chicago .
 Obama launches his election effort in the living room of his friend and ghost writer, William Ayers . Ayers head the cop-killing Communist Weathermen who terrorized Chicago in 1968 .
 In 2004, Peter Fitzgerald announced that he will not seek reelection . Fitzgerald is the popular incumbent Republican United States Senator .
 Fitzgerald's Democrat predecessor, Carol Mosely Braun, then strangely passes up the chance to win her old seat back . Fitzgerald's Democratic predecessor Carol MOSEly Braun also strangely passed up the opportunity to win a seat back.
 In the Democrat primary, Obama defeats Blair Hull in the much better known, and much better funded, Blair Hull . Hull's former marriage surface.
 Obama's Republican opponent, Jack Ryan, withdraws from the race again after Zionist George Zell’s Chicago Tribune persuades a Court to release Ryan's divorce papers . Ryan's ex-wife, Zell's husband, has filed for divorce .
 One by one, every big-name politician in Obama's path has been removed by an unseen force . Palmer, Fitzgerald, Mosely-Braun, Hull, Ryan and Fitzgerald have been removed .
 George Soros and the NWO gang replay the same spectacle in Ukraine, another former Soviet Republic friendly to Vladimir Putin's Russia .
 When Viktor Yushenko loses a close Presidential election to Viktor Yanukovych, "spontaneous protests" once again erupt .
 Georgia is treated to a Hollywood charade filled with music and orange banners . Georgia is known for its orange banners.
 Under intense pressure from the outside, a 24 election is held in December of 2005 . The election was held under controlled pressure from within .
 The Orange Revolution results in another hostile puppet state being set up on Russia’s border .
 Ukrainians will dump their Globalist President and re-establish friendly ties with their brother nation of Russia .
 A Jewish woman told me she was Jewish and she knew I was, too, and between us we could acknowledge there's a lot of truth in that statement .
 For the Jews were the vanguard of a social movement that over the course of the 20th century transformed the American university system and the nature of the American elite . Vladimir Putin succeeded Boris Yeltsin in 2000 and regained control of Russia from the criminal ""Oligarchs"" who had
 Putin is a patriot who respects Russia’s culture and heritage, including the Orthodox religion and the Romanov past .
 Putin will not tolerate the curious American obsession with placing missiles in Globalist puppet Poland .
 This begins a series of high-level meetings among the developing giants . This is the first time the two sides have met in a public meeting .
 A full-scale diplomatic meeting would be held in Yekaterinburg, Russia, in May 2008 .
BRIC will emerge as an independent international organization that facilitates commercial, political and cultural cooperation between its members . BRIC will become an independent organization that facilitate commercial,political andcultural cooperation between members .
 The SCO & BRICS clubs deal with each other as equals, with no centralized power source to absorb their individual sovereignty . The critical difference between the BRICS (and also the SCO — Shangai Cooperation Organization), versus Globalist bodies such as the EU and NAFTA, is that
 BRICS & SCO are like a group of neighbors collaborating to hold a neighborhood yard sale, or block party . The New World Order bodies on the other hand, are like an overbearing Condo Association .
 Putin forges close ties with China. Putin establishes the BRIC trade powerhouse . Russia & China’s Eurasian SCO is growing fast .
 Russian President Putin presents America with a sculpture to commemorate the fallen towers .
 Hanging from the crack is a massive ""teardrop" designed to actually drip water . It is designed to drip water.
 The base of the monument is surrounded by a marble wall with the names of all 3000 victims engraved in it . The names of the victims are also engraved in the marble wall .
 The media gives the memorial, dedicated by Putin himself, a total silent treatment . The memorial is dedicated to Putin himself .
 One Bayonne Councilman is happy to host the monument, but he is baffled by Jersey City's rejection of it .
 The Globalists need to portray Putin as evil, they say, in anticipation of the eventual conflict with the allied powers of Russia and China .
 The 9/11 memorial gift from Russia remains unknown to Americans . That is why the 9/ 11 memorial gift is unknown to the Americans .
 The Globalists know that their Global Warming fairy tale has been discredited by honest scientists . They use the hoax as a tactic to impose taxes on carbon dioxide, depress living standards, and erode national sovereignty .
 Each year, Gore's unscientific Globalist garbage is shown to millions of impressionable young people .
 Gore himself is a member of the CFR; and his daughter Karenna married into the Marxist-Zionist Schiff family . Gore's daughter is the daughter of a former Communist leader .
 Gore is making a multi-million dollar fortune by promoting the hoax . He has won a Hollywood Oscar, a Pulitzer Prize for his book on the subject, and a Nobel Peace Prize .
 Gore is personally and publicly disgraced after allegations surface that he attempted to sexually assault a masseuse . In 2010, Gore is publicly and publiclydisgraced .
 His wife of many years divorces the perverted propagandist soon afterwards . His wife divorces him soon after .
 The Globalists unleash a "Color Revolution" aimed at Russia . Vladimir Putin is ready for it .
 The man chosen by the Rothschild / Soros / Brzezinski / CIA destabilization gang is the legendary Chess Champion, Garry Kasparov Kas parov and 3000 of his ’Other Russia’ thugs stage an anti-Putin rally in St Petersburg .
 The arrogant Kasparov is now widely viewed as a traitor by most Russians . He is now considered a traitor in Russia .
 His popularity is so low that he decides to abandon his run for President of Russia in 2008 .
 Kasparov-Weinstein continues to take cheap shots at Putin while visiting Israel and the US . Don't expect the influence of the popular Putin to decline anytime soon .
 Kasparov works as a street agitator for the Rothshilds . He also works with Jacob Rothschild .
 More than 60 years of post-war, Globalist inflicted self-hatred has damaged both the minds and spirits of once proud Germans .
 German guilttripping over “Nazism, and Globalist media hype combine to create the most ridiculous spectacle of Obama-Mania.
 In Berlin, 200,000 German imbeciles give candidate Barack Obama a delirious reception .
 Obama's Globalist owners must surely be amused at the stupidity of the German people . Their recent ancestors had so mercilessly butchered, tortured, slandered, and conquered .
 The homosexual Marxist "community organizer" who never held a real job is worshipped by brainwashed Germans .
 Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and United States President George Bush are seated close to each other as they watch the Opening ceremonies of the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, China .
 Putin is informed that NWO puppet Georgia has just invaded South Ossetia a tiny independent state . He wags his finger at Bush and storms out of the stadium .
 Russian leaders Putin and Medvedev order Russian troops to mobilize, but by the time they arrive, 2,000 civilians have been murdered by the Georgian army .
 The Russians quickly and impressively rout the Georgian invaders, chasing them back deep into Georgian territory . The Russian forces quickly and impressed the Georgian invasion .
 Globalist media then reports that Russia has "invaded" Georgia . In a manner similar to the lies surrounding the German-Polish conflict of 1939, the World War II lies .
 No mention is made of the fact that it was Georgia that drew first blood against Russian civilians .
 The Wall Street banks and investment houses profited greatly from Greenspan’s housing bubble . Georgia puppet state attacks Russia and gets smacked down hard in 2008 .
 The party is over, they demand $750 billion of losses to be covered by the U.S. taxpayer . Now that the party has ended, they want $750billion of losses.
 The Establishment Media terrorizes the American public with horror stories of what will happen if the bankers are not bailed out and new emergency powers are not given to the Federal Reserve .
 The public never bought into the bailout, but that didn't stop the politicians from robbing them . The public didn't buy in the bailout .
 After an initial failure in Congress, the bailout bill passed on a second try . The bailout bill is the second attempt to pass Congress .
 It was the largest robbery in U.S. history . The robbery was the biggest robbery in United States history .
 Haider had openly supported Muammar Qaddafi of Libya and Saddam Hussein of Iraq . Haider also openly supported Qaddafi and Hussein .
 Haider is being closely watched by Israel’s Mossad . Haider's perceived contacts to “Holocaust deniers’, the Israeli Foreign Ministry declares that it is heavily concerned about the 2008 Austrian elections .
 Haider dies of injuries from a car crash in the state of Carinthia . We see it as a disturbing development.
 Haider was on his way to celebrate his mother's 90th birthday when he met Hussein . Haider meets Qaddafi and meets Mossad OCTOBER, 2008 The OMINOUS PROPHECY of WEBSTER GRIFFIN TARPLEY .
 Webster Griffin Tarpley spots George Soros’s ‘Obama Deception’ and tries to warn anyone who will listen .
 Webster Tarpley said Obama would maneuver the U.S. into war with Russia & China if elected .
 Barack Obama is the previously unknown Chicago street agitator and vote fraud organizer . Obama's rapid, media-fueled ascent to the Presidency is the first time he has been in office .
 Marxist activist with close ties to former Weather Underground terrorists William Ayers and Jeff Jones . Obama is the ultimate puppet of choice of Globalist Billionaire George Soros and the International Banking gang .
 The Jewish-Hungarian Soros and his paid mob of liberal activists pour millions of dollars and countless man-hours into getting Obama elected .
 Trillion, passing another bailout for General Motors, advancing socialized health care, allowing Goldman Sachs to loot the Treasury . Goldman Sachs also gave new powers to the Fed, and expanding America's military role in Asia .
 Critics of Obama’s reckless spending are denounced as “racists’ by the Media, as credible allegations of his homosexuality and ineligibility due to foreign birth are ignored .
 Obama is an artificial creation of the most intense media hype campaign in history . Obama's campaign is a "media hype campaign"
 By installing a black man as President, the Globalists can advance their agenda more radically than ever before . By installing black men as president, they can advance the agenda.
 Fear of being called "racist" combined with media-inflicted "white guilt" shield the Marxist President from the condemnation he deserves .
Barack Obama is a wholly owned puppet of George Soros, who is himself connected to the Rothschild Octopus . G, talk, or even destroy, can make him sing, entire economies without moving my 1BarackObama .
 Rockets of unknown origin are landing in uninhabited areas of Israel .
 The Israelis accuse Palestinian guerillas of firing the cheap and harmless rockets .
 Using the rockets as a pretext, Israel launches a 3 week terror bombing campaign against the Palestinian refugees trapped in the Gaza strip .
 By the end of Cast Lead, 1400 Arabs lay dead, mostly women and children . The end of the Cast Lead was in the middle of the year .
 The U.S. blindly declares its support for Israel's terror campaign . Israel bombed densely populated neighborhoods with skin-melting white phosphorous bombs .
 Israeli school children write messages on bombs destined for Palestinians . Israeli schoolchildren write messages.
Soros is concerned that the new China is acting too much in her own national interests . Soros is concerned about China's new national interests.
 The Globalist plan to encircle China and Russia is the true reason behind U.S. military adventures in Asia . CIA sponsored “color revolutions’ throughout Europe, Asia, and North Africa .
 It remains to be seen if this dynamic and nationalist new China will go fully Globalist or ally itself with Russia against the coming Globalist confrontation .
 Poland may be in the process of “mending fences’ with Russia, it appears . It appears that Poland may have been trying to build fences with Russia .
 Putin & Medvedev invite the most powerful people in Poland to attend a memorial service honoring Polish victims of Stalin's Katyn Forest massacre of 1940 .
 Polish president Lech Kaczynski, the Chief of the Polish Military Staff and other senior Polish military officers, among other senior military officers . The Central Bank of Poland president is the president of the Central Bank.
 A low impact crash over Russian soil near Katyn Forest near Poland decapitates the Polish government .
 Poland has since become much more anti-Russian and obedient to the EU . The fact that Poland has now become more pro-Russian adds further intrigue to this bizarre event .
 commodity prices for grains, meats, oil, and metals rise steadily from 2010 and beyond . As expected, commodity prices have risen steadily from 2011 to 2012 .
 Few understand the true nature of the Fed’s role American decline. But few understand the real nature of American decline .
 The Origins, History, and Future of the Federal Reserve is held on November Sth & 6th in the very same building where the original 1910 meeting occurred .
 Inflationary Zio-Globo bubble-makers Alan Greenspan and Benjamin Bernanke are both in attendance and participate as speakers .
 Between the pure Globalist George Soros-Bilderberger faction, and the radical Zionist faction of the New World Order, there is a deep divide .
 The Bilderberger Globalists believe that a military invasion of Iran is costly and risky . They believe that the invasion is risky and costly .
 The Zionists on the other hand, have no patience for long-term maneuvers .
 The Zionists respond by using some of their controlled "conservative" talk radio mouthpieces to do "limited hangouts" of George Soros and even the Bilderberg conferences .
 The Bilderberger / Trilateralists strike back by exposing scandals related to FOX News chief and international media mogul, and arch neo-con Murdoch .
 Obama is clearly in the Soros / Zbig Bilderberg camp, but he also knows that he must respect the Israeli / Neo-Con power base .
 Like two competing Mafia Families, the internal squabbles between the ""left"" Bilderbergs and the ""right"" Israel Firsters can get very ugly at times .
 Both lunatic factions of this New World Order crime gang work against the interests of the people . But they will eventually come to an agreement over the Iran situation, he says .
 The unrest begins after a CIA operation known as ‘WikiLeaks’ “leaks’ out information damaging to certain Arab states . The unrest starts after aCIA operation known to “ WikiLeaks’s” conveniently ‘leaks out information.’
 CIA media in those states then spread the embarrassing stories which help to spark to demonstrations . CIA media then provided protective cover for the agents leading the ‘people’s’ revolutions .
 ClA-engineered coups aim to install NWO _ puppet ""democracies" all along the outskirts of the great Eurasian land mass . Starting in Tunisia, and then ""spreading" to Egypt, Libya, Bahrain, and Syria, these ClA
 Brzezinski's Globalist noose is being skillfully constructed around the defiant Chinese and Russia giants . From Eastern Europe to North Africa to the Middle East to Iran to South Central Asia and South East Asia, Brzezzinski's noose has been built around China .
 The ex-communist powers are now peaceful and moving towards a market-based economy . The United States & EU are becoming socialistic as they terrorize the disobedient nations of the world .
 TIME sells the idiotic myth that Arab college kids on the Internet started the 2011 revolutions . Time sells the myth that college kids started the revolutions .
 Osama Bin Laden has just been killed in a U.S. raid on his compound in Pakistan . The deceitful Marxist President announces to a gullible nation that Bin Laden is dead .
 The phantom terrorist is innocent of the 9/11 attacks and was actually killed in 2001 .
 The brain dead American public swallows this latest media hoax . Without a shred of evidence, no photos, no videos, and no body — the brain dead Americans swallow this hoax .
 China strongly condemns the violation of Pakistan's sovereignty . China issues a warning against future attacks on Pakistan .
 By 2011, millions of Mexican "anchor babies" have already reached voting age . Millions of Mexican children are already voting age as "Amnesty" programs threaten to turn millions more into instant Democrats .
 Traditionally conservative states such as California and Nevada have already become Marxist leaning .
 Within 25 years, even libertyloving Texas will have a majority ""Hispanic"" voting bloc that will have been skillfully radicalized by Globalist controlled Spanish TV .
 During the 1980's, the eccentric "Colonel Gaddafi" was framed by the Israelis for acts of terror that he had nothing to do with .
 President Reagan ordered the bombing of Gaddafi's compound in response to pressure from "neocons"
 Libya is a debt-free country that issues currency from a National Bank, not a Rothschild Central Bank . Libya's currency is issued by the National Bank .
 Qaddafi was seeking to take leadership of the emerging African Union . He wanted to free it of Globalist-Zionist domination .
 Gaddafi accused Zionists of having murdered John F Kennedy in 2009 speech before UN .
After months of merciless NATO bombing, Gaddafi's convoy is bombed by French jets .
 NATO/CIA paid mercenaries then capture and torture the popular leader . They beat him and sodomize him with a knife before finally shooting him in the head .
 China is forced to evacuate all of its foreign-based workers from Libya . The chaos has led to the evacuation of all its foreign workers from the country .
 President Obama imposes tough new economic sanctions on Iran . Obama wants to court the Jewish vote for his re-election campaign .
 The NWO gang is falsely accusing Iran of building nuclear bombs . As they did during the 2002 run up to Iraq War, the NWO Gang is falsely claiming Iran is building nuclear weapons .
 US ships in the Persian Gulf now face a serious threat of a 'false flag' attack staged by Israeli submarines and to be blamed on Iran .
 Iran vows to massively retaliate if attacked, but insists that they will not attack first . US/Israel threats and propaganda are being used by Iran .
 Obama's assault on tradition and faith is completely in line with the centuries-old drive by Marxists and Globalists to attack traditional family structure and undermine the moral codes of civilized societies .
 Newsweek's controversial cover was really a literal statement of Obama's homosexuality .
 Russia's new President Vladimir Putin counters by announcing an increase in military ties, and war game operations, with the Chinese navy .
 The rhetoric between the NWO Globalists and the Russia-China-Iran-Syria Axis continues to heat up, as the chess pieces for the Grand War are positioned .
 independent Russia and China unite against the Globalist NATO war machine . No longer the communist tyrannies they once were; independent Russia, China unite .
 Russia, China and Iran are blocking the effort to deploy naval assets to the region . The New World Order wants to conquer Syria but Russia and China are blocking it .
 Russia and China now have provocative NWO puppet neighbors provoking conflict on their doorsteps .
 Alert Internet ‘conspiracy theorists’ soon expose the ‘Sandy Hook Massacre’ as a staged, fictitious event that involved ‘crisis actors’ and total CIA orchestration .
 To date, not a single photo of a crime scene or of any covered bodies has ever been released .
 The media and Hollywood launch into a massive push to ban semi-automatic rifles . Immediately, the just recently re-elected Obama, the media andollywood launch into the push .
 The outspoken Hugo Chavez is a socialist, but is also fiercely independent .
 His close allies include Iran, Syria, Russia, Iran and Syria . The U.S. backed 'rebels' in Libya .
 Chavez is stricken with a strange form of cancer . Chavez has claimed for years that Israel and the United States were plotting to assassinate him .
 Chavez supporters believe he was infected with cancer cells by sophisticated methods of a foreign intelligence service . Many of his supporters believe that Chavez was infected by foreign intelligence.
 The odd onset of his sickness, and the absolute hatred that the Globalists and Zionists had for Chavez, lend weight to this ‘conspiracy theory’ 1 Chavez honoring Qaddafi with The Sword of Simon Bolivar .
 The sudden overthrow of Benedict and the installation of Frankie the Fake proves that the Globalists have agents of destruction working high up in the Catholic Church .
 Israel attempts to force the matter by dropping a massive bomb just outside of Damascus .
 Syria refuses to take Israel’s bait. With its hands already full fighting a CIA backed internal civil war, Syria is fighting an internal war .
 Putin’s Russia announces that it will not cancel deliveries of advanced Surface to Air missiles to Syria .
Out of nowhere come the professionally-made banners, massive EU flags, English-language placards, etc. Out of nowhere comes the professionally made banners .
 The CIA-NGO protesters demand that Yanukovich reverse his course and return Ukraine towards the path of EU membership .
 As these ‘revolutions’ go, the mobs begin to stir more and more each passing day . The mobs are growing, and the mobs are getting bigger each day .
Globalist politicians arrive in Kiev to foment chaos. Feeding the frenzy are Globalist politicians who arrive in Ukraine .
 Senator John McCain takes to the outdoor microphone and fires up the roaring mob . Putin’s hatful adversary is Putin'shatful adversary, Senator McCain .
 The whole time, riot police continue to treat the violent attackers with kid gloves . The riot police are treating the attackers with child gloves .
 Russia-friendly President flees Kiev with his life, as mobs trespass into his private home . The Russian President's home is a private residence .
 A violent coup, orchestrated by the “democratic West, has toppled a democratically-elected friend of Russia, Russia .
 The Russian majority of eastern Ukraine is incensed over the coup . Many are rightfully frightened by the coup and many are rightfully scared .
 Nuland's hand-picked puppet, Arseniy ‘Yatsenyuk, is installed as Ukraine's new President . The puppet was named as Ukraine’s new President.
 No sooner had the ousted President Yanukovich arrived to safe haven in Moscow than another ‘spontaneous’ protest erupts on the majority-Russian, Ukrainian Peninsula of Crimea . The region had always been Russian and ended up as part of ex-Soviet Republic Ukraine only by a
 This phony flash mob consists of a group of ethnic Tatars, a Turkic minority of Russian-speaking Crimea . The group is part of a minority of a Russian- speaking Crimea .
 These NGO Tatars rally in favor of the new illegitimate gang installed in Kiev .
 Russian Crimeans and NGO Tatars face off; exchanging chants and insults with each other .
Before the situation can escalate, local Crimean Self Defense units deploy and established order . Local Crimean Self defense units deploy, establish order and establish order .
 The ‘Mother of all Lies’ races around the Globe at lightning speed . It is then that the ‘ mother of all lies’ race around the globe at lightningspeed .
 The ‘H-Word’ is rolled out again, used most notably by Hillary Clinton . The “H- word’s’S’ has been used by many in recent years .
 All the Germans that were ... the ethnic Germans, the Germans by ancestry who were in places like Czechoslovakia and Romania and other places, Hitler kept saying they're not being treated right .
In Western Ukraine, out came the NGO rent-a-mobs and other assorted ‘pro-Western’ ignoramuses with their professionally made English-language banners .
 Crimea has always been majorityRussian, no objective rational person would have blamed Putin for sending his troops into Crimea . Now, given NATO’s aggressive antagonizing of Russia, the violent NGOMossad coup in Kiev, and Crimea has been majority Russian .
 Crimea is a peninsula attached to Ukraine only by a very thin strip of land . The peninsula is only a small part of Ukraine's Crimea .
 Crimea's easternmost point is more than 3 miles across the water from Russia . Crimea’s eastern most point is over 3 miles away from Russia.
 Crimea’s own version of U.S. State “National Guard” units took to the streets to protect their own brothers and sisters .
 Crimea voted to return to Mother Russia with a 97% majority . The happy people of Crimea soon voted for a return to Russia .
 The ‘annexation’ is followed by more threats from the U.S. and the pygmies of Europe . The “annexations’ are followed by the United States and the Pygmies.
 China, India, Argentina and Brazil calmly expressed their understanding of Russia’s position . But China and India, India and Argentina calmly expressed an understanding of the Russian position .
 Donetsk and Louhansk declare their independence and have been fighting Kiev ever since . Unwilling to endure such Globalist-inspired provocation, Donetsk andLouhansk declared their independence .
 The New World Order gang falsely blames Putin for the very “aggression’ that it started . As they had done with Saddam Hussein and Adolf Hitler in years past, the gang also blames Putin .
Under the pretext of “protecting Europe’s Europe, harsh economic sanctions are imposed upon Russia as NATO builds up its forces along the Russian borders .
 A series of fake beheadings are staged in order to keep the world frightened . They are staged to keep world frightened.
 The emphasis shifts from fighting Syrian troops to massacring Syrian civilians instead .
Fake 'beheading' videos cut to black just as the throats of 'victims' are cut by the really bad actors in black .
Terrorists attack and kidnap Chinese workers while destabilizing the pro-China / pro-Russia government of Nigeria . The terrorists attack and kidnapping Chinese workers .
 The Race for Raw Materials a Mutual respect and common benefit is the foundation of the strong ChinaNigeria relationship . The Race For Raw Materials is a Mutual Respect and common benefits .
Refugees are fleeing to chaotic Libya and boarding boats bound for Europe . As a direct result of destabilizing proxy wars initiated by deep cover front groups such as ISIS .
Spooked out of their native lands, free housing, money and health care awaits them in dying Europe .
 The New World Pope and the Globalist media are all in favor of the invasion that they themselves engineered . The Pope is the leader of the New WorldPope .
 The sovereign powers of Russia and China make it clear that they will not submit to The New World Order . The joint naval drills take place in the Mediterranean .
 General Secretary Xi Jinping attends Moscow’s ‘Victory Day’ celebration and looks on as Chinese military units actually march in Russia's parade . That same month, President Xi Jinping attended Moscow's ‘victory Day' celebration .
 Front-Man Soros speaks for his Rothschild bosses when he “warns’s that World War III is a real possibility.’
 The Globalists have broken down the mental and moral resistance of the American and European public . A majority are now willing to “tolerate” female impersonation / bodily mutilation and ‘same sex marriage’ as part of our society . The
 The lighting of The White House in rainbow colors marks the final surrender of normality to the organized forces working for The New World Order . The hyped up “transformation’ of former Olympic champion Bruce Jenner into a “woman’s’
 There are higher reasons behind this moral madness which people cannot understand . There are more reasons behind the moral madness than the madness of people .
 The U.S. National Debt as of July 1, 2015 stands at $18 Trillion Dollars . The United States National Debt is growing at a rate of $1 Trillion dollars annually .
 Much of this unpayable debt is floated by the printing of additional money by the Federal Reserve in the form of bond purchases .
 This printing of money ‘out-of-thin-air’ is debasing the value of existing currency and causing food prices to rise . Food prices to steadily rise.
 All we can do is prepare ourselves to cope -financially, personally and emotionally - is to prepare ourselves for each other .
 Our "saviors" propose a New World Order to solve the world's problems . Then propose a new world order.
 National borders disappear as "racist" Europe and America are flooded with third world immigration . Europe and the U.S. are flooded by third world immigrants .
 People are micro-chipped, monitored, controlled, and reeducated in the new Global System . People are reeducated, monitored and monitored, and are re-educated .
 The remaining remaining "Blue-Blood" Whites, Orientals, and Jewish Global Elites will live like gods and marry among themselves .
 The mixed masses of the Globe will be fed, housed in small apartments, given "free" access to public transportation, and entertained .
 The American Dream of prosperity and upward mobility will be a thing of the past . But the "American Dream" of prosperity will be in the future .
 The Lindemann made a remark on more than one occasion with such an air of seriousness that he seemed to regard it as his testament of wisdom . I feel it incumbent upon me to record it here, although not in perfect sympathy with it .
 Tt will not be Hitler and the Second World War; it will be the release of nuclear energy . Tt won't be the menace of Communism. Tt is not Hitler and second World War .
 A biography of F.A. Lindemann (Lord Cherwell), Chief Scientific Advisor to Winston Churchill . The book is based on a biography of the former British Prime Minister .
 As the collective memory of past days fades away, the docile mixed-race people of the One World may find happiness in their benevolent slavery .
 They will learn to love their elite masters for the peace and "security" they have been given . They will be able to learn to "love their elite master"
 The people, by design, are too ‘dumbed-down’, too decadent, too depressed and too lazy to reclaim their liberty .
 Unless there is some miraculous reawakening of humanity at the 11th hour, the sheeple will have what they deserve .
All we can do now is take care of ourselves, and our loved ones, and prepare to make it through the coming crisis . All we can now is taking care of themselves, and their loved ones .
 The searches will also open up new avenues of exploration. Not only will one find that the research, events and quotes presented in this book are accurate, but the searches are also new avenues.