 The simmering conflict in Donbas now dominates the headlines, but it is possible to see a path to resolution there .
 Crimea will remain a problem between the West and Russia for years to come . It is much more difficult with Crimea, which will remain an issue between Kyiv and Moscow for years .
 “little green men’s” seized key facilities on the Crimean peninsula in February 2014 . In late February 2014, just days after the end of the Maidan Revolution and Victor Yanukovych's flight from Kyiv, a term coined by Ukrainians .
 The little green men were clearly professional soldiers by their bearing, carried Russian weapons, and wore Russian combat fatigues . But they had no identifying insignia .
 Vladimir Putin originally denied they were Russian soldiers . In April, he confirmed they were Russians .
 Crimean authorities then proposed a referendum, which was held on March 16 . It was then proposed by Crimean authorities .
 A true referendum, fairly conducted, might have shown a significant number of Crimean voters in favor of joining Russia . The Crimean referendum was fairly conducted .
 Some 60 percent were ethnic Russians, and many might have concluded their economic situation would be better as a part Russia .
 It was conducted in polling places under armed guard, with no credible international observers . Russian journalists reporting that they had been allowed to vote .
 Putin's Human Rights Council says 30 percent of voters voted to join Russia . Two months later, a member of the council let slip that turnout had been more like 30 percent .
 Crimean and Russian officials signed a ‘treaty of accession’ just two days later, on March 18 .
 ratification by Russia’s rubberstamp Federation Assembly and Federation Council was finished by March 21 . The vote was sparked by a fiery Putin speech, and ratification was completed on March 21.
 Moscow's actions violated the agreement among the post-Soviet states in 1991 to accept the then-existing republic borders . Moscow’s actions violate the agreement in 1991 .
 The Russians could not veto a resolution in the U.N. General Assembly . They could not, however, veto the resolution .
 Russian officials sought to justify the referendum as an act of self-determination . Russian officials seek to justify it as a act ofself-determination.
 Russia waged two bloody wars in the 1990s and early 2000s to prevent Chechnya from exercising a right of self-determination . It was not an easy argument for the Kremlin to make.
 Serbia subjected hundreds of thousands of Kosovar Albanians to ethnic-cleansing in 1999 . By contrast, no ethnic- Cleansing occurred in Crimea. Serbia subjected thousands of Kosovo Albanians.
 Kosovo negotiated with Serbia to reach an amicable separation for years before declaring independence unilaterally . Kosovo negotiated for years to reach a settlement before unilaterally declaring independence .
 There were no negotiations with Kyiv over Crimea's fate, and it took less than a month from the appearance of the little green men to Crimea’s annexation .
 The United States and European Union applied visa and financial sanctions, as well as prohibited their ships and aircraft from traveling to Crimea without Ukrainian permission . The U.S. and EU applied visas and sanctions .
 Ukrainian forces on Crimea did not resist the Russian invasion . Kyiv resisted the appearance of little green men in Donbas .
 Ukrainians found themselves fighting Russian troops as well as “separatist forces’s” forces .
 Finding a settlement in Donbas has taken higher priority over resolving the status of Crimea . Some 13,000 have died and two million have been displaced in the fighting in eastern Ukraine .
 Moscow seems to see the simmering conflict as a useful means to pressure and distract Kyiv . Both sides want to make domestic reform more difficult and hinder the deepening of ties between Ukraine and Europe .
 The seizure of Crimea proved very popular with the broader Russia public . The quagmire in Donbas has not so far proved popular with Russia's public .
 The most biting Western economic sanctions would come off of Russia if it left Donbas . Donbas is one of Russia's most biting economic sanctions .
 At some point, the Kremlin may calculate that the costs outweigh the benefits and consent to a settlement would allow restoration of Ukrainian sovereignty there .
 Russia-as-a-great-power cards. Retaining Crimea is especially important to Putin, who can offer the Russian people no real prospect of anything other than a stagnant economy .
 He gained a significant boost in public popularity from the rapid and relatively bloodless takeover of the peninsula .
 It offers a vehicle for Russia to maintain a festering border dispute with Ukraine . The Kremlin may see as discouraging NATO members from getting too close to Ukraine .
 Kyiv at present lacks the political, economic, and military leverage to force a return to the country . Kyiv lacks political and economic leverage to return to its former glory .
 Ukraine has seen no dramatic economic boom after becoming part of Russia . The Crimea people see their economic lot would be better off back as part of Ukraine, writes Peter Bergen .
 Russia’s seizure and annexation of Crimea pose a fundamental challenge to the European order and norms established by the 1975 Helsinki Final Act . For the West, Russia's seizure of Crimea poses a challenge to European order .
 The U.S. and Europe should continue their policy of non-recognition of Crimea’s illegal incorporation .
 Russia should also maintain Crimea-related sanctions on Russia, if for no other reason than to signal that such land grabs have no place in 21st-century Europe .