 The Foreign Military Studies Office at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas is an open source research organization of the United States Anny .
 It was founded in 1986 as an innovative program that brought together military specialists and academics to focus on military and security topics derived from unclassified, foreign media .
 FMSO conducts unclassified research on foreign perspectives of defense and security issues that are understudied or unconsidered . Today FMSo maintains this research tradition of special insight and highly collaborative work .
 He specializes in Russian and Central Asian defense and security and security . He is a member of the editorial board, for Central Asia and the Caucasus .
 The Russian Armed Forces in Transition: Economic, Geopolitical and Institutional Uncertainties, in 2011 .
 FMSO has provided some editing, format, and graphics to this paper to conform to organizational standards . The paper has been updated to comply with organizational standards.
 Academic conventions, source referencing, and citation style are those of the author . The author is the author of the book .
 The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent the official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the United States government .
 ‘hybrid warfare’ concept is entirely alien to Russian military science . Only discussed by Russian military theorists and specialists in reference to assessing developments in foreign military approaches to warfare .
 Colonel N Nikolaev assessed the ‘hybrid’ concept specifically in a U.S. context . For example, in March 2014, in an article in Zarubezhnoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, the author said .
 Nikolaev conceived of this as only concerning the U.S. Joint Staff, while outlining ‘hybrid’ war .
 On February 19, 2015 an expert conference was hosted in the Moscow offices of Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye . The conference discussed ‘controlled chaos,’ or the ‘hybrid’ aspects of modem warfare .
 There is simply no agreed or accepted definition of the term, according to specialists . They concluded there was no agreed definition of it .
 Russia has only limited deployment and sustainment capabilities to commence and support operations on the country’s periphery . In reality, the relatively lowscale commitment of Russian military and security forces in Ukraine provides further evidence of ongoing conventional weakness .
 A key determinant of Russian military actions in Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk flowed from Moscow’s assessment of these operational environments . Moscow's assessment of the operations in Crimea and Donetsk flowed from the assessment of those environments .
 Kyiv All the destabilizing influences in Donetsk and Luhansk were the result of Moscow’s indirect involvement through the mechanism of ‘polite people’ as first witnessed in Crimea .
 Those pushing for autonomy or independence from Kyiv were labelled as ‘terrorist’ and the Antiterrorist Operation was seen as the natural response . Those supporting them were also labelled as 'terrorist' or those supporting them .
 Moscow The Russian/Novorossiya narrative portrayed the Euromaidan protests as the precursor to bringing an illegitimate and anti-Russian government to power in Kyiv . The Russian and Novorossya narrative is based on the Russian/Russian narrative .
 Both sides escalated the conflict, from Kyiv's effort to prosecute the ATO to Moscow’s covert aid to separatists . The ATO is accused of supporting separatists in Russia .
 The conflict assumed its own internal logic of evolution, with its dialectic of conflict involving action and response .
 Analysts had long connected such efforts as part of a wider effort to undennine the Russian state . Moscow’s views on ‘color revolution’ and the risks of Western powers pursuing similar goals in Russia .
 The US, NATO and EU response was to try to isolate Russia diplomatically and inflict graduated damage on its economy . Moscow regarded the crisis in its Eurasian context .
 Russia’s Strategic and Operational Advantages on the Eve of Conflict . In any conflict there certain advantages enjoyed by a stronger side prior to onset of operations .
Russia and Ukraine have appeared shoulder to shoulder since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Traditionally, Russia and Ukraine has appeared shoulder-to- shoulder since that collapse .
 In February 2014, Russian military hard power was used to dislodge part of Ukrainian territory from Crimea . Many onlookers were tempted to compare the relative numerical and hardware strengths of the opposing militaries .
 Such an approach, simplistic at best, hides the more nuanced and detailed aspects that fed into Moscow’s planning for and later involvement in such events .
 A number of Russia’s strategic and operational advantages over Ukraine need to be kept in mind . Some of these were intentional concerning developments in Russia's military force structure and military modernization . Other factors fall into the category of coincidence or serendipity .
 Some factors facilitated the ease with which Russia took Crimea, or the way in which its involvement would later differ in southeastern Ukraine . Some of these factors facilitated Russia's involvement in Crimea .
Conventional forces still heavily relying on poorly trained 12-month conscripts . These consisted mainly of contract personnel unlike conventional forces .
 The embryonic RRF structure consisted of 70,000 to 80,000 personnel . Russia’s information tools and capability to dominate or seize the initiative to influence events in Ukraine .
 The presence of the Black Sea Fleet HQ and the military’s developing RRF allowed rapid deployment by stealth capitalizing on Russian personnel having a ‘friendly’ status .
 Later deployments including artillery and Motor Rifle Brigades suggest that the ultimate default position envisaged regular combined-arms warfare .
 The Operation to restore Crimea to Russia is relatively easily established . There remain some contradictions and inherent problems in relation to the ‘start date’ for the operation .
 In early March 2015, President Putin stated in a Russian documentary trailer that he ordered the operation to ‘restore’ Crimea to Russia . The operation began on February 22, 2014 .
 The medal to decorate participants in the Russian operation ‘Liberation of Crimea’ is dated ‘February 20’ to ‘March 18’ 2014 . In other words, commencing two days before Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych fled Kyiv .
Based upon open source reporting of these events, the author has concluded that these issues reflect various levels of contingency planning .
 The contingency planning to retake Crimea most likely began in the 1990s over the status of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet base in Sevastopol, Crimea .
 Such contingencies, however, are not to be confused with evidence of willful intent . Such contingency, though, are to be mistaken with evidence.
 Moscow is likely to have intensified the planning and formulation of intervention scenarios to protect Russia’s interests . The contingencies were being narrowed and refined into possible options .
 Yanukovych’s decision to eschew the EU association agreement in favor of a counter-offer from Moscow sparked popular protests in Kyiv in November 2013 .
 The protests, known as ‘EuroMaidan’ were seen by Moscow as a mortal threat to the Yanukovych regime . The president fled and his government collapsed resulting in interim government emerging along pro-Western and deeply anti-Russian lines .
 The anti-Russian elements crystalized on February 23, 2014, the same day as the Winter Olympic Games ended in Sochi . The interim Ukrainian government repealed Russian as an official state language .
 Moscow was seized upon by Moscow to justify its claims to protect ethnic Russian interests in Ukraine . This arguably alienated the predominately ethnic Russian Crimea .
 Russian intelligence penetration, as already noted, implies possible foreknowledge of the collapse of the Yanukovych government .
 Ukrainian General Staff sources suggested later that they had detected ‘unusual’ Russian activity in Crimea . But that Kyiv had ignored such warnings, they said .
 Post-factum claims are difficult to test and even if there was some type of ‘unusual’ activity in Crimea as early as January 2014 .
 Putin most likely ordered planning to be intensified on February 20, while only giving final authorization on February 22/3, 2014 . In this context, Putin likely ordered plans to be increased on February 19, 2014.
 The fact that Russia’s largest foreign military base was located in Crimea permitted such military activity to occur under the guise of ‘reinforcement,’ suggests that such an operation would prove impossible to replicate on the territory of a NATO member state .
 Russian foreign ministry recognized concerns of Crimean parliament . On February 25, 2014, during an extended period of public silence on the crisis by President Putin .
 Crimean Parliament announces it will hold a referendum to boost autonomy from Kyiv . Two day later, the Crimean Parliament announced it would hold a vote to boost its autonomy .
 VDV, Special Forces and Spetsnaz also deployed in the peninsula . Marine infantry were also deployed on the same day. This included seizing the parliament in Simferopol .
 The myth of hybrid warfare operation to take Crimea became a popular label to explain these events . The Russian media soon labeled these gunmen as ‘polite people,’ a phrase Putin reportedly liked .
 On February 28, 2014, the masked gunmen increased their control over Crimea with the airport and the state television station placed under pro-Russian control . This extended to surrounding and blockading military bases .
Russian forces restricted activities to surrounding or blockading Ukrainian military bases, except for command and control points and air defense units which were seized .
 Moscow ordered ‘snap inspection’ exercises involving large numbers of its conventional military forces in Western and Southern Military Districts. Simultaneously, Moscow ordered 'snap inspection' exercises.
60 percent of Ukrainian Air Defense units in Crimea had been captured, according to reports . Spetsnaz brigade arrived in Simferopol and additional SpetsNaz units were inserted by air through Sevastopol .
 Putin sought parliamentary approval in Moscow for the right to use troops in Ukraine to protect ethnic Russians . Putin also sought parliamentary permission for the use of troops to protect Russian citizens .
 The ‘polite people’ by this stage, had effectively dislodged Ukraine from Crimea, says the Ukrainian government .
 The Crimean Parliament changed the date of the referendum from May 25, 2014 to March 30, 2014 . On March 3, 2014, the Crimean Parliament moved the date again to March 16, 2014.
 By March 9-12 the Ukrainian naval air base at Novofedorovka fell and the 12 th Motor Rifle Brigade entered Crimea via Kerch . The 12 th motor rifle brigade was the first to enter Crimea in March .
 Moscow recognized Crimean independence in March 2014 . Moscow began preparing to absorb it into the Russian Federation .
Kyiv made no effort to reassert its control of Crimea. What puzzled analysts and governments alike was the fact that it occurred with little bloodshed .
 The myth of Russian hybrid warfare was reinforced by media focus on ‘polite people,’ or Tittle green men’
 The case for a Russian ‘hybrid’ operation cannot be tested since Kyiv never authorized combat operations against Russian forces . The case would have revealed what in fact lay behind these deployments .
 At strategic level, there was nothing new in the operations, the areas of novelty lie at the tactical and operational levels .
 The operation was actually a case of a stronger power exploiting weaknesses of a weaker power during a period of political uncertainty caused by the revolution in Kyiv .
 The Russian military used the Black Sea Fleet HQ and other platforms to spread forces out across Crimea as well as to reinforce and add to the deployment, transfer materials and supplies .
 The Ukrainian military presence in Crimea was 22,000 mainly consisting of Naval personnel, with small number air defense and Interior Ministry personnel . The Ukraine military presence was also in Crimea.
 The Black Sea Fleet in Crimea was limited to no more than 25,000 personnel . The actual number was lower prior to the crisis .
 The new interim government in Kyiv lacking experience, legitimacy and any opportunity to consolidate its control over Ukraine . Crimea was momentarily isolated and were at a loss to understand what was unfolding .
 Putin chose to act decisively to find Kyiv in at best a transition phase . Timing was critical, and from Putin’s point of view the timing of the operation could not have been better .
 Russian General Staff planned and executed a rapid deployment of forces into Crimea based mainly on elite and Special Forces mix . It is precisely in this context that Russian General staff planned to take key communications nodes.
 Russian intelligence gathered in Kyiv and the use of Russian intelligence in Crimea afforded Moscow a clearer insight into the capacity of the Ukrainian state to respond . FSB, SVR and GRU involved in stirring up local protests, hiding among the population and conducting reconnaissance and subversive operations .
 All of these measures were accompanied by an active information campaign, including levels of disinformation to deny Russian military involvement or to mask intentions .
 The use of the referendum device was one illustration of how these initiatives played locally, regionally and internationally .
 The force mix is discussed below, but zeroing in on the information campaign brings the reader closer to understanding how and why the Ukrainian military never responded to Russian actions .
 Moscow’s infonnation operations were aimed at boosting domestic support for and local acquiescence to its actions over Crimea . Russia's Information Operations Moscow was also raising doubts internationally about any contradictory narrative .
 The campaign was clearly aimed at facilitating and complementing the military intervention . Yet the campaign locally was clearly intended to facilitate and complement the military Intervention .
 These measures were matched with the force mix and rapid deployment in order to maximize command and control advantages over the enemy . These measures are matched with a force mix, rapid deployment and quick deployment .
 The date shown in leaked video footage of an operation by one of the Russian Special Operations Forces is the date of the operation . The operation was carried out by a unit of one of Russia's special operations forces .
 The fact that something unusual was going on was quickly picked up by the Russian social networks and regional media outlets .
 The entire 45th Independent Spetsnaz Regiment of the Airborne Assault Troops had left its base outside Moscow .
 Two squads of the 16th Independent Spetsnaz Brigade left their base in Tambov . Two squads left their bases in the Russian capital .
 The 3rd Independent Spetsnaz Brigade in Tolyatti was put on combat alert . The brigade is the third in the 3rd independent spetnaz brigade in the city .
 Similar orders were received by some units of the VDV service, including the 7th Airborne Assault Division .
 One Moscow-based source believes that select elements of five of Russia’s seven GRU Spetsnaz brigades were involved in the campaign . The campaign was launched by one of Russia's sevenGRU Spetnaz Brigades .
 The confused and rapidly emerging picture on the peninsula was that the additional deployments centered on elite and Special Forces personnel . The confusion was that there was a new picture of the peninsula .
 Kyiv lost Crimea rather than Russia ‘winning’ it, says Peter Bergen . Moscow’s authorization of the operation exploited a unique set of circumstances, he says .
 The mismatch in the capabilities that either side could bring to the conflict played an important role in the conflict . The mismatch of the capabilities of both sides played a important role .
 The Russian forces looked highly professional and operated in a very disciplined manner . But assessing their performance must be balanced against the significantly weaker condition of the Ukrainian military on the eve of conflict .
 Russian military had experienced reform and a degree of modernization . The imbalance stems from the fact the Russian military has experienced reform .
 Russia has used a scalpel in the past. In terms of execution, past occurrences of Russian force projection have taken the “sledgehammer’s approach .
 The Russian troops were well disciplined over the course of the operation . Russian troops are well disciplined.
 There were undoubtedly many tense situations over the few weeks that could have resulted in a limited shooting war . There were many tense moments over those few weeks.
 The Ukrainians wanted to avoid bloodshed as much as the Russians, this certainly was not the same military that entered Chechnya in 2000 and fought Georgia in 2008 .
 Moscow's involvement in destabilizing southeastern Ukraine in 2014-15 was different in its approach. Southeastern Ukraine was different to the Russian military operation in Crimea .
 After annexing Crimea, the peninsula could no longer be used as a means of Russian leverage over Kyiv . The peninsula could now be used to establish a protectorate in Ukraine .
 Moscow wanted to achieve a larger protectorate under the banner of Novorossiya . By the fall of 2014, it was no longer clear that Moscow wanted a bigger protectorate .
 The performance of rebel forces in the conflict shows the Russians were there, but not in large numbers . This was driven by quality and not numbers .
 Russian military activities in Ukraine have focused on combat operations, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: The primary mission appears to have been to conduct a train and equip program to provide capabilities to the local separatists .
 Moscow's adoption of a low-scale ‘deniable’ conflict mirrored Kyiv’s avoidance of declaring martial law and de facto war on Russia . President Petro Poroshenko could not declare war on a nuclear power .
 The Kyiv leadership underestimated the extent of the separatist strength in southeastern Ukraine . The separatist movement quickly took hold in spring 2014 .
As the conflict gathered pace, though direct and indirect Russian Federation support existed, it was relatively small-scale . As the conflict gathers pace, it's not clear how much support there was .
 The bulk of the ‘forces’ facing the Ukrainian Armed Forces in 2014-15 were home grown .
 Moscow's use of military power in theater is considered a key part of its military strategy . The Russian military components and Moscow’s use in theater are considered to be the most important .
 Russia’s use of military coercion in Crimea appear to some observers as ‘hybrid’ was the lack of a combat response from Kyiv . It was likely reflecting Russian foreknowledge of Ukrainian capabilities and readiness levels rooted in Russia's penetration of Ukrainian intelligence .
 Major rebel successes in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts were achieved using occasional Russian combined-arms operations . Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine was used to porting local rebels .
 Moscow kept Western governments and Kyiv guessing as to the nature of its tactics and overall strategic aims . Moscow used a range of measures to instigate, supply, train and equip local separatists .
 Moscow's operation to destabilize southeastern Ukraine involves analysis of tactical tools used to achieve these ends. Establishing how Moscow conducted its evolving operation.
 In the second phase in January 2015, the ill-fated Ukrainian government effort to take Donetsk airport was followed by significant rebel advances to the fall of Debaltseve in February 2015 .
 Both ceasefires proved to be shaky, with scepticism among Russian experts that Minsk Two could be implemented in full .
In support of Moscow’s implied strategic threat of using larger-scale military power in southeastern Ukraine, there were also intermittent joint military exercises, which appeared to rehearse a ‘peacekeeping’ intervention in a neighboring country .
 This might have been used by Moscow on legal grounds in tenns of protecting Russian-speaking civilians in Ukraine .
 Nerushimoye Bratstvo-2014 in October and Vzaimodeystviye-2014 tested combat and peacekeeping skills .
 The CSTO exercise in Kazakhstan used a scenario based on rehearsing intervention in a neighboring country . The scenario was similar to events in Ukraine, with close similarity to events.
 VDV commander, Colonel-General Vladimir Shamanov, said the V DV should expect to deploy beyond Russia’s borders .
 The focus of the Ukraine crisis shifted from Crimea to southeastern Ukraine in spring 2014 . Many commentators interpreted it as a new Russian ‘hybrid warfare’ approach to conflict .
 The concept lacks definition, remains alien to Russian military theory and doctrine . It fails to serve as an explanatory model for Russia's mix of hard and soft power in Ukraine .
 The battle of Ilovaysk in August 2014 and rebel advances in January-February 2015 were two of the most critical points . It was old-style Russian-led combined-arms force that propelled these rebel advances .
 Russian military training provided to rebel forces in southeastern Ukraine was for manoeuvre warfare . Russia's Use of Military Power in Ukraine used ‘hybrid warfare’ approaches .
 The BTG is a superior manoeuvre force in the field compared with Ukrainian deployments of battalions . Russia's military trainers passed the BTG to their rebel trainees .
 The Russian military and security structures were under development in Russia . It was quite simply old-style combined-arms operations that secured key advances during the campaign .
 Poroshenko over-relying on possible foreign aid, repeatedly failed to appreciate the buoyant mood in the Russian Armed Forces and Putin’s will to use military coercion .
 The dangers of conflict escalation frequently reappeared, but with Moscow holding all the cards . The dangers are often reappeared.
 Moscow consistently used the threat of conflict escalation in the period by staging ‘snap inspections’ of its conventional Anned Forces throughout the Russian Federation . Moscow also sustained force build-ups in proximity to the Ukrainian border .
 It also stepped up tactical and strategic level military exercises in ways that might be interpreted by other actors as preparations for a larger-scale military intervention in Ukraine .
 This was frequently combined with exercises of nuclear forces and strategic bomber flights close to NATO airspace . This was a signal to other actors to stay out of the conflict .
 NATO and Kyiv estimates of the numbers of Russian troops participating in the conflict varied . It seems that the surges and variance in regular troop numbers during critical periods were relatively modest .
 Russia’s sudden discovery and use of ‘hybrid warfare’ tactics in southeastern Ukraine stemmed from Moscow utilizing a broad range of soft and hard power approaches . NATO considered to be below the threshold of Article Five were it to be replicated against an Alliance member .
 Moscow questioned the legitimacy of the government in Kyiv, yet recognizing it on numerous occasions . It pursued a broad mixture of diplomatic, economic, political, informational and military mechanisms .
 Moscow was also involved at an early stage in fomenting rebellion in Ukraine’s east and contrary to its own laws on mercenary activity .
 Moscow supported the rebels with materiel, deploying some Russian Ground Forces, and maintaining higher-readiness forces close to the Ukrainian border . The first Russian aid convoy to Donbas in August 2014, and inserting moderate numbers of Russian troops, was triggered during the first Russian
 The humanitarian aid convoys also represented psychological operations to achieve limited political and strategic ends with minimal forces . The convoys were also represented by psychological operations .
 The threat to deploy Russian ‘peacekeepers’ remained on the table . In real terms, the threat was far more effective in destabilizing Ukraine than any alleged use of ‘hybrid’ techniques .
 Moscow has increased the number of its regular troops involved in supporting rebels in the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic campaigns in August 2014 .
 Moscow added the motif of sending ‘humanitarian aid convoys,’ in what many saw as a fresh breach of Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 Despite official denials, there was strong evidence of direct Russian military participation in the conflict zone, as well as materiel support from weapons systems and hardware .
 The rebel forces' organizational structure and individual makeup of the rebel forces generated considerable uncertainty about the precise objectives of such advances . Yet, the organizational structure of the rebels is unclear .
Speculation about the possible targets for the rebels centered upon Mariupol in order to create this land link . Ukrainian forces locally to open a second re-supply route directly from the Russian Federation .
 The Kremlin placed ‘plausible deniability’ at the heart of its use of military power in Ukraine .
 Novaya Gazeta ‘identified’ a senior Russian general in Debaltseve, which resulted in Russian media trying to quickly explain or dismiss his presence there .
 Lieutenant-General Aleksandr Lentsov had slipped from public view in late 2014 . Lentsov was the former deputy commander of the Airborne Forces .
 Russian media reported on February 19, that a man ‘resembling’ Lentsov had ‘appeared’ in Debaltseve .
 General Lentsov appeared in video footage taken in the town on February 18 . He was filmed in February 18.
 Novaya Gazeta editor-in-chief, Dmitry Muratov, told Ekho Moskvy. To us, he looks like Lentsov, he said .
 No-one appeared to question why Moscow would nominate such a high ranking officer and deputy commander of the Ground Forces for such a role .
 General Lentsov was replaced in the JCCC in mid-December by Major-General Aleksandr Vyaznikov, deputy commander of the VDV forces for peacekeeping operations .
 General Lenstov’s continued presence in the conflict zone in January-February 2015 may well indicate a dual hatted role . This could have shifted to the latter as operations intensified to take Debaltseve .
 The SMM was informed that the Russian military representatives were withdrawing north to Soledar, which also coincided with an intensification of the rebel offensive on Debaltseve .
 The wellconducted encirclement of Debaltseve also implies the presence of an operational HQ for planning and logistics .
 NATO again strongly condemned Moscow’s active role in the conflict in January 2015 . The rebel seizure of Donetsk airport followed months of fighting and an upsurge in clashes .
 Russian military systems within the conflict zone offer clearest evidence of direct Russian support .
 Moscow’s intervention in Ukraine in February 2014 made extensive use of ‘plausible deniability’ Since then, its military operations have made use of 'plausibleDeniability'
 An article in late January 2015 in Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye by its editor Oleg Odnokolenko presented views on the conflict .
 Western intelligence agencies, NATO, and even local eyewitnesses, noted the presence of Russian-manufactured and defense ministry-owned weapons .
 In any conflict situation there are competing claims, counter-claims, rumors and propaganda that generate an atmosphere of confused information/disinformation . Of course, in any conflict situations there are conflicting claims,counter-claiming, rumors, and propaganda .
 Some Russian specialists have talked to media outlets in detail in an effort to respond to what Moscow views as hyperbolic claims made by Kyiv . The claims have been made about the level of Russian involvement in the conflict .
 In March 2015, an anonymous analyst in the Russian General Staff, denoted as ‘a specialist in battle management analysis,’ commented at length to Novaya Gazeta . Ukraine’s defense ministry.
 General Staff analyst tried to rebut reports of direct contact between Ukrainian journalists and serving member of Russia’s Armed Forces .
 The commander of the smallest subunit gave his affiliation on the air, if only even the company number . In 34 years of service, I know of not one instance where the commander came up in communications with the enemy .
 Some key examples offer glimpses into the flow of Russian weaponry and hardware across the border . In the following analysis, some key examples are considered to offer glimpse into Russian weaponry .
 In April 2014, as separatists launched early operations in Donbas, weapons and equipment appear to have been Soviet relics . In April 2013, separatists launched operations in the city of Donbas .
 As the conflict advanced so too did the level of input from Russia’s military inventory .
 The 2B26 Grads mounted on KAMAZ-5350, in the Russian military inventory, were observed in Donetsk in late January 2015 .
Footage shows two Pantsir-Sl truck-mounted anti-aircraft and surface-to-air missile systems . Also, in late January 2015, footage emerged in rebel-held town of Shakhtarsk .
 On September 3, 2014 locals witnessed a convoy of 25 combat vehicles in Luhansk oblast .
 The convoy included a BTR-80, two main T-72B3 battle tanks, as well as three ‘Strela-10’ SPGs, mounted on MT-LB tracked vehicles .
 Russian T-72B3 tanks were destroyed near Starobeshevo in September 2014 . In December 2014, an armored convoy of 20 units passed through Luhansk including six tanks identified as T- 72B3s .
 There is also reliable reporting on the presence of sophisticated Russian military EW systems in southeastern Ukraine . There are also reliable reports of Russian militaryEW systems in the region .
 The system was displayed to representatives from the OSCE in Donetsk in January 2015 . This system was shown to representatives in Donetsk .
 The Aistenok detects mortar firing positions at up to 5 km and provides trajectory-based artillery fire adjustment up to 15 km .
 Numerous different lightly annored vehicles of Russian resonance were identified in Donbas . Many different lightly-annored vehicles were identified .
 Approximately ten of these vehicles appeared in Vesti TV footage of ‘regular field training’ on December 30, 2014 .
 The four-wheel-drive GAZ-3937 Vodnik was seen in local combat operations on January 10, 2015 .
 The platform has been exported from Russia, but none of the contracts included Ukraine . This platform has also been exported to Russia .
 On February 10, 2015, a convoy of Russian vehicles, including three BPM-97s, was also identified in Luhansk . The convoy includes three vehicles from Russia .
 Tigr-Ms (modem light armored vehicles) have been witnessed in a convoy passing through Ukrainian territory on their way to Luhansk .
 NATO repeatedly alluded to Russia's use of military systems in Ukraine . Some of the smaller arms in use also implicate Moscow in the conflict .
 In December 2014, Ukrainian separatists were reportedly using the KSVK/ASVK Kord sniper rifle, part of the 12. mm 6S8Kord sniper system .
 The Kord entered use in the Russian military in mid-2013, designed for action against lightly armored and non-armored vehicles . Up to 1,500 Ukrainian troops seized examples of these weapons at Donetsk airport on January 14, 2015 .
Footage of Donetsk separatists in January 2015 reveals the silent and flameless 9-inm AS Val assault rifle . Russian Special Forces and the Russian Interior Ministry Troops used the rifle .
Russia's military inventory includes modem and advanced weapons systems and equipment . These weapons systems are not only come from the Russian military inventory but are modem, advanced and modem .
 Russian military weapons systems and hardware identified in southeastern Ukraine demonstrate direct support for the rebels . Russian military service personnel use these assets, train separatists in their use and also to maintain, repair and even supply fuel and spare parts .
 Moscow became a much more cohesive military structure with training and assistance from Moscow .
 DPR/FPR forces more closely mirrored the brigade-based structure of the Russian Armed Forces . By February 2015, DPR/ FPR forces were more closely mirroring the Russian armed forces' structure .
 Often the type of military equipment supplied to the separatists, therefore, demanded experienced and well-trained Russian contract personnel in order to use .
 Moscow was introducing specialist sniper companies into the table of organization and equipment in 2011 . Since 2011, Moscow has introduced sniper companies to the table.
 The presence of Russian weapons systems in southeastern Ukraine is also acknowledged in the February 12, 2015 Minsk Two agreement .
 Many Russian systems are sophisticated and way beyond the capacity of inadequately experienced separatists . A significant proportion of this hardware demands specialist military training and can't be operated properly by amateurs .
 Russian kontraktniki from various branches of Russia’s Armed Forces, acting in at least training, guidance and mentoring roles to maximize use of such systems and equipment .
 In January 2015, President Poroshenko claimed there were around 9,000 Russian troops in eastern Ukraine . NATO estimates were somewhat lower, but no more than a brigade-strength in total .
 By early March 2015, NATO estimated up to 12,000 Russian troops were involved . German intelligence told Der Spiegel that the numbers were much lower .
Kontraktniki military specialists were covertly deployed from units in the VDV and Ground Forces and combat support units such as artillery brigades, but in relatively modest numbers .
 Artillery fire from Russian territory into the conflict zone was sporadically detected . Actual artillery support during combined-arms operations likely involved direct deployment of units in theater .
 Moscow tightened its grip over which systems were deployed and how they were used . For example, the SA-11 ‘Buk’ SAM system was widely attributed to the use of MH17 on July 17, 2014 .
 The need for ‘plausible deniability’ restricted the available military options, according to the Pentagon .
 Moscow could not deploy the Russian Air Force to keep the Ukrainian Air Force from entering the conflict and gaining control of airspace . Thus, Moscow could no longer deploy the Russia Air Force.
 The rebels and Russian regular troops required constant access to and training in the use of portable and more sophisticated air defense systems .
 Moscow also effectively field-tested new or modernized weapons systems or equipment in Ukraine .
 The Russian military used the Ukraine conflict to test new systems, possibly even to assess how these may perfonn against NATO forces .
There are no publicly available reliable figures for the total number of Russian military casualties in Ukraine . There are no public figures.
 In the early stages of the conflict in southeastern Ukraine in the spring of 2014, ‘plausible deniability’ continued as the sine qua non of the operations . ‘Plausible deniable’ continues in the early years of the war .
 In late May 2014, reports emerged of the discrete funerals of Russian military personnel killed in the conflict zone .
 Russian military personnel in Ukraine have been reported to have been killed in Ukraine . The official narrative has been modified since the initial reports of casualties . Moscow has maintained that Moscow had not ordered their deployment .
Soldiers going to the conflict during their ‘vacation’ or to VDV servicemen becoming ‘lost’ in the combat zone . These explanations varied from soldiers going to conflict during ‘Vacation,’ to soldiers becoming �
 Russian social media including Vkontakte (Russian equivalent of Facebook) were actively reporting on the unofficial fatalities of Russian military personnel in southeastern Ukraine .
 Some Russian TV channels reported on these secret burials, such as on the funeral of a VDV soldier in late August 2014 . Some still use the official narrative that he was only there on ‘leave,’ from his unit .
 Similar projects have been launched to publicise the plight of Russian military families struggling to gain recognition for their familial losses in combat .
 The Kremlin pursued the line in public of ‘deniability,’ most Russian media including television 34 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine channels maintained a near eerie silence on this aspect of the Ukraine conflict .
 Social media is trying to piece together the numbers and identifies of Russian military personnel missing or killed in action .
 Admittedly this offers only a partial insight into these issues, and cannot be relied upon to reveal anything near a complete picture. Admittedly, this offer only apartial insight into the issues .
 Airborne: BTG/CTG of the 56th Air Assault Brigade, Volgograd . BTG 76th Division, Pskov, Ivanovo, BTG 98th Division. BTG 247th Regiment of 7th Regiment, Novorossiysk;
 Company Tactical Groups and Saboteur-Reconnaissance Teams of the Main Intelligence Directorate . 10th Spetsnaz Brigade, Molkino, Krasnodar Kray, 22nd SpetsNaz Brigade. 100th Experimental Reconnaissance Brigade, Mozdok, North
 The table and its contents by no means offer an exhaustive account of the Russian military personnel and Russian units involved in the Donbas conflict . The table is not exhaustive, but it offers a detailed account of what happened .
 It illustrates the unit types and levels of Russian military deployment in the theater of operations . However, it shows the unit type and level of Russian forces in the military .
 A number of observations can be made concerning the broader picture of Russia’s use of military power in Ukraine .
 Russian servicemen are being deployed from BTGs, including Motorized Rifle Brigades, Ta nk Brigades and with combat support from Artillery Brigades .
 The elite Airborne Forces were heavily involved with personnel deployed from several key VDV fonnations . The elite air force was heavily involved in the deployment of personnel .
 Russian GRU Spetsnaz also featured, and FSB ‘Alpha’ and ‘Vympel’ units .
Russian military personnel appear to have supported the use of advanced military weapons systems and hardware . Russian military personnel are demanding the deployment of kontraktn ik i from among VDV, the Ground Forces and other supporting units .
 It is highly likely that entire artillery battalions were deployed in theater to support rebel operations . It's highly likely.
 VDV personnel seem to feature more among the fatalities than other branches and arms of service . Perhaps reflecting their use in theater as lightly armed combat infantry .
 GRU Spetsnaz most likely aiding and abetting the separatists by carrying out or training locals in sabotage, reconnaissance and intelligence gathering .
 Data illustrates how different were the Russian military operations in southeastern Ukraine in contrast to the earlier relatively smooth experience of the operation in Crimea .
 The author's conclusion is that the operational environment in each case not only differed, but served to shape the nature and options in Moscow’s use of military force .
 Neither of these operations were driven by innovative concepts such as ‘hybrid warfare,’ or other novelties, but simply shaped by the unique local circumstances involved .
 Crimea and Southeastern Ukraine Historically, Russia does not engage in military operations without extensive preparation of the battlefield . Crimea and Southeastern Ukraine Historically, Russian military operations have been conducted without preparation .
Black Sea Fleet HQ in Crimea has been linked to Moscow since the 1990s . It is likely to have been updated following the Orange Revolution in Kyiv in 2004 .
 Contingency plans do not equate to a ‘pre-determined’ intention to act aggressively, says the author .
 As the crisis in Ukraine developed it is entirely plausible that diplomatic, legal and media campaigns were used in this context . It is part of a wider campaign to support military/security operations in Ukraine .
 Russian ‘reflexive control’ theory 96 as part of a deeper information campaign . The campaign aims to support the overall use of Russia’s military power in Ukraine .
 Moscow carefully conducted operations in both theaters in Crimea and Donetsk/Luhansk . This complex operational environment, distinct in Crimea, resulted in Moscow carefully conducting operations .
 Moscow’s options and actions were therefore shaped by the unique circumstances of the differing operational environments in Crimea and Donbas, and the same methods could not be applied to each theater .
 Moscow’s efforts to prepare military operations in each case involved 10 focused on reflexive control, designed to influence the enemy and gamer domestic support .
 Putin’s decision to authorize the use of Anned Force in Crimea and later ‘implausible deniability’ operations in southeastern Ukraine was steeped in caution and choosing options that were relatively low key .
Russian operations in these two distinctive theaters differed greatly, guided by the uniqueness of the operational environments . Russian operations in the two different theaters were guided by a unique environment .
 The Russian military was used more as a scalpel than sledgehammer in order to reduce the inherent risks of conflict escalation .
 Putin specifically ordered the use of GRU Spetsnaz, elite VDV units and marine infantry to Crimea under the guise of reinforcing Russia's military infrastructure .
 Russia's use of military power in Ukraine broke all inter40 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine national standards and conventions . It flouted the sovereignty of its neighbour, challenged European security and effectively marked the end of the post-Cold War international security system .
 Putin chose to protect the security of the Russian state by replaying the Kosovo crisis in reverse . The Kosovo crisis occurred during a general worsening in US-Russia relations .
 The consequences of which will take generations to fully understand or heal the current divides. The consequences will take decades to fully understanding or heal current divides .
Experts on sudden use of ‘hybrid’ warfare by the Russian Armed Forces traced to an article by the Chief of the General Staff in February 2014 .
 The article suggests possible ‘pre-planning’ mistranslates predvidenii as ‘prediction’ or ‘anticipation’ and underestimates the inherent limit on foresight in military affairs or refer to the specific circumstances which led the Kremlin
 Jacob W Kipp highlights the importance of these articles as well as helping to understand how alien the ‘hybrid’ concept is to the Russian Armed Forces .
 Putin appeared to enjoy the use of the term ‘polite people’ in reference to the first sightings in Crimea of Russian military forces without insignia moving to secure Ukrainian bases .
Russia must stop U.S. expansion in Ukraine, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Sergei Karaganov, “Flow to Avoid a Second Afghanistan,’s ‘Flow to avoid a second Afghanistan’ is a Russian author .
 Order of the President of the Russian Federation of 17.03. 2014 N° 63-p ‘On the signing of the Treaty between the Russian federation and the Republic of Crimea on the adoption of the Russia Federation Republic of Ukraine and the formation of the Russians new subjects’
 A Rude Awakening: Ramifications of Russian Aggression Towards Ukraine, FOI: Stockholm .
 Such approaches have long been identified by specialists on the Soviet and Russian militaries . Such approaches are often used in Russia and Russia .
 Author interviews with SMEs, Rome, Rome and Washington .
 The Military Operation for Crimea is underway in Crimea . It is the first time Crimea has been involved in a military operation .
 The Russian Army realized that it needed to increase its ability to respond and gain the initiative through agility, mobility, and independent action over a much larger area . The Russian army realized that the army needed to improve its ability.
This led to reforming motorized rifle battalions and companies into mobile detachment combat groups . This led to adding artillery, tanks, and engineers to the ranks of motorized rifles and rifles .
 Helicopter gunship support complemented the formation by adding long-range, accurate fires to neutralize opposing forces . Helicopter gunners also added long- range, accurate fire fires toneutralize opposition .
 Among the many volunteers that arrived in Donbas were small numbers of Kazan Tatars . Among the ethnic diversity of many volunteers were small number of Kazans .
 A common theme was a sense of identifying with rhetoric and appeal around the nationalist cause of Novorossiya .
 In December 2014, rebels posted video footage of their field tank training in southeastern Ukraine . The footage also clearly revealed the participation of modem Russian MRAPs .
 One Russian report indicated ways in which ‘volunteers’ were recruited in Russia and sent to Ukraine, for $1,000 to $4,000 per month .
 As many as 5,000 volunteers were fighting in Donbas, it is unclear as to the ultimate source of such money .
Antiterrorist units of the Strategic Rocket Forces are all equipped with this asset . Antiterrorists are also equipped with the asset .
 One example of Russian kontraktniki wounded in combat and treated in hospital emerged in early March 2015 . One example was one example of Russia's most recent war-torn country .
 A Russian kontraktniki was treated in a hospital in Donetsk for severe facial and arm bums . He is from the 5th Ta nk Brigade in Central Military District .
 During an interview he spoke of extensive training prior to his deployment . He later sustained severe injury on February 8, 2015 .
 Russian military personnel need to apply to secure official permission to go on leave . They must disclose details as to the destination of their leave of absence and gain approval of their commanders .
 Elena Vasilieva created a Facebook page using the phrase Gruz 200, sharing details on Russian soldiers killed or missing in Ukraine .
 Most fatalities listed in Russian social media appear to be service personnel from VDV. Ground Forces with lesser numbers from GRU Spetsnaz .
 The Daily Discussion is a weekly feature on CNN.com's iReport.com.com . This week, we look at the latest trending news stories .
 This goal is often accomplished by the use of disinformation, camouflage, or some other stratagem . This goal has been used by disinformation, camouflaging, or other strategies .
This principle can be used against either human-mental or computer-based decision-making processors . This principle can also be used by humans or computers .
 The theory is similar to the idea of perception management, except that it attempts to control more than manage a subject . The theory has been compared to the concept of control over the subject .
 Putin compared Crimea's ‘secession’ from Ukraine to Kosovo’s secession from Serbia .