 The conflict in Ukraine was created intentionally and follows "unprofessional actions" by the West, Russian President Vladimir Putin said .
 The West has been accusing Russia of meddling in Ukraine's internal affairs and supporting independence fighters in the regions of Donetsk and Lugansk . Kiev launched a special military operation in April, 2014 .
 The United States and the European Union have criticized Moscow over the reunification of Crimea with Russia in March, 2014 . The U.S. and the EU have also criticized Moscow for its actions .
 96 percent of Crimean residents voted for rejoining Russia at a referendum following a declaration of independence from Ukraine . Russia has repeatedly stressed that it is not involved in the situation in Ukraine .
 Russia has had to deal with a range of sanctions imposed against it by the West over the Ukrainian crisis . Russia has been hit by sanctions over the Ukraine crisis .
 Russia has introduced a one-year food ban against countries that have introduced anti-Russia sanctions . In response to the restrictive measures Russia has also introduced a food ban .
 The Ukrainian crisis started in 2014 when pro-EU forces ousted Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych after he did not sign an association agreement with the European Union .
 Kiev proposed that the country join NATO in recent months, and drop its non-aligned status . It was proposed that it would be the first time the country had joined NATO .
 Crimea's residents voted to rejoin Russia while people in Donetsk and Lugansk regions opted for independence . Russian President also said that concerns over a possible repetition of the Crimean scenario are ungrounded .
 Donetsk and Lugansk regions have demanded sovereignty from Ukraine as they refuse to recognize the new Kiev government . Putin emphasized that, in contrast to Crimea residents, people in Ukraine's Donetsk, Lugansk region have demanding sovereignty .
 Donetsk and Lugansk residents held independence referendums in May, 2014 . Residents of Donetsk, Lugansk, Donetsk and Donetsk held independence referendum .
Self-proclaimed people's republics of Donetsk and Lugansk were established . As a result, the self-proclaimed republics were established.
 DPR and LPR fighters have been countering attacks from Kiev forces . Kiev forces launched a special military operation against residents of southeast Ukraine in April, 2014 .
"These issues of this kind can only be resolved by peaceful means," Putin stressed . "These issues, issues of these kind canonly be resolved," he said .
 Putin noted that Russia is doing everything possible to influence independence supporters in Ukraine's southeast . He called on its EU and U.S. partners to make the same effort in relation to Kiev .
 Our European and U.S. partners should exert influence on the current Kiev administration, according to the U.N. European and United States.
 Putin also stressed that the European Union could and should provide more substantial funds to crisis-hit Ukraine . Putin stressed that EU could provide more funds to Ukraine .
 "I believe that the European Union could surely provide greater financial assistance to Ukraine," the Russian president stressed . "We are talking about what can or must be done," he said .
 The deep political crisis in Ukraine has had a devastating impact on the country's economy and finances . It has pushed the former Soviet republic to the brink of a default .