 Once communism as an ideology officially ended, over 25 million Russian minorities got stranded behind the borders of Russia in countries such as Estonia, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Ukraine, and more .
 The issue of minorities was important at the time of the Munich Agreement in 1938 . The Sudetenland in western Czechoslovakia had over 3 million people of German origin .
 Hitler used ethnicity to justify his takeover of this territory within another sovereign country . Hitler had used ethnicity as a justification for his takeover .
 Russia could have used the Russian minority issue after the Cold War to reclaim territory from surrounding states . However, it did not .
 The former Yugoslav republics fell amid bloody civil wars and ethnic hatred . This could not be said about the former Yugoslav Republics which fell amid Bloody civil wars .
 Slobodan Milosevich was adamant about holding Yugoslavia together and using ethnicity as a way to galvanize the population for violence . Boris Yeltsin at the time did not .
 The dog did bark in Yugoslavia, but in the case of the Soviet Union, it did not . In other words, the dog didn't bark in the cases of Yugoslavia .
 Vladimir Putin used the issue of the protection of the Russian minority to move into Ukraine and illegally annex the Crimea . Putin said that this move followed international rules .
 At the time, his rhetoric indicated that the Russian speakers in Ukraine needed protection from right wing extremists who were mistreating people . The rights of Russians were largely protected .
 In the 14 former Soviet republics where Russians reside, they vary a great deal with respect to group size, lifestyle, lifestyle and the extent of knowledge of the titular language .
 Overall, Russians in the surrounding states are not a cohesive group . In some cases, their tie to Russia is not strong .
 In the past, they often did not identify themselves strongly with Russia . They did not consider Russia as their homeland .
 With the leadership of President Vladimir Putin this has changed, but to what extent, we don't know for sure .
 The Russian speakers' potential level of support toward Russia is very complex because of the country's history and the divided nature of allegiances that are visible on a regional basis .
 Ukraine is divided between the mostly Ukrainian speaking western region and the mainly Russian-speaking eastern region . The mostly Ukrainian-speaking western region is mostly Russian.
 What complicates this situation, however, is that determining who is ethnically Russian does not always coincide with who is a Russian speaker .
 Ethnicity in the Ukrainian census is shown by self-identification and we know that ethnicity is malleable according to theoretical literature .
 The majority of Russian speakers are located in the eastern part of the country, in the Donbass area .
 While they are Russian speakers, most identify themselves as Ukrainian . However, while they are Ukrainian, they are not Russian speakers .
 In Donetsk ethnic Ukrainians make up 56. %, and ethnic Russians 38. % of the population .
 The numbers are similar for Luhansk, and in both cases, ethnic Ukrainians are a majority . In both cases. The numbers of ethnic Ukrainians is similar to those of Luhans .
 A large number of the population still consider themselves Ukrainian, despite the fact that they live in the Donbass .
 Ukraine developed differently with respect to their political administration and the extent to which nationalist sentiments were allowed to surface . Second, historically Ukraine developed different withrespect to its political administration. Third, Ukraine developed with respect to their political administration .
 From the 1860s, western Ukraine was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, while Eastern Ukraine fell under the rule of the Russian Empire .
 This impacted the extent of political participation as well as the expression of nationalist sentiment . This impacted how Ukrainian one felt or identified .
People in the west primarily exhibiting a negative attitude toward Russia, while the east was less so . People in the east are less so, according to the author .
 The east is entirely under the spell of Russia, while the west is Ukrainian nationalist . Still, it would be easy to jump to the conclusion that the east is completely under Russia .
 President Putin is accomplishing the exact opposite of what he intended to when he started this invasion . Putin should be aware that the Russian minority is not entirely on his side .
 Anna Batta is an Associate Professor of International Security Studies at Air War College . She is the Course Director for the Global Security Studies course in the Department of international Security Studies .
 Batta’s teaching and research interests include Russian politics and foreign policy, Eastern European politics, and politics of authoritarian states .
 Secession, Integration, and Homeland, was published in December 2021 with Routledge .
 Some of these former Soviet republics had a sizeable Russophone population, such as Ukraine and Latvia . Others did not .
 In 1989, the total of Russian speakers in the 14 republics was 25,289,000 . In 1989 before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the number of speakers in Russia was 25.
 Titular language refers to the language of the seceded states, such as Latvian, Estonian, Georgian, Kyrgyz .
 The distinction is much more nuanced in the entire country given the ethno-linguistic makeup by various regions . The difference is more nuanced than in other countries .