 Read our expert’s summary, then the referenced articles very carefully . Read our anonymous expert's summary, and then the references are carefully read .
 It reminds me of the massacre in Christ’s Church, where neo-Nazis symbols were worn . Russian neo-Nazi symbols are worn in the church .
 The new ‘improved’ Russia of Putin appears incidental to the new 'improved' Russia of Vladimir Putin .
 SECDEF and Chairman of the JCS testify to SASC, more on SACEUR testimony . SECDEF, Chairman of JCS testified to the SASC .
 USAF sorties a Buff from RAF Fairford over the Baltic, Russians get very excited . USAF sortie a Buff.
 ethnic Russians in former Soviet republics who are descendants from mixed marriages with non-Russians are now no longer allowed to migrate to Russia . Only “pure Russians’ are now permitted to enter Russia to live there as Russian nationals .
 Muscovy MoD would like a million children enrolled in the Yunarmia by 2020 . The country would like to have one million children in the region by 2020.
 EU very unhappy with Muscovian proxy Orban, and Kazakhstan genocide documentary now available on Youtube . The documentary is a documentary about the genocide in Kazakhstan .
 The 5th anniversary of the invasion of Crimea has produced a great many public statements . The Crimea invasion has produced many statements .
 U.S. increases the number of Island class CG cutters for Ukraine to four hulls .
 Crimea water crisis is far worse than earlier suggested and well detailed in Makarenko’s analysis . Crimea water Crisis is far better than previous suggested, according to the analysis .
 Crimean residents put up leaflets calling for the votes to be withdrawn . U.S. labels the 2014 fake referendum as a sham .
 In Russia, support for Krymnash collapses from 67 percent to 39 percent . A majority of Russians now think it was a bad idea .
 The Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2020 and the Future Years Defense Program will be reviewed . The Department of Defense budget posture is being reviewed by the Senate .
 The Pentagon believes that the modernization of the armed forces of China and Russia allows them to act quickly to put the U.S. in front of a fait accompli .
 Russian military strategists are seriously studying the possibility of using nuclear weapons in limited military conflicts, a senior U.S. general warned .
 The Pentagon plans to modernize U.S. nuclear forces, taking into account the new threats . In a statement, he refuted the suggestion that Russia is developing such weapons solely in order to cause alarm .
 Russia cannot compete with the U.S. military in a long conflict with the use of conventional weapons, officials say . The Pentagon believes Russia is thinking about using nuclear weapons for quick victories over weaker neighbors .
 Both countries are seeking to lead the U.S. to a difficult dilemma . Both countries want to find a solution to their problems .
 Russia supports this strategy with “active stocks consisting of approximately 2,000” weapon systems, Skaparotti said . Russia supports the strategy with a “non-strategic’s” nuclear weapons .
 A U.S. B-52H Stratofortress large-payload multirole strategic bomber aircraft practiced a mock attack on a Russian naval base in the Baltic Sea region .
 A strategic bomber approached to within 99 miles of the border with the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad on Friday .
 The B-52 is one of the oldest airframes that the Air Force still operates . The Air Force is still using the airframes .
 The Stratofortress bombers have been in every conflict since the Vietnam War . The bombers have also been involved in the conflict in Vietnam .
 B-52s have been modified for low-level flight, conventional bombing, extended-range flights and transport of improved defensive and offensive equipment . ballistic and cruise missiles can be launched hundreds of miles from targets .
 B-52H Stratofortress is capable of carrying and launching nuclear weapons . It is also able to carry and launch nuclear weapons.
 The bomber can fly at high subsonic speeds at up to 50,000 feet . It can be armed with nuclear-tipped cruise missiles or a conventional payload of up to 70,000 pounds .
 The B-52H bombers currently in service were built between 1961 and 1963 . They are expected to fly until 2040 .
 The Air Force will replace them with the new B-21 Raider bomber, currently under development . The new bomber will be the first of its kind .
 A U.S. B-52H Stratofortress multirole bomber aircraft flew over the Baltic Sea . It approached to within 93 miles of Russia’s border .
 According to official reports, a B-52 plane was last spotted over the Baltic Sea in 2017 .
 A U.S. B-52H Stratofortress large-payload multirole bomber aircraft practiced a mock attack on a Russian naval base in the Baltic Sea region .
 Government officials and executives from the United States and Europe square off in tense debates over the Nord Stream 2 pipeline at a major energy conference .
 Some of the tensest moments at a major energy conference in Houston were over a Russian-German natural gas pipeline .
 The debates this week show that Germans and their counterparts in the U.S. and Poland cannot even agree on why the line is being built .
 Berlin sees Nord Stream 2 as a purely economic project, while its opponents see it as a tool of Russian influence over Europe .
 Romania is looking to acquire additional F-16 fighter jets to replace its ageing MiG-21 Lancer fighter aircraft . National Defense Minister Gabriel Les said the country is looking for more fighter jets .
 The Fortele Aeriene ale Romaniei started the procedure for acquiring more F-16 Fighting Falcon fighter aircraft to replace the last MiG-21 Lancer aircraft .
 It is reported that the air force expressed a need for 36 F-16 Fighting Falcons . The air force is said to be in need for a 36-F-16.
 To date, Romania bought a total of 12 F-16 Block 15 Mid-Life Upgrade fighter jets from Portugal . The first six jets were delivered in late September .
 The Romanian Air Force commenced flying Air Policing missions under Romanian command with the Baza 86 Aeriana F-16s . Minister Gabriel El also reported that starting on 14 March 2019, the Romanian Air force commenced flying airpolicing missions .
 Romania will also conduct these kinds of missions under NATO command . The squadron will complete the NATO certification process .
 The Romanian Air Forces conducted this service with MIG aircraft, according to Gabriel Les .
 The Block 15 change feature larger horizontal stabilizers, an improved AN/APG-662 radar, and increased capacity for the underwing hardpoints .
 Russian immigration policy reflects and intensifies the increasing role of ethnicity in Russian life . Officials ever more often use ethnicity as a test to decide who is allowed into the country and who is not .
 In large measure, this reflects the impact of the large number of Ukrainians who fled to Russia in 2014-2015 . This is in large measure .
 Many Russians were happy to welcome them at first only to turn on them when the Ukrainians proved less ‘angelic’ and less grateful than Russians assumed they should be if they were to remain in Russia .
 The Russian government initially trumpeted its willingness to take in these people . But the Russian government generally ceased to be interested in them as soon as their propaganda value was exhausted .
 As a result, many have been forced into impossible situations within Russia or forced to leave . Many have had to leave Russia.
 Russia is increasingly closed to refugees, Gannushkina says . Moscow wants not just ethnic Russians but “’pure Russians,’” a much narrower category .
 Larisa Iosiashvili, her colleague at Civic Action. She gives as an example of this case of Larisa. She gave as a case of her colleague, her colleagues at Civic action .
 Her father, a Georgian, left the family early on and she knows no Georgian, speaking only Russian . She considers herself a Russian despite her name .
 Officials weren't even willing to give her a test when she sought to get Russian citizenship .
 She didn't discuss a saying the way they wanted, but that is because she is an ordinary person, not an alien. Maybe she didn’t discuss a say the way she wanted, she said .
 Russian officials can exclude anyone in this way, rights activist says . They can do so apparently in the name of ethnic “purity’ whatever they think that means, activist says.
 Rosstat's figures are for Russia's demographic problems in recent months, according to a blogger .
 The blogger, who posts under the screen name Burckina, compared Rosstat numbers for seven predominantly ethnic regions with the figures of the registration offices in these same oblasts .
 In every case, the decline in total population in January of this year was from 89,500 to 103,800 greater than according to the registration offices .
 Russian Federation's population decline is far steeper than Moscow is admitting . If the former figures are correct, then that means both the overall decline of the population and the decline in the number of ethnic Russians is far higher than Moscow admits .
 The population of the country is going to get smaller faster than Russian officials acknowledge . In many regions, that will change the ethnic balance against Moscow .
 Rosstat routinely falsifies numbers is commonly recognized . Rosstat has been especially inclined to do so after the withering criticism it received last year for being too negative .
 ZAGS figures should be treated with caution. But the comparison with ZAGs figures nonetheless should betreated with caution, according to CNN .
 ZAGS data in Russia are also prone to inaccuracies and especially to late reporting . ZAGs data in the Russian capital are prone to errors and errors .
 An oblast registration office did not include births in one month but listed them in the next . It might overstate a decline in population in the earlier month .
 The problem may be especially likely during January with the long winter holiday . The long winter holidays may be particularly difficult during January .
 The demographic decline of Russia is something very real and very likely far worse than anyone in or near the Kremlin wants to face . But at the same time, this comparison of figures is important as a reminder that Russian statistics and especially Rosstat statistics should be used with caution .
Only a few years ago, many analysts and commentators were pronouncing nations and nationalism as survivals of the past . Now, they say they would give way to civic identities under immigration and globalization .
 Dimitry Savvin says prediction of their demise was premature . But now it is obvious that the prediction was premature, he says .
 At the same time, their arrival provokes a new ethnic assertiveness among the host population .
Only those with a strong ethnic or ethno-confessional core will have a chance to survive, he says . His first argument is that “any nation is a political community, but in the future, only those in the basis of which there is a strong Ethnic
 The state on whose territory representatives of a nation are located will become one resource among many for those people . In some cases, it is not the most important .
 That unity, promoted and maintained by the rapid flow of information and people, will overwhelm the capacity of the state to control it .
 The situations of the Armenians and Kurds are especially instructive in that regard . The situations are particularly instructive for Armenians.
 The new nationalism will be based on securing representation not just in states but in broader institutions, giving it leverage over all the places where its representatives happen to find themselves .
 Those nations that are best represented in these institutions will be in the best position to survive and even flourish . Those nations with the best representation in these nations will have the best chance to survive .
 Historians see as their task as determining whether something happened or not and then explaining it .
 They care only about whether their image of the past is good or bad, something entirely different . It's not about whether they care about the past, it's about what they think .
 Other speakers elaborated on this theme and showed the ways in which it has pernicious influence on a wide variety of issues . Other speakers also elaborated on the theme .
 Sokolov for his part notes that the Russian economy has always been extensive rather than intensive, seizing new resources rather than developing those already has .
 The authorities aren't concerned about developing schools and laws but in destroying them if they get in the way of its unlimited access to resources .
 There are limits, including in the population’s assessment of Stalin, he suggests . It will be led far in any direction but there are limits to any direction, he says .
 The study of local history is based on local history and local history . The study is a study of the past's history .
 The current Russian government has done what it can to destroy such history, says Petrov . It encourages a diverse view of the Russian past and promotes a more honest one, Petrov continues .
 Russians have the sense that they are accidentally in any one place and may soon be shifted to another, Petrov concludes . The current powers that be in Russia want, he says .
 European Commission slams Google for what it says is a lack of action in fighting disinformation ahead of elections to the European Parliament in May .
 In October 2018, Twitter published a database of over 9 million tweets from Russian Internet Research Agency . The agency is believed to be a state-backed troll factory .
 Ukrainian think tank VoxUkraine identified more than 750,000 tweets related to Ukraine by keywords . VoxUkraine analyzed how the Russian troll factory has been working against Ukraine .
 In the separatist regions of eastern Ukraine, young people prepare to defend themselves and their nation .
 The European Union is determined to pursue the policy of non-recognition of the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia . It will continue imposing restrictive measures .
 The illegal restrictions to passage via the Kerch Strait have negative economic consequences for Ukraine's ports in the Sea of Azov and the whole region .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry has announced Moscow will respond to fresh sanction action by the European Union . The European Union has already taken action against Russia .
 President Petro Poroshenko congratulated the North Atlantic Alliance on its 70th anniversary . He promised to raise the issue of the Action Plan regarding Ukraine’s membership at the NATO summit in December 2019 .
 The letter of the head of state to NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg was published by the press service of Ukraine’s mission to NATO .
 The President assured that on the eve of the 70th anniversary of NATO he is proud that the partnership with Ukraine has become an important page in the history of the alliance .
 Ukraine highly appreciates the solidarity of the Alliance with Ukraine with Ukraine and the continued support of the country in the face of Russia’s aggression . According to him, Ukraine highly appreciate the solidarity with Ukraine .
 Ukraine remains a reliable partner of NATO in building our common and secure future, the president said .
 Russia will respond to new European Union sanctions without saying what action it would take . Russia's foreign ministry said on Saturday it would respond to the new sanctions .
 The Russian side said it would not leave this unfriendly action by the European Union unanswered . The European Union has said it will not leave the unfriendy action unanswered .
 Measures target Russian officials over Moscow’s actions against Ukraine, including 2018 naval clash in Kerch Strait . Measures target Russia's officials over Russia's actions.
 The U.S., Canada and European Union on Friday imposed financial sanctions on more than a dozen officials and entities accused of supporting Russia’s occupation of southeastern Ukraine .
 The United States designated six Russian individuals and eight entities in response to Russia’s continued and ongoing aggression in Ukraine . The U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control designated six Russians and eight others .
 The U.S. Treasury targets individuals and entities playing a role in Russia’s unjustified attacks on Ukrainian naval vessels in the Kerch Strait, the Treasury says . The United States Treasury says it also targets the backing of illegitimate Nov 11 elections in eastern Ukraine's Donbas .
 The U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control designated six Russian individuals and eight entities in response to Russia's continued and ongoing aggression in Ukraine .
 The United States, Canada and the European Union simultaneously announced the imposition of the Azov package of sanctions against Russia as a powerful transatlantic strike against its plans to occupy the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait .
 Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin has commented on the decisions of the European Union, the United States and Canada to impose sanctions in response to Russia's continued aggressive acts against Ukraine .
 The solidarity and unity of Ukraine’s friends and partners are the key to the effectiveness of sanctions against the Russian Federation, Klimkin said .
 The United States and the United Kingdom will never recognize the occupation of Crimea . The U.S. and the UK call on the world to thwart the legalization of the annexation of the peninsula by Russia .
 Five years ago today, Russia stage-managed a sham referendum in Crimea . Two days later, Russia illegally annexed the peninsula, the minister says .
 Crimea has become a bridgehead for the Russian armed forces striving to control the whole Black Sea region and thus to cement Russian influence in the wider area . Crimea has been the focus of Russia's efforts to cement its grip on the region .
 The United States Embassy in Ukraine has said the United States does not and will not recognize the Kremlin’s control of Crimea .
 Five years ago, Russia organized an illegitimate referendum on the annexation of Crimea . Russia organized the referendum on Crimea .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey has released a statement on the occasion of the 5th anniversary of the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation . It reiterates the support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Russia must release detained Ukrainian servicemen and return the vessels of the Ukrainian naval forces seized near the Kerch Strait in November last year . The vessels were seized by Ukraine's naval forces in November 2013 .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic says that the ongoing militarization of Russian-occupied Crimea represents a blatant breach of international law . The ministry says that Russia's military action in Crimea is a violation of the law .
 Since the occupation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, the fundamental human and civil rights of the Crimean Tatars have been violated . The rights of other ethnic and religious communities have also been violated.
 Ukraine proposes to include the issue of Crimea de-occupation in the Minsk negotiation process, Serhiy Kyslytsia said .
 Ukraine insists on Russia’s full implementation of the Minsk agreements . Ukraine proposes to include the issue of Crimea in the process .
 With restrictions on the movement of vessels, the canal bottom is growing shallow and silting up, the minister says .
 The Mariupol port remains one of the strategically important enterprises of the city . However, he said that despite the blockade of the Kerch Strait by the Russian Federation, it continues operating .
 Domestic financial resources could remain in ports. One of them is the use of domestic financial resources that could remain .
 The EU additional funds are an equally important financial resource, the minister said . The EU extra funds are also an important financialresource, he said .
 The Commander-in-Chief of the United NATO forces in Europe Curtis Scaparrotti stated that the United States intends to send two more Island-class boats to Ukraine .
 Congress wants to transfer funds to Kiev, primarily two ships, to start replenishing their Navy . "We have a good relationship with them, and now there is an increase in funding"
 Two Island class patrols boats transferred to Ukraine from the U.S. in September . They will arrive at the port of Odessa in July .
 In the summer of 2017, Ukrainian officials announced that the U.S. would send Island-class boats to Ukraine .
 It appears that many Crimeans with life under Russian occupation is becoming more vocal . Many Crimeans are unhappy with life in Russia.
 The Crimean city of Yalta was plastered with leaflets criticizing life in Russia and calling to “withdraw’s signatures in the sham referendum of 2014 . Russia held a referendum in March 2014 to legitimize its occupation of the Ukrainian peninsula .
 The user who originally posted the photos is now unavailable, being supposedly blocked .
 Photos of leaflets had by that time spread like wildfire in the internet .