 The prosecutor in the Yanukovych treason case, Ruslan Kravchenko, said he could neither confirm nor deny the participation of Chepiga-Boshirov in the ""evacuation" of the ex-president .
 He and his special forces unit arrived at the residence of Yanukovych in Mezhyhirya . He is in charge of the special forces.
 Former Russian journalist Sergey Kanev took part in a probe into the suspects in the Skripals case . He was transported from Crimea to Crimea and further to Russia .
 Alexey Dyumin, a former security guard of Russian President Vladimir Putin, also received the ""Hero of Russia"" award for the ""evacuation"" of Yanukovych from Ukraine .
"I also know that the people who later formed the backbone of Private Military Company Wagner also got awards for Yanukovych's evacuation," Kanev said . "I know that I also know" that the men who formed the company also got the awards .
 The journalist promised that he would publish a detailed investigation into the facts of Chepiga-Boshirov's participation in a special operation concerning the flight of Yanukovych from Ukraine .
 Yanukovych's lawyer, Alexander Goroshinsky, told Hromadske that he knew nothing about Russian special operations forces' involvement in the "evacuation" of Yanukovych .
 He also said he did know anyone with such names as Chepiga and Boshirov . He said he also knew anyone with names such as ChePiga. He did not know any of those names.
 "I haven't read all the materials, but in those which I have, I hasn't read anything," lawyer says .
 The prosecutor in the Yanukovych treason case, Ruslan Kravchenko, said he could neither confirm nor deny the participation of Chepiga-Boshirov in the "evacuation" of the ex-president . He said investigators were not aware who of the Russians had participated
 Chepiga was a highly decorated GRU officer with the ""Hero of Russia"" title for participation in the Chechen war and a certain ""peacekeeping mission"" in 2014 . The Russian invasion of Donbas, eastern Ukraine is probably the Russian invasion.