 The recent campaign to discredit and dismiss Valeria Hontareva appears to be based on speculation, rumor, fear-mongering, and open manipulation, and half-truths .
 MP Serhiy Taruta distributed the message at the annual meeting of the IMF in October in Washington .
 A number of articles appeared in public containing reasonable arguments “pro’ and “con,” and purely emotional rants . Within a few weeks, a considerable number of article appeared.
 All the sides have had their say, and it's time to analyze the arguments . Now that all the sides had their says, it’s time to analysis the arguments.
 After the Euromaidan and the Revolution of Dignity, a series of tectonic changes took place in the country’s economy . Most of them with negative consequences, most of them have negative consequences .
 Many of them are now being blamed on the NBU and its governor, Valeria Hontareva . The governor is also being blamed.
 Ukraine’s Constitution does make the National Bank responsible for the stability of the national currency . The latest decline affected absolutely all Ukrainians, without exception .
 The exchange rate is based on the interaction between supply and demand on the currency market . The exchange rates are based on a number of factors including supply, demand .
 The supply of dollars is determined by dollar earnings, primarily from export operations, and to a lesser extent from repaid credits .
 Ukraine’s exports plunged by 46% compared to 2013, and the country lost nearly U.S. $40 billion in annual dollar earnings .
 U.S. $12bn of that is the loss of exports to Russia and another $2-3bn losses to other CIS countries . Russia blocked their transit to the United States .
 The annexation of Crimea and the occupation of parts of Donbas cost the U.S. $5-6bn, and if we include the disruption of production links, this amount probably doubles .
 Half to two thirds of the loss of exports in the last three years is directly due to Moscow’s actions, says Hontareva .
Since 2014, prices for commodities have been falling on global markets . Since 2014, the United States has eaten up about $4-5bn of the remaining amount .
 World trends are not something the National Bank of Ukraine has a lot of influence over . World trends aren't something the bank has influence over.
 The country inherited a trade deficit of about $15.6bn from the Yanukovych regime . The hryvnia exchange rate was inflated even before the Euromaidan and needed to be adjusted downward .
 Ukraine suffered an unprecedented decline in exports and this meant that dollars were in short supply on the domestic money market . All told, Ukraine suffered a decline in export exports .
Panicky actions of contractors who were afraid of the war and of the losses that it would bring led to a steep rise in demand for hard currency .
 The only thing it might have done was to institute strict controls over the currency market . The currency market is now under strict control .
 Some quarters complained about controls and about their side effects . Some quarters blamed the central bank and Hontareva personally .
 Ukraine’s balance of payments crisis of the last three years is compared with other countries . It appears that it was not as bad as other countries, it appears .
 The Russian and Belarusian rubles collapsed by more given their initial trade surpluses and the size of the foreign exchange reserves of the Russian central bank .
 In developed countries, devaluations were relatively lower, but even their systems weren’t much more stable . In developed nations, devaluation was relatively lower.
 The devaluation of currencies in countries that went into unexpected default, such as Argentina in 2014 and Ukraine at the turn of the century, was more substantial than in the past .
 Ukraine was able to avoid a collapse in its currency because of the rapid response and negotiating skills of the Ukrainian team at the time . Some of whom were from the NBU, with foreign creditors.
 Over 1997-1999, the newly-minted hryvnia also devalued by two-thirds, going from UAH 1.76/USD to UAH 5.00/USD .
 The then-governor of the NBU, Viktor Yushchenko was appointed Premier at the end of 1999 . No one even considered blaming him for devaluation of the hryvnia .
 The NBU did what it could, which was to establish strict controls, increase the interest rate and so on . In short, with the national currency losing value for external reasons, the NBU does what it can .
 The government has been forced to print more money to finance government bonds . It managed to prevent a far worse situation from developing .
 In terms of exchange rate, there are two factors that can be laid at Hontareva’s feet . The exchange rate is the highest in the world .
 The first was artificially propping the rate prior to the Rada elections in October 2014 . The war in Donbas was going full-force when the war was goingfull-force .
 The second was specific statements that there would be ‘no further devaluations’ and that the dollar would “stop’ First it was UAH 12, then UAH 16, andthen UAH 20, then the dollar will ‘stop”
 Neither of these factors had much of an impact on the overall result of devaluation . But neither of the factors had a much of a impact on a devaluation.
 The NBU governor is also being blamed for the sharp rise in inflation . inflation is a direct consequence of the devaluation of the hryvnia . The proportion of imported goods, from medicine and clothing to fuels is high .
 Devaluation also affects the value of utilities, whose rates are set by the Cabinet .
 If hryvnia were stronger, rates would be lower, so blaming the Bank is simply wrong . If the Bank was wrong, it would be better to blame the Bank for lower rates .
 Inflation would continue to trample the wallets of Ukrainians . Without that, inflation would continue.
 The NBU simply did what it could in very difficult circumstances that it found itself . NBU just did what the NBU could in difficult circumstances .
 Governor Hontareva is also blamed for the decline in household incomes and in the standard of living . Both are the plain arithmetic result of inflation and devaluation .
 One major accusation against the central bank is the removal of more than 80 commercial banks from the market . The central bank has been accused of removing 80 banks from market .
 The U.S. has over 5,000 banks, but the system is much better regulated and reliable . The Federal Reserve works more systematically and effectively, according to the Federal Reserve .
 Ukraine's crisis of 2008-2009 was not nearly as deep as what Ukraine has experienced, says CNN's John Sutter .
 cleaning up the fallout from the crisis took more than three years . Cleaning up the crisis from the financial crisis took three years.
 According to Russia’s central bank, 76 banks lost their licenses in 2014 alone . As well as a dozen non-banking lending institutions, the bank says .
 Had the NBU done its job after the crisis rather than preserving pseudo-banks and the status quo, it would have had a lot less work to do today . The NBU has been in charge since the financial crisis in 2009 .
 Hontareva took this task on, without any pressure from the IMF, simply honors her . The fact that she took this job on is not a problem for the IMF .
 The NBU supposedly could have saved about a dozen of those banks . It is believed that the NBU would have saved some of the banks .
 At the current stage, the regulator needs to demonstrate enough firmness to make the banking sector better . The regulator must demonstrate enough Firmness that the country’s bankers will believe in its integrity and resolve .
 The insolvent banks lost about UAH 30bn in refinancing and over UAH 100bn belonging to individuals and businesses . The second complaint is that the insolvent Banks lost about 30bn.
 This particular side-effect is society’s inevitable price for the clean-up, says the author . The author .
 domestic banks have supposedly stopped lending since Hontareva became the NBU governor . One more accusation is that domestic banks are supposedly stopping lending .
 In the last 6 months, banks are enjoying record levels of liquidity . Banks are enjoying a record level of liquidity in the past 6 months .
 In QI’09, banks also stopped giving out both commercial and personal loans . By the third quarter, commercial lending had picked up again, according to analysts .
 Individuals are still paying off personal loans from that time . Individuals, however, are stillpaying off personal loan.
 In fact, loan portfolios have not grown during crises in Greece or other problematic European countries, either, because it's too hard to assess the cash flow of potential borrowers .
More serious accusations against Valeria Hontareva derive from her pre-NBU years . More serious accusations are made against her .
 She ran Investment Capital Ukraine, a company criticised for helping the Yanukovych “Family’s” to rob the state . For instance, she ran investment Capital Ukraine .
 ICU was involved in the schemes publicized recently that were used to embezzle from state banks on the Perspektyva stock exchange, which the Family controlled .
 ICU acted as the official intermediary between a state bank and the “pocket-laundering operation known as Fondoviy Aktyv or Equity Stock . It was paid a standard commission for its services, not a cut of the deals .
Both FA and the Perspektyva exchange, and the supervisory boards and top management of the state banks, belonged to the Donetsk clans . They had no intention of sharing the windfall with anyone .
 At the time, the company was one of the leaders in this segment of the market and professional market players were needed as an intermediary, according to the law .
 ICU itself involved absolutely legal operations, but such schemes could not have been carried out without ICU . In fact, such schemes were carried out by companies like ICU, but ICU did not .
 ICU bought and sold T-bills, but also participated in driving up prices on these bonds, documents show . ICU deliberately overpricing them so that the Family wheeler-dealers could take advantage of them later .
 Delta Bank was declared insolvent by Hontareva’s relatives prior to the bank being declared insolent . A much more damaging accusation is that money was taken out of Delta Bank by the relatives .
 Typically the bank’s biggest clients are offered deals to recover their money for a cut . Sometimes as much as 50% of the cash is recovered .
 The problem is that the National Bank is structured in such a way that it is very easy for certain individuals to buy the information they need . The bank is structured so that it's very easy to buy information, says the author .
 The purchase of junk stock and government bonds of a company called Svizhachok took place at least five years prior to Hontareva’s appointment . NBU management knew about the purchase of the company's junk stock.
 In fact, she initiated an investigation into this affair when she came to the Bank . She initiated the investigation into the affair.
 Results won’t be immediate and will need the cooperation of the Fund itself and of the Verkhovna Rada .
 The NBU’s Corporate Non-State Pension Fund should operate in a standard manner and not be hand-managed by the Bank . The same goes for the NBU's Corporate non-state Pension Fund .
 Criticisms of the NBU’s flawed system are fair, and hopefully Hontareva is prepared to do something about it . The NBU's flawed system has been criticized by some .
 The Russian banks should have gained a lot more market share if they were expanding. Still, given the serious decline in the number of banks on the Ukrainian market, the Russians should have Gained a lot of market share .
 Ukrainians began to massively boycott Russian goods after Euromaidan . Russian banks felt the hit as well, losing deposits at the fastest rate of any other domestic banks .
Prominvest and VTB bank are known to have plenty of problems and gaps in their balance sheets . No Russian banks have lost their licenses, but Prominvest, VTB and Prominvest have had plenty of issues .
 The issue of Russian capital in Ukraine was one of the unpublicized components of the Minsk talks . It’s hard to know whether these banks are simply staying within the law or whether the issue is just staying in the law .
 National Security Council or President would be better addressed to the President, rather than the Governor of the National Bank .
 The threefold decline in the hryvnia against the dollar is hardly surprising, but 10% of Ukrainians actually understand the devaluation .
 Hontareva has been targeted by massive criticism aimed at oligarch-owned television channels and the NBU .
 Dmytro Firtash, Kostiantyn Zhevago, Oleh Bakhmatiuk and Serhiy Arbuzov have withdrawn licenses of many of their banks . She has stepped on some big toes of her predecessors .
 Ihor Kolomoyskiy has probably joined their ranks now that the regulator is forcing him to stop using PrivatBank to finance other businesses .
 Many television channels have little good to say about the NBU these days . That might increase confidence in both the hryvnia and Hontareva .
 Some politicians are trying to make populist hay out of the situation and piling on the criticisms .
 The NBU today has a proper team of professionals and is working to institute best world practice in its administration . The N BU is trying to establish best world practices in the administration .
International and independent Ukrainian experts say the National Bank is one of the leading reforming institutions in Ukraine .
 Rada submitted a series of bills intended to reduce the NBU’s powers and make it more amorphous . IMF and others came to the defense of the independence of the central bank .
 The NBU's first female governor has made her fair share of mistakes, both before being appointed to the Bank and since .
 Hontareva's mistakes pale in comparison to what she has accomplished and the major problems she has managed to avoid . But those mistakes pale to what Hontarva has done and what she's managed to avoided .
 At this point, it makes more sense to let her to carry through the reforms that she has begun rather than pushing for her to be dismissed .
 The oligarchs have not been happy with the slew of new people who have come to government . populists and fifth columnists are quite happy to jump on this bandwagon .
 At a time when the country is slowly but surely crawling out of an economic black hole, preserving the credibility of the central bank should be a priority .