Russia’s ongoing conflict with Ukraine has flared up once again . The conflict has flared again once again.
 This time, it wasn’t another Russian artillery or rocket barrage in eastern Ukraine’s embattled Donbas region .
 A bridge across the Kerch Strait connecting the Crimean Peninsula with mainland Russia . The latest escalation was evidenced by the completion of a bridge.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin led a convoy across the newly opened Kerch Strait bridge May 15 .
 Ukrainian Infrastructure Minister Volodymyr Omelyan said during a May 16 Cabinet meeting, Ukrainian agencies reported .
 The United States and the European Union levied economic sanctions on Moscow . As a result, the U.S. and the EU imposed economic sanctions.
 Additional sanctions were put on Russia for its ongoing proxy war in eastern Ukraine . Other acts of Russian aggression included meddling in Western elections and a nerve agent assassination attempt against a former Russian spy .
 Moscow touted the new bridge as proof that Russian rule over Crimea is permanent . Moscow touted it as proof the Russian rule is permanent.
 U.S., EU, and Ukraine roundly condemned the Kerch Strait bridge, calling it a further violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty . The bridge was built in the early 1990s .
 The Russian public relations hoopla surrounding the bridge's opening highlighted Moscow’s intransigence to back down from its territorial claim . Putin's domestic popularity has been shoring up his domestic popularity .
 Dutch think tank specializes in Russian and European affairs . To return Crimea to Ukraine is unthinkable, says Marcel Van Herpen .
 Ukraine's ousted president, Viktor Yanukovych, had just fled to exile in Russia . Yanukovych is a Kremlin ally .
 Russian troops appeared in Crimea as part of a “hybrid warfare’s’ invasion. Days later, Russian troops were seen in Crimea .
 95 percent of Crimean citizens supposedly voted in favor of joining the Russian Federation .
 The international community widely condemned the referendum as illegitimate . The referendum was widely condemned as illegitimate.
 Putin claimed Crimea people had turned to Russian for help . Putin claimed people of Crimea turned to Russia for help in Crimea .
Only 10 U.N. members have recognized Russia’s annexation of Crimea as legitimate .
 Afghanistan, Bolivia, Cuba, Venezuela, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, North Korea, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela and Zimbabwe . Afghanistan, Bolivian, Cuba and Nicaragua are among the countries in the world .
 Following its illegal annexation of Crimea, Russia launched a proxy war in the Donbas in April 2014 .
 Russia's 2014 invasion and annexation of Crimea was a popularity boon for Putin within Russia . Russia’s 2014 annexation and Crimea annexation was a popular boon for the Russian president .
 Prior to the Crimean invasion, Putin's popularity ratings were in the low 60s, news reports said .
 Putin’s popularity rating within Russia was at 89 percent, his highest approval rating ever . By July 2015, according to polling by the Levada-Center, an independent Russian research center, it was 89 percent . Putin's approval rating was his highest ever .
 The U.S., Europe, and Ukraine are collectively standing their ground, insisting that Crimea remains sovereign Ukrainian territory . Russia’s occupation of Crimea is illegal, says the United States .
 Ukraine and its Western partners swiftly protested the May 15 opening of the Kerch Strait bridge . To that end, Ukraine and the West quickly protested the opening .
 Minister for Europe Sir Alan Duncan said in a statement on the opening of the bridge .
 This constitutes another violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity by Russia, the European Union says .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has officially dedicated the first section of the Crimean Bridge .
 We shall not ask for anybody’s permission to build transport infrastructure for the sake of the population of Russian regions. We shall never ask for any permission to built transport infrastructure.
 Ukraine and the West have hit a de facto ceiling on the pressure they're willing to exert on Russia for its seizure of Crimea . Some say Ukraine and West have put pressure on Russia over Crimea .
 The future of Crimea is a pickle for all parties involved. Going forward, Crimea's future is aPickle for the future of all parties .
 Ukraine and the West don’t want to acknowledge Russia’s annexation as permanent . Russia's annexation of Crimea is not considered a permanent annexation .
 Putin won't likely reverse course and return the territory to Ukraine. And for domestic political reasons, Putin won’t likely return to Ukraine .
 Ukrainian forces remain engaged in a low-intensity, static war against a combined force of about 35,000 pro-Russian separatists, foreign mercenaries, and Russian regulars . Ater more than four years of constant combat, Ukrainian forces have been engaged in the war .
 The day of the bridge opening, combined Russian-separatist forces fired mortars at the Ukrainian government-controlled village of Novhorodske .
 The Ukrainian military reported one soldier killed in action and two others wounded . Two others wounded.
 Ukrainian military says combined Russian-separatist forces had attacked Ukrainian positions 66 times in the preceding 24 hours . The Ukrainian military said the attacks included mortars and Grad rocket systems .
 Two Ukrainian troops were killed in the attacks, and four more were wounded . The attacks took place in Ukraine in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Also Thursday, combined Russian-separatist forces shelled an elementary school in Svitlodarsk on the Ukrainian government-controlled side of the front lines .
 U.S. and European diplomats generally see the ongoing war in the Donbas as the priority for negotiations with Russia .
 U.S. and European diplomats have made clear that sanctions levied on Russia for its invasion of Crimea are separate from those put in place due to the war in the Donbas . Still, the United States and EU diplomats have said that sanctions are not related to the Crimea invasion .
 The relief of Crimea-related sanctions will occur only after Russia returns control of the territory to Ukraine, officials say . Officials say .
 Even with the sanctions regime in place, Ukraine and the West have limited options available to force Russia to relinquish Crimea .
 Acknowledging Moscow’s permanent control over Crimea would be a diplomatic retreat for Kyiv . It would undermine the legitimacy of its post-revolution government and likely spur domestic unrest .
For the West, conceding Russia's control of Crimea as permanent, or legitimate, would be a body blow to norms of geopolitical behavior . Some say it has prevented another global conflict on par with the two world wars .
 The week’s volley of diplomatic jabs underscores what will likely be the status quo for the time being .
 Many security experts and Western government officials say no real progress toward returning Crimea to Ukraine is likely to happen while Putin is in power .
 The sanctions regime against Russia should be maintained with an eye toward influencing a future Russian government . Russia might be willing to trade Crimea back to Ukraine in exchange for sanctions relief, or as part of a broader reconciliation deal with the West .