 This includes several rounds of sanctions against Russia, as well as military assistance to Ukraine, and temporary protection for Ukrainians and third country nationals fleeing the conflict . This includes numerous rounds of penalties against Russia and military assistance .
 The EU has also discussed plans to end the dependence of some Member States on Russian energy . The EU is also considering plans to stop the dependence on some countries on Russia's energy .
 The EU and Ukraine have an association agreement, in force since 2016 . The EU-Ukraine association agreement is in force until 2016 .
 The agreement provides a framework for the convergence of Ukraine with the EU in the political, economic and legal spheres . The agreement is based on the agreement between Ukraine and the EU .
 In 2013, then Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych said he would not be signing an association agreement . In 2013 he said he wouldn't be signing the agreement .
 President Yanukovych’s decision led to a wave of mass protests and a violent response from the Government .
 He was removed from office by the Ukrainian Parliament in February 2014 . He fled to Russia and fled to the country. He was taken out of office by Ukraine's Parliament in 2014 .
 Russia moved to occupy Crimea after President Yanukovych was forced out of office . EU response to the Russian annexation of Crimea was swift and swift .
 This was followed by protests by pro-Russian separatists in the Donbas region in Eastern Ukraine . Parts of this region came under their control in April 2014 .
 The EU condemned Russian actions in Crimea as illegal and called on Russia to withdraw .
 Russia’s involvement in the then G8 was ended, and the EU said it was suspending further talks on a new co-operation agreement . The EU says it is suspending talks on the new agreement .
 The EU imposed sanctions against officials involved in Ukraine's actions in Ukraine . The sanctions were imposed against officials in Ukraine.
Ban on the import and export of arms and related material and a ban on the export of dual use goods for military users . The ban also includes a ban for dual use items for military use .
 There were also restrictions on exports of energy-related 5 Commons Library Research Briefing, 22 March 2022 . The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine equipment and technology was in place .
 EU Response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine began its invasion on 24 February 2022 . These sanctions have remained in force since 2014 . Russia's invasion began in February 2022.
 EU Sanctions against Russia Sanctions have been coordinated with the USA, UK and other allies . The EU has joined the U.S. and UK in the fight against Russia .
 New sanctions had already been imposed on Russia on 22 February . President Putin had signed order recognising self-declared independent republics in Donbas region .
 Further sanctions were announced on 25 February, and these were expanded again on 28 February, 2 March and 15 March . Further sanctions are announced on 26 February, 25 February and 2 March .
 The list of individuals and entities subject to an asset freeze and travel ban has been expanded to include President Putin, Government Ministers, all members of the Russian Parliament and various businesspeople . The list has been progressively expanded.
 The EU also announced on 15 March that there would be action to deny Russian products and services ‘most favoured nation treatment’ in EU markets .
 Belarus' accession to the World Trade Organization would also be blocked . Belarus’ access to the world trade Organization would be also blocked .
 This includes restrictions on the use of SWIFT services for three Belarus banks and other financial sanctions . This includes Restrictions on use of the services for the three banks .
 Belarus's military is on the list of individuals subject to sanctions . Members of the Belarus’ military are on the lists of individualssubject to sanctions.
 European Commission announced plan to make Europe independent from Russian fossil fuels before 2030 . EU plans to end EU reliance on Russian energy.
 The Commission outlined measures to respond to rising energy prices in Europe and to replenish gas stocks for the next winter . The Commission also outlined measures.
 The Commission said this could reduce EU demand for Russian gas by two thirds before the end of the year .
 Russia accounts for around 25% of oil imports and 45% of coal imports . Russia also accounts for about 25 per cent ofOil imports .
 Other States, such as Germany, are reluctant to go this far given high levels of dependency on these imports . Other states, like Germany, have not been able to go far this far .
 The German government has announced that it will not allow the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany to begin operation . The pipeline will not be allowed to start operation .
Proposals would be developed further by the European Commission and Member States . Proposals will also be developed by the EU and Member states .
 €450 million was allocated under the European Peace Facility for this . €50million was allocated for non-lethal supplies . This would be the first time the EU had provided lethal equipment to a third country .
 EU foreign ministers agreed an additional €500 million would be allocated under the European Peace Facility . On 21 March, EU foreign minister agreed an extra €500m would be given under the Peace Facility.
 The EU adopted legislation providing for temporary protection for persons fleeing Ukraine on 4 March .
This applies to Ukrainian nationals, and their family members, if they resided in Ukraine on or before 24 February 2022 . This applies to Ukrainians living in Ukraine, and family members .
 It will apply to third country nationals or stateless persons benefiting from international protection in Ukraine . It will also apply to stateless people and their family members .
 The scheme could end earlier if the Council of the EU decides it is safe to return to Ukraine .
 People fleeing Ukraine will have rights of residence, access to labour market and housing, medical assistance, and access to education for children in the Member State they go to .
 The EU will coordinate assistance and provide funding for the host Member States . The European Union will provide assistance to the host countries .
 The European Commission announced an emergency support package of €500 million for those affected by the conflict in Ukraine on 1 March 2022 . Humanitarian and economic support will be provided by the EU .
 Supplies delivered through the EU Civil Protection Mechanism by EU Member States are estimated to be worth an additional €100 million . The EU Civil protection Mechanism is worth an extra €100million .
 Humanitarian aid has gone to Ukraine and to neighbouring countries receiving people fleeing from Ukraine . The aid has also gone to the neighbouring countries.
 The European Commission announced a €1. billion emergency Macro-Financial Assistance loan programme to Ukraine on 1 February 2022 .
 €5 billion of MFA loans had already been provided in the period 2014-2021 . Half of this was expected to be delivered by March .
 Some funds had been withheld as they had been contingent on reforms being undertaken in Ukraine . Some funds were withheld as it was contingent on reform being undertaken .
 Several EU Member States have called for the EU to begin the process of Ukraine’s accession to the EU swiftly .
 Other Member States have adopted a cautious tone and have pointed to the lengthy process for accession . However, other Member States are cautious about the process .
 The EU and Ukraine have an association agreement, which provisionally came into force on 1 January 2016 . The EU-Ukraine association agreement comes into force in January 2016.
 Following ratification by all Member States of the EU it came fully into force on 1 September 2017 . The EU was ratified by all member states of the European Union in 2013 .
 The aim was to establish a framework for enhanced political dialogue, and convergence of Ukraine with the EU in the political, economic and legal spheres .
 Ukraine would align its legislation with the EU in a number of areas, including competition, technical barriers to trade and sanitary and phytosanitary measures .
 Ukraine would establish state aid rules similar to those of the EU, and align with EU public procurement legislation . Ukraine would be the first country in the EU to do so .
 The agreement was hoped that the agreement would help with the reform and modernisation of the Ukrainian economy .
 Progress by Ukraine in aligning legislation with the EU would enable greater access to the EU internal market . Ukraine is the first country to align with the European Union .
 The agreement also included a commitment to enhanced cooperation in the field of justice, freedom and security . The aim of reinforcing the rule of law and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is to be reinforced .
 Ukraine 2 Sanitary and phytosanitary requirements relate to trade in live animals, animal products, food, plants and products . Ukraine 1 Sanitary, phytoanitary and Phytosansitary requirements related to live animals and animal products .
 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine placed particular emphasis on the strengthening of the judiciary and combating corruption in Ukraine .
 The agreement promoted gradual convergence on foreign affairs and security matters . The aim of Ukraine's ever-deeper involvement in the European security area.
 There was also a commitment to regular political dialogue, including through EU-Ukraine summits and governance structures established by the agreement .
 The EU-Ukraine agreement was negotiated between 2007 and 2011 . The agreement was signed in Ukraine and Russia .
 Ukraine had loosened ties with Russia in the period following the so-called Orange revolution in 2004 . Ukraine's relationship with Russia has been strained since 2004 .
 Earlier in 2013, Russia warned it would tighten customs procedures against as “suicidal’ for Ukraine . A Russian official described the EU-Ukraine agreement as ‘suicidal for Ukraine.
 Ukraine President Yanukovych’s decision led to a new wave of mass protests and a violent response from the Government .
 President Yanukovych was removed from office by the Ukrainian Parliament in February 2014 . He fled to Russia and fled to the country .
 An interim government then signed the political part of the association agreement with the EU in March 2014 .
 The economic part of the agreement, the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area, was then signed by the new President, Petro Poroshenko, following his election in June 2014 .
 A referendum was held in Crimea on 16 March, backing union with Russia . A referendum in Crimea was held on 17 March .
 Neither referendum nor Russian annexation were recognised internationally . Neither the referendum nor the Russian annexation.
Pro-Russian separatists in the Donbas region in Eastern Ukraine have taken control of parts of this region in April . These developments were followed in March by protests by pro- Russian separatists in this region .
 The conflict in Eastern Ukraine has continued since 2014, although there have been several ceasefires . The conflict has been ongoing since 2014 .
 The EU adopted a series of statements condemning Russian actions, and also agreed on a set of sanctions against Russia . The EU also agreed to a set-of- sanctions on Russia .
 G7 leaders suspended participation in preparations for G8 summit due to be held in Russia later in 2014 . President of European Commission and President of the European Council joined with G7 leader .
 The EU's political leaders, including UK Prime Minister David Cameron, held an extraordinary meeting on 6 March 2014 . The EU’s political leaders including UK PM David Cameron attended the meeting .
 EU leaders adopt joint statement condemning Russia's “unprovoked in Crimea as an violation of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity’ EU leaders call on Russia to withdraw its forces .
 The EU leaders also confirmed that bilateral talks with the Russian Federation were to be suspended . They also described the decision to hold on a referendum on Crimea joining the Russia Federation as illegal .
 EU leaders and Ukraine’s acting prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, signed the political provisions of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement .
 The EU leaders’ statement of 6 March 2014 warned of sanctions if Russia did not take steps towards a negotiated solution to the crisis . EU leader’s statement of six March 2014 warns of sanctions against Russia .
 On 17 March 2014, EU foreign ministers agreed a package of restrictive measures against 21 officials associated with their role in threatening Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 The list of persons and entities subject to sanctions and the legal basis was expanded throughout 2014 . The legal basis for sanctions was doing so was expanding throughout 2014.
 EU adopted additional sanctions against Russian The EU adopted Federation on 29 July 2014 .
 EU leaders agreed to adopt further targeted sanctions against Russia . This followed the European Council meeting of 16 July .
 EU foreign ministers asked for the adoption of measures to be accelerated following the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 over Donetsk in Eastern Ukraine .
 Crimea and Sevastopol were also placed on 30 July 2014 . Further trade and investment restrictions were also put on Crimea .
 sanctions originally imposed in 2014 were extended for a further six months until the end of July 2022 . In January 2022, the sanctions were extended to a further five months .
 In April 2014, the Council of the EU approved proposals aimed at providing economic and financial support to Ukraine .
 Ukraine has been given €1bn in macro-financial assistance to support its economic stabilisation and its structural reform agenda .
 Ukraine also adopted a regulation granting unilateral trade preferences to Ukraine . The regulation also provides for temporary reduction or elimination of customs duties ahead of the EU-Ukraine association agreement .
 The previous MFA commitments were paid out in 2014 and early 2015 and were for €610 billion worth of loans . The previous commitments were in 2014, 2015 and 2014 .
 Macro-financial assistance operations are part of the EU's wider engagement with neighbouring countries . They are intended as an exceptional crisis response instrument .
 EU countries are experiencing severe balance-of-payments problems . They are available to EU neighbourhood countries experiencing balance- of-payment problems .
 EU prolongs economic sanctions by six months, 21 December 2015 25 See for example Council of the EU, Russia, Russia: EU prolonging sanctions by 6 months, 28 June 2017 . EU sanctions eight more people over territorial integrity, 11 October 2021 2021 .
 Ukraine had not fulfilled four out of 17 policy commitments which were conditions for this instalment . Third €600 million tranche of the 2018 2015 was not paid out .
 The MFA funds provided by the EU to Ukraine were the largest it had provided to any single partner country . By 2020, the MFA had provided the largest amount of funds to Ukraine .
 EU has so far supported Ukraine through five consecutive MFA operations totalling €5 billion of loans in the period 2014-2021 . European Commission proposes new assistance on 1 February 2022 .
 The proposal in February 2022 was for a new macro-financial assistance programme for Ukraine of up to €1. billion . New funds proposed, 2022.
 Ukraine's Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy had direct discussions . This followed a request from Ukraine.
 Council of the EU and European Parliament said first tranche of €600 million would be paid to Ukraine . It said a first tranches would be pay to Ukraine immediately .
 The second tranche would be paid once there had been a positive assessment of progress made by the Ukrainian authorities . The first tranche will be paid after there has been positive assessment.
 The European Commission said in January 2022 that it was also allocating an additional €120 million to Ukraine in bilateral assistance grant funding . Other economic support alongside the €1. billion MFA programme formally proposed on 1 February 2022 .
 It said this support would strengthen Ukraine’s state-building and resilience efforts . It said it would strengthen the country's state- building efforts .
 The Commission said that in addition to this, its Economic and Investment Plan for Ukraine aimed to leverage up to €6. billion in investments in upcoming years .
 EU bilateral assistance for Ukraine is brought together under the framework of the eastern regional dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
 A U.S. intelligence assessment in December 2021 suggested that Russia could be planning an invasion of Ukraine in early 2022 . The assessment was based on an assessment by the United States .
 It reiterated its full support for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity . It also reiterated its support for the country's sovereignty .
 Any further military aggression against Ukraine will have massive consequences and severe cost in response, including restrictive measures coordinated with partners . The Ukraine government has said it will not tolerate any further aggression .
 President Putin signed Executive Orders recognising self-declared independence of Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic . The areas of the Donbas are under the control of Russian-backed separatist forces .
 EU Foreign Ministers met later in the day to agree on initial package of sanctions in response to Russia’s actions .
 Josep Borrell indicated his appreciation to Germany for making the EU's united message stronger by stopping the pipeline .
 The pipeline had previously been opposed by the USA and some EU Member States . The pipeline was previously opposed by some EU members .
 Calls for Germany to stop the pipeline had increased as a Russian invasion of Ukraine appeared more likely .
 Germany halts Nord Stream 2 approval, 22 February 2022 42 EU External Action Service . The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine weeks prior to the invasion .
 An urgent special meeting of the European Council was already due to take place on 24 February 2022 .
 The European Council (the heads of state or government of the 27 Member States) issued a joint statement ahead of their meeting on 24 February . The meeting will take place on February 24 .
 The European Council condemned “in the strongest possible terms Russia's unprecedented military aggression against Ukraine’s military aggression’ The Council also demanded Russia's unconditional withdrawal from Ukraine .
 Belarus was also condemned for its involvement in the aggression against Ukraine . The involvement of Belarus in the Ukraine aggression was also condemn .
 The EU would be providing further political, financial and humanitarian and severe assistance to Ukraine . The European Council meeting held later in the day was also addressed, by the President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelenskyy .
 The conclusions of the meeting reiterated the messages set out in the earlier statement . The meeting was held in London, London, on Monday .
 Russia will “be held accountable for its actions,’ it said . It said that further sanctions against Russia were being prepared .
 There would also be additional sanctions against Russian individuals, with new listing criteria . There would be more sanctions against Russians .
 The EU would continue strong coordination with partners and allies, within the UN, Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, NATO and G7 .
 The meeting was also an opportunity to affirm the unity of the EU Member States . Michel referred to discussions about developing the EU's strategic autonomy .
 This was hosted by France, which holds the rotating Council Presidency for the first half of 2022 . This was held by France.
 The EU and its condemnation of Russia’s actions and support for Ukraine is repeated earlier . This repeated earlier earlier the EU and the European Union and its condemn of Russia.
 The declaration made reference to Ukraine’s application to join the EU on 28 support” February 2022 . Ukraine had exercised the right to choose its own destiny, the declaration said .
 Initial proposals were set out in relation to these dimensions, which the EU and individual Member States would take forward .
 The EU leaders agreed on the need to invest more and better in defence capabilities and innovative technologies . The need to spend more on defence capabilities will increase, they said .
 EU leaders asked the European Commission to bring forward an analysis of defence investment gaps by mid-May . EU leaders want to propose any further initiatives to strengthen the European defence industrial and technological base .
 EU leaders agreed reassessment of how the EU ensured the security of its energy supplies . Reducing energy dependency required a thorough assessment of the situation .
 EU leaders agreed to phase out dependency on Russian gas, oil and oil and dependency on coal imports as soon as possible . EU leaders also agreed to step down dependency on Russia's coal imports .
 The development of renewables would be speeded up, and soon as possible further work on improving energy efficiency and energy consumption would be undertaken .
 The Commission was invited to propose plan to end energy dependency on Russia by the end of May 2022 to deliver on objectives .
 It was also invited to put forward its plan to ensure security of supply and affordable energy prices during the next winter season by the end of March .
 The declaration identified measures to foster investment that would strengthen the EU’s economic base .
 This involved promoting skills and job creation, meeting green and digital objectives, and creating more integrated, attractive and competitive European financial markets . This also involved promoting job creation and meeting green, digital and green objectives .
 International Coordination Sanctions and other measures taken by the EU in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine have been co-ordinated with UK, USA, Canada and other allies .
 The international response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine has also been co-ordinated through the G7 format . The G7 is also the first G7 to be held in the same format .
 Some statements have been coordinated alongside European Council meetings . Some statements were coordinated alongside EU meetings .
 The EU as a whole is not part of the G7, three EU Member States are G7 members . The Presidents of the European Commission and the European Council take part in G7 leaders’ summits .
 The EU High Representative on Foreign and Security Policy, Josep Borrell joined a meeting of G7 Foreign Ministers on 19 February 2022 . He expressed grave concern about Russia’s threatening military build-up around Ukraine .
 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine would be coordinated by the EU and G7 members . It would impose severe and unprecedented costs on the Russian economy . It also warned of ‘massive consequences’ including financial and economic sanctions .
 The European Union described the action as ‘a serious violation of international law’ and “a grave continent, President breach of the United Nations Charter” and of previous commitments given by Russia .
 Putin had ‘put himself on the wrong side of history’ to the European continent, it said .
 The statement affirmed the G7’s unity with partners, including NATO, the EU and Ukraine . The G7 are bringing and their Member States as well as Ukraine to preserve the integrity of the forward severe and international-rules base order .
 The G7 would also closely monitor global oil coordinated and gas market conditions . The G 7 would also support “consistent and constructive economic and engagement and coordination among major energy producers and consumers”
 SWIFT is a system that facilitates secure messaging between banks and other financial institutions . The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine is the EU's response to Russia's annexation of Ukraine .
 Additional Russian officials and elites close to the Russian government, their families, and their enablers would also be subject to these sanctions .
 Work with other governments would also be undertaken “to detect and disrupt the movement of ill-gotten gains’ Work also would be undertaken to prevent these individuals from hiding their assets .
 On 4 March, the Foreign Affairs Council of the EU held an extraordinary meeting .
 US Secretary of State Antony Blinken, UK Foreign Secretary Liz Truss, Canada’s Minister for Foreign Affairs Mélanie Joly and NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg joined the meeting in Brussels . EU foreign ministers and the EU High Representative Josep Borrell
 The foreign ministers called for a humanitarian corridor from Ukraine . They discussed further support for the neighbouring EU Member States hosting the majority of those fleeing the war .
 The meeting also involved an informal exchange with Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba . They discussed the latest developments in Ukraine and the needs of Ukraine .
 House of Lords Library, Ukraine sanctions and Swift system, 1 March 2022, and section 3 of Commons Library Briefing 9481, Sanctions against Russia .
 The statement referred to existing internationally coordinated measures that had “severely compromised Russia’s economy and financial system, as evidenced by the massive market reactions’ and targeted the architects of the war .
 Russia will be denied most-Favoured-Nation status 56 to products of Russian favoured nation companies . Russia will also be denied WTO most• Action to deny Most-Favourite nation status .
 This will revoke important benefits of Russia’s membership of the World Trade Organization . status . Work to prevent Russia from obtaining financing from leading multilateral financial institutions .
 The task force previously announced on 26 February will work to target the assets of Russian elites close to President Putin and the architects of his war .
More specifically, this will include work to ensure sanctioned individuals cannot leverage digital assets as a means of evading or offsetting the impact of international sanctions . More specifically, the work will be done to ensure sanctions are not enforced .
 The statement said that EU citizens should not see their savings and investments fund the companies that underpin Russia's economy .
 The G7 would continue working together to develop and implement measures that will further limit Russia’s ability to raise money internationally . The G 7 would also continue to work together to create measures that would limit Russia's ability to raised money internationally.
 The G7 leaders said they stood ready to impose further restrictions on exports and imports of key goods and technologies on Russia . The leaders also said they were prepared to impose more restrictions on imports and exports .
International companies are already withdrawing from the Russian market, they said . They said they would ensure that the elites, proxies and oligarchs that support Putin's war are deprived of their access to luxury goods and assets .
 Russian energy plans to reduce reliance on Russian energy . In addition to the announced plans, the statement referred to further international efforts to reduce Russian energy reliance .
 The G7 leaders said they would work together to preserve stability of energy markets as well as food security globally . Ukraine invasion threatened Ukraine’s capacity to grow crops this year .
 Sanctions are designed to impose • Cripple Kremlin's ability to finance Russia’s military action clear economic and political costs . Diminish Russia's economic base. Impose clear economic costs on Russia's political elite .
 The EU amended the criteria for designation to include individuals and companies supporting and benefitting from the Russian Government . The criteria also included family members of listed individuals .
 The EU would also target those individuals who facilitated the Russian military aggression from Belarus .
 Financial sanctions, restricting Russian access to EU financial markets, were also expanded . Existing sanctions and restrictions on access to European financial markets were expanded .
 A full asset freeze was imposed on three leading Russian banks and the list of state-owned companies subject to sanctions was extended into the defence sector . The list was also extended to the defense sector .
Russian individuals would also be restricted from depositing money in EU banks over a certain value . Russian individuals would be also restricted from deposits in the EU banks .
 The EU also introduced an export ban on specific goods and technologies related to the oil refining sector . The aviation and space industry was also banned from selling aircrafts and equipment to Russian airlines .
 Further restrictions imposed on dual-use goods and technologies related to the defence and security sector . Semi-conductors and cutting-edge technologies such as drones and associated software, and encryption software.
 The EU said that this decision would not affect ordinary Russian citizens . The decision was made by the European Union .
 The EU sanctions against Russia were subsequently expanded on 28 February and again in early March . The third sanctions package was expanded on February 28 and March 28 .
 On 28 February, the Council of the EU adopted additional measures related to aviation and finance . The EU adopted new measures on 28 February .
 Aviation EU member states would deny permission to land in, take off from or fly over Russian aircraft their territories . Any Russian cannot land in or fly registered aircraft, and other aircraft owned, chartered, or otherwise over the EU controlled by a Russian legal or natural person .
 Seven Russian banks are banned from using the SWIFT system . This included Russian banks. This included seven Russian banks .
 This would come banned from using into force ten days later . It would also apply to any legal person, entity or SWIFT system body established in Russia who have proprietary rights .
 The Council of the EU adopted sanctions on Russian stateowned media outlets Russia Today and Sputnik . Also on 2 March, the European Union adopted sanctions against Russian state-run media outlets.
 The Council approved the suspension of broadcasting activities in the EU of Russia Today and both Sputnik and Russia Today .
 Sputnik are banned in the EU until the aggression against Ukraine is brought to an end and until the Russian Federation and its associated outlets cease conducting disinformation and information manipulation actions against the EU and its member states . Sputik is banned until the Russia Federation and the
 The Council press release commented that Sputnik and Russia Today are under “the permanent direct or indirect control of the authorities of the Russian Federation’s authorities. They are instrumental in supporting the military aggression against Ukraine .
 Russia said it had “engaged in a systematic, international campaign of disinformation, information manipulation and distortion of facts’ It said Russia had ‘engaged’ in a “systematic, internationalcampaign of disinformation and information manipulation’
 It said this had targeted political parties and civil society and the functioning of democratic institutions in the EU and its member states .
 EU bans certain Russian banks from SWIFT system and introduces further restrictions . 63 Council of EU, EU imposes sanctions on state-owned outlets RT/Russia Today and Sputnik's broadcasting in EU .
 Sanctions against individuals extended on 10 March . Council decision extended the duration of these sanctions until 15 September 2022 .
 Roman Abramovich and German Khan among those added to the list . Other prominent businesspeople involved in key economic sectors such as iron and steel, energy, banking, media, military and military .
 Several prominent businessmen and oligarchs were already on the list from previous rounds of sanctions . The sanctions are expected to continue until the end of the year .
 G7 statement on 11 March gave go ahead to the European Commission to support actions at the WTO to deny Russian products and services most favoured nation treatment in EU markets .
 This was announced on 15 March, alongside a new sanctions package against Russia adopted by the Council . This was also announced on March 15 March .
 The EU response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine contribute to Russia’s technological enhancement of its defence and security sector . EU agrees fourth package of restrictive measures, 15 March 2022 .
 There were also further additions to the list of individuals and entities subject to restrictive measures . The list includes individuals and individuals subject to restrictions .
 Companies in the aviation, military and dual use, shipbuilding and machine building sectors were added to the list of entities .
Some states, notably Germany, were reluctant to go this far given their own high usage of Russian energy imports . Some states, including Germany, have been reluctant to use Russian energy .
 Poland had called for a total ban on trade with Russia . Some Member States supported a ban on Russian ships docking in EU ports .
 On 24 February, 20 members of Belarusian military personnel were added to the list of individuals sanctioned for undermining or threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 The Council of the EU said it had added 22 high ranked members of Belarusian military personnel to this list . On 9 March 2022, the EU added 22 members of the Belarusian army to the list .
 EU High Representative Josep Borrell said Belarus’ involvement in the aggression against Ukraine would “come at a high price’ EU was targeting those in Belarus who were collaborating in the Russian action .
 Belarus is supporting the Russian military aggression against Ukraine inter alia by allowing Russia to fire ballistic missiles from the Belarusian territory . Belarus has allowed Russia to fly over Belarusian airspace into Ukraine, providing refuelling points and storing Russian weapons and military equipment in Belarus .
 The Council announced further measures targeting the Belarusian financial sector on 9 March .
 A €450 million support package for the provision of by a third country lethal assistance for defensive purpose. This includes a €50 million support packages for non-lethal supplies . The package also includes a $450 million package for a second country lethal aid package .
 EU High Representative Josep Borrell said this followed a request by Ukraine's Foreign Affairs Minister of Ukraine .
 Previously, the EU had announced a package of measures to help strengthen the Ukrainian armed forces .
 This package is worth €31 million over three years . It will finance military medical units, including field hospitals, engineering, mobility and logistics units and support on cyber .
 EU foreign ministers are discussing the establishment of an EU military training assistance mission to Ukraine . The mission will focus on military education reform .
 It replaces the previous Athena Mechanism through which the common costs of EU military operations were financed . It replaces previous Athena mechanism through which common costs are financed .
 Council adopts assistance measures for Georgia, the Republic of Moldova, Ukraine and Mali . Ministers agreed an additional €500 million would be allocated under the European Peace Facility .
 Several EU Member States have provided arms and military equipment to Ukraine, or said they intend to . Several individual EU Members States have said they will provide military assistance .
 Belgium, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Finland and the Netherlands . The Netherlands, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Slovenia and Sweden are also included .
 Germany to send lethal weapons to Ukraine on 26 February 2022 . The move was viewed as a historic shift from its post-WWII policy of not sending weapons to conflict zones .
 Germany is sending anti-tank weapons and anti-aircraft defence systems to Ukraine . It is also giving permission to other EU countries to send German-made arms to Ukraine.
 2001 directive had not been previously used but had been adopted on the basis of the EU’s experience relating to persons displaced by the conflict in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s .
 The protection will apply to Ukrainian nationals, and their family members, if they resided in Ukraine before or on 24 February 2022 . The protection applies to Ukrainians living in Ukraine.
 Family members are defined in the decision as including spouses or partners, children under 18 and other close relatives that lived with them as part of the family unit .
 EU temporary protection or equivalent protection under the national law of the Member States should also be applied to third country nationals residing in Ukraine before or on 24 February with a permanent residence permit and who cannot safely return to their country .
 Member states may also apply this decision to other persons, including any third country nationals residing legally in Ukraine and who are unable to safely return to their country of origin, as well as Ukrainians .
 The decision will provide temporary protection for a period of one year . The decision is expected to be made in the coming months .
 Council decision to extend six monthly periods for a maximum of one year . This will be extended automatically by six months, unless terminated by another Council decision .
 The Commission can then propose to the Council to extend the temporary protection for an additional year . The Commission is then able to propose a further year of temporary protection .
 It may also propose to end the temporary protection if the situation in Ukraine is such as to permit safe and durable return . The situation in the Ukraine is currently in a state of crisis .
 The Commission will coordinate cooperation and exchange of information among Member States . As part of this decision, it will identify any need for additional support .
 EU agencies, including Frontex, the EU asylum agency and Europol, can provide further operational support if requested by the Member States . Europol can also provide additional operational support.
 In this time they will need to decide where they wish to claim temporary protection . They will be able to claim the right to stay in the UK .
 They cannot subsequently transfer that status to a different EU Member State . Another Member State may then decide to offer them temporary protection . They cannot then transfer the status to another Member State.
 Ireland has decided to waive short-term visa requirements for Ukrainian nationals unilaterally . Ireland does not apply EU visa policy (because of its Common Travel Area with the UK)
 Decision says nationals should be admitted on humanitarian grounds, without the need to produce a valid visa or travel documents or to prove they have sufficient means of subsistence . However, the Decision says that these nationals should not be admitted.
 The 2001 Council directive sets out the various obligations of Member States where people are granted temporary protection .
Beneficiaries of temporary protection will be provided with a residence permit in the Member State where they are granted temporary protection . Beneficiaries will be given a residence permits in Member State .
 There are various grounds for excluding specific individuals from temporary protection . There are reasonable grounds for considering that they present a security risk to the host community .
 Council unanimously introduces temporary protection for persons fleeing the war . 85 22 of the 27 EU Member States are part of the Schengen area .
 Non-Schengen EU countries, apart from Ireland, have also applied the same list of countries requiring or visa or having a visa waiver for short stays .
 EU countries and regions providing emergency protection to people fleeing Ukraine . This will allow cohesion policy funding to be released swiftly to help EU countries .
 Member States will also be able to use €10 billion under the Recovery Assistance for Cohesion and the Territories of Europe package . It is one of the EU's post-pandemic EU public investment programmes .
 The European Parliament would also need to approve the proposal . But it was expected to use an urgent procedure to do so .
 The Council agreed on a proposal to release a further €420 million of unspent home affairs funds to support those fleeing Ukraine . Also on 16 March, the Council agreed to release €420m of home affairs money .
European Commissioner for Innovation, Research, Culture, Education and Youth, Mariya Gabriel, held a video conference on 16 March 2022 to discuss ways of supporting those who had fled Ukraine .
 Half of the three million Ukrainians who fled the country are estimated to be children . Around half of the 3 million who had fled are children .
 EU health ministers also had a video conference call on 16 March to discuss the EU response to the health consequences of the conflict in Ukraine . Support for healthcare EU health Ministers also had the video conference.
 Council approves swift release of cohesion resources for Ukrainian refugees . 87 Council of EU, Ukraine: Council adopts negotiating mandate to unlock additional support under home affairs funds .
 Ministers discussed coordination of action and mutual support to ensure health systems could cope with these challenges . Ministers discussed coordinating of action, mutual support.
 A medical evacuation mechanism for those fleeing the war in Ukraine has been established under the EU Civil Protection Mechanism .
 The first operation under this mechanism transferred chronically ill patients from Poland to Italy . On 13 March, the first operation took place in Poland .
 Member States provided essential supplies, including disposal masks, medical supplies and equipment, and tents .
 Support was expanded following the Russian invasion, with all 27 EU Member States, together with Norway and Turkey, offering assistance .
 This included provision of medical supplies and shelter items, specialised equipment, vehicles and fuel . This included provisions for medical supplies, shelter items and vehicles. This included specialised supplies and equipment, including fuel and equipment .
 Moldova activated the EU Civil Protection Mechanism to support Ukrainians arriving there at the end of February . Moldova also activated the European Civil Protection mechanism to help Ukrainians arrive there .
 By 18 March, 16 EU countries had offered various assistance to Moldova, including shelter and hygiene kits .
 Poland and Slovakia also requested assistance via the EU Civil Protection Mechanism . Poland and Slovakia also requested help to deal with the Ukrainian refugee influx .
 On 28 February 2022, the European Commission announced an additional €90 million for humanitarian aid programmes to help civilians affected by the war Commission.
 €3 million was allocated to Moldova on 10 million in March to support the Ukrainians forced to flee there . This is part of the European Commission’s emergency support package for those affected by the conflict in Ukraine announced on 1 March 2022 .
 The rescEU medical stockpile, worth over €10 million, was sent to Ukraine . In addition, a substantial contribution from the resc EU medical stockpile was sent there .
 On 11 March, the Commission said it had on that day paid €300 million in emergency Macro-Financial Assistance to Ukraine .
 The Commission said it was preparing an additional MFA programme to further support Ukraine in the longer term . The Commission is preparing an extra programme to support Ukraine .
 The European Council statement of 24 February 2022 asked the European Commission to bring forward contingency measures on energy . The European Commission has asked for contingency measures.
 EU energy ministers met on 28 February, and discussed energy supply and stocks . They discussed energy supplies and stocks.
 The EU was not immediately at risk in terms of supplies of gas or fuel, even in the event of a disruption in the supply of Russian gas . The EU agreed that the EU wasn't at risk.
 contingency measures discussed, along with actions aimed at increasing energy imports from regions other than Russia . However, contingency measures were also discussed .
 The ministers discussed proposals for providing further assistance to the Ukrainian Government . They also discussed consolidating the operation of its electricity network .
 RePowerEU plan to make Europe independent from Russian fossil fuels before Europe independent 2030, beginning with gas .
 The Commission also outlined measures to from Russian fossil respond to rising energy prices in Europe and to replenish gas stocks for the fuels by 2030 .
 The plan would seek to diversify gas supplies, speed up the rollout of renewable gases and replace gas in heating and power generation . The plan is aimed at diversifying gas supplies.
 The Commission said that this could reduce EU demand for Russian gas by two thirds before the end of the year . This could reduce European demand for Russia's gas.
 The Commission said it would also present a legislative proposal by April . The proposal would require underground gas storage across the EU to be filled up to 90% of its capacity by 1 October .
 The Commission would also look into all possible options for emergency measures to limit the contagion effect of gas prices .
 The Commission said that following the invasion of Ukraine, the case for a rapid clean energy transition had never been stronger .
 The EU imports 90% of its gas consumption, with Russia providing around 45% of those imports . Russia provides around 45%, in varying levels across Member States .
 The Commission said it was also working with neighbours and partners which share the EU's fossil fuel dependencies and exposure to price hikes, including in Western Balkans .
 Support would also be provided for Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia, to ensure reliable and sustainable energy . Support also would be provided to Ukraine and Moldova .
 The statement referred to the impact on international energy markets of recent developments . The need to control prices was also cited as a reason for the statement .
 Oil and gas producing countries were called upon to act in a responsible manner and examine their ability to increase deliveries to international markets . Oil and Gas producing countries called on to take responsibility for their actions .
 The G7 would be committed to working together to mitigate the impact on energy supply and security . The statement was released by the G7 on Monday .
 This involved working together to ensure diversification of energy sources and supply routes . This also involved working with other energy sources to ensure that energy supply routes were diversified .
Russia threatens to cut off flow of Nord Stream 1 pipeline, says OilPrice.com .
 President Biden signed an executive order banning the import of Russian gas and oil on 8 March 2022 . The EU’s RePowerEU plan was highlighted in this context .
 Georgia and Moldova submitted applications to join the EU later in the same week . Georgia, Moldova and Georgia submitted applications for the EU earlier this week .
 President Zelenskyy of Ukraine, and Speaker of Ukraine’s Parliament, Ruslan Stefanchuk, addressed remotely .
 The group are fighting to be equal members of Europe . They are fighting for their survival, and this is their highest motivation .
Today, I believe that we are all showing the world exactly what we’re made of . Today, I think that we're all showing what we're made of, I say .
3 Ruslan Stefanchuk also called upon the EU and its Member States to support candidate status for Ukraine . He said this was now supported by the whole of Ukraine . Without you, Ukraine will be alone .
 The best support for the people of Ukraine in their darkest hours would be the immediate recognition of our membership of the European Union . Ukraine is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 membership of the European Union was supported by the majority of Ukrainians . Membership of the EU even before these events that started on 24 February.
 Council of the EU has responded swiftly by inviting the Commission to submit its opinion on Ukraine’s application . It said the submit an opinion Council had responded swiftly .
 The EU would deepen its partnership with application Ukraine and support it in pursuing its European path . In the meantime, the EU will deepen its relationship with Ukraine and help it pursue its EU path .
 It also referred to “significant progress’ in the implementation of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement and internal reforms in Ukraine .
 Slovenia and Poland’s Prime Ministers also signed a joint letter to the President of the European Council expressing support for Ukraine's EU membership by 2030 . Slovenia, Poland and Slovenia's Prime Ministers signed joint letter .
 Croatia, Hungary and Romania have also added their support for moves to launch an accession process for Ukraine . The German Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock adopted a more cautious tone .
 Mark Rutte says countries in the Western part of Europe were agreed on this . The Dutch Prime Minister said there could be no “fast-track procedure’s’.
 There are reported concerns in some Member States about corruption in Ukraine, instability of its institutions and the state of its economy .
 Member States are concerned about what they view as a drift towards undemocratic practices in some Member States . They do not want further enlargement without reformed EU decision-making .
 One treaty article of particular relevance to Ukraine is Article 42 of the Treaty on European Union . The Ukraine treaty is part of the European Union's "Treaty on Europe"
 This has been interpreted as a “mutual defence’ clause similar to Article 5 of the NATO treaty . This is the same as Article 5, which is part of the treaty. This is not the first time this has been misinterpreted .
 The NATO treaty does not include an explicit reference to the use of force to assist the party being attacked . However, unlike the NATO treaty, it does not mention an explicit mention of force being used .
 The process by which the EU agrees to applicant states joining the EU is set out briefly in Article 49 of the Treaty on European Union . Some Member States are not members of NATO, and some retain a policy of neutrality .
 European Commission makes assessment of suitability to join . Commission also conducts accession negotiations .
 Candidate countries are expected to have stable institutions that guarantee democracy, the rule of law and human right, as well as a functioning market economy . Candidate countries will be able to have a functioning economy and democracy .
Member States also need to implement all of the EU’s standards and rules, over time .
 Accession negotiations for process is lengthy most of the countries that have joined the EU since 2004 took six to eight years . Most countries that join the EU in 2004 took 6 to 8 years to reach agreement .
 For recent Member States such as Poland, Romania, Bulgaria and Croatia, ten to twelve years elapsed between submitting applications to the EU and actually becoming Member States .
 All countries that have applied to join the EU have been approved by the EU . The EU has approved the beginning of accession negotiations .
 Accession negotiations with Montenegro and Serbia have also made little headway . Accession talks with Serbia and Montenegro also have made little progress .
 Some commentators have warned that the reluctance of certain EU leaders to move forward with EU accession for the Western Balkan countries is fuelling instability in the region . Some countries are more prone to Russian influence.