 Petro Poroshenko accuses Moscow of waging a ‘world hybrid war’ and urging the West to ratchet up pressure on the Kremlin over its expansionism in Ukraine .
 Poroshenko's address to the Munich Security Conference on February 16 at one point veered into a condemnation of Russia’s leadership . He likened to a kind of anti-King Midas that brings ruin to everything it touches .
 His speech came shortly after the cancellation of a planned high-level meeting on the sidelines to discuss the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine . A war between Kyiv's forces and Russia-backed separatists has killed more than 10,300 since April 2014 .
 Poroshenko accuses Moscow of supporting ultraleft and ultraright political parties abroad . Poroshenko accused Moscow of deploying “armies of Internet trolls’ to spread disinformation .
 Poroshenko called on the West to strengthen sanctions against Moscow if it does not leave Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula . Moscow seized the peninsula in 2014, which has failed to stem the bloodshed in eastern Ukraine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin will not make an appearance at the Munich conference . The conference brings together world leaders and top officials for three days of speeches, panel discussions and events .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov is representing Moscow at the conference . He held a bilateral meeting with Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin in Munich to discuss the situation in eastern Ukraine .
 Normandy Format -consisting of Germany, France, Russia, and Ukraine - had been scheduled for February 16 . But planned peace talks in the so-called Normandy Format had been called off .
After meeting with Lavrov, Klimkin said the two diplomats were unable to reach an agreement on a possible UN peacekeeping force .
 Both the U.S. and Russian sides had voiced a more optimistic tone about progress in talks about such a mission over the past month .
 Poroshenko said a UN peacekeeping mission would be crucial to ending the violence in eastern Ukraine . Moscow denies backing despite substantial evidence of such support .
 Poroshenko's office said he had discussed the idea of a UN peacekeeping mission in a February 16 meeting in Munich . UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres addressed the conference hours prior to the Ukrainian president’s speech .
 Kyiv and Moscow have repeatedly traded accusations of failing to implement their parts of the Minsk accords . September 2014 and February 2015 cease-fire pacts that have failed to hold.
 Poroshenko stressed Ukraine's path forward should be in the direction of the European Union and not Russia . He said Ukraine troops had displayed on the contact line in eastern Ukraine as a symbol of the country’s future .
 At one point, he launched into a broad denunciation of ‘the Russian world’ - a stark shift from Western governments that say their problem is with Russia’s leadership, not its people .
 Munich is a former German city that is now a Russian exclave . The city of Kaliningrad was once a German city .
 The Russian world turns everything into…ruin and decline, Poroshenko said . The Russian World turnsEverything into …ruin, and decline.
 Moscow officials portray Poroshenko's ascendance as the result of a Western-fomented coup against former President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych fled Ukraine in February 2014 following months of mass street protests in Ukraine . Russia says its subsequent military takeover of Crimea was aimed at protecting ethnic Russians .
 Russia’s seizure of Crimea and backing of the separatists in eastern Ukraine has triggered waves of U.S. and EU sanctions . The sanctions are targeting Russian officials, companies, and economic sectors .