 The Ukrainian government has deployed the Ukrainian Armed Forces and volunteer battalions to combat pro-Russian separatist fighters in eastern Ukraine .
 Separatists are reputed to be receiving military assistance from Russia in the form of personnel and equipment . Separatist groups are said to have received military assistance.
 Pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych was replaced by pro-Western President Petro Poroshenko in spring 2014 . Pro-Western demonstrations that began in November 2013 spurred a political shift .
 In the midst of this transition, Russia annexed the Ukrainian region of Crimea . Russia annexed Ukraine's Crimea in the middle of the transition .
 Armed conflict broke out between separatist fighters and the Ukrainian Armed Forces in Ukraine's eastern regions .
 Ukraine and much of the international community have contended that Russia has been supplying personnel and military equipment to separatist groups . Despite Russian denials, Ukraine and many others have contended Russia has supplied personnel and equipment to separatists .
 There were relatively few violent skirmishes during the Euromaidan demonstrations . Crimea was also relatively peaceful .
 Intense fighting began in Ukraine’s eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk in spring 2014 .
 A second ceasefire, known as the Minsk II agreement, came into effect on September 13, 2015 . But fighting increased in 2016, with both the Ukrainian forces and the pro-Russian separatist forces violating the agreement .
 Russia’s annexation of the Ukrainian territory of Crimea saw little mobilized protest . Russia's annexation of Crimea was seen as a result of its annexation by Ukraine .
 Violent confrontation has been concentrated in the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk . The region is bordered by Russia and called Novorossiya or New Russia by Vladimir Putin .
 Most fighting took place in the Donetsk areas of Avdiivka, Marinka, Horlivka, in addition to heavy shelling in government-controlled Mariupol .
 Both the Ukrainian government and pro-Russian separatist forces continued to ignore the 2015 Minsk Agreements, perpetuating violence and conflict in the eastern region of the country .
 In December, the U.S. government announced that it would provide the Ukrainian government with weapons and training . The Ukrainian government has said it will provide weapons and train .
Civilians in conflict areas experienced high levels of poverty and unemployment, and record high food prices . Civilians in Conflict areas experienced a high level of poverty, unemployment and food prices.
 Ukrainian government and pro-Russian separatists agreed to an indefinite ceasefire to start on December 24, 2016 . However, significant diplomatic progress was made in late December .
 Ukraine continued to pursue greater integration with the European Union in 2016 . In 2016, Ukraine continued the pursuit of greater integration.
 Much of Ukraine’s previous trade with Russia has been cut off by the two countries . The two countries have been cutting off trade between them .
 Major violations of the agreement began with the capture of Debaltseve on February 18 .
 Second ceasefire agreement came into effect on September 1 and was largely respected by both sides . A second ceasefire agreement was also in effect September 1 .
 Minsk agreement granted special status to separatist-held regions only after local elections .
 In July the government tabled draft constitutional amendments that gave some autonomy to separatist-controlled regions .
 Separatists declared local elections for October 18 and November 1, but elections were postponed until February 2016 . The elections were scheduled to take place after October 2 agreement between Russia and Ukraine .
 The “Euromaidan’s’ demonstrations, also protesting corruption, continued until late February 2014 . Yanukovych was removed from office and an interim government appointed .
 In March, Russia swiftly annexed the southern Ukrainian region of Crimea . Russia annexed the Crimea in March .
 The elections were widely recognized as legal and legitimate by most of the international community . But disputed by Russia, the elections were not recognized as legitimate by the world .
 Poroshenko signed a free trade agreement with the EU, but deferred implementation of economic restructuring measures until 2016 . The agreement was signed by the Ukrainian president .
 Russian separatist movements emerged in several eastern regions of Ukraine . Violence broke out in the spring in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Russia denies direct support of pro-Russian separatists in armed clashes with Ukrainian troops . Russia denies support of separatists in clashes with Ukraine troops .
 The UN reported more than 4,700 conflict-related deaths during the year . The UN reports more than 3,000 conflict- related deaths in the year.
 Viktor Yanukovych fled Ukraine in February 2014 during a period of anti-government protests and civil unrest . He was then removed from office by parliament .
 An interim government called for elections, which Poroshenko won with a slight majority . The interim government was called for an interim government .
 The former Yanukovych government was accused of profound corruption, a key factor in the 2013-2014 protests . Former Yanukovych government accused of widespread corruption .
 Yanukovych regime favoured ties with Russia . Poroshenko has sought closer ties with the European Union .
 This seesaw between Russia and the West has been common since independence in 1991 . Russia has been in contact with the West since 1991 .
 Conscription ended in 2013, but was reinstated in 2014 after the onset of fighting in eastern Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian Armed forces are significant opponents of the eastern separatists . The Ukrainian armed forces are also significant opponents to the separatists .
 Irregular forces of pro-Ukrainian fighters have conducted much of the ground combat against eastern separatists . The separatists have been fighting in eastern Ukraine .
Foreign volunteers have been joined by foreign volunteers, mainly from Europe, and financially supported by some wealthy Ukrainians . They have been join by some of the world's richest Ukrainians .
 These battalions are directed by the Ukrainian Armed Forces . They are part of the Ukrainian Volunteer Army .
 Some believe volunteer brigades have been fully incorporated into the formal military structure . Some believe that volunteer brigade has been fully integrated into the military .
 This far-right Ukrainian nationalist political party emerged out of the Euromaidan demonstrations and clashes of 2013-2014 .
 Ultra-nationalist groups had claimed involvement in Euromaidan since its beginnings . They later joined forces as part of the ‘Right Sector’ movement, which became a political party in April 2014 .
 Far-right nationalists have played a significant role in Ukraine’s volunteer battalions .
 Most do not support the government’s move to enhance ties with the EU .
 In May 2014, the Right Sector’s original leader, Dmytro Yarosh, ran for president . He earned less than one per cent of the popular vote .
 In October, he won the seat of Dnipropetrovsk Oblast with almost 30 per cent of the vote . In October he ran in the parliamentary elections, winning the seat by almost 30% .
 Russia sent military troops into Crimea after Euromaidan protests compelled former Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych to flee Ukraine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin initially denied that he had sent troops to protect ethnic Russians in Crimea . But he later stated that he has sent troops in Crimea to protect the ethnic Russians .
Russian military involvement with pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine, according to reports . Russia has annexed Crimea from Ukraine .
 Putin has stated that Russian fighters in eastern Ukraine are there independently and participate in the conflict as members of self-defence groups .
 Most of the violent conflict has taken place in the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, where pro-Moscow separatist forces have formed militias .
 conflicting reports about the presence of Russian troops in the region and among separatist militias . There are conflicting reports.
 In November 2014, pro-Russian separatists proclaimed independence after leadership elections in Donetsk and Luhansk . No international election monitors were present for these elections . Their results were not recognized by Kiev or the international community .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin stated that Russia annexed Crimea to protect the rights of ethnic Russians . Russian President Putin said the annexation was to protect their rights .
 When Russian troops took over Ukrainian military bases in Crimea, some local military personnel defected . Others simply gave up their weapons .
 97 per cent of voters reportedly favoured union with Russia . The referendum was widely criticized as illegal and illegitimate .
 Since the 2014 annexation, Russia has maintained de facto control of the region .
 Most members of the international community still recognize Crimea as part of Ukraine . However, most members still recognize the region as a part of Russia .
 The cities of Avdiivka, Yasynuvata, Makiivka and Donetsk were subjected to intense fighting between government and nongovernment forces from January 21 until February 3 .
 It is estimated that there were more than 30,000 ceasefire violations in one week . The ceasefire was reported to have taken place in the past week .
 On April 23, a paramedic for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine died . Two other monitors were taken to hospital after their vehicle was damaged by an explosion near Pryshyb .
 From mid-August to the end of October, security improved somewhat, perhaps because of renewed ceasefire negotiations . The ceasefire negotiations were renewed in August .
 Most violations occurred in separatist-controlled areas in eastern Ukraine and along the border of these areas . The violations involved large-calibre weapons and heavy artillery .
 June was the worst month for military fatalities, with 25 Ukrainian troops killed . June is the worst year for Ukrainian military fatalities .
 Most fighting took place in Donetsk areas of Avdiivka, Marinka, and Horlivka, in addition to heavy shelling in government-controlled Mariupol . Several combatants, including three Ukrainian troops and three separatist fighters, were reportedly killed .
 Arsen Pavlov, the well-known Russian commander of the Donetsk People’s Republic, was killed with his bodyguard in October .
 December saw an upsurge of fighting, resulting in 25 separatist deaths near Svitlodarsk in eastern Ukraine .
 The ceasefire was observed on December 24, but was violated by separatists in the early morning hours of December 26 .
 Separatist soldiers forced Ukrainian government troops to retreat from key posts at Donetsk airport . Separatists forced Ukrainian troops to leave key posts in Donetsk airport.
 On February 12 the two sides agreed to a new peace agreement in Minsk, Belarus . The two sides have been in talks since February 12 .
 The deal called for the removal of heavy weapons from the front lines and the withdrawal of foreign armed factions .
 The agreement went into effect on February 15, but suffered a major blow three days later, when separatist forces captured the Ukrainian army garrison at Debaltseve .
 Both sides accused of returning heavy weapons to the front lines after inspections by observers . Both sides were accused of return heavy weapons after inspections .
 On April 13 a Ukrainian army armoured advance was repelled by separatists that were allegedly supported by Russia . The advance was allegedly backed by Russian separatists .
 Fighting again intensified in May; again, there were indications of Russian involvement .
 A major battle took place around the towns of Maryinka and Krasnohorivka, west of Donetsk, in June .
 On July 24 the United States announced that it would send military personnel to train Ukrainian troops . The U.S. will send personnel to Ukraine to train its troops .
 On August 26 the Ukrainian government, Ukrainian separatists, Russia, the EU, and the EU signed a new ceasefire agreement . The ceasefire agreement began on September 1 .
 A bilateral meeting between Ukraine and Russia on October 2 produced an agreement that, inter alia, called for the withdrawal of small-calibre weapons .
 The "contact line" in eastern Ukraine saw skirmishes in November, but fighting generally declined after the September ceasefire .
After an interim government was installed, these protests largely ceased . After the interim government, they largely ceased.
 At the height of the unrest, Yanukovych temporarily fled to Crimea and then Russia . While men in camouflage, commonly recognized as Russian troops, appeared in Crimea .
 Putin initially claimed that they were independent self-defence groups . He initially claimed they were self-defense groups .
 The Crimea referendum was non-violent, but concerns have been raised about mistreatment and abuse of Tatars in the region . The referendum was not violent .
 In April widespread separatist violence broke out in the eastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk . In early April, widespread separatist Violence broke out.
 Ukrainian government mobilizes 100,000 reservists in response to reinstated conscription . In response, Ukrainian government decides to mobilize 100,00 reservists .
 Both sides accused of indiscriminate shelling, putting at risk and killing civilians . Both sides accuse of indiscriminately shelling .
 It is alleged that both the Ukrainian military and rebel forces have used cluster munitions . Neither Ukraine nor Russia has signed the Convention on Cluster Munitions .
 On July 17 Malaysian Airlines flight MH17 was struck down over rebel-controlled territory . 298 people were killed .
 Responsibility for the strike was widely attributed to the rebels, who denied it .
 Ukrainian forces resumed fighting at the end of the ceasefire, claiming that rebel forces had been non-compliant . Ukrainian forces resume fighting after ceasefire ends .
 In September, Ukraine, Russia, certain districts of Donetsk and Luhansk signed the Minsk Protocol, which included a new ceasefire agreement . In September representatives of Ukraine and Russia signed the agreement .
 As of November 15, 2016, the total number of deaths from the conflict has risen to 9,733 . The U.N. Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner documented the deaths .
 The UNHCR estimated that there were 318,786 refugees and 20,754 asylum seekers originating from Ukraine as of June 2015 . The UNHCR estimates that there are 318,800 refugees in Ukraine .
 The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre estimated that 1,272,700 people had been internally displaced by conflict as of April 2015 .
 In 2014, 610,413 internally displaced people were identified by Ukraine’s State Emergency Service . The Ukrainian Ministry of Social Policy reported 823,000 IDPs at the yearend .
 In December, the Ukrainian government and rebel forces conducted the largest prisoner exchange since the conflict erupted . The prisoner exchange is the largest in the country's history .
 No progress was made, despite encouragement from the French and German Foreign Ministers . No progress has been made.
 The Minsk Tripartite working group called for an indefinite ceasefire on the front lines of Donbas starting on September 1 . However, August 26 discussions showed modest progress, but the talks showed little progress .
 Ukrainian parliament debated legislation giving special status to separatist-held areas . In accordance with Minsk II, in March, the parliament debated a bill to give the area special status .
 In August, legislators granted initial approval to constitutional amendments on decentralization . The law allows the special-status law to be a special law .
 A nationalist from the Svoboda party threw a hand grenade outside the parliament building, killing three members of the National Guard . In retaliation, a Ukrainian nationalist threw the grenade outside.
 A second and final vote on the amendments, scheduled for December, did not take place by yearend . The amendments require a two-thirds majority .
 Russia unexpectedly released former military officer Nadezhda Savchenko from captivity in exchange for two Russian paramilitary troops .
 Savchenko took up her seat in parliament as a member of Yulia Timoshenko’s Batkivshchyna party . After her release, Savchenko became member of Ukraine's defence committee .
 In July, her Batkivshchyna party gained two new representatives in parliament . The party gained 2 new representatives.
 The June 23 referendum generated fears that the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union could derail EU support for sanctions against Russia and a visa liberalization process for Ukraine .
 Ukraine has met all required benchmarks under the Visa Liberalisation Action Plan 2016 . By December, Ukraine had met the required benchmarks . discussions continued on visa-free travel .
 In July, former journalists and activists formed the Democratic Alliance, a new liberal political party . The party hoped to unite the centre and the centre-right .
 Its founder,legislator and former journalist Mustafa Nayem, wrote the social media posts that helped trigger the Maidan Revolution in 2013-2014 .
 In November 2016, the Regional Governor of Odessa resigned and launched a new opposition movement, New Forces . New Forces was formed by the New Forces in November 2016 .
 Mikheil Saakashvili has called for early parliamentary elections in 2019 . He attracted 1,000 supporters at a November 27 rally in Kyiv, after calling for early elections .
 The accord included clauses mandating permanent special status for certain geographic areas, local elections in eastern Ukraine, and constitutional reform in advance of decentralization .
 In March the Ukrainian parliament amended the special status law to require local elections before granting special status to separatist areas . The law was amended in March .
 separatists claimed that this new provision went against the Minsk agreement . But it was approved on August 31 .
 In September separatists announced that local elections for separatist areas in eastern Ukraine would take place . The Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic will take place on October 18 and November 1 .
Ukrainian President Poroshenko objected to the calling of elections by separatists . The Ukrainian President said he would not allow separatists to hold elections .
 separatists announced on October 6 that elections would be delayed until February 2016 . On October 6 separatists announced that elections will be postponed until 2016 .
 On July 1 Poroshenko introduced constitutional changes that gave separatist-controlled regions some self-determination .
 Ukrainian parliament sent proposed changes to the constitutional court for review . Later that month, the parliament sent the proposed changes.
 President Poroshenko’s ruling coalition retained support in west and central Ukraine . But lost support in the south and east of the country .
 The European Union publically demanded that Ukraine speed up reforms to achieve greater economic and political integration with Europe . The EU publically demands that Ukrainespeed up reforms.
 Separatist Oleg Tsarev introduced the Novorossiya project to create a state from the Russian border to Moldova .
 When President Yanukovych fled Ukraine in February, an interim government was appointed . Official elections were scheduled for May, and official elections were set for May .
International monitors were present in Ukraine for the election, in which Petro Poroshenko became the new president .
President Poroshenko signed the EU Association Agreement after his inauguration . implementation of the DCFTA was later postponed until 2016 .
 Crimea was annexed by Russia in March 2014 after a referendum that was not recognized by the international community . Crimea was annexation by Russia after a vote not recognized as a referendum by the world community .
 The UN General Assembly passed Resolution A/RES/68/262 . It reaffirmed Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity to include Crimea .
 In the spring the People's Republic of Donetsk and the People’s Republic of Luhansk held referenda on self-rule . The results were not recognized by the Ukrainian government .
 President Poroshenko had pledged to grant more autonomy to Donetsk and Luhansk . Both regions held elections in November that were deemed illegitimate by many western countries .
 Many countries imposed travel bans and economic sanctions on Russia . Many countries have cited Russia as an aggressor .
 Russian President Putin maintained that Russians fighters in Ukraine were volunteers . He denied supplying weapons to rebel fighters .
 In 1991, after the fall of the Soviet Union, Ukraine reclaimed independence .
 Ukraine straddles a divide between Russian and European political systems . Western regions largely upholding nationalistic Ukrainian sentiments and eastern regions reflecting a strong Russian identity .
 Independence saw the return of many Crimean Tatars, a Muslim ethnic minority with deep roots in Crimea . Their families had been expelled in 1944, but their families were returned .
 In the 2001 census Tatars accounted for about 12 per cent of the population in Crimea . Most of the rest were people of Russian descent .
 Crimea was included in Russia from 1783 until 1954, when control over the territory was transferred to Ukraine . Crimea was part of the Crimea region in Russia between 1783 and 1954 .
 In 2004 Ukraine’s Orange Revolution grew from widespread allegations of corruption and election rigging by pro-Russian candidate Viktor Yanukovych .
Yushchenko won in a new vote in December and became president of Ukraine in January 2005 . The legitimacy of Yanukovych’s presidential victory was challenged by both Viktor Yushchenko of the opposition and thousands of demonstrators .
 The December elections displayed a clear divide between Ukraine’s east and west . Although Yushchenko won, support for Yanukovych remained firm among eastern and southern regions .
 Yanukovych returned to power after winning the 2010 presidential election . Yanukovych won the election in 2010 .
 Yanukovych canceled trade talks with the European Union in November 2013 in favour of strengthening ties with Russia . In November 2013, Yanukovych canceled talks with European Union over Russia .
 The sudden move away from the Association Agreement, including the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with the EU, was the catalyst for massive protests .
 Euromaidan is the name of the movement that took place in the capital city of Kyiv . The movement has been linked to the movement since it was formed in 2011 .
 Popular protests also motivated by widespread corruption in the country . Popular protests were also motivated.
 The Euromaidan movement spread to other cities, despite the government’s protest bans .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia at the height of the violence and with the collapse of state authority, Yanukovych fled .
 The Ukrainian parliament appointed Oleksander Turchynov interim president . The parliament appointed him as the president of Ukraine .
 The 2012 language law that made Russian a second official language was under threat of repeal . Within days, the law was underthreat of repeal.
 International leaders expressed support for the new regime and recognized interim President Turchynov . International leaders also expressed support.
 At the end of February 2014, covert Russian troops, wearing no identifying insignia, began to infiltrate Crimea .
 The troops began to take over strategic locations, including the regional airport and media outlets . The troops have taken over strategic areas in the past few months .
 97% of voters supported joining Russia; Russia then moved to annex Crimea . It was reported that 97% supported joining.
 There have been reports of abuse and discrimination against Crimean Tatars . Since then, there have been Reports of abuse, discrimination.
 unrest was gaining momentum in the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk . The 2014 annexation of Crimea was the focus of the unrest in the region .
 Separatist groups took control of many cities and strategic infrastructure, such as government buildings . Separatists have taken control of some of the world's largest cities .
 Donetsk and Luhansk disintegrated into civil conflict . Pro-Russian demonstrations in other areas of Ukraine, such as Odessa, were suppressed .
 There are widespread reports that Russia is helping local separatist forces, but Russia denies this . There are also reports that Russian forces are helping local separatists .
 The international community has decried Russian intervention in Ukraine as a violation of internationally accepted principles of sovereignty and nonintervention .
 President Putin claimed that the intervention was to protect ethnic Russians in Ukraine . He said it was in the event of a breakdown of law and order .
 More than 17 per cent of Ukraine's population identify as ethnic Russian, with high concentrations in eastern regions . It is estimated that more than 17% of Ukraine’s population identifies as ethnic Russians .
 Political analysts have pointed to fears over Ukraine's joining NATO and the future of Russia's Black Sea Fleet based in Crimea as factors in Russia's intervention in Ukraine .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, a newly independent Ukraine reduced its military and defence funding, maintaining its stockpile of weapons from the Soviet era .
 Before relations between Russia and Ukraine deteriorated, arms trade with Russia accounted for a third of Ukraine’s arms sales . Before relations deteriorated, the arms trade between the two countries accounted for one third of Ukrainian arms sales.
 Ukraine had been a major arms supplier to Russia since the Soviet era . It discontinued this trade in 2014 after the Russian annexation of Crimea .
 Ukraine was the world’s eighth largest arms exporter, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute . From 2009 to 2013, Ukraine is the world's eighth largest arm exporter .
 Ukraine has requested military and arms support from the international community to respond to separatist attacks in the east . Ukraine has asked international community for help in responding to the separatist attacks .
 The United States, Britain, and Canada have provided non-lethal military equipment . Most countries have been reluctant to send arms to Ukraine . The U.S., Britain, Canada, and the United States have provided weapons .
 Ukrainian government arranged to buy arms from the United Arab Emirates in February 2015 . In February 2015, the Ukrainian government agreed to buy weapons from the UAE .
 There have been widespread allegations that separatist forces are being given weapons by the Russian military . The U.S. and NATO officials reported evidence of cross-border movements of military supplies from Russia into Ukraine .
 Russia has consistently denied these allegations and accused the U.S. intelligence services of helping Ukraine to suppress separatist fighters . Russia has also accused the United States of helping Ukrainian separatists .
 Reports suggest separatist groups have both accessed weaponry left behind at Ukrainian military bases and captured weapons in skirmishes with Ukrainian troops .
 The Armament Research Services suggested that a large quantity of separatists’ weapons could have been acquired from internal stockpiles left over from the Soviet era .
 separatist fighters accessed internal and external arms trafficking networks, according to reports . A number of reports indicate that separatist fighters access internal and External arms networks .
 The Russian government sought to expedite its military modernization efforts . The U.S. and the EU banned arms sales to Russia .
 In 2014, the Poroshenko government initiated a plan to increase the defence budget from one per cent of GDP to five per cent .
 Ukraine has striven to replace Russian-made military equipment with equipment supplied by NATO member states . Since 2014, Ukraine has been trying to replace Russia-made equipment .
 Ukroboronprom, Ukraine’s state-owned weapons manufacturing consortium, signed a deal to acquire German-made engines for the military's armored personnel carriers .
 The United States and other NATO countries have been supplying Ukraine with equipment and training during the conflict . The U.S. and other countries have also been supplying the country with equipment .
 In 2017, it was announced that the U.S. would provide “enhanced defensive capabilities,’ which reportedly include anti-tank missiles . The United States will provide the government with ‘enhanced defense capabilities’
Both the Orange Revolution in 2004 and the Euromaidan demonstrations of 2014 grew out of Ukrainians’ distress over profound governmental corruption . Both the Orange revolution in 2004. and the 2014 demonstrations in 2014 grew from Ukrainians' distress over government corruption .
 Ukraine's declining economy was smaller in 2015 than it was at independence in 1991 . Massive political corruption contributed to Ukraine’s declining economy .
 In 2013, President Viktor Yanukovych publicly abandoned the EU Association Agreement and Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement initiated in 2012 .
 Pro-Russian leader threw his support behind Russia’s offer to provide Ukraine with $15-billion in loans and significantly reduce gas prices . Instead, the pro- Russian leader threw support behind the offer .
 Euromaidan movement, which swept President Petro Poroshenko to power in May 2014, was a major part in igniting the movement . President Poroshenko has been in power since May 2014 .
 Poroshenko signed the EU Association Agreement, deferring implementation of DCFTA until January 2016 . Shortly after his election, he signed the agreement .
After Russia annexed Crimea in 2014, many countries imposed economic sanctions on Russia . Russia annexed the Ukrainian territory in 2014 .
 In 2015, the G20 and EU extended sanctions against Russia until July 2016 . In 2016, the EU extended the sanctions until 2016 .
 Russia announced a plan to create a special economic zone within Crimea to encourage direct private business investment and to boost tourism in the region .
 On December 16, 2015, Ukraine announced that it would suspend trade with Crimea .
 The Ukrainian parliament imposed a trade embargo on Russia on December 24, 2015 and officially cut off trade with Crimea in mid-January 2016 . The Ukraine parliament imposed the ban on Russia in December 2015 .
Fighting has destroyed as much as 10 per cent of Ukraine's industry, with output reduced by 25 per cent . In Ukraine’s ‘industrial heartland’ in the east, the fighting has destroyed 10% of the industry .
 In February 2015, Ukraine accepted a bailout from the International Monetary Fund worth approximately $17-billion . Ukraine accepted the IMF's bailout of about $17 billion .
 On May 19, 2015, Parliament suspended debt repayments . negotiations to restructure foreign debt started soon after .
 Ukraine's economy had been in recession for 18 months and its currency had been devalued by 10 per cent . By February 2016, Ukraine’s economy was in recession.
 During 2016, the IMF expressed concern about the future of its loan programs for Ukraine .
 The February 2016 resignation of Ukraine Economy and Trade Minister Aivaras Abromavicius generated major concerns among international partners . The resignation of the Ukraine economy and trade minister was announced in February 2016 .
 The IMF reported that Ukraine had made economic progress in May 2016 . The IMF reiterated its call to the Ukrainian government to boost reforms .
 In May 2016, President Poroshenko appointed a close ally with no legal background as Prosecutor General .
 In August 2016, the IMF delayed the release of a third, $1.7-billion loan to Ukraine . The delay was in response to a perceived lag in reform efforts in Ukraine .
 The money was released in mid-September, but the IMF stressed that progress on reform was required .
 Ukraine received energy from Russia on a credit system. During the Soviet period, Ukraine received power from Russia .
 Following independence, Ukraine continued to source much of its energy from Russia . There was some domestic production of oil and natural gas, and exports of electricity and coal .
Over the course of the recent conflict, Russia increased the price of gas and requested that Ukraine settle its gas debt .
 At the end of October 2014, Russia and Ukraine agreed to clear Ukraine’s debt through a new payment plan and to continue Russian gas exports to Ukraine . The deal also includes a payment plan for Ukraine's gas exports .
 Ukraine also cut power supply to Crimea after its annexation by Russia . Ukraine also reduced and, on occasions, cut power to Crimea .
 Conflict in the east, where most coal mines are located, has disrupted Ukraine’s coal supply . Most coal mines in Ukraine are located in east .
 In 2013, Russia provided Ukraine with a $3-billion loan, which remained unpaid at the December 20, 2014 deadline . The loan was paid by Russia in 2013 .
 In mid-November 2015, Russia offered to extend the payback period for the loan . Ukraine rejected the proposal .