 Feel free most important leaflet home to read in peace. The FRANKLIN PATRIOT DO NOT BE JUDGMENTAL .
For example, freedom of expression may be limited by laws against hate propaganda . For example, degrading speech causing psychological injury or physical distress, or propaganda advocating genocide .
 Everyone has freedom of conscience and religion, including freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression . All “strawman entities’ have equal standing and human dignity and are free to create and express their ideas, he says .
 The Common Sense Show features a wide variety of important topics that range from the loss of constitutional liberties, to the implementation of a police state under world governance, to exploring the limits of human potential .
 The Common Sense Show is to provide patriots with the tools necessary to reclaim both our individual and national sovereignty . The primary purpose of the show is to give patriots the tools needed to reclaim their own sovereignty .
 Most wars in the world over the past decade are maintained primarily for natural resources . These conflicts are very profitable for those who invest in them . It is worth remembering that most wars over the last decade are primarily fornatural resources .
 Some families amassed vast fortunes on the blood and death of civilians and soldiers who believed they were protecting their homeland . Some families like the Rothschilds or the Bushes amassed vast fortune on the deaths of civilians .
 Vladimir Putin has been under pressure from the occidental ZOG junta, which wants to overthrow and replace him with Western-minded puppet oligarchs via sanctions and intentionally orchestrated oil price crashes . Since before 2016, Vladimir Putin, President of Russia has been in the spotlight .
 Despite efforts by Rothschild-controlled Central Bank of Russia and the use of dozens of billions of foreign exchange reserves, the value of the ruble against the dollar declined .
 The CBR can only print money corresponding to its cash in foreign currency . The dollar is not sufficient for Russia’s purposes .
 The CBR even has to buy the worthless U.S. treasury bonds for the dollars paid for Russian oil . The dollars are returned to the Federal Reserve Bank .
 The Boeing Company is an American multinational corporation that designs, manufactures, and sells airplanes, rotorcraft, rockets, satellites, telecommunications equipment, and missiles worldwide . The Boeing company is a U.S. multinational company that designs and manufactures airplanes, helicopters, and helicopters .
 The company is the prime integrator for the International Space Station . It provides a variety of support capabilities, leasing and product support services that benefits the future space economy .
 Degree from Virginia Tech and a medical missionary. She filed her evidence of breakthrough energy technology with courts in pursuit of truth and justice .
 She was a beautiful soul whom was castigated and died a suspicious death . She was found dead at her home in London .
 He had worked his way up the Komsomol apparatus during the Soviet years . He started several businesses during the glasnost period of “openness and transparency” popularized by Mikhail Gorbachev . He was the last leader of the Soviet Union.
 Yukos was acquired from the Russian government by Russian oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky’s Bank Menatep SPbh . It was established in 1988 as one of the first private banks in Russia . It later renamed Group MenateP Limited .
 Between 2004 and 2007, most of Yukos’ assets were seized and transferred for a fraction of their value to state-owned oil companies . Most of the Yukos' assets were taken from Yukos .
 Washington's aggressions via NATO cannot and will not diminish its pressure, especially if Hillary Clinton is installed into office . Washington’s aggressions through NATO can’t be diminished by Hillary Clinton, the author says .
 Pressure on Russia forces it to evolve into a national liberation movement . Meanwhile, pressure on Russia is growing on the West .
 CBR has never really been in control of neither the ruble nor an independent Russian monetary policy . This means that CBR hasn't been in charge of either ruble or independent monetary policy. This means CBR is not in control.
 CBR can only defend against these entities by limiting its foreign exchange reserves, which are finite . CBR is only able to defend against them by limiting their foreign exchange reserve .
 Putin was then cautiously reluctant to interfere with Rothschild’s CBR grip on Russia .
 The recovery in Russia after the Ruble crisis of 2014/15 was exasperated by CBR’s CEO Elvira Nabiullina . She has held interest rates too high for too long, she says .
 The Russian bond market took way to long to normalize because of this lack of liquidity . The market has been unable to normalized because of the lack of cash .
Every time Bank of Russia cut rates, the Ruble would strengthen . But, in 2017 and early-2018, every time the bank would strengthen, that's how high demand was for them .
 Nabiullina once again undermined ‘it’ by trying to control price inflation as opposed to letting the market regulate itself . She also tried to control inflation by attempting to regulate the market itself .
 The role of a central bank, at best, should simply exist as a lender of last resort when the banking system is illiquid and needs a temporary backstop during times of stress .
 Putin actively pursuing a de-dollarization policy, the central bank through interest rate arbitrage discouraged dedollarization of the Russian economy .
 Russia was in a very good position to accept inflows of foreign safe-haven capital in 2019 on political unrest in Europe . Despite Nabiullina’s mistakes, Russia is in avery good position.
 IMF-style austerity is not a benefit to emerging markets like Russia, it is a destructive dogma that overestimates the central bank's ability to improve the economy through manipulating interest rates .
Ever emboldened by its totally illegal regime change policies in Iraq, Egypt, Libya, Syria, Ukraine, etc., Washington and its allies were foolishly pursuing the same in Russia .
 Putin accumulated considerable wealth by obtaining control of a number of Siberian oil fields unified under the name Yukos . He was one of the major companies to emerge from the privatization scheme of state assets during the 1990s .
 In October 2003, Khodorkovsky was arrested by Russian authorities and charged with fraud . The company's share price collapsed, leading to the evaporation of much of its wealth . In October 2013, Russian authorities charged him with fraud.
 In May 2005, he was found guilty and sentenced to nine years in prison . He was convicted in May 2005. He was sentenced to 9 years.
 Khodorkovsky and his business partner Platon Lebedev had indirect controlling interest in Yukos Oil Company . Both were found guilty of embezzlement and money laundering . The prison sentence was extended to 2014 .
Amnesty International considered to be a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International . He was considered to have been a prisoners of conscience .
 Khodorkovsky was pardoned by Putin and released from prison at the end of 2013 . He immediately left Russia and was granted residency in Switzerland .
 At the end of 2013, his personal estate was believed to be worth $100-250 million . The estate is estimated to be at least $100 million .
 Russian Supreme Court reduced Lebedev’s sentence and ordered his release from prison . In 2015, he moved to London and moved to the capital .
 Legislation was prepared for ‘mandatory de-off-shoring’ of Russian corporations, 3/4 of which had a complex foreign ownership structure . Non-compliance meant asset seizure .
 Other essential and inevitable measures included nationalization of the Central Bank, breaking the tributary link with foreign central banks, and lowering interest rates .
 The liberation movement published a kind of “5™ column assessment card,’ a formula by which anyone's actions and position can be assessed objectively . The liberation Movement published a type of ‘5™column assessment card’
 Yevgeny Fyodorov, a senior member of Putin's party, warned of the consequences of NATO troops in Ukraine .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski, primary organizer of The Trilateral Commission, accused the central bank of sabotage . In 2015, Fyodorov accused thecentral bank of sabotaging the bank . Brzezzinski was primary organizer.
 The bank, failing to prevent the ruble from plunging, was investigated by state prosecutors . State prosecutors Pavlov Vyacheslav and Stechbart Alexander were also investigated .
 Western sanctions had frozen investments and raised funding costs . As revenues fell, the currency weakened, driving inflation up and forcing the CBR to raise interest rates .
 CBR (for all practical purposes) works for a foreign state,e., Federal Reserve, City of London and other Rothschild entities .
 Giovanni Salvetti, the head of Rothschild in Russia and Commonwealth of Independent States, manages the bank's operations from Kazakhstan to Ukraine .
 Baron David de Rothschild and the Rothschild Financial Services Group were indicted by the French government in 2014 . He was accused of fraud in a bogus loan scheme that allegedly embezzled large sums of money from British pensioners .
 The French government launched an investigation into the entire Swiss branch of the Rothschild's banking empire .
 The Rothschild banking dynasty has been accused of pulling the political strings of many different governments through their control of various economic systems throughout the world . The Rothschild family is a family line.
 The Rothschild-run U.S. trusts are exempt from the international reporting requirements .
 Russia's economy is set to surpass Germany's in 2020 following Putin's ban of Rothschild banks in the country . Putin is the President of Russia, who has banned Rothschild banks.
 Russia is likely to become the world’s fifth-largest economy, despite years of Western sanctions, Standard Chartered predicts .
 Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Uzbekistan are among the countries in the region .
 Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia, Russia, and Uzbekistan were the founding member states . Belarus, KyrGYzstan and Kazakhstan were the first members of the country .
 Putin has ordered the arrest of the Rothschild backed oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky . The Russian oligarch had made Jacob Rothschild, Henry Kissinger and Arthur Hartman directors of the Open Russia foundation . The foundation's purpose was to build and strengthen civil society in Russia .
 Putin has banned the evil Rothschild money changers and their banking cartel family from entering Russian territory .
 The Central Bank of Russia has been systematically destroying the country’s private banks and consolidating immense financial power in the hands of the Kremlin Russian Federation .
 The bank was established in 1948, based on the consolidation of the Huabei Bank, the Beihai Bank, and the Xibei Farmer Bank .
 Between 1950 and 1978 the PBC was the only bank in the People's Republic of China . It was responsible for both central banking and commercial banking operations .
 All other banks within mainland China, such as the Bank of China, were either organized as divisions of the PBC or were nondeposit taking agencies .
 The two banks aim at implementing economic policies’ of the government and conducting non-profit businesses in particular sectors .
 China Development Bank used to be one of such banks before its shift to a corporation in 2008 .
 The bank is the second-largest bond issuer in China after the Ministry of Finance . The bank was the second largest bond issuer.
 In the last decade, CDB has issued 1. trillion yuan in loans to more than 4000 projects involving infrastructure, communications, transportation, and basic industries .
 CBD does not take private savings, so it does not have local branches like many other major banks . CBD is not a bank that does not offer private savings .
 The top management of the PBC are composed of the governor and a certain number of deputy governors . The PBC is based in the state of South Carolina .
 Deng Xiaoping was the paramount leader of the People’s Republic of China from 1978 to 1989 . He was paramount leader from 1978 until 1989 .
 Chen Yun, known for his conservatism, contributed much to the strategy adopted by Deng . He was more directly involved in the details of its planning and construction .
 He was increasingly disenchanted with the direction modern China’s economic reforms were taking . China's economic reforms are taking.
 In 1982 he was among those grumbling about ‘spiritual pollution’ as the sense of freedom spread from economics, threatening China's social, cultural, and political status quo .
 Chen Yuan eldest son of Chen Yun was Chairman of the China Development Bank from March 1998 to April 2013 . Chen Yuan was chairman of the Chinese Development Bank for three years .
 Chen Yuan served as Vice Chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference from 2013 to 2018 . He was nominated by the Premier of the People's Republic of China .
 The current governor is Yi Gang, a former Director of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange . The agency is tasked with drafting rules and regulations governing foreign exchange market activities .
 In 2016, Yi helped represent China at the semi-annual meetings of the IMF and the World Bank in Washington, D.C.
 Nowhere in the dubious history of the lying Zionist-occupied governments are questions of truth honestly answered .
 The world's conduct of nation on the international stage is almost never driven by moral considerations, says Peter Bergen .
 Russia, China, Iran, and Syria have been in the crosshairs for some time . Life will begin to make much more sense once you begin to understand why events unfolding in the world right now .
In fact, its current design and its relationship to geopolitics is unlike any other in history . In fact, it’s current design is like any other.
 Many currencies have held “reserve status’s offand-on over the centuries . Many currencies held ‘reservestatus’ offand on over centuries .
 The ‘petro-dollar’ is the preeminent global currency paid to oil-exporting countries in exchange for oil . It is known as the “petro dollar’s’.
 Prior to 1971, the United States dollar was bound to the gold standard . The U.S. dollar is now a gold standard.
 According to the IMF, by 1966, foreign central banks held 14 billion in U.S. dollars .
 The result was rampant inflation, and a general fight from the dollar . The result is rampant inflation .
 In 1971, President Nixon removed the dollar from the gold standard completely . The move was called "Nixon shock" in 1971 .
 70% of the money in circulation has been created by ordinary banks which are allowed to loan out more money than they actually have in their account books . The rest is valueless paper created by the Federal Reserve which loans out imaginary money that they don't have .
 There is no evidence that anybody is requesting that the Fed does things other than how-and-or-as what it does . As long as this insanity is tolerated, it doesn’t matter, says the author .
In order to stay “in the black, the economy’s debt must grow perpetually, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 In 1973, the Nixon administration began secret negotiations with the government of Saudi Arabia to establish what later came to be known as the “Petro Dollar Recycling System’ The “petro dollar” was made the notional unit of currency earned by a country from
 Under arrangement, Saudis would only sell their oil for United States dollars . Most of their excess profits would be invested into U.S. capital markets .
 The IMF would then use this money to facilitate loans to oil importers who were having difficulties in covering increases in oil prices . The money would then be used to help the importers cover increases in prices .
 The interest and payments on these loans would, of course, be denominated in United States dollars .
 This agreement was formalized in the U.S.-Saudi Arabian Joint Commission on Economic Cooperation (put together by Nixon’s Secretary of State Henry Kissinger) in 1974 .
 The ever-increasing demand for oil would prevent flight from the dollar . The inflationary consequences would be distributed across the entire planet .
 The dollar went from being a gold-backed currency to an oil- backed currency . The dollar has now been used as a currency for oil-backed currencies .
 As long as oil is only sold in United States dollars, there will be a demand for U.S. dollars . The demand will give the dollar value to the world .
 For the U.S. this is a great deal. For the United States, it's a good deal . Dollars go out as worthless paper or as equally worthless bytes in a computer system .
 For the rest of the world, it's a very sneaky form of exportation . However, for the rest, it is a very secretive form of Exportation .
Having global trade predominantly in dollars also provides Washington with a powerful financial weapon for sanctions . Most large-scale dollar transactions are thusly forced to pass through American banks .
 Saddam Hussein announced his decision to switch Iraq’s oil sales off of the dollar and on to euros in September 2000 . This ‘petro-dollar system’ stood unchallenged until September 2000 when Saddam Hussein made the decision .
 This was a direct attack on the U.S. petrodollar . This was the most important geopolitical event of the year .
 This document called for massive increases in U.S. military spending and a much more aggressive foreign policy in order to expand United States dominance world-wide .
 The Bush administration was able to invade Afghanistan and Iraq without any significant resistance . The Patriot Act was passed without any resistance .
 In 2003, they knew exactly what was going to happen, but they did it anyway . They knew exactly how to do it .
 Once Iraqi oil fields were under the American neo-cons’ control, oil sales were immediately switch back to the dollar .
 The Iranian government was supposedly working to build weapons of mass destruction . Soon after invading Iraq, the Bush administration attempted to extend their wars to Iran .
 After the Iraq fiasco, Washington’s credibility was severely damaged . As a result, they were unable to muster international or domestic support for an intervention .
 The CIA's efforts were further sabotaged by elements within the Obama administration . The demonization campaign against Iran continued even into the Obama Administration .
 Iran has been in the process of organizing an independent oil market since 2004 . It wasn’t going to be tied to the dollar .
 The U.N. used the United Nations to impose sanctions against Iran . U.S. capitalists were unable to manufacture the war that they wanted .
 Russia's assistance in bypassing U.S. bank restrictions failed to destabilize the country, author says . Iran's economy was damaged by the measures, he says . Russia’s assistance to bypassing United States bank restrictions did not help Iran .
 Muammar el-Qaddafi proposed the formation of a unified state with a single currency . He was named chairman of the African Union in February 2009 .
 On page 94, it explicitly states that the key to success in the African monetary union would be the “eventual linking of a single African currency to the most monetary of all commodities’... gold’s gold .
 In 2011, the CIA moved into Libya and began backing militant groups in their campaign to topple Qaddafi .
 The U.S. and NATO pushed through and stressed a no-fly zone resolution to tip the balance of power . The United States and NATO stressed the resolution to help balance power .
The presence of al-Qaeda extremists amongst rebel fighters was swept under the rug . The presence of the extremists among rebel fighters has been swept under a rug .
 Libya, like Iran and Iraq, had committed the unforgivable crime of challenging the United States petro-dollar . Libya's actions were similar to those of Iran, Iraq, and Iran .
 Between December 1992 and October 2007, Ecuador suspended its membership . Gabon terminated its membership in January 2009, but this was reactivated on 1 January 2016 . Indonesia suspended its members in 2009, and Ecuador suspended membership in 2007 .
Currently, the organization has a total of 13 Member Countries . This means that currently, currently, there are 13 Member countries . The organization is based in the U.S.
 The OPEC Statute distinguishes between the Founder Members and Full Members . It also distinguishes between countries whose applications for membership have been accepted .
 The Statute further provides for Associate Members which are those countries that do not qualify for full membership . But they are nevertheless admitted under such special conditions.
 Hafez al-Assad, President of Syria (1971 — 2000), established an authoritarian regime under the control of the “nationalist, populist, socialist, socialist’s regime . It was already clear that a large percentage of these fighters had ties to terrorist organizations .
 The United States national security apparatus considered this as a necessary evil . However, the U.S. national security system considered this a necessaryevil .
 In 2013, these same al-Qaeda-linked Syrian rebels launched two sarin gas attacks in an attempt to frame Assad and muster international support for military intervention .
 The push for air-strikes completely fell apart. Fortunately, they were exposed by United Nations and Russian investigators .
 The Syrian War is a Proxy War. The campaign for regime change in Syria, as in Libya, has been presented in terms of human rights .
 In 2009, Qatar put forward the proposal to run a natural gas pipeline through Syria and Turkey to Europe .
In 2011, Assad forced a pact with Iraq and Iran to build a pipeline eastward . In 2011, he forced Qatar and Saudi Arabia out of the loop completely . Assad rejected this, and in 2011, the pact was agreed to go eastward.
 Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey have been the most aggressive regional players in the push to topple the Syrian government . Not surprisingly, Qatar and Saudi Arabia have been most aggressive region players .
 In February 2014, this global chess game heated up a new venue, Ukraine . The game was played in Ukraine .
 The real target was Russia... the world’s second-largest oil exporter .
 Washington's energy bourse in 2008 had sales nominated in rubles, not gold, for the first time .
 Russia had been in the process of organizing a Eurasian Economic Union, planning to adopt a common currency unit which was slated to have its own independent energy market .
 The E.U. insisted that this was an either-or proposition, but Ukraine couldn't join both . The E., U.S. insisted it was anEither-or- proposition .
Yanukovych was removed from office in the 2014 Ukrainian revolution . He currently lives in exile in Russia .
 The U.S. quickly lost control of the situation in the first half of the day . The United States is now in the midst of a series of high-profile incidents .
 Crimea held a referendum and people voted overwhelmingly to secede from Ukraine and reunify with Russia . Crimea held the referendum on whether to reunite with Russia.
 The transition was orderly and peaceful, but the West immediately framed the entire event as an act of Russian aggression . No one was killed and the transition was peaceful. The West framed the event as a act of Russia aggression .
 Such a move would place U.S. forces right on Russia’s border . It would result in Russia loss of their naval base in Crimea .
 Russia immediately accepted the results of the disputed 2014 Crimea referendum ° and quickly consolidated the territory . This is why Russia Immediately accepted the result of the referendum ° .
 In Eastern Ukraine, two regions declared independence from Kiev and held referendums of their own . The results overwhelmingly favored self-rule .
In practice, this is a massive and indiscriminate shelling campaign killing thousands of civilians . In practice, the shelling campaign is an indiscriminate campaign of hundreds of people .
 killing civilians didn’t qualify as aggression to the West, says U.S. military official .
 The IMF explicitly warned the provisional government that their seventeen billion dollar loan package could be in danger if they were not able to put down the uprising in Eastern Ukraine .
 Having a puppet in place hadn't turned out to be enough to get Washington the upper hand in this crisis .
 Russia's plans to impose sanctions on Russia backfired, author says . "This wasn’t a very good strategy for dealing with Russia," he says .
 Sanctions merely pushed Russia and China into closer cooperation. Sanctions only pushed the two countries closer to closer cooperation .
 The United States and NATO put a wedge between themselves in Russia . The U.S. and NATO are not the same country as Russia .
 This new anti-dollar axis goes deeper than economics, says John Sutter . Sutter: These countries understand what’s at stake. This new axis goes further than economics .
 China proposed a new Eurasian security pact including Russia and Iran . This is why in the wake of the Ukrainian crisis China proposed the new pact .
 The Obama administration also had a mutual defense agreement with Iran . Consider the implications of the Obama administration beginning bombing in Syria .
 The masses may not have figured out yet... but history will remember it that way . The masses might not have found out yet .
 It’s only a matter of time for the big players to confront each other directly... and that is a recipe for disaster . It's not time for them to confront the other players directly .
 The people running the world right now are insane, and the public is sleepwalking into a tragedy . The people who run the world are insane.
 Even the most powerful weapons of war are neutralized if we reach the minds of those with their fingers on the doomsday button . The most powerful weapon of war is a weapon that can be neutralized.
 A bank-driven economic system is sucking the life’sblood out of ordinary people through the process of usury and taxation .
 As China, Russia and the U.S. are drawn into a confrontation, the world’s economy will be obliterated along with billions of lives .
 In the aftermath of the coming global holocaust, the supreme financial rulers of the planet will be waiting to create order .
 The BIS controls the central banks and world finance. Make no mistake about it... the BIS control the central bank and world Finance . It controls the world finance .
 Putin laid the groundwork for Moscow to end Syrian conflict with the territorial caliphate of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria . He accomplished this feat in less than 10 days when the United States has been trying to accomplish the same.
 Putin, in a move foreign to politics, has openly explained the dangers to the media . U.S. politicians would never do, since they have a policy of keeping the American people in the dark .
 Putin has found him in the unlikely role of underdog fighting for common people all over the world . Good folk want to be free from neocolonialism, imperialism and the evil influence of the Jesuit Papacy .
 People's willingness to hold money can change suddenly for ‘psychological and spontaneous reasons’ People’s willingness to keep money can cause a spike in the velocity of money .
 It can occur at lightning speed, over a surprisingly short period of time, and invariably catches economists by surprise . It can be a surprise.
 Near civil war between town and country will be a pervasive feature of the break-down of social order . They wait too long to drain the excess money... and get burnt .
 Large mobs of half-starved and vindictive townsmen will descend on villages and farms to seize food from farmers and ranchers accused of hoarding .
 Common booty will become the currency of pauperized civil service elites trading the symbols of their old status for a sack of potatoes and a side of bacon .
 Foreigners with money and power will live in opulence whilest the ‘national citizens’ will suffer from more than want or need .
Great numbers of citizens which have failed to realize the quick becoming Apocalypse have been ‘revealed’ to the prophets .
 Imagine how much more y* trusting fools who heedeth not the warners shall suffer whence even our children’s children will have to struggle to reclaim our stolen heritage .
 The Kalergian refugee ‘replacement peoples’ are the central bank’s new debt slaves .
 ZOG doesn't give a good god damn about any of us... they’d rather we goy were mindless automatons... clones and androids .
 Hell, why not do away with fleshapoids for ever and robotize “human labour’s’. Hell. Why not do Away with Fleshapoids? Hell.
 The New World Order want to plunge us all into World War III and the failure of the central banks to corral and control Vladimir Putin, President of Russia and Xi Jinping . The People's Republic of China has made Armageddon a likely scenario .
 Stop borrowing from these banks and begin looking for loop-holes to avoid paying taxes . Start resisting their UN Agenda 21 vaccination-depopulation plan .