 Russia is continuing to deny any involvement in events in Ukraine from Euromaidan to the war in Donbas . Russia is also denying involvement in the conflict in Ukraine .
 Some former Berkut officers are suspected of having taken part in the gunning down of unarmed Maidan activists . Yet it cites concern about ‘national security’ as its reason for rejecting extradition requests .
 Russia is imprisoning on charges linked solely to Euromaidan or with alleged involvement in the Right Sector movement . The refusal to cooperate over suspected killers is particularly suspect .
 Ten of the 23 ex-Berkut riot police officers suspected of gunning down protesters have received Russian citizenship . A further two men have been given ’refugee’ status, while a further two are given ‘refugees’status
 Russia is giving refuge to former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych and a large number of other former high-ranking officials . Russia is offering refuge to ex-president Viktor Yanukovych .
Serhiy Horbatyuk, Head of the Special Investigations Department, reports that they are prevented from questioning any of these people, including ex-Berkut men .
 Russian involvement in the last days of Euromaidan is something that his team is investigating . Horbatyuk is cautious in what he says, but is cautious about what he said .
 Russia's FSB was providing consultation to Yanukovych regime, advising them on how to counter protests . It is known, for example, that Russia’s FSB provided consultation to the regime .
 There were also visits from people in Russian President Vladimir Putin’s administration, and a major delivery of so-called ‘humanitarian aid’
 Yanukovych’s path to greater movement towards the EU would be blocked once and for all . It was not only Ukrainians who expressed the fear that the Kremlin wanted bloodshed .
 Moscow believes it could endanger national security can, for now, only be guessed .
 Russia’s claim that Maidan and the war in Donbas are internal Ukrainian matters would be more convincing if it did not so actively persecute Ukrainians for their part in Maidan, or for their involvement in Right Sector .
 A number of Ukrainian political prisoners, including filmmaker Oleg Sentsov, were active participants in Maidan .
 Sentsov was tortured to force him to give ‘testimony’ against Maidan, and against the government formed after Yanukovych fled the country .
 Natalya Poklonskaya, the so-called ‘prosecutor’ installed after Russia’s invasion, used former Berkut officers who had later switched allegiance and taken Russian citizenship .
 Oleksandr Kostenko is a former police officer who took part in Euromaidan from the beginning . He was a police officer in the country from the start of the year .
 He was arrested in Russian-occupied Crimea on Feb 5, 2015, and savagely tortured to extract a ‘confession’ for over 24 hours before the officially recorded time of arrest .
 Kostenko was charged with slightly injuring a Ukrainian Berkut officer in Kyiv on Feb 18, 2014 .
 Kostenko was also charged with possession of a rifle barrel which they claimed to have found . The charges are obviously politically motivated .
 Andriy Kolomiyets and his 10-year sentence on June 10, 2016, should have deterred any Ukrainians from travelling to Russia . The ‘trial’ of the then 22-year-old and his ten-year prison sentence should have dissuaded any Ukrainians
 Kolomiyets had been living with his partner and her children in the south of Russia when seized, tortured, and then taken to Crimea .
 The young man was charged with ‘attempted murder’ of two Ukrainian Berkut officers during the Euromaidan protests in Kyiv .
 Kostenko is accused of transporting hashish . The second charge was thrown in – this time of allegedly transportingHashish .
 Kolomiyets was sentenced to 6 years on the ‘attempted murder’ charges and 4 years over the hashish charge . He was also sentenced to six years for the 'attempting murder' charges .
 Right Sector came to prominence in January 2014 when Yanukovych attempted to push through draconian anti-protest laws . The 16 January Dictatorship Laws were normally referred to as the 16 January 2014 Dictator Laws .
 The idea that Kolchenko, a committed left-wing anarchist should have been involved in a right-wing organization was laughable . Not only was there no evidence of Right Sector’s presence in Crimea or of any ‘plot’
 Sentsov is, nonetheless, serving a 20-year sentence, Kolchenko 10 years . Kolchenko is still serving a 10 year sentence .
 Russia officially banned Right Sector as ‘extremist’ in November 2014 . It is now using this as an illegal pretext for imprisoning Ukrainians and one Russian, permanently resident in Ukraine .
 The first such ‘trial’ is now underway, though it is of a person of somewhat ill repute among activists who knew him in Ukraine .
 Dadei had moved to Novorossiysk to be with his Russian wife, and was arrested there in July 2017 . He was arrested at the end of the year .
 Dadei has stated clearly in court that Crimea is Ukrainian territory, annexed by Russia . He has reportedly stated clearly that Crimea was Ukrainian territory .
 UN statement of fact, reiterated by UN, can easily get you a prison sentence in Russia or occupied Crimea .
 Dadei is charged under Article 282. Section 2 with ‘involvement’ in an organization declared extremist in Russia .
 He could face a sentence of up to five years’ imprisonment for posting two advertisements about a collection to help a volunteer battalion .
 Oleksandr Shumkov was the next Ukrainian to be abducted to Russia and imprisoned . He was the first Ukrainian abducted and imprisoned in Russia .
 Shumkov is a former Maidan activist, a member of the Kherson branch of the Union of Ukrainian Youth in Ukraine . He is a contracted military servicemen for the Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 Dmytro Yarosh is an ex-security guard to an MP, who is now an MP . He was the leader of Right Sector, but was also an MP for Right Sector .
 Roman Ternovsky was arrested for attending entirely legal Right Sector events in Ukraine and for promoting the organization on Facebook . The Russian Investigative Committee and FSB arrested him on 18 October 2017 .
 In all three cases, Ukrainian citizens have been arrested for carrying out activities on Ukrainian territory linked with an organization which is legal in Ukraine . The organization is also linked to an organization linked to the Ukrainian territory .
 Denis Bakholdin, 37, is accused of activities in Ukraine . He is a Russian citizen. He is also accused of activity in Ukraine.
 Bakholdin is a Russian activist and fierce critic of Russia’s war against Ukraine .
 He had been living in Ukraine since 2014, but tried to visit his mother when she fell ill in March 2017 . He was detained in the Bryansk oblast, and remanded in custody on the same charges of involvement in Right Sector .
 Russian prosecutors and judges provide sentences demanded . Afterwards, Russian prosecutors provide the sentences demanded by judges .