 U.S. sends extra six fighter jets to Nato air policing mission in Baltics . Robert Serry is told to leave Crimea, Crimea .
 The U.S. and Russia will hold talks on easing East-West tension over Ukraine on Wednesday . The West steps up efforts to persuade Moscow to pull its forces back to base in Crimea .
 John Kerry and Sergei Lavrov will meet for the first time since the crisis escalated . All five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council attended the conference in Paris .
 NATO and Russia will hold parallel talks in Brussels amid concerns that a standoff between Russian and Ukrainian soldiers in Crimea could still spark violence . There are concerns that Moscow could also intervene in eastern Ukraine .
 French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said European Union leaders meeting in Brussels on Thursday could decide on sanctions against Russia . If there is no "de-escalation" by then, there will be no sanctions.
 President Vladimir Putin defends Russia's actions in Crimea . He says he will use force only as a last resort . The Black Sea peninsula is part of Ukraine but used to be Russian territory .
 markets ease fears of a war over the former Soviet republic after sharp falls on Monday . This eased market fears of war over former Soviet Republic .
 Ukraine's hryvnia rose slightly against the U.S. dollar on Wednesday . The rouble was steady on Wednesday and the rouble remained steady .
 Russian forces remain in control of the region, however, and Putin gave no sign of pulling servicemen back to base . Russian forces remained in control in Crimea as part of the Black Sea Fleet .
 MICEX index down 1 percent on Wednesday in contrast to other stock markets . Investors in Russian stocks still worried about Ukraine .
 Russian forces remain in control of the region . Putin gave no sign of pulling servicemen from Crimea back to base .
 Obama spoke to German Chancellor Angela Merkel on Tuesday and discussed a potential resolution to the crisis . A senior administration official said Obama spoke with Merkel and discussed potential resolution .
 The Russian-speaking German leader has good relations with the German-speaking Putin . Berlin is Russia's biggest economic partner with Russia .
 The official said Obama had discussed what officials called an "off-ramp" to the crisis in which Russia would pull its forces in Crimea back to their bases . Russia will allow international monitors to ensure that rights of ethnic Russians are protected .
 The U.S. president will stay away from a G8 summit scheduled for Sochi, Russia, in June unless there is a Russian reversal in the Ukraine crisis, an official says .
 Putin said Tuesday that Russia reserved the right to use all options to protect compatriots living in "terror" in Ukraine . Putin said that force was not needed for now .
 Francois Hollande becomes the latest Western leader to raise the possibility of sanctions if Putin does not step back and accept mediation . French President Francois Hollande is the latest leader to ask Putin to accept mediation.
 He set out a tougher public line than Merkel, who has avoided talk of sanctions so far .
 Hollande told an annual dinner of France's Jewish community leaders late on Tuesday . Hollande told the dinner of the French Jewish community.
 Putin said Western sanctions against Russia would be counter-productive . Putin earlier said sanctions would becounter-productive.
 A senior U.S. official said Washington was ready to impose them in days rather than weeks . A senior United States official said the move was expected to take place within weeks .
 Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper said after speaking to Obama at the weekend that the Group of Seven leading industrialised nations were considering meeting in the near future . The move would pointedly exclude Russia .
 Kerry is on his first visit to Kiev since the overthrow of Russian-backed President Viktor Yanukovich . Kerry accuses Moscow of seeking a pretext to invade more of the country .
 He is expected to meet Lavrov, Hollande and Hague on the sidelines of a Paris conference on Lebanon . He is also expected to hold private talks with the Russian minister later in the day in the French capital .
 Ukraine's acting foreign minister, Andriy Deshchitsia, is also in Paris for talks with French officials and Kerry . France and Ukraine are also in the city for talks .
 The Feb. ousting of Yanukovich after months of street protests in Kiev and Russia's seizure of control in Crimea has prompted the most serious confrontation between Moscow and the West since the end of the Cold War .
 Lavrov told European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton that an EU-brokered agreement signed by political leaders in Kiev on Feb. should be the basis for stabilising the situation in Ukraine .
 The agreement foresaw constitutional reform which would take into account the wishes of all regions in Ukraine .
 Russian soldier fired three volleys of shots over heads of unarmed Ukrainian servicemen . The incident happened at a military airfield surrounded by Russian troops at Belbek, near Sevastopol .
 Russian soldiers levelled rifles and rocket-propelled grenade launchers at the Ukrainians . After a standoff in which the two commanders shouted at each other, the incident was defused .
Ukrainian businesses owe $10 billion to subsidiaries of Russian banks in the country .
 Russian president asks him not to abolish subsidies to the Russian Post that cover its losses from lower fees for newspapers delivered . Text of open appeal of Russian publishers to Russian president .
 Russian stock market and currency exchange rate have recuperated from a plunge on March 3 after Putin dispelled fears of the Russian intervention in Ukraine .
 Kirill Belyaninov article says U.S. has failed to persuade its European partners to freeze economic cooperation with Russia .
 Vyacheslav Kozlov article called ""OMON has no complaints" provides an update on the trial of Sergei Udaltsov and Leonid Razvozzhayev . The article is called "OMON have no complaints."
Margarita Lyutova article discusses possible sanctions that the USA and the EU may take against Russia if it attempts to escalate the conflict in Ukraine .
 Vladimir Gurvich essay called "Stagnation as result of stabilization" says that the Russian authorities have finalized their ideological and political concept that is aimed at contained Western influence and promotion of pan-Eurasian values .
 International media rights advocates say independent journalists are getting attacked and harassed while trying to cover events in Crimea . Crimea has been occupied by pro-Russian forces .
 The recently appointed head of the southern Ukrainian republic of Crimea says his government refuses to negotiate with newly installed central authorities in the capital, Kiev .
 Crimea, a peninsula of some 2 million people, has with ample support from Russia . Russia resisted the authority of the leadership that came to power last month after the ouster of Viktor Yanukovych .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin this week described the current Ukrainian government as illegitimate . Putin said the Crimean government's position is in effect bolstering the Ukrainian government .
 Aksyonov has requested that Moscow provide security assistance in the largely ethnic Russian-populated Crimean Peninsula . The region could come under attack.
 Thousands of unidentified troops under apparent command from Russia have taken control over Ukrainian military bases across the Crimea over the past week .
 Russia's parliament has given its approval to military intervention in Ukraine . It is ostensibly for peace-keeping purposes, though .
 Crimea plans to hold a vote this month on the future status of the peninsula, with greater autonomy and even secession named as possible options on the ballot . Crimea is expected to hold the vote on its future status on the peninsula this month .
 Aksyonov was appointed prime minister last month by a vote in the Crimean parliament . Unidentified gunmen had occupied the building the previous night .
 Aksyonov declined to be drawn on whether he supported on secession for Crimean . He said that it was a decision for the people on the peninsula to make .
 The majority of the region's population is pro-Russian, although it is unclear to what extent they favor a breakaway from Ukraine .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk says Russian government officials have engaged in consultations . He describes the consultations as "tepid" Despite Moscow's refusal to accept the legitimacy of the government in Kiev, interim PM says .
 Since Ukraine exploded last week in a blaze of lethal violence and collapsed leadership, some ominous predictions have been circulating about Russia’s future .
Military intervention seems too high-stakes a game for Moscow to play. But military intervention seems to be too high stakes a game to play .
 The new leaders in Kiev are hardly more acceptable than the new leaders . And cooperating with them is hardly moreacceptable .
 Russia is far likelier to choose fence-sitting as its modus operandi, with a view to step in more actively when its chances for success improve . For now, in pursuing its national interests, Russia is more likely to focus on national interests .
 For days, Russia was, at best, incoherent and, at worst, stuck in denial about the new political reality in Ukraine . The de facto deposed president, Viktor Yanukovych, has been ousted .
 President Vladimir Putin has said nothing publicly about Russia's new position on Ukraine . Putin held a Security Council meeting about Ukraine on Tuesday .
 Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev and the Foreign Ministry have been busy casting doubt on the legitimacy of the new authorities .
Kremlin propagandists have been lashing out at Yanukovych for betraying Moscow . And Kremlin propagandist has been lashed out at the Yanukovych.
 Moscow's vested interest in integrating Ukraine into a Russia-led trading bloc is a key priority for Putin in his third presidential term . This floundering cannot last long given Moscow’s vested interest.
 Cooperating, in this case, means sincere and effective action to help the new Ukrainian government keep its footing . This is a highly improbable option for Moscow.
 European Union officials have called on Russia to participate in joint financial assistance to Ukraine . They have invited Moscow to discuss the country's future .
 The development would fly in the face of numerous firm convictions held by the Kremlin in dealing with its neighbors . But this development would be a setback for the Kremlin .
 The Kremlin views the revolt in Ukraine as part of a zero-sum game with the West in the former Soviet republics . Moscow regards the Ukraine revolt as its zone of privileged interests .
For Putin, cooperating would mean acknowledging defeat in the largest, most prized of these now sovereign countries . For Putin, cooperation would mean admitting defeat in some of the most prized countries .
 Belarus, emboldening Western-leaning opposition groups and disheartening pro-Moscow incumbent leaders . Also, it would send the wrong message – in the Kremlin’s view – to political players in other ex-Soviet republics .
There is a big risk that the new Ukrainian government will not be stable and effective . The country's dire economic situation is aggravated by the country’s dire economy .
 The second option, “spoiling,’ would require the active disruption and sabotage of Ukraine’s new government . This would come at a price Moscow is not willing to bear .
 The U.S. and European leaders have already warned Moscow against possible military intervention in Ukraine . It is highly unlikely Putin would keep this option on the table even without the warnings .
 Radical, violent Ukrainian nationalists would be very likely to wage a campaign of terror and sabotage both in the occupied territories and in mainland Russia .
 Ukrainian elites would then seek stronger alliances with the West, including military ones . Also, were it to fail, would only strengthen anti-Moscow sentiments among Ukrainian elites .
 Propping up separatists in Crimea and in Ukraine’s eastern provinces is also a road to violent conflict that Moscow cannot afford .
 Russia will either have to face the consequences described above or lose face. If these provinces eventually demand that Russia intervene and protect them, Russia will have to do so .
 Russia will not interfere in Ukraine, the Foreign Ministry says . The Foreign Ministry effectively ruled out military intervention .
 Russia has declared that it would freeze the remaining $12 billion of $15 billion in pledged aid to Ukraine until a working government is in place in Kiev . Russia has already declared it will freeze the remainder of the $12billion of pledged aid .
 Ukraine bans on Ukraine imports as it has in the past, including just last summer . It may also boost economic pressure by imposing bans.
 Russia is Ukraine’s largest trade partner, responsible for nearly 30 percent of its foreign trade in 2012 . The EU is a close second in the world .
 import bans would not be the way to pressure Ukraine's new leadership into concessions that it could not deliver in any case, such as integration into Russia's trading bloc .
 Fence-sitting, under the circumstances, amounts to outsourcing the tough job of stabilizing Ukraine to the European Union .
 The EU might eventually offer Russia certain concessions in exchange for agreeing to share the burden of salvaging Ukraine, with its miserable economy .
 Such concessions could include lifting restrictions on Russian energy trade in the EU and visa-free travel long sought by Moscow .
 Moscow would be able to deal with a functioning, established government capable of reciprocity . After a time, things go well for Ukraine, things would go well.
 If the new government fails, Ukraine will see a wave of popular resentment for the idea of integration with the EU, especially in the eastern regions and Crimea .
 Moscow could then open its arms wide to embrace anyone disenchanted with the Europeans . This, in turn, would mobilize and empower proponents of closer ties with Moscow .
 Nabi Abdullaev is the head of RIA Novosti’s Foreign-Language News Service .
 U.S. and Russia to hold talks on easing east-west tensions over Ukraine . West steps up efforts to persuade Moscow to pull its forces back to base in Crimea .
 The United States secretary of state and the Russian foreign minister will meet for the first time since the crisis escalated . All five permanent members of the UN security council attended the Paris conference .
 The French foreign minister said European Union leaders meeting in Brussels on Thursday could decide on sanctions against Russia if there is no "de-escalation" by then . Laurent Fabius said EU leaders could decide if there are no de-escalations .
 Donetsk's government headquarters seized from pro-Russian demonstrators who had occupied it . Donetsk is the home of deposed president Viktor Yanukovych .
 The Ukrainian flag was raised above the building in Ukraine on Wednesday morning . It was replaced by the Russian flag that had flown there since Saturday, when protests erupted after Putin said he had right to invade .
 Protesters led by a man who declared himself "people's governor" had been barricaded in the regional administration building . They demanded relations with Kiev be severed and control of the security forces placed in their hands .
 evacuation began after reports the building had been booby-trapped with explosives . A police statement said the evacuation started after reports of an explosion .
 Putin on Tuesday defended Russia's actions in Crimea, a strategic Black Sea peninsula that is part of Ukraine but used to be Russian territory . He said he would use force only as a last resort .
 His comments eased market fears of a war over the former Soviet republic . His comments ease market fears that a war would be held over the country .
 Putin gave no sign of pulling servicemen based in Crimea back to base . But Russian forces remain in control of the region and Putin gives no sign.
 Barack Obama acknowledged that Russia had legitimate interests in Ukraine . But he said that did not give Putin the right to intervene militarily .
 Obama spoke to Angela Merkel on Tuesday and discussed a potential resolution to the crisis . A senior U.S. administration official said Obama spoke with the German chancellor on Tuesday .
 Russian bonds and stock markets around the world lifted after a panic selloff on Monday . His comments, coupled with the end of Russian war games near Ukraine's borders, lifted Russian bonds .
 The French president, Françcois Hollande, became the latest western leader to raise the possibility of sanctions if Putin did not step back and accept mediation .
 The G7 group of leading industrialised nations are considering meeting in the near future . The move would pointedly exclude Russia . The Canadian prime minister said after speaking to Obama at the weekend that the G7 were considering meeting .
 Kerry on his first visit to Kiev since the overthrow of Russian-backed president Viktor Yanukovych . Kerry accuses Moscow of seeking a pretext to invade more of the country .
 Yanukovych is expected to meet Lavrov, Hollande and the British foreign secretary, William Hague . He will also hold private talks with the Russian minister later in the day in the French capital .
 Ukraine's acting foreign minister, Andriy Deshchitsia, was also in Paris for talks with French officials and Kerry . Ukraine is also in France for talks, with France and Kerry in Paris .
 Ukrainian border guard service said Russian navy ships had blocked both ends of Kerch Strait between Crimea and Russia . Ukraine's infrastructure ministry said the 2.7-mile wide waterway was still open for civilian shipping .