 Institutskaya Street, linking the Kreshchatik metro station to the Kiev Maidan, or central square, has become a cordon of memorials .
 Black-and-white headshots of both men and women, many young but some middle-aged, line the street . Many young but many middle-ages line the streets .
 All are housed in small stone shrines and many are adorned with flowers left by still mourning relatives, close friends, and other well-wishers . Many of the shrines are filled with flowers from mourning relatives and friends .
 Others hang on trees decorated with plastic bouquets whose colors have long faded . Others are decorated with flowers that have faded from their colors .
 The Orange Revolution of 2004 marked the end of the Orange Revolution in 2004 . The movement was inspired by the use of gas masks, car tires and metal shields .
 There is an atmosphere of religious devotion along Institutskaya, but the homage is solely political . There is a religious devotion to the city's political leaders .
 The memorial honors the protestors killed in the 2010 demonstrations that ultimately led to the ouster of former president Viktor Yanukovych . Yanukovych was seen as a stooge of Vladimir Putin's Kremlin and an obstacle to further democratization .
 Ukraine is held hostage by a war that is not really a war, at least in the conventional sense . Ukraine has been in the midst of a conflict that has gripped the country in recent months .
 It could be called a ghost war, fought by unidentifiable combatants, and the motives and endgame evade definition . It could also be called an endgame war .
 To better understand the mess that has become eastern Ukraine we must backtrack, first to 2004 . To better understanding the mess, we should backtrack to 2004, says Ukraine's president .
Pro-Russian candidate Viktor Yanukovich wins the election by 11 percent . exit polls give Yushchenko an 11 percent margin . The election was held in Ukraine on Sunday .
 Thousands of protestors filled Kiev’s Maidan from November 2004 to February 2005 . The Maidan was Kiev's Maidan.
 A rerun of the election was ordered by Ukraine's Supreme Court . Yushchenko was clearly declared the winner by 8 percent of the vote .
 In the 2010 presidential election Yanukovich defeated Yushchenko, despite widespread claims of voting irregularities and election fraud .
 Protestors again filled Kiev's Maidan, though this time the outcome was more deadly .
 Four years later protests again erupted, and this time they forced Yanukovich from power . Four years after the protests, Yanukovich was forced from power.
 To paraphrase Hans Christian Andersen, the curious became curiouser . But then, to paraphrase Andersen, it became more curious .
 “soldiers’ wearing army fatigues without insignias appeared on the Crimean Peninsula, “little green men’s” as referred to by the international media . Days after Yanukovich fled Ukraine for Moscow for Moscow, ‘soldiers'
 In March 2014, a hastily thrown together referendum, passed the Crimea back to Russian control . The referendum was deplored by international monitoring agencies .
 Russia's argument that historically the Crimea is and always has been Russian territory is worth a hearing . Russia’s argument that Historically the Crimea has been Russia is worth hearing .
 In December 1954, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet authorized the transfer of the Crimea from Russia to Ukraine . The move later claimed as unconstitutional because only 13 of the 27 members were on hand to vote .
 As recently as 1997 a treaty designating Ukraine’s borders, place the Crimea within Ukraine . The Crimea is in Ukraine .
 The reasons for the transfer remain as murky as the current conflict. Still, the reasons for a transfer are still murky .
 Nina Krushchevna, daughter of Soviet Premier Nikita, has claimed that her father always had a soft spot for Ukraine . She said her father wanted to give the territory back to the republic in honor of the Treaty of Pereyaslav .
 The transfer quickly resulted in a large influx of Russian migrants. What is clear is that the transfer quickly led to an influx of migrants .
 One million ethnic Russians moved to the Crimea, replacing the Tatars who had been expelled to central Asia only 10 years earlier .
 In 1954, the two republics were part of the same nation, and the dissolution of the Soviet Union could not have been envisioned beyond the most distant of horizons .
 Simferopol was designated the capital of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea . The annexation of the peninsula appeared complete after a referendum .
 In August, convoys of military vehicles rolled across the border with the assistance of Russian loyalists in Ukraine . The convoy was painted nondescript white .
 Three months later, tanks and heavy weapons continued to flow across the border . Fighting erupted between the Ukrainian military and this ghost army made up of Russian sympathizers .
 Donetsk and Lugansk were turned into war zones. The now “independent republics’ of Donetsk, Lugansk, were turned to war zones . "Independent republics" of Donetsk and  Lugansk have now been turned into War zones .
 Ukrainian forces have been left to battle a ghost army in Ukraine . Since then the war in Ukraine has become combat without identifiable combatants .
 For the separatist forces in the Ukraine’s east it is a rebel conflict .
 Xenophobic elements in Russia, along with pro-Russian elements in Ukraine, refer to it as a struggle for independence .
 The only undisputed fact is that tanks and military trucks have rolled through Lugansk and Donetsk without identifying insignias, a violation of international law . “rebel brigades,’ and “volunteers,” in Kremlin-speak, have appeared wearing green combat
Call it a war, call it a rebellion, or a rebellion . The motives and endgame defy definition of the conflict .
 Many have justified warfare for what they are, distant abstractions, alien to the horror that warfare brings . But for that reason, national sovereignty, and cultural identity have been revealed .
Two years ago, I was in Ukraine two years ago and wanted to return to see what had changed since the Orange Revolution euphoria .
 Michael's, and other churches that stand as monuments to Ukraine’s religious history. Michael's.
 Ukrainians are wearing peasant shirts as casual attire, pulled out of closets for weekend jaunts . They had even become the uniform of café waitresses .
 Teenage girls pranced through city parks donning garlands of plastic flowers .
 It was not clear how to read of these symbols of Ukraine’s rural heritage .
 The statement they intended to make had been lost in the ambiguity of the moment . They, too, had lost their meaning .
Despite this appearance of national unity, the war frayed the national fabric . Despite this appearance, it was not the first time that the war had been fought .
 walls had been built in the 11th century by Yaroslav the Wise, leader of the Kieven Rus’, to protect the city from hostile incursions .
 The war had taken a toll on both human patience and national spirit. Nevertheless, the war had been taking a toll.
 Putin’s motives for sending aid to eastern Ukraine weren’t purely tactical, but it would have been useless to point out this out . It wasn't hard to imagine that Putin's motives were purely tactical .
 Larisa was fed up with the war, and like Ukraine itself, her life was in limbo . Larisa's life in limbo.
 She worked for a company that manufactured window trimmings, but as the war wore on business dried up . She had come to Kiev to stay with her daughter until tensions eased .
 weeks had dragged into months, leaving her marooned in her daughter’s one-bedroom apartment . But weeks had dragging into months.
 Among Ukraine’s youth the war had also short-circuited aspirations, truncated career planes .
 Larisa’s daughter has a degree from a British university . She was working in the marketing department of a cosmetics firm for $300 a month .
 Her daughter had received a job offer from a company in Slovenia, and Larisa was encouraging her to leave . Larisa's daughter was encouraged to leave.
 Ukraine has been in turmoil since the start of the Ukraine crisis in 2010 . Ukraine is now in the middle of a crisis in the east and west of the country . It is the first time in years that the country has been involved in the conflict .
Dnipropetrovsk, or Dnipro, as the city is now known. This view was very different from what I had heard from Elena, a friend of Elena, who is from the city . This view is very different than what I
 Dnipro is also east of Kiev, about halfway between the capital and the occupied provinces of Lugansk and Donetsk . The city is about half a mile from the capital .
 The suffix -petrovsk has been removed from the city’s name because it signified Russian heritage . It was a sign of how far west antipathy to Russia had spread .
 De-russification throughout Ukraine had been under way since independence on August 24, 1991 .
 The eastern city of Kharkov became Kharkiv, Lvov became Lviv, and streets and squares throughout the country were renamed to honor Ukrainian national figures . The city was renamed Lviv and the streets were renamed for Ukrainian figures .
 During the communist era Soviet citizens moved around what was then a single country for the same reasons that most people moved around .
 The monolithic Soviet Union was a grab bag of cultures and ethnicities . The Soviet Union is a grab-bag of cultures.
 The Soviet state dominated everyone’s lives, for better or worse . But there was a single unifier, the Soviet state, which dominated everyone's lives .
 Russians moved to the Republic of Ukraine, Ukrainians moved to Russian republic . Russians moved from Ukraine to the republic .
 Petersburg, but moved to Tashkent as a child because her father was a general in the Soviet army . Her father was an army general .
 Now she has a Uzbek passport and is officially a Uzbek citizen, though she identifies herself as Russian .
 On a previous trip to Ukraine, in 2015, I had traveled west, far west, to Lviv, formerly Lwow, or Lvov, depending on variations in Latin spelling . On the previous trip, he had traveled to Ukraine.
 Lviv has played the role of geopolitical football for centuries, primarily between Ukraine and Poland . The Habsburgs in Vienna had a turn at control of Lviv .
 Lviv had been a Polish city for several hundred years, with a Polish majority and a Polish culture . After the Nazi invasion of 1939 it found itself on the other side of the Soviet border .
 As part of their grand bargain to control Europe, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany had settled on dividing Poland between them .
 Shortly after the Nazi invasion, with the Polish state under occupation, a referendum was held to determine Lviv’s fate .
 The Hobson residents faced a Hobson’s choice: German invaders or communist superpower to the east . The residents faced the choice.
 The east seemed the safest choice, but much like the hastily organized 2014 vote in the Crimea, the poll in Lviv was also widely regarded as illegitimate . The east was the safest place to vote, but the vote was also considered illegitimate .
 Legitimate or not, it redrew the border of Poland and the Soviet Union . The border was redrew in particular .
 The takeover of the Donbas was only the most recent episode in a series of land swaps and transfers of sovereignty that have taken place for the last thousand years . The region of eastern Ukraine is known, as the region is known .
 Lviv had been the capital of the West Ukrainian People's Republic for much of the interwar period . Lviv was capital of West Ukraine prior to World War II .
 An uprising of the Ukrainian minority briefly handed the city back to Ukraine . The city was briefly returned to Ukraine.
 The Peace of Riga was passed back to Poland and became a regional capital under Polish administration . But under the terms of the Peace ofRiga, the city was passedback to Poland .
 In 1772, the Habsburgs annexed Lviv and continued to rule the city throughout the 19th century . The city of Lviv was annexed in 1772 .
 Before the Habsburgs appeared, Lviv had already been a longstanding prize in the battles of regional powers .
 In the 17th and 18th centuries the city was besieged by the Swedes, Romanians, Cossacks from Ukraine, and the armies of the Ottoman Empire .
 Lviv became an important hub for goods moving between the Baltic and Black seas . The trade became the foundation of its eventual wealth .
 At the height of the medieval era it was held, off and on by the crowns of Poland, Hungary, and Grand Duchy of Lithuania .
 Instability had been written into Lviv’s history from its very beginning .
 In 1256, only five years after the city was founded, it was invaded by the Tatars from central Asia .
 borders in eastern European states have been constantly challenged and in constant flux . Few things may be clear about the present conflict in Ukraine, but it cannot be doubted that borders in these far-flung eastern states are constantly challenged .
 Warring tribes, armies under an array of flags, super-nationalist Cossacks, and "little green men" have tugged at the fringes of the territory as long as there has been a strategic interest in doing so .
 The further west one traveled in Ukraine anti-Russian sentiment only deepened . Whether or not this long and fractious history bears any weight on the present state of affairs .
 A military tent had been set up to recruit Ukrainian youth for the armed forces . In the middle of the Lviv's square boasting a monolithic statue of Taras Shevchenko, Ukraine's national poet and 19th-century literary icon .
 A military vehicle riddled with bullets, mirrors broken and windows shattered, was parked under the intimidating shadow of Taras Shevchenko .
 Ukrainian soldiers on leave from the war in the east nibbled on sausages doused with mustard and beer from plastic cups .
 This time I ventured eastward, not as far as Donetsk or Lugansk, but to Zaporozhye, a regional capital on the Dnieper River southeast of Kiev .
 Russian, not Ukrainian, is the common language, though the population is a mix of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians . The population of Russian is a mixture of ethnic Russian and Ukrainians.
 The region is most well known as the base of the Zaporizhian Cossacks, the ragtag collection of mercenaries . Many of them runaway serfs defended the territory from foreign invasion between the 15th and 19th centuries .
 The Russians, Ottomans, and Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth have mastered political gamesmanship . They also mastered the art of fighting, allying themselves, as well as fighting, the Russians,Ottomans.
 The Cossacks excelled in marksmanship and horsemanship, skills much prized on the battlefield . They hired themselves out to defend neighboring feudal lords .
 An outdoor museum on Khortitsa Island, in the middle of the Dnieper, honors the Cossack legacy .
 The Cossacks had established a fortress here in 1552, and today on summer afternoons would-be Cossacked recreate the military expertise of their ancestors in scripted performances .
 The Cossacks shoot arrows at straw-packed targets, engage in hand-to-hand combat with bared swords, and dodge arrows riding horseback . As the audience bears witness, slurping sodas and licking ice cream cones.
 One night in Zaporozhye I had dinner with Tatyana, another Ukrainian friend and an ethnic Russian, at a traditional Ukrainian restaurant .
 She was born in Siberia and moved to Zaporozhye with her parents when she was four . She is also part Tajik but was also part of the Russian-born family .
 Russian may be her first language, but her loyalties are indisputably Ukrainian . She is not a native Russian .
 Truth may be the first, but its cousins, clarity and objectivity soon follow . This is no more true than in today’s conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 He had no idea he was describing not only the Soviet Union but the conflicts of a post-Soviet world .
 For 5 years he was a correspondent for the U.S. State Department’s International Information Programs . He wrote articles on Arab/Muslim life in the United States and the U.-S. role in the Gulf region .