 All manuscripts are reviewed by at least two other experts in the field to ensure the high quality of the publications . All manuscripts have been reviewed by other experts to ensure they are quality .
 publications undergo professional language checking and editing . In addition, publications undergoprofessional language checking .
 The responsibility for the views ultimately rests with the authors, says the author .
 András Rácz is Senior Research Fellow at the Finnish Institute of International Affairs in Helsinki . He is also a senior research Fellow at Finland's Institute of international Affairs .
Until 2014 he worked at the since disbanded Hungarian Institute of International Affairs . Until 2014 he was at the Institute of international Affairs .
 He was a member of the European Foreign and Security Policy Studies Programme of the Volkswagen Foundation . He was Visiting Fellow at the Transatlantic Academy of the German Marshall Fund in Washington D.C. in 2011–2012 .
 In April 2014, separatist riots broke out in Eastern Ukraine, following a very similar pattern to those in Crimea . In April 2013, Ukraine's pro-Ukrainian protests broke out.
 Well-trained, heavily-armed men appeared in Donetsk and Luhansk,1 and started to organize demonstrations . They claimed that they were local separatists dissatisfied with the new Kyiv leadership .
 The capture of the first major buildings in Donbass was quickly followed by the proclamation of the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics, two non-recognized separatist entities .
 The Russian military units lined up along the border with Ukraine . All these actions were accompanied by a strong and intensive, well-coordinated diplomatic, economic and media campaign .
 The highly-trained separatist forces, together with their local allies, were able to completely disable the Ukrainian state administration in Crimea . The peninsula was soon annexed by Russia, without any gunshots targeted at people .
 The rapidly unfolding Crimea crisis shocked both the newly established Ukrainian government and the Western world .
 The unprecedented, very efficiently coordinated actions of Russian soldiers, pro-Russian local separatists, the Russian media and diplomacy were described by many experts as an example of hybrid warfare .
 The name of a settlement differs in Ukrainian and Russian . The Ukrainian variant is used in respect of Ukraine's state language and territorial integrity .
 The present report is based on the theoretical assumption that the Russian Federation has been an active participant in the conflict in Eastern Ukraine from the very beginning . Official Russian sources keep claiming the opposite .
 Moscow never admitted to the involvement of Russian regular armed forces in Eastern Ukraine . Unlike in the case of Crimea, Moscow did not admit to involvement of Russia's regular forces .
 Russian support for the insurgency in Eastern Ukraine was evident from the start . However, Russian support was evident in the start of the insurgency .
 Most effective units of Donetsk and Luhansk separatist movements consisted of the same highly-trained and disciplined ‘polite green men’ wearing Russian uniforms and Russian military equipment similar to that used in Crimea .
Evidence confirms Russia has been an active supporter of the insurgency in Eastern Ukraine . All of this evidence confirms that Russia is an active support for the insurgency .
 Derived from the first, the second research question is focused on the operational prerequisites for the Russian hybrid war . The first research question was focused on operational pre requirements for the hybrid war.
 An inductive approach was adopted in order to try to draw general conclusions from the concrete events observed in Ukraine .
 T-72BM tanks, BM-21 2B26 multiple-launch rocket systems and advanced 96K6 Pantsyr air defence vehicles are among the few available options .
 hybrid warfare was not new, but the way Russia implemented it was indeed a novelty . The concept of hybrid warfare is not new .
Policy-oriented literature on hybrid warfare was practically nonexistent until the Crimea operation . Few theoretical works have been published to date .
 Crimea crisis is still something of a 'moving target' as many details are not yet known . The international expert community has started to analyse the events .
 The adoption of an inductive approach almost automatically leads to a problem with regard to sources . The use of inductive approaches often leads to problems with sources .
 Throughout the research phase, the reliability of the available sources has constituted a serious problem . The reliability of available sources is a serious issue .
 This was due in part to the effect often referred to as ‘the fog of war’ that is, the lack of tactical information on what is happening on the ground .
 The other, more serious reason has been the intensive information measures conducted by both the Ukrainian and Russian sides . Both sides have been conducting intensive information Measures .
The critical analysis of resources has been of crucial importance throughout the research . The critical analysis has been crucial for the research.
 Ukrainian and Russian channels and also the national media have been using information provided by independent sources . efforts have consistently been made to verify it by means of independent sources.
 News reports delivered on the ground by independent Western journalists and social media networks . Facebook and Twitter proved to be useful fact-checking sources .
 Monitoring the oftentimes real-time reporting via social media provided in-depth insights into daily life in the territories affected by the fighting .
 A critical, cautious approach had to be adopted in these cases as well. Needless to say, a critical, cautious approach was needed .
 Other valuable sources included witness reports collected by various organizations and media channels, as well as public information from the OSCE Monitoring Mission .
Independent outside experts turned out to be highly useful. In addition, analyses and policy papers written by independent outside experts were highly useful .
 Primary sources connected to either the Ukrainian or Russian government sides turned out to be more useful for support purposes than for fact-based research .
 The only notable exception was the strategic map published daily by the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine . The map was published daily.
 These maps, available in both Ukrainian and English, painted a remarkably accurate picture of the strategic INTRODUCTION 13 situation .
 NSDC maps were generally honest and accurate in depicting both the successes and defeats of the Ukrainian forces . The maps turned out to be very useful sources, at least in the period under examination .
 It studies events in Ukraine in detail only between February and August 2014 . It studies the events in Ukrainian events in detail.
 The power change in Kyiv that followed the EuroMaidan and provoked Russia to launch the Crimea operation was later openly admitted by President Vladimir Putin .
 Russia had to send a massive number of regular forces to Eastern Ukraine in order to prevent the defeat of its proxies . The end point of the research is August 2014, when due to the success of Ukraine's AntiTerror Operation against the separatists .
 This resulted in the collapse of the border defence on a long section of the Ukraine-Russia border . ATO forces at Ilovaysk were also defeated in the decisive defeat of ATO troops .
Since August 2014, the conflict has been transformed from a hybrid war into a conventional interstate war . The conflict has now been transformed into a traditional interstate war, albeit of limited size and scope .
 The general character of the conflict has indeed changed. This does not mean that elements of hybrid warfare have completely disappeared from the Russian political and military inventory, but rather that the general character has changed .
 Research does not focus on events that took place before the February 2014 change of power either . It deals with them only to the extent that is necessary to understand the way in which hybrid warfare functions .
 Developments taking place in Ukrainian domestic politics in the period under scrutiny are touched upon only briefly . Developments take place in Ukraine's domestic politics.
 All in all, the report concentrates on the practical aspects of the implementation of Russia's hybrid war .
 The author takes it for granted that the basic timeline of the events in Ukraine is known, thereby eliminating the need for chronological footnoting .
 First, a brief overview is provided on the development of asymmetric warfare theory . Second, an overview of the theory is provided by the authors .
 The second chapter focuses on hybrid war theory, as well as the Russian concept of new-generation warfare . The third chapter of the book focuses on the concept of hybrid war .
 The third part is dedicated to the extant academic and policy-related literature on this new form of Russian warfare . The third is dedicated.
 The fourth part concentrates on defining the main components and phases of Russia’s hybrid war . It is based on the Crimea and Donbass experiences .
 In the fifth chapter, the prerequisites for hybrid warfare are examined . The prerequisites are examined. The fifth chapter is in the fifth.
 The report ends with a sixth, concluding 14 RUSSIA’s HYBRID WAR in UKR AINE chapter . recommendations are also made for launching a defence against hybrid warfare .
 The Finnish Institute of International Affairs is based in Finland . It is located in the Finnish city of Helsinki . The Finnish government is hosting a conference on hybrid warfare .
Juha Mäkinen for his help with the editing and Lynn Nikkanen for her excellent work as language editor . This particularly applies to Juha M Finnish for help with editing .
 All errors remaining in the text are solely the author’s responsibility .
 The development of asymmetric warfare theory in the 19th and 20th centuries would clearly exceed the length of the present report . The report is called for in order to properly contextualize Russia's hybrid war in Crimea .
 The well-known Prussian political thinker and soldier, Carl von Clausewitz, stated in his famous work On War that ‘War is merely the continuation of policy by other means'
 Clausewitz clearly recognized that war is just a tool, but not the objective itself . In On War Clausewitz makes a clear distinction between the objectives of various forms of warfare .
 One such objective is aimed at beating the enemy by defeating its army and conquering its territory . The objective is to defeat its army, conquer its territory and defeat the enemy .
 The objective of another type of warfare is to achieve the desired political goals by exhausting the enemy’s forces, but without aiming either for a decisive military victory or the conquest of territory .
 The first type could be termed direct warfare, as pointed out by Hungarian military theorist Balázs Forgács6 . It intends to achieve 3 C Clausewitz, On War .
 The second type of warfare Forgács describes as indirect . It intends to achieve the desired political objectives without destroying the enemy’s forces or conquering enemy territory .
 Indirect warfare has been typical of irregular armed forces conducting asymmetric operations . For the weaker side exhausting the enemy’s army is a more rational objective than trying to defeat it .
In most cases, asymmetric warfare has been able to achieve only indirect results, but not completely destroying its forces, or capturing enemy territory . The result is that the enemy does not completely destroy its forces.
 Clausewitz argued that successful irregular warfare could only be effective only if five key conditions were met .
 Second, the war needed to be carried out in the heart of the country, thus behind the main frontlines . The war was carried out behind the frontlines in the country .
 irregular forces have to refrain from becoming engaged in open, decisive battles . Third, the war could not be decided by a single catastrophe, meaning basically that irregular forces must refrain from being involved in open battles .
 Fourth, the insurgence has to occupy a considerable part of the country, and fifth, the character of the given nation has to be suitable for a people’s war .
 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels also contributed to the thinking on asymmetric warfare, while combining it with their theory about the working-class revolution .
 Engels openly criticized the Piedmontese uprising in 1849 . The insurgents wanted to fight against the Austrian regular army in a regular way, he said .
 A less strong army can be put in a position to resist a stronger and better organised one . Mass uprising, revolutionary war, guerrilla detachments everywhere is the only means by which a small nation can overcome a large one .
 Engels explained that a massive uprising that could mobilize the whole province would have been able to counter the superior training and equipment of regular Austrian troops by its size . Engels said that a major uprising would have had to rely on continuous guerrilla warfare .
 Lawrence, popularly known as Lawrence of Arabia, wrote extensively about his asymmetric warfare experiences against the Ottoman Turkish Army . Lawrence was known for his work against the Turkish Army.
 Turkish military commander says desert conditions played a key role in his victory . He pointed out that terrain conditions, namely the vast desert impassable for Turkish regular forces, were key to victory .
 Yugoslav Communist partisan leader Josip ‘Broz’ Tito wrote extensively about the importance of the rough terrain that allowed his forces to avoid open confrontations with larger, better-equipped German units .
 Mao Zedong described mountains and hard-to-pass river areas as the best places for guerrilla bases . So did Chinese Communist leader and military commander Mao Zedongs .
 Lawrence, Mao and Tito all argued that irregular guerrilla forces alone are often unable to defeat the enemy . Lawrence, Tito and Mao and Mao all argue that irregular forces alone can't defeat theenemy .
 ‘irregular troops are as unable to defend a point or line as they are to attack it’, Lawrence says .
 Lawrence and his Arab allies strove to set up a regular Arab army able to cope with Turkish forces .
 British regular units were necessary13 in terms of logistics, supplies, intelligence, and sometimes also fire support .
 This experience was shared by the Soviet and Yugoslav partisans, as well as the French resistance fighters during the Second World War .
 irregulars were able to bog down considerable enemy forces and could sometimes inflict serious damage . But strategic victory was achieved not by the partisans, but by the advancing regular allied armies .
 Mao Zedong paid a lot of attention to the question of how regular and guerrilla armies need to cooperate and fight together .
 He examined how coordination should function in terms of strategy, during concrete campaigns and also at the tactical level in individual battles .
 He argued that the concrete command structure should depend on the tasks to be achieved . But strategic command had to be unified, he said .
 He described the proper relation between the regular army and partisan units as ‘two arms of a man’
 Lenin advocated that an armed insurrection by the working class would be necessary to seize power . In many of his works, Lenin advocated the idea of armed insurrection .
 Lenin was the first to define the city as possible terrain for asymmetric, ideology-led partisan warfare against the suppressive central power .
 In his work Lessons of the Moscow uprising, he made detailed recommendations about how barricades were to be set up and how regular army soldiers were to being combated .
 He further developed the use of propaganda as well, by promoting the need for its continuous, systematic use in a detailed and concentrated way .
 In connection to a revolution, he often asserted that a revolution should endeavour to make the government troops change sides, primarily by means of tailored propaganda .
21 attempts to kill military leaders have always featured in military history . Lenin spoke openly about the need to assassinate the enemy’s political and military leaders .
 Lenin was not the first to promote terrorist actions against political leaders . 19thcentury revolutionaries such as Mikhail Bakunin had already done so .
 Lenin was the first to integrate terrorist methods into the wider context of asymmetric, urban warfare against the central authorities . But Lenin was also the first.
 The guerrilla tactics of urban warfare were perfected by Brazilian Leftist revolutionary Carlos Marighella . The guerrilla tactic of urban Warfare was perfected by Carlos MarIGhella.
 Marighella's book Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla,23 published in 1969 . Marig hella argued that cities were the best places for guerrilla warfare because the functionality of state institutions could be disabled there .
 Marighella gave very detailed tactical advice on urban warfare, including how to seize enemy weapons, how to set traps for members of the police force .
 He advocated the use of small, highly mobile and flexible teams, which eluded capture by the slower and more rigid police force .
 Instead of open confrontations, he preferred ambushes, surprise actions and terrorist attacks against the political, police and military leadership of the central power .
 The expression originally had a different meaning, but it has now been adopted by NATO . It should be noted that the expression was originally used by NATO.
 It is necessary to trace the development of both the concept of hybrid war and of Russia’s so-called new generation war in order to understand the military theory behind the origin of the Ukraine war .
 The aim is not to provide a full historical overview, but to list the main milestones in its theoretical development .
 The Russian variant, ‘гиг    ’, resulted in no fewer than 235,000 hits . The Russian version of the Russian variant has been called ‘  гiгщ’ and �
 The hybrid war in Chechnya Nemeth argued that Chechen society was in a hybrid situation between a pre-modern and contemporary state . The architecture of the modern society was built upon the basis of a traditional, pre-state clan and family ties .
 The structure enabled Chechens to mobilize their society for war and provide widespread support for the fighting through family ties . This structure provided Chechens with support for war.
 Field commanders who emerged could also rely on the loyalty originating from kinship relations in addition to military virtues and demonstrated success against Russians .
 A hybrid form of warfare emerged, which combined elements of regular and irregular warfare in a highly flexible and efficient way . The study found that from this hybrid society a hybrid form.
 The Chechens were successful in synthesizing elements of Western and Soviet military doctrines with guerrilla tactics and the sophisticated use of modern technology . The Chechen were successful with the use of sophisticated technology .
Reliance on their intimate knowledge of the terrain and the background support of clan and kinship relations played an important role in their resilience . Reliance on the terrain played a key part in their strong resilience .
 Chechens shift gear from guerrilla warfare to more conventional, direct tactics and back again, depending on Russian moves . Their warfare put great emphasis on flexibility, enabling them to quickly shift gear .
 A seemingly amorphous, but deliberately structured, coordinated, strategic way to strike from all directions . Swarming will work best – perhaps it will only work – if it is designed mainly around deployments of myriad, small, dispersed, networked maneuver units .
 The Chechens also used psychological and information operations against the Russian forces . In addition to their highly flexible operational tactics, the Chechens used Psychological and Information operations .
 Russian intelligence made their information operations very effective. Their detailed knowledge of Russian culture and fluency in Russian made them very effective . Their information operations were very effective, they said .
 Chechen society turned out to be largely impervious to Russian propaganda efforts . Due to close kinship and religious ties as well as ethnic homogeneity, Chechensociety turned to be impervious.
 Chechens were able to drum up considerable political support and sympathy in the West as well .
For Chechens, the war signified much more than the battlefield itself, according to Nemeth . Nemeth states that for Chechens the war is more than a battlefield itself .
In addition to field tactics, they also employed all the means of the information age to gain an advantage over their enemies . Instead, they perceived it in a wider, non-linear sense, and hence, they used all the ways of the Information age.
 Chechen society is hard for outsiders to understand, so was hybrid warfare . Hybrid warfare hampered the operational capabilities of Russian military intelligence, it said .
 Theory 29 terrorism, massacres, extremely inhumane treatment of prisoners, and criminal methods as well as criminal methods .
 The term ‘hybrid warfare’ in Nemeth’s work basically signified a society-specific way of warfare . Nemeth combined irregular and regular tactics with modern information measures .
 Chechen wars were the focus of his study . He made little effort to explore implications of wider relevance than the specific Chechen case .
 Some elements of the Chechen ‘hybrid warfare’ may well have influenced the contemporary Russian hybrid warfare, particularly when it came to the overall perception of the war . However, as will be demonstrated later, certain elements of this may have influenced some of the
 hybrid wars in Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq and Lebanon were further developed by John McCuen in his authoritative article published in the March-April issue of the Military Review .
 The first of these is the conventional battleground, where one needs to face both symmetric and asymmetric threats . The first is a conventional battleground where one need to face the same threat .
 The second is the battleground of the population of the attacked country, where the often alienated and hostile locals need to be convinced . The third front is composed of the home population and the international community .
 To secure and stabilize the indigenous population, the intervening forces must immediately rebuild or restore security, essential services, local government, self-defense forces and essential elements of the economy .
 The standard, sequential approach of conventional warfare was based on the logic of defeating the enemy’s regular forces, securing control over the territory, and then starting state-building and reconstruction was inadequate in contemporary hybrid conflicts .
 Failure in any of the three fronts may well result in the overall failure of the whole operation . Due to the interconnected nature of theThree fronts, failure in the three may well be the result of the entire operation .
 McCuen says the enemy decided to target the local population because they clearly recognized their own inability to defeat the U.S. military .
 Instead of trying to seize and control territory, they concentrated on the human terrain, namely both on the indigenous and home front population .
 The U.S. military was forced to retreat after growing dissatisfaction of the local population forced the military to retreat . The strategy was based on the desire not to defeat the United States army .
Locals needed to be kept alienated from the United States forces . dissatisfaction was to be induced on the home front mainly via information measures .
 McCuen: In order to win a hybrid conflict, combat victories and territorial gains need to be immediately followed by massive efforts to build security, governance, infrastructure and stability in the conquered territories .
 The enemy would be able to fill the vacuum created by the advancing US forces, thereby creating a lasting, protracted insurgency based on the support of dissatisfied locals, and possibly of outside powers .
 Kyiv is able to regain full control over separatist regions in Ukraine . This is a lesson which might resonate in Ukraine as well, if and when Kyiv regained full control .
 experiences of the 2006 war in Lebanon have contributed to the development of hybrid war theory . In addition to Afghanistan and Iraq, Iraq and Afghanistan, experiences have also contributed to hybrid war theories .
 The surprising success of Hezbollah against the well-trained and equipped Israeli Defence Forces attracted the attention of military theorists .
 Theory 31 Hybrid threats incorporate a full range of different modes of warfare including conventional capabilities, irregular tactics and formations, terrorist acts .
 Hybrid wars can be conducted by both states and a variety of non-state actors . Hybrid wars are often conducted by states and non- state actors .
Multi-modal activities can be conducted by separate units, or even by the same unit, but are generally operationally and tactically directed and coordinated within the main battlespace to achieve synergistic effects .
Traditional wars could also include both regular and irregular elements, says Hoffman . Hoffman also pointed out that even though traditional wars may also include regular andregular elements, these occurred in different places or in different formations .
 In a hybrid war all the above-listed elements act in a coordinated, coherent way . But in the hybrid war, all the elements act a coordinated and coherent way.
 For the external observer as well as for the enemy, they may become blurred into a single force acting in a single, comprehensive battlespace .
 The key to hybrid warfare is convergence and coordination, which allow the various actors to act together in order to achieve a synergistic effect .
 The efficiency of hybrid warfare is also due to the growing destruction potential of modern weapon systems, says Hoffman . Hoffman also concluded that the efficiency of hybrids is also a factor .
 hybrid wars do not herald the demise of conventional warfare, says Hoffman . hybrid wars represent a complicating factor in defence planning .
 hybrid threats do not make older tools and methods of conventional warfare obsolete and unnecessary, says author .
Modern armed force needs to be able to counter threats, says military spokesman . A new layer of threats could be added to modern armed force .
 Any adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs a tailored mix of conventional, irregular, terrorism and criminal means or activities in the operational battlespace .
 Rather than a single entity, a hybrid threat or challenger may be comprised of a combination of state and non-state actors .
 In 2009 there was little new in the combined use of state and non-state actors, as well as terrorism and criminal means .
 It is worth pointing out that even this definition concentrated only on the various ways of using force and violence, and thus did not consider the use of political, diplomatic and economic tools .
 An adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs some combination of political, military, economic, social, and information means, and conventional, irregular, catastrophic, terrorism, and disruptive/criminal warfare methods . The adversary is an adversary that both uses political and military, military and social.
 The main novelty of Glenn’s definition is that it already took into account the use of non-violent political, economic and other means as well .
Stunning similarity may be observed if one compares this definition to the field events in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine . Hence, striking similarity could be observed.
 Russian forces and proRussian separatists in Ukraine employed all the measures listed by Glenn . In the spring and summer of 2014, Russian forces, pro-Russian separatists used all measures listed .
 The only exception unseen in Ukraine is catastrophic terrorism, as well as natural or man-made disasters . 41 such as blowing up a major river dam or a nuclear power plant .
 The above-mentioned definition was not adopted by all . However, it was not used by all of the world's leaders .
In 2012 a whole collection of essays was published about hybrid warfare . The essays were edited by Williamson Murray and Peter R Mansoor .
 The authors perceived and described hybrid warfare by concentrating on the combat actions of military and irregular forces . The authors paid less attention to the social and information aspects .
In their opinion, hybrid war was akin to classical joint forces operations, which involved infantry, artillery, cavalry and other service branches . In their opinion,. hybrid war involved infantry and artillery, including cavalry, and other branches .
43.43 declared that hybrid war was not changing the face of war; it was merely changing the way forces engage in its conduct . Hybrid warfare was thus ‘a useful construct to analyze conflicts involving regular and irregular forces’
As they focus almost exclusively on combat operations, their work is of limited relevance in describing the conflict in Ukraine . The main particularity was the very limited use of direct force .
 Russian military thinkers have also studied the changes taking place in the nature of warfare in depth . Russia’s ne w-gene r ation wa r fa r e. e. In line with Western developments, Russia's military thinkers also have studied the changing of warfare .
 The goal of the present report is not to provide a full overview of the developments of Russian military thinking . But to highlight some of the milestones that led to the warfare witnessed in Ukraine in 2014 .
 He predicted that due to the increased range of missile and artillery systems, in a future war the depths of enemy territory could easily be penetrated in an attack .
 Gareev frequently refers to the works of various Western scholars, demonstrating that Russian military science has been fully aware of the West . He also shows that Russia is able to monitor, react to and further develop the ideas of counterparts in the West.
 Gareev pointed out that technological development made the methods and means of information warfare much more sophisticated than before . Garev said that technology made information warfare more sophisticated.
 New computers and communication systems allow the swift collection of information and short-reaction command and control . New computers allow the quick collection of data and control of information .
 He forecasted the widespread use of electronic warfare, aimed at disrupting the functionality of enemy communication, radar systems and command and control .
 New information warfare methods may well imply that, instead of a direct armed attack, the struggle may get transformed into a hidden, latent, undeclared war .
 Theory 35 high-precision weapon systems are in the depths of enemy territory . They are used in the battle of the Middle East .
 The focus will be on destroying military, political and economic targets, particularly the command and control infrastructure, without directly engaging enemy forces in a conventional attack .
 The document reflected many changes in modern warfare already mentioned by Gareev and others . In-depth precision strikes and long-range fire combat are going to replace close-contact fighting .
 General Valery Gerasimov, Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Federation, developed ideas about future armed conflicts . He described a new form of warfare, called ‘new generation warfare’, which concentrates on the combined use of diplomatic, economic, political and other non
 The Russian general argued that the importance of non-military means in reaching political and strategic goals has increased . He said they are often more efficient than arms alone .
Gerasimov foresees the concealed, non-open use of force, such as paramilitary and civilian insurgent units . Gerasimov emphasizes the need to rely on asymmetric, indirect methods .
 He urges that, besides the physical reality, war should include the information space as well . He urges the real-time coordination of the means and tools used is possible .
 He puts great emphasis on targeted strikes conducted well behind enemy lines and on the destruction of the enemy’s critical infrastructure . He says strikes should be conducted in short timeframe .
 Gerasimov advocates the massive use of special forces and also of robotized weapons, such as drones . Gerasov advocates the use of Special Forces and robots .
Russian presidential advisor Vladislav Surkov wrote an article under his frequently used pseudonym, Nathan Dubovitsky .
 The essay speaks about a future war, which involves everybody and everything, all aspects of life, while still elusive in its main contours . The essay is published in the New York City-based book, "The War"
 The article was published on 12 March 2014, only a few days before the official Russian annexation of Crimea . It is probably no coincidence that the article was released just days before Crimea's annexation .
Russian military theorists have continued to discuss new generation warfare . Since then, Russian military theorists are discussing new generations of warfare .
 The authors declared the Gulf War to be the first ‘new generation conflict’ in human history . They used it to illustrate their thesis about the characteristics of this type of warfare .
 The authors concur with Gerasimov in stressing the high importance of asymmetric actions aimed at neutralizing the enemy’s military superiority through the use of political, economic, technological, ecological and information campaigns .
 The writers point to the need for integrating all these tools into a single, shared system of command and control in order to multiply their efficiency .
 New generation warfare is described as an operation possibly conducted by the United States or the West . Gerasimov, Chekinov and Bogdanov continue the defence narrative .
 They write very explicitly about the need to massively employ non-military methods prior to and during an armed confrontation . They say they need to use non- military methods before a confrontation .
 The HYBRID WAR CONCEPT IN MILITARY THEORY 37 the target country . The war has been described as a "hybrid war"
 The U.S. accuses the United States of operating a specialized internet ‘troll’ army and of using Facebook and Twitter for propaganda purposes . They also accuse the US of operating an internet 'troll' army .
 The authors highlight the need to gain information superiority over the target country . They also highlight the use of electronic warfare methods to disable enemy communication, command and control capabilities .
 EW is transforming from combatsupport activity into an important form of combat operation . EW is turning from a combatsu support activity into a form ofcombat operation .
 The main battleground for new-generation wars will be the information space, according to analysts .
 New-generation wars will be dominated by psychological and information warfare aimed at crushing the morale of enemy troops and the population .
 In future wars, they predict that in future wars the widespread use of non-traditional forms of fighting can be expected . They also predict the increased use of robotized, possibly autonomous weapon systems .
 The opening period starts with an extremely intensive, months-long coordinated non-military campaign . The campaign includes diplomatic, economic, ideological, psychological and information measures .
 Deceiving and bribing governmental and military officers in the target country is an important way of decreasing the functionality of enemy armed forces in advance, says the author .
 The authors anticipate the arrival of international militants in the target country to exacerbate the situation . The authors also anticipate the arrivals of international militant militants .
 Large-scale reconnaissance and subversive missions are expected to be expected before the start of the military phase . The missions include diplomatic signalling tools to espionage .
 This is to be followed by a full-scale electronic warfare operation, an ‘electronic knockdown’ aimed at disabling the enemy’s government and military . This is the first time this will be carried out .
 The real military attack would begin, probably with precision missiles, drones and other automated weapons, as well as long-range artillery .
Authors: By the end of the opening phase, the enemy country would have its main government and military control centres destroyed .
 The next, closing phase of a new generation war would see the attacker’s regular ground forces entering the target country .
 This second phase is much less detailed, in contrast to the several pages dedicated to the opening phase . The closing phase constitutes only one paragraph .
 Chekinov and Bogdanov consider the first, predominantly non-military phase of the conflict to be much more important than the second . This reinforces the impression that Chekinova and Bog Danov consider first, mostly non- military phase of conflict more important.
 There is a striking similarity between the new generation war theoretically described by Chekinov and Bogdanov in 2013 and the events that took place in 2014 .
 A several-months-long non-military preparatory campaign against Ukraine must have started well before the EuroMaidan, in mid-2013 at the latest, but probably even earlier .
 Theory 39 that time is a rare case in military history, which is indeed a rare cases in history .
 New Ukrainian leadership came to power in February 2014 to stop the hybrid war and prevent the Russian annexation of Crimea . However, this did not help the new Ukrainian leadership that came into power to prevent the annexation .
 hybrid war did not emerge immediately after the start of the Russian operation in Crimea . From what can be reconstructed, the term hybrid war didn't emerge immediately .
Experts and journalists were casting around for expressions to describe this suddenly emerging, unprecedented phenomenon . The elusive, indirect and highly effective warfare conducted by the Russian forces took not only Ukraine but the whole world by surprise .
 The Russian operation unfolded in late March, even the leading military and defence affairs journal Jane’s had not yet come up with a concrete name . The journal spoke only about a 'novel approach' to warfare .
 Latvian expert Jānis Bērziņš in his April 2014 study was one of the first comprehensive analyses of the new Russian warfare being waged in Crimea .
 Even long after the Crimea operation, several expressions have been used in parallel .
 Peter Pomerantsev used the expression ‘non-linear war’ in Foreign Policy in May 2014,63 referring to the work of Vladislav Surkov .
 The same ‘non-linear war’ term was used by Mark Galeotti, leading expert on Russian security structures in his essay published in July,64 .
 In August, the XX Committee spoke about a ‘special war’66 in describing the Crimea and Donbass operations .
 The use of the term hybrid war didn't gain traction until summer 2014 . There were several mentions before that .
 Dutch General Frank van Kappen called the Russian operations a hybrid war on 26 April 2014 . Russian political scientist and former advisor to President Vladimir Putin, Andrei Illarionov, also mentioned the term .
 A breakthrough in the discourse came when NATO decided to adopt the expression . NATO has now adopted the expression of the phrase .
 The Washington Post and Washington Post also used the term 'hybrid warfare'71 more than once and as a well-elaborated, comprehensive term during NATO's Wales Summit in late September .
 New, alternative terms are emerging in NATO's hybrid war discourse . It should be noted that in addition to the increasingly dominant role of NATO’s hybrid War discourse, new, alternative Terms are also emerging .
 Russia uses several military and non-military means under a single central command, subordinated to a centrally-defined political goal . They proposed this expression because, as they argued, Russia use several military, non- military means under one central command .
 The use of conflict instead of war also better reflects the varying degrees of ambiguity and intensity in Russia’s actions .
 The authors say this is in stark contrast to the more binary Western interpretation, which perceives the absence of armed fighting as peace .
 The expression hybrid war has become the most commonly used term for Russia’s new mode of warfare .
 hybrid war originally had different, albeit related meanings . This occurred despite the fact that, strictly from the military science point of view, hybrid war initially had different meanings .
 NATO adopted the term as a NATO term. The term surely contributed to the wider use of the term .
 The present report will keep using the term hybrid war, while bearing in mind that the meaning of academic expressions may well develop and get transformed over time .
 Hybrid war has already undergone such a transformation, well before Crimea . Crimea has already been transformed by hybrid war .
Original concept coined by Bill Nemeth referred to flexible, half regular, half irregular warfare of the Chechens in 1994–1996 . Later evolved to describe combined warfare of relying on conventional arms, irregular warfare, methods of terrorism and organized crime .
 hybrid war is gradually becoming the preferred term to describe Russia’s operation in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine . The same transformation of meaning is taking place once again .
 The article by Lawrence Freedman published in the December 2014–January 2015 issue of Survival. In addition to all of the above, it is also important to note the article by Freedman .
From April 2014 the situation could be described as an externally sponsored insurgency in Eastern Ukraine, or as a hybrid war, says Freedman . Freedman argued that this changed with the massive involvement of regular Russian forces in August 2014 .
 He applied the term limited war to describe the post-August phase of the conflict . Hence, he applied the word limited war. The term was used to describe post- August conflict .
 The original denotations of hybrid war are not capable of completely describing the Russian warfare in Ukraine . All in all, it is worth pointing out that the originaldenotations are not completely accurate .
 In Ukraine a state, namely Russia, has been using hybrid warfare, while in all previous cases these tools were used by non-state actors .
 Russia’s operations in Ukraine have been much wider than any earlier analysts of hybrid wars could have imagined .
 hybrid warfare was thought mainly about nonstate actors, incapable of conducting high politics . They included influencing even the highest levels of policymaking and the use of diplomatic and macroeconomic measures as well .
 Russia’s hybrid warfare was not concentrated on the battlefield or in the operational theatre . Instead, the main emphasis was put on other, non-military methods, which mitigated the necessity for an armed confrontation .
 In order to properly understand the way in which this functions are used, the relevant literature needs to be studied first . The author says that in order to fully understand the functions of this function, this literature must be studied .
 The conflict in Ukraine, starting with the operation in Crimea and continuing with the one in Eastern Ukraine, attracted massive media and expert attention .
 Journalists monitored and commented on the occupation of Crimea in the early weeks of Crimea .
 The expert community required more time to provide in-depth analysis that went beyond the level of merely reporting on the movements of the ‘polite green men’ and their local allies .
 The Center for European Policy Analysis first reacted to the annexation of Crimea in late March 201476 . The report pointed to the vulnerability of Central and Eastern Europe .
 The authors argued that Russia certainly has the military capabilities and may also have the political will to carry out rapid, limitedobjective military strikes .
 The paper recognized that Article 5 of the Washington Treaty cannot provide a suitable defence against the Russian tactics used in Crimea . The paper also recognized that the treaty cannot provide an adequate defence against Russia .
 CEPA experts did not address the Russian tactics, namely the hybrid war itself .
 The Kremlin has been involved in an intervention in Eastern Ukraine . However, such risks would not necessarily prevent the Kremlin from conducting another intervention .
 The first, more detailed study on the new, unprecedented form of Russian warfare was prepared by Latvian expert Jānis Bērziņš in April 2014 . The article mostly referred to the article by Russian authors Valery Gerasimov, Sergey Chekinov and
 Bērziņš devised a categorization composed of eight consecutive phases of new generation warfare . Based primarily on guidelines provided by Chekinov and Bogdanov .
 He made numerous recommendations about how Latvia should defend itself against hybrid warfare . In addition, he made several recommendations about defending itself from hybrid warfare.
In June 2014 the International Centre for Defence and Security in Estonia provided a detailed analysis of the involvement of the Russian military and special forces in both Crimea and Eastern Ukraine .
 The paper was based on the available primary sources, mainly on photographic and video evidence . The paper is based on photographs, video and photographic evidence .
 The ICDS paper also proved that some of the units seen in Crimea were later put into action in Eastern Ukraine as well .
Galeotti called this approach an ‘Aesopian’ one, where defence means offence, and repelling an attack actually means attacking .
Presenting the Arab Spring – wrongly – as the result of covert Western operations allows Gerasimov the freedom to talk about how Russia can subvert and destroy states without direct, overt and large-scale military intervention .
 Gudrun Persson argues that Gerasimov meant exactly what he had written . The new wars may pose a serious threat to Russia, particularly because Russian military science lags far behind that of the U.S.
Gerasimov noted the great importance Gerasimov attached to coordination between various state agencies . Galeotti also noted the importance of the coordination between state agencies, as well as military, intelligence and information operations .
 Gerasimov’s arguments were consistent with the discourse and actions of the Soviet Union, he said .
 Several authors concluded that hybrid warfare actually contained little novelty .
 Several elements that were used in Ukraine constituted integral parts of the Soviet political-military inventory . Several elements of the Ukrainian political- military inventory were used .
 J Hedenskog – C Vendil Pallin , Russian Military Capability in a Ten-year Perspective – 2013 .
 RUSSIA’S HYBRID WAR in the LITER ATURE. 49 the government of independent Estonia, by taking over strategic locations, governmental institutions and communication networks .
 Paul Goble,85, and Vitaly and Dmytro Usenko,86 compared the Russian aggression against Ukraine to the Winter War between Finland and the Soviet Union in 1939–1940 .
Special forces attacked bridges, roads and command, control and communication infrastructure . Both attacks were carried out despite existing treaties on non-aggression .
 Moscow has been doing its best to conceal the losses of these undeclared wars, often from the families of the killed or injured .
88 Russia’s efforts to justify its actions with false and misused legal claims need to be systematically countered and deconstructed, says Roy Allison . Moscow may further fracture the international legal order already damaged by the annexation of Crimea .
 Popescu concluded that the real novelty of the Russian operation in Ukraine was the ‘near perfect’ coordination between the various tools used .
 FOI experts also pointed out90 that the Russian operation in Crimea presented no major novelty regarding either Russia’s military capabilities or the disinformation and propaganda measures conducted .
 The only really new element was the skilful and effective coordination of the diplomatic, economic, military and information instruments used during the operation . All in the framework of a single, well-functioning command structure, says the U.S.
Authors argue Crimea constituted a particularly favourable environment for the Russian operation . However, authors argue that Crimea constituted an favourite environment .
Russian forces in Crimea met no resistance, and hence the operation in the peninsula actually reveals little about their fighting capabilities in a regular conflict . For example, Russian forces in the Crimea metno resistance .
 FOI analysts warned that Russian military capabilities were often underrated before Ukraine . There was now a risk of overrating them, they said .
 Oscar Jonsson and Robert Seely agreed with FOI analysis that the only real novelty of the Russian warfare witnessed in Ukraine was the highly effective coordination of the various tools used .
 Russia has significantly strengthened and upgraded some of its old tools, familiar since Soviet times, particularly concerning information warfare . But it should be noted, that Russia has also upgraded some old tools .
 Russia has invested considerable time and resources in establishing a strong media presence in the Western world as well . Keir Giles, 93, has been in charge of Russia's media presence for years .
 The Russian media in Ukraine has traditionally had a strong presence, due in part to the high ratio of Russian-speakers . The high proportion of Russian owned companies in the Ukrainian media market is due to the Russian-owned companies .
 Russian-speakers in Ukraine frequently watch, and mostly prefer Russian television channels . Russian-speaking people often watch Russian TV channels, and read local newspapers .
 Moscow has a strong media presence in Ukraine. Taken together, these factors empower Moscow with a strong press presence in the country .
 The FOI.96 study analyzed the various foreign and security policy tools and means Russia has been using in the post-Soviet region . The study analyzed in detail the various Foreign and Security policy tools .
 A Case of “Soft Power?’, East European Politics and Societies and Cultures.’.
 The second part of the book describes the most important modalities of influence, ranging from tools of high diplomacy to cultural policies . All of which played an important role in the operation against Ukraine as well .
Mass of literature emerged in Russia following the official narrative by the Kremlin . Another noteworthy aspect of the hybrid war in Ukraine is the mass of literature .
 Putin himself admitted involvement of Russian special forces in Crimea after almost two months of denial . Some key elements remain constant .
 Crimea is depicted as a territory that historically belongs to Russia and the February-March 2014 insurgence as an organically developed, bottom-up independence movement . Ukraine's political leadership is still questioned despite the democratic presidential and parliamentary elections conducted in 2014 . Ukrainians are often depicted as radical nationalists and
 This ideological setup is strongly supported by an intensive book release campaign both in Russia and abroad . This ideological set-up is strongly backed by an intense book releases campaign .
 A new book by Sergey Glazyev entitled Ukrainskaya katastrofa is published in Russia . The book is called Ukrainkaya k atastrof .
 The official Russian narrative was published in 2015, primarily for the domestic Russian audience . The Russian narrative is based on American Aggression and New World War .
 Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine99 is aimed mainly at Western, English-language readers .
 The book provides an in-depth analysis of the Russian and Ukrainian militaries . It also promotes the official Kremlin narrative by questioning Ukraine’s territorial claim to Crimea .
 A detailed analysis of the Russian version of events is beyond the scope of the present study . The study is based on the current study .
 Hybrid war in action based on events that took place in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine . It is possible to map out the functioning of the hybrid war using an inductive methodology .
 The ‘fog of war’ is a frequent shortage of reliable information, as well as the disinformation and propaganda operations conducted by all sides involved in the conflict . Of course, one needs to be aware of the distorting effects of the ‘ fog of
 The timeline of events has become much clearer and many more details have now emerged . It was not the case during the outbreak of hostilities. However, the timeline has now become more clear .
 The analysis below is based on the assumption that in light of the knowledge about contemporary Russian strategic thinking on the new generation warfare, it is possible to construct a more detailed classification of the way in which hybrid warfare functions .
 It is possible to draw some general conclusions about the prerequisites for waging a successful hybrid war . In addition, it is possible.
 hybrid war can be described as being composed of three main phases . Ope r ationa l ph ases of t h e h y br id wa r. Oper ational ph ase ases. O pe r ation l ph.
 Russian state secrets most probably constitute well-guarded 57 state secrets in Russia . Of course, this classification is abstracted from the concrete events that took place on the ground .
 The first, preparatory phase concentrates on mapping out the strategic, political, economic, social and infrastructural weaknesses and vulnerabilities of the target country . The second, preparation phase focuses on creating the necessary means for capitalizing on them .
 Russia has been in an excellent position to do so, thanks to the long common history, the tight economic and social ties between the two countries, as well as the strong connections between political, economic and security elites .
 The initial phase of hybrid war is built on the traditional toolbox of Russian foreign policy, in line with the increasing importance of non-military measures in Russia's concept of new generation warfare .
 Many of the actions listed below are not explicitly or necessarily illegal, which makes it hard for the target country to defend itself against them . In addition, many of these actions are not necessarily illegal .
 Strategic preparation. Exploring points of vulnerability in the state administration, economy and armed forces of the target country .
 Political, diplomatic, special operation and media tools are used to prepare for the target country . Use political, diplomatic and special operation tools to get dissatisfaction with central authorities in the country .
 Operational preparation. Launching coordinated political pressure and disinformation actions . Launching political pressure, disinformation actions.
 During the preparatory phase, no violence is openly engaged in, and the measures taken do not contravene any political or legal threshold that would make the target country take serious, active countermeasures . The measures taken don't contravenes any political, legal threshold.
 Russia has been targeted by the targeted government in recent years . The pressure felt may make the other country more receptive to Russia’s demands and interests .
 Self-doubt and fear constitute important parts of Moscow’s foreign policy inventory .
 The effects of the preparations become visible only in the next phase, when the attack is actually launched . It is basically following the principles laid down by Chekinov and Bogdanov .
 All weaknesses explored during the preparatory phase of hybrid warfare suddenly surface when the attacking country actually launches the full-scale hybrid offensive .
 hybrid war clearly becomes different from the traditional actions of Russian foreign and security policy described above .
The key difference is that open, organized, armed violence starts to occur . The key difference in violence is that the violence is more organized .
 Not a single shot was fired, but it quickly became clear that Ukrainian units could not leave their bases without using force against the unmarked militants .
 Donetsk state administration building was among first targets to be taken over in April 2014 . The building still serves as the headquarters of the so-called Donetsk National Republic .
 Police and local security forces failed to defend the buildings, mostly due to the lack of clear commands to do so, and also due to their low morale, weak leadership and inadequate equipment .
 In parallel with these actions, well-organized, often armed demonstrators, dressed in civilian clothes and exhibiting high tactical skills, started to take over other, less defended public administration buildings, media outlets and civilian infrastructure .
 Capturing television and radio stations as well as broadcasting towers was of key importance . It enabled attackers to take central government media channels off the air, and to replace them with Russian channels .
 The attackers and the ‘polite green men’ consistently claimed that they were local protesters dissatisfied with the Kyiv central government . Both the attackers and 'politegreen men' consistently claimed to be local protesters .
 The Russian official discourse and media consistently referred to them, and still does, as the ‘opposition’ or ‘resistance’ by using the term opolchenie .
 Ukraine’s chains of command and control were frequently damaged, disrupted or jammed by sabotage attacks, corrupt officials103 and electronic warfare . In parallel with these actions, Ukraine's chains of control were often damaged or jammed .
 Almost all of the Ukrainian army, police and navy units ultimately surrendered in Crimea . As a result of the intensive, multifold pressure, as well as the hesitation of the Kyiv government, almost all of them ultimately surrendered .
 Some actually changed sides, while the resistance of the few that stood firm was broken with low-level violence . Some even changed sides.
 Moscow kept denying its involvement, and was duly able to buy time to reach a fait accompli both in Crimea and later in Donbass .
 Moscow's consistent denial policy could be considered a clear success. In this respect, Moscow’s consistency of denial policy may be a success .
 Moscow would probably employ the same denial strategy, hoping that it could prevent the activation of Article V of the Washington Treaty .
 The aim is to break the target country’s ability to resist by using predominantly non-military means . This would be perfectly in line with the whole concept of ‘new generation warfare’ described earlier .
 NATO would not get engaged at all, or would do so only when it was already too late . Most actions would remain below threshold of NATO’s collective defence .
 Most actions of the attack phase are conducted by nonmilitary means (using the term non-military in the sense that the regular military does not participate in the attack), it is important to recognize that the military also has a key role to play .
 The threat of an overwhelming conventional attack is a major threat, according to the latest report . It is the latest in a long line of attacks that have been reported in recent years .
 Ukraine's government did not want to provoke Russia by opening fire on demonstrators . In this way, they managed to both divert Kyiv’s attention and resources .
 Russia quickly established alternative centres of political power . After this was achieved, Russia quickly became an alternative centre of power .
 In Crimea, deputies of the occupied parliament were forced to vote for holding a referendum on independence . In Donbass, separatists proclaimed the so-called People's Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 None of these decisions or self-proclaimed entities had any proper democratic legitimacy. None of them had any legitimate democratic legitimacy .
 referendum in Simferopol, Crimea, was held at gunpoint . Members of Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea were forced to do so at gun point .
 Igor Girkin often used the nom-de-guerre Strelkov in a January 2015 TV show in Russia . This was later openly admitted by senior separatist commander Igor Girkins .
 The legitimacy of the separatist leaders is a purely constructed one, says the author . Russian diplomacy, media and public discourse, both at home and abroad, he says .
 The Russian media constantly refers to the separatist authorities as if the People’s Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk were properly functioning states .
 The attack on the government's information monopoly may well suffice in alienating the locals from the central government . However, even this constructed legitimacy may well serve as an alternative power centre .
 Exploding the tensions. Organizing massive anti-government protests and riots in the attacked country . Organizing protests and rioting in the country .
 Ousting central power from the targeted region. Disabling the central power by capturing administrative buildings and telecommunications infrastructure in the region .
 The media of the attackers tries to mislead and disorientate the international audience, and discredit the target country . The media also tries to discredit the targets .
 Establishing alternative political power. Declaring an alternative political centre based on captured administrative buildings . Declaring a real or fabricated tradition of separatism .
 As demonstrated both in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine, the resistance potential of the target country was broken . Its governance, command, control, control and communications capabilities were severely damaged .
 Ukraine is the first country in Ukraine to enter the European Union in 2014 . The country has been in the midst of a major crisis in recent years . Ukraine has a long history of violence and violence in the past .
 If insufficient weaknesses can be identified in the target country, a full-scale hybrid offensive never starts .
 Stabilization phase is part of the plan to consolidate the results achieved by the hybrid war . The attacking country needs to take additional steps to further strengthen and legitimize its rule .
 The Eastern Ukraine scenario turned out to be radically different from the Crimean one . However, in this respect, the Eastern Ukraine situation turned to be drastically different .
 Referendums on ‘independence’ were organized in both regions . In both cases, the results were in favour of the separatists .
 More than 97% of the population voted for secession from Ukraine with an 83% turnout . On the peninsula, according to the ‘official’ results, more than 97%.
 Only 15% of those eligible to vote were in favour of secession . Only 30% of the vote supported independence .
 This obviously did nothing to change the fait accompli on the ground. Nevertheless, this obviously didn't change the ground .
 Russian units stationed in Crimea kept exerting pressure on the local elites and the population . Crimea was annexed by Russia after less than a full day of ‘independence’
 In Eastern Ukraine, separatism could not gather sufficiently strong momentum towards secession, according to reports . The lack of such massive operational support in Crimea by the Russian units stationed there is to be discussed .
 Russia-supported separatists were successful in ousting the central government from considerable territories in Crimea . Without massive Russian ground presence they would never have been able to control the territory .
 Instead of a functioning alternative power, what they managed to create in the main was a political, security and social limbo for several months .
 Kyiv launched a counteroffensive on 15 April 2014, the so-called Anti-Terror Operation . Kyiv government realized that the regular forces were not going to attack due to the anticipated high political costs .
 The ATO suffered from considerable problems from the outset when it came to morale, command and control and equipment . However, the ATO has suffered from some problems since the start of its career .
 The operation got off to a spectacularly bad start at Kramatorsk on 16 April when a whole column of ATO armoured vehicles was held up and captured by demonstrating civilians and separatists . In early May, referendums were conducted in the occupied territories of the Donetsk and Luh
 The international community condemned the referendums and did not recognize them as valid in any sense . Similarly to Crimea, the international community did notrecognize them asvalid in any way .
 The exact motives underlying Moscow’s decision are not yet known, but the size of the territory is unknown . The ongoing armed resistance of the Ukrainian army and the foreseeable political and economic fallout all played a role .
 hybrid warfare means there are at least two possible outcomes. From the perspective of hybrid warfare this means that, relying on the inductive methodology based on concrete events, there is at least 2 possible outcomes .
 One variant is the annexation of the captured territory, as occurred in Crimea . Another option is to keep the territory inside the attacked country, but deny the central government any control .
 The case of Ukraine perfectly demonstrated how hybrid warfare is able to cripple the very functionality of a state without launching a full-scale war against it .
 Political stabilization of the outcome. Organizing a ‘referendum’ and decision about secession/independence in the target country . The strong diplomatic and media support of the attacking country .
 Lasting limitation of the strategic freedom of movement of the attacked country. Loss of territory results in severe economic hardship, domestic political destabilization and possibly grave humanitarian situation .
Following the election of Petro Poroshenko as President of Ukraine on 25 May 2014, the ATO gained momentum . The ATO also gained momentum.
 Russia launched a massive intervention by its regular forces in August 2014 . In order to prevent the defeat of the separatists, Russia launched an intervention by the regular forces . The conflict has been transformed into a conventional war .
 Russia’s hybrid war was devastatingly effective against Ukraine . Despite its partial failure in Eastern Ukraine, it was successful against the Ukraine .
 Some of the reasons for this efficacy are of a very general nature, while others are highly Ukraine-specific factors . In order to properly understand the reasons, one needs to be aware that some of them were of a general nature .
 The element of surprise was the first and probably most important general reason for the high effectiveness . The first and most important reason for high effectiveness was the element of Surprise .
 The rapid implementation of the full spectrum of hybrid warfare (i.e. all three phases) managed to take both Kyiv and the West by surprise .
 This form of warfare had never been fully deployed anywhere else, and thus the means of defence against it were also underdeveloped . This type of warfare was never fully deployed.
 Russia was apparently successful in misleading both Ukraine and the West in terms of intelligence, according to the report . The report was published on Monday .
 Russian General Anatoly Zaitsev is the head of the Russian forces . The Russian forces are believed to have kept a strict radio silence in place before the operation .
 The surprise factor combined with the efficient use of deception provided Russia with a decisive advantage over Ukraine . Russia would probably have done so against many other possible adversaries .
 Ukraine-specific factor was the skillful use of the Russian base in Sevastopol, as well as the ships of the Black Sea Fleet .
 General Zaitsev also mentions the ‘polite green men’ who appeared in a timely fashion whenever necessary to prevent a possible counter-attack by the Ukrainian forces .
 The main tool in misleading both Kyiv and the West was the extremely effective, well-coordinated information warfare . Kyiv's main tool was the very effective and well- coordinated information warfare, says the author .
 Moscow invested an immense amount of time and resources in building up this capability,113 and was smart enough not to uncover its full potential before the decisive moment of the attack . Moscow invested a huge amount of money and resources to build up its capability .
 The full power of information warfare — both in Ukraine and abroad — constituted another element of surprise, says the author .
 Kyiv was just as unprepared as probably many other countries would have been, it was unable to properly counter this unforeseen pressure . Kyiv had been put in a weak, defensive, reactive position .
 The attackers appeared to have no connection to any foreign state, nor any formalized institutional subordination . The attackers could enjoy the benefits of the lack of accountability, as they appear to have neither any connection to a foreign state .
 Ukraine was put in a situation where it formally had no partner to negotiate with Russia . Russia consistently refused to engage in any bilateral discussions, claiming its non-involvement .
 At the same time, Moscow followed the old pattern familiar from the early 1990s, and pushed Kyiv to negotiate directly with separatists .
 Ukraine could not do this because it would have meant the de facto recognition of the separatists as legitimate partners . This was something that Ukraine obviously couldn't do, because it was something the Ukraine obviously would not do .
 The denial of formal involvement theoretically empowered Russia with the possibility to stop the hybrid attack at any time, according to plan . Russia has been accused of being involved in a hybrid attack .
 Moscow would have been able to exit both the Crimean and the Eastern Ukraine operations without formally losing face . By withdrawing its unmarked forces and ordering its agents to gradually put an end to the violent demonstrations and sabotage actions.
 There was no need to exercise this option in the end, but it was still available . The option was available for the first time in the past .
 Many of the attackers were dressed in civilian clothes and were practically indistinguishable from the local civilian population . Another element that contributed to the efficiency of the hybrid offensive was that many of the attacker were wearing civilian clothes .
 Ukrainian government limited potential to use force against them for four main reasons . This seriously limited the potential of the Ukrainian government to use forces against them .
 Kyiv could hardly risk killing Russian-speakers, because Moscow has both the capability and means necessary for an armed intervention . Moscow has had both capability and the means necessary to defend the Russian population .
 The other reasons why disguising attackers as civilians were so effective were already highly Ukraine-specific .
 Ukraine had a HYBRID WAR in action. 69 severe lack of capable, reliable and properly equipped police officers to deploy against the attackers . Ukraine has a HY BRID WAR IN ACTION .
 The Berkut riot police unit was mainly loyal to the regime of ousted president, Viktor Yanukovich . It should be remembered that the former ‘iron fist’ of Ukraine’s interior ministry forces, the Berkut police unit, was mostly loyal to Yanukovich.
 Berkut was disbanded immediately after the change of power in Kyiv, in February 2014, in relation to crimes allegedly committed by Berkut members during the EuroMaidan protest . The disbanded riot control capability was not replaced with anything of a similar nature .
 Ukraine rendered itself defenceless against violent riots at a very critical moment . The country is now in the middle of a crisis .
 The possibility of using massive force against the Russiacontrolled demonstrators was a risk . Most ordinary non-Berkut Ukrainian policemen were simply not willing to take, either from the moral or responsibility perspective .
 Lacking proper riot control capabilities, the only option to quickly disperse the violent demonstrations would have been to use firearms against the demonstrators .
 The decision to open fire against civilians is never taken lightly by any police or military force . However, it is never one that is taken lightly.
 Russian propaganda was highly effective in sowing the seeds of doubt about the legitimacy of the interim government in Kyiv . In addition, Russian propaganda is highly effective.
 Many police officers could not be sure which orders to follow and whether the law was actually on their side .
 Many commanders disappeared or changed sides, as happened in Eastern Ukraine . This was particularly the case when many of their commanders disappeared .
 Most ordinary Ukrainian police officers were not eager to risk injury or even death, not to mention their career prospects . They duly decided to stand passively by instead .
 Ukraine-specific factor that explains why Russian hybrid warfare was so effective against Kyiv was the long-standing, grave weakness of Ukraine as a state in terms of its governance and functionality .
 Many perceived the Russian hybrid war as a new, invincible, universal menace, a weapon that Russia could deploy anywhere at any time . Following the swift annexation of Crimea and the rapid outbreak of what initially appeared to be a similar conflict in Eastern Ukraine, many perceived it as a
 The full spectrum of hybrid war is bound to a number of prerequisites, all of which will be studied below in detail .
 hybrid war may turn out to be unsuccessful. If these requirements are not fulfilled, hybrid war could be unsuccessful . The requirements may not be fulfilled, or only partially met, they may be met .
 hybrid war has to be kept in mind that its initial, non-violent sections do not constitute anything particularly illegal or violent . In order to identify the prerequisites for the use of hybrid war, it has to keep in mind the pre-requisites are not particularly violent .
 The preparatory phase of hybrid warfare does not differ that much from the conventional tools of Russian diplomacy, such as gathering information, establishing contacts with decisionmakers, setting up media outlets, supporting cultural projects and proMoscow NGOs .
 hybrid war preparations are mostly built on these long-known and long-employed tools of Moscow, which could be used in almost any environment and in any circumstances .
 The sample that can be used for the analysis of the full spectrum of hybrid war is very limited . Of course, one needs to remember the methodological constraints listed in detail in the introductory chapter .
 The first hybrid war was 73 transformed into a conventional, but limited armed conflict . So far we have only one completely successful case, namely Crimea, and another, partially successful case .
 Analysts need to be wary of drawing too general conclusions based only on these two cases .
 The most important prerequisite for the full spectrum of hybrid warfare is that Russia needs to be militarily stronger than the target country . Based on the phases described in the previous chapter, one may conclude that Russia must be stronger than its target country.
 The hybrid war develops from the predominantly covert preparatory phase to the already open, second, attack phase . Full spectrum in this context means that the hybrid war developing from the mostly covert pre-war phase.
 The ability of the attacked country to conduct armed resistance needs to be disabled in order to allow Phase 2, namely open, armed actions to unfold . The reason why Russian military superiority is essential is that it is essential for the country's military superiority .
 ‘polite green men’ and their local armed allies could be arrested – or, if police means are insufficient, then destroyed by military force . Otherwise, ‘Polite greenMen’ may be arrested .
 The Ukrainian government could not use force against either the ‘polite green men’ or against the violent protestors in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine was the acute danger of an overwhelming conventional attack from Russia .
 Russian forces were lined up along the border with Ukraine. One needs to remember that both during the Crimean events and the beginning of the crisis in Eastern Ukraine .
 The Kremlin officially justified their presence by claiming they were only participating in snap exercises . In reality they posed an imminent military threat to Ukraine, the Kremlin said .
 Ukraine's leadership could hardly risk using force against the invaders, because it could have easily induced a full-fledged attack from Russia . In other words, the threat of a massive Russian conventional military attack against Ukraine functioned as a deterrent .
Military units based in Crimea would have been able to conduct some armed resistance, if ordered to do so .
 Kyiv did not dare to risk a massive, devastating military attack from Russia . However, such an order never came, precisely because of Kyiv's refusal to risk such a massive military attack .
 There was an additional outside element that played a role, namely the reluctance of the West to see Ukraine get involved in an open military conflict with Russia .
 Ukrainian officials sometimes openly claim that ‘The West told us not to do anything, not to provoke the Russians’ However, this deterrent functions only if Russia possesses clear military superiority over the attacked country .
 The attacked state either has no strong self-defence capabilities at all, or is unable or unwilling to put them into action . This means that the attacked state is not strong enough to defend itself .
 The attacked country must have no allies committed and able to guarantee its defence . Furthermore, the attacked country should have no ally committed and can guarantee its defense .
 The hybrid offensive may soon turn into a disaster. If the attacked country decides to use military force against the invaders, the hybrid offensive could soon be a disaster .
 Military history has few cases where irregular forces have been able to hold open territories against a systematically advancing regular army .
 If irregular forces become engaged in symmetric combat, if they try to rigidly defend territory in the classical ‘No step back’ sense, partisans inevitably get outgunned and often outnumbered by the professional military . The professional military is ready to employ heavy weaponry against them.
 Ukraine's AntiTerror Operation launched against separatists in April 2014 . This was well demonstrated by the success of Ukraine’s AntiTerror operation .
 The lightly armed, often disorganized rebel militias were not able to withstand the advancing Ukrainian regular units, despite the support they allegedly received from Russian special forces .
 The rebels suffered serious losses both in terms of personnel and territory . The rebels also suffered serious loss to the government .
Both the preparation and the attack phases of hybrid warfare are largely built on capitalizing on the inherent weaknesses of the target country . The preparation and attack phases are largely based on capitalization on the weaknesses of a target country.
 weak central leadership, badly functioning state administration and underpaid, corrupt police and armed forces all increase the vulnerability to infiltration and bribery . Weak central leadership and poor state administration increase vulnerability to bribery and infiltration .
 A well-functioning, strong state administration, together with its police and secret services, is able to quickly uncover and suppress such activities emanating from abroad .
 The Ukrainian state was unable to do so during the Crimean crisis for a number of reasons . However, the Ukrainian state has been unable to help in the crisis .
First, the whole state was infected by an extremely high level of corruption, including the highest levels of state administration . First, the entire state is infected by a very high level.
 Ukraine was the third most corrupt state in Europe during Viktor Yanukovich's presidency . Ukraine's structural weaknesses in the state administration did not disappear with the February 2014 political turnabout .
2 Low and/or questionable government legitimacy is an additional factor that may weaken the resistance potential of the target country . Further, oligarchs have had a strong influence on the political elite, but also on the police, border guards and secret service structures, particularly in Eastern Ukraine .
 Kyiv leadership was faced with serious problems of legitimacy, as well as everyday functioning . This was particularly the case during the Crimean crisis .
 Petro Poroshenko was elected as President on 25 May 2014 . The election helped to address the legitimacy problems, but functional hardships persisted .
 Low-level Ukrainian commanders, isolated from any alternative source of information, often decided to surrender under the pressure of the Russian information warfare .
 The Yanukovich regime purposefully weakened the Russia-oriented counter-intelligence capabilities of the Security Service of Ukraine (Sluzhba Bezpeki Ukrajni, SBU) The former president was informed about the action before the commando unit had even left Kyiv .
 Special agents of the Alpha Group were betrayed by their own commander to the separatists in Eastern Ukraine . Another spectacular case was when special agents were betrayed to their own commanders .
 The SBU had to be restructured and rebuilt. All in all, in order to enable the SBU to carry out its duties properly, the whole organization had to have to be rebuilt .
Interim President Oleksandr Turchynov openly admitted the police and security services were ‘helpless’ against the pro-Russian gunmen taking hostages and occupying public buildings .
 Simon Shuster says many police units stepped aside because they probably realized they would lose either way . Shuster: The reason why many officers stepped aside was that they probably knew they would lost either way.
 Had Russia taken over Eastern Ukraine, police officers using force against pro-Russian demonstrators may have faced war crime charges .
 If Ukraine had won in the end, local police officers could still have been made scapegoats for initial failures to protect administrative buildings and critical infrastructure .
 Most police officers would have been reluctant to open fire against civilians . What is more is more, most police officers are reluctant to fire on civilians .
 The local oligarchs and criminal groups supported the new Kyiv government . They supported the separatists against the new government .
 In the conventional armed forces there were also many professional soldiers who finally chose Russia over Ukraine .
 Rear-Admiral Denis Berezovsky, commander of the Ukrainian fleet, tried to rally the whole fleet to change sides and swear allegiance to Moscow .
 More than 5,000 Ukrainian soldiers and navy personnel decided to continue serving in the Russian armed forces .
 There has to be a lasting, regionallyconcentrated dissatisfaction with the central government, preferably with an inherent ethnic or separatism-related element . In order to successfully implement the fourth and subsequent sections of hybrid warfare, there must be a long-term dissatisfaction .
 This dissatisfaction may serve as a basis for organizing first political, and then armed opposition against the central power . This dissatisfaction could be used to demand autonomy and independence .
 Ethnic and languagerelated elements have been present both in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine .
Ukraine's corruption and dysfunctionality was closely connected to the earlier Ukrainian governments during the previous two decades . A detailed description of its causes would far exceed the framework of the present study .
 It was not hard for pro-Russian activists to find like-minded people among the locals, and to organize civil society networks .
 Crimea and Donbass may actually serve as an explanation for why the two cases ultimately had different outcomes . However, the deeper differences between the two countries may serve as a reason for the differences .
 In Crimea the majority of locals were supportive of the actions taken against Kyiv . But in Donbass the level of public support was much lower .
 The Kyiv International Institute of Sociology conducted a survey from 8 to 16 April 2014 . They asked the population about the ongoing takeovers of public buildings in Eastern Ukraine . They also asked about the possibility of joining Russia .
 The former, consent exceeded 15% only in Donetsk and Luhansk regions . 78 RUSSIA’s HYBRID WAR in UKR AINE separatism also receiving the highest support here .
 The combined result of the 'surely yes' and 'mostly yes' answers was 27.5% in the Donetsk region and 30.3% in Luhansk region . The combined results of the ‘yes’ and ‘mostly yes’ answers were 27.
In all affected cities there were indeed some people among the local population who sympathized with the idea of seceding from Ukraine, or a federal transformation of the country .
Public support for violent actions of the Donetsk separatists was very low . However, the visible public support for the violent actions was verylow .
 There were no large, pro-Russian demonstrations taking place, and local people were hardly out in the streets en masse . In most public gatherings in support of separatism only a few hundred, or a maximum of one to two thousand people were present .
 In countryside towns only a few hundred locals actively supported separatism, according to news reports .
 The picture provided by Russian media channels about ‘people of Donetsk’ rising up collectively was fundamentally false and distorted, as the active local support for the violent actions was very low .
 Most residents reacted as they had learned to do during the Soviet years, and simply remained passive even during the riots . Most local residents reacted to the riots, and particularly after the eruption of the armed violence .
The shortage of locals supporting separatism became an acute issue in October 2014 during the siege of Donetsk airport . The shortage of local residents became an issue during the Siege of Donetsk Airport .
 A Communist Russian veteran of the Chechen war fighting in Donetsk openly complained that locals were fleeing instead of defending their homeland .
 Russian-spea k ing m inor it y as sou rce of l egiti m ac y c l ai m . Another important prerequisite is the massive presence of a Russian-speaking minority in the target country .
 Moscow could claim that its actions were legitimate because it was protecting the rights of ethnic Russians . With regard to politics, based on the presence of Russian-speakers in Ukraine, Moscow could say it was legitimate .
 Using Russian-speaking minorities as reference points for coercive actions is nothing new, says CNN.com .
 The Russian-speaking minority has been an integral part of the Russian political inventory since the breakup of the Soviet Union . It is probably easier to find people dissatisfied with the central power and to recruit them for the purposes of the attacking country .
 They may serve not only as sources of tactical and operational intelligence, but may also provide shelter and guidance for infiltrating special forces . They may also participate in organized anti-government protests and riots .
 The presence of Russian-speakers enables the special forces of the attacking country to disguise themselves as locals, and masquerade as civil society activists .
 Russia has denied involvement in both the Crimean and Eastern Ukraine cases . It also claims that armed rioters are merely dissatisfied locals, as Russia did .
Locals disguising the infiltrating special forces as locals also limits the potential of the target country to use force against those taking illegal actions .
 The reason for this is that shooting at ‘civilians’ may weaken the overall legitimacy of the government . The media of an adversary country picks up and capitalizes on the story .
 The use of massive violence against civilians may also cause moral problems within the armed forces .
 It is a false generalization to state that ethnic Russians in Ukraine would have univocally supported the separatist ideas .
 Many Russian-speakers are actually fighting on the side of the Kyiv government forces . On the contrary, many Russians are fighting for the government forces.
 In both Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, the Russian media was very successful in constructing an alternative reality in which they could claim that most Russian-speakers were in favour of the secession from Ukraine . In fact this was not the case at all .
 In other words, in the country against which a hybrid war is being employed, the majority of Russianspeakers may well find themselves the objects of Russia's actions .
 St rong m edia pr esence b ot h in t h e rget cou nt ry and a broad . An additional prerequisite is that the attacking country has to possess a strong media presence .
 The full spectrum of hybrid war started to unfold when implementation had reached the second, attacking phase . separatists were quickly able to establish almost full control over the media both in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine .
 TV and radio studios as well as broadcasting and transmission towers were among the first critical infrastructure targets to be overtaken .
 This way, they could ban the pro-Kyiv media from the air and replace it with Russian channels . This would be the first time they could do this .
 The central government practically lost its ability to deliver its messages to the population of the attacked regions, except for the internet and radio broadcasts .
 Russian media has been able to obscure and blur the perception of events in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine . The West has a well-established position in the West .
 There was already open-source information available on the build-up and functioning of Russia’s ‘troll army’ A year earlier when the Ukrainian conflict started to unfold, this form of information warfare constituted a novelty.
 The importance of a strong media presence and of information warfare in general, leads to the conclusion that without the existence of modern media no hybrid war can be waged, says CNN .
 warfare is unsuitable for an environment where the level of technological development is low . This form of warfare is not suitable for a low level of development .
 Russia may employ the full spectrum of hybrid warfare only in those countries where its media has a similarly dominant position . In addition to the factors mentioned above, implementation of the full range of hybrid war also has certain logistical requirements .
 Certain conclusions may still be drawn from the events in Ukraine . This element cannot be reconstructed from the available Russian public sources .
 The full implementation of the second and third phases of a hybrid war requires constant logistical support . While individual agents may work independently, so may small special forces units .
 The attacker needs to know and master both the language and culture of the target country, as well as its main political and historical narratives, and ways of discussing them .
 Direct proximity to Russia or to Russian military bases is required in order to provide the attackers with shelter, food, drink, weapons, ammunition, fuel and equipment .
 Sending replacements and evacuating the wounded also necessitates maintaining constant, uninterrupted contact with the hinterland .
 Black Sea Fleet ships played a crucial role in ensuring the mobility and concentration of the attacking forces . Russia might be able to conduct actions belonging to the first, preparatory phase of the hybrid war in a number of countries .
 The form of warfare Russia employed in Ukraine in 2014, often called hybrid war, has been aimed at defeating the target country by breaking its ability to resist without actually launching a full-scale attack .
 hybrid war is built on the combined use of military and non-military means . It employs basically the whole spectrum of a state's policy inventory, including diplomatic, economic, political, social, information .
 NATO has started to officially describe such events as hybrid war . Oscar Jonsson and Robert Seely developed the term 'full-spectrum conflict'
All the tools and means employed by Russia in the framework of hybrid warfare have long been part of the Soviet/Russian foreign and security policy inventory, as well as the history of asymmetric warfare .
 The only real novelty was the highly effective coordination of the various means employed, including political, military, special operations and information measures . In many cases almost real-time coordination was the most effective .
Both the Kyiv government and the West were caught unawares by the swift and effective Russian operations in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine . This was partially due to the element of surprise (i.e. the lack of precedent and the subsequent lack of elaborate defences)
 hybrid war is built on exploring and capitalizing on the inherent structural weaknesses of the target country .
 Corruption is a key element of infiltration into the target country’s political, administrative, economic, defence, police, secret service, social and media structures .
Impoverished, badly governed states, where respect for democracy and human rights is weak, are particularly vulnerable to a hybrid offensive. Impoverished states are vulnerable to hybrid offensive .
 The hybrid attack against Ukraine was largely built on the traditional foreign policy activities of the Russian Federation . Preparing the hybrid attack on Ukraine was mostly built on traditional foreign policies of the Russia Federation .
 Most of these activities are not openly illegal and are predominantly non-violent, active defence against them . But, as most of them are highly complicated, they are mostly non- violent .
 The attack phase of the hybrid war is already too late because the attacked state quickly loses control over the regions targeted . This was the case on two occasions.
 The initial development happened almost exactly as described by contemporary Russian scholars and analysts discussing the functioning of new generation warfare .
 hybrid warfare is an absolute, invincible menace, one needs to be aware that successfully waging a hybrid war is bound to a number of important prerequisites . However, before jumping to the conclusion, one must be aware of the dangers of hybrid warfare .
 The target country needs to be weak and divided, with officials that are easy to corrupt. First and foremost, the target country must be strong and divided .
 If insufficient weaknesses can be exploited in the preparatory phase of hybrid warfare, the actual attack never gets underway . The attack could be carried out if insufficient weaknesses are exploited .
 The attacker needs to be militarily stronger than the target country in order to limit the countermeasure potential of the attacker . Second, the attacker must be stronger than a target country . The attacker must also be more militarily stronger than the target.
 Kyiv government could not take open action against the Russian ‘polite green men’ and their local proxies because they were deterred from doing so by the threat of an overwhelming, massive conventional attack by Russia .
 hybrid war does not mean that the target country could be rendered dysfunctional solely by non-military means . In other words, hybrid war doesn't mean that a target country is dysfunctional solely.
Military superiority still constitutes a necessary condition for victory, just as it does in any other war . In fact, the regular military force also has a key role to play, and hence military superiority still is a key.
 The regular 88 RUSSIA’s HYBRID WAR in UKR AINE military force is used mainly as a deterrent and not as a tool of open aggression . The difference is that in a hybrid war the regular 88. RUSSia’S HY
 Russia would be sending ‘polite green men’ and other special forces en masse to the target country .
 Ethnic minorities of the attacking state in the target country are not completely satisfied with their treatment by the central government .
 In Ukraine, Russia could use ethnic Russians as a recruitment base for protests and riots . Many are used as agents and collaborators, and sources of operational and tactical intelligence .
 The presence of Russian-speakers allowed the ‘polite green men’ and other infiltrating Russian special forces to disguise themselves as locals .
 The majority of ethnic minorities in the U.S. are not supported by the majority of the country's population . However, they are seen as more important than their presence .
 According to numerous sociological polls, active and particularly violent separatism was never supported by the relative majority of Russian-speakers in Ukraine .
 The developments were against the will of the majority, even though most of them reacted only passively . Hence, the developments are against the majority .
 Russian state propaganda consistently depicted them as a homogenous group firmly supporting the break-away efforts . Meanwhile, state propaganda repeatedly depicted the few as a majority .
 In the country against which hybrid war is employed, the majority of local Russianspeakers may well find themselves the objects of, but not the subjects or partners of, Russia's actions .
 The successful implementation of hybrid warfare is bound to a strong media presence, both in the target country and abroad, as well as important logistical requirements .
 A hybrid offensive is possible if there are already Russian military bases in the target region before the attack, enabling the operation to rely on them in terms of personnel, support and supplies .
 Another option is that the attacked region has to share a long, uncontrolled border with the attacker . The uninterrupted flow of supplies can be ensured in Eastern Ukraine .
 The first was a swift success, while the second turned into a long and costly conventional war . The different outcomes in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine may indicate an established Russian military presence in the target region constitutes an absolute precondition for a successful hybrid attack .
At present, the question cannot be answered properly, due to the lack of information on Russia’s plans and actions before and during the crisis . At present, it is not clear how much information is needed .
 Russia would be able to employ a fullspectrum hybrid war, says Peter Bergen . The number of countries where Russia could attack is very limited, he says .
 At present, all of the preconditions for a hybrid war have been met in Ukraine and in Georgia .
 In Belarus and Kazakhstan, almost all of the preconditions have been met, apart from the weakness of the state . These countries have firm, centralized, presidential regimes .
 The vulnerability of Moldova and Armenia is much less serious, as they do not share a direct border with Russia . The small Russian bases isolated from mainland Russia are not suitable for measures involving a military component .
 A full-scale hybrid war poses an acute threat to only a small number of countries . Russia could not employ its hybrid toolbox, namely the perfectly coordinated use of political, diplomatic, economic, information and other measures against other countries .
 Research into Russian hybrid warfare is important because other major powers may learn and adopt the methods Russia has developed, and use them in their own perceived zones of influence .
 The most important practical implication is, of course, the possible means of defence against a hybrid war .
In line with the abovedescribed dual, namely military and non-military nature of hybrid warfare, defence against it also needs to address both aspects . In line with this, Defence against hybrid warfare must address both sides .
 Neither a solely non-military, nor an exclusively military-oriented defence can be successful . Both aspects are critically important, but both aspects are critical .
 The key element is that the deterrent posed by a possible, massive conventional attack by regular Russian forces has to be neutralized .
 The open attack phase of the hybrid war is unlikely to even start . If this threat can be properly addressed, it will be 90 RUSSIA’s HYBRID WAR in UKR AINE .
 The reason for this is that the attacked country might be able to easily defeat ‘little green men’ and their local allies if its counteraction potential is not restricted by Russian deterrence .
 Neutralizing Russian deterrence may be built on strong self-defence capabilities, or on collective defence .
 Either way, the defence has to be credible, strong and capable of being mobilized at very short notice . The defence must be credible and strong.
 A hybrid attack is at its most vulnerable and easiest to break right at the moment it starts . The latter is particularly important because a hybrid attack can be difficult to break .
 The bifurcation point is the appearance of illegal armed formations, be they civilians or clad in military garb . They claim to be local self-defence units or international volunteers .
 If a hybrid attack manages to gain momentum, the gradual loss of control over the targeted territories, as well as heavy damage inflicted on critical infrastructure, is almost unavoidable, as demonstrated in Ukraine .
 decisive action needs to be taken against ‘little green men’ from the moment they appear, says CNN .
 Russian communication strategy built on denying involvement would turn against its master . In this case, the Russian strategy would be turned against the master .
 Moscow could not credibly complain about the neutralized ‘little green men’ or other armed formations without actually admitting its involvement . Moscow has been accused of being neutralized by some of its armed formations .
 The proper legal framework for taking such action needs to be elaborated in advance, says the author .
 For countries relying on national defence, the realistic aim is not to establish capabilities that would be able to repel the full weight of the attacking Russian armed forces .
 National defence should be able to raise the costs for the attackers to such an extent that they would finally refrain from taking military action . Instead, national defence should raise the cost of the attackers .
 Russian new generation warfare puts great emphasis on cyber and electronic warfare . Chekinov and Bogdanov even spoke about an ‘electronic knockdown’ prior to the start of the actual attack .
State-of-the-art cyber and electronic warfare defences are of key importance . State-of the-art Cyber and Electronic Warfare defences are key.
 Special attention needs to be paid to securing communication channels, as well as anti-drone measures . Special attention is needed to secure communication channels and communication channels .
 Russia attaches to disrupting the very functioning of the enemy state . The protection of critical infrastructure vulnerable to sabotage needs to be strengthened both by active and passive means .
 Civilian communication infrastructure in those regions potentially vulnerable to a hybrid attack needs to be strengthened . Civilian communications infrastructure in the regions could be vulnerable to hybrid attack .
 It has to be ensured that 91 certain television and radio towers and broadcasting stations, as well as internet hubs, were damaged . The government would remain able to deliver its message throughout the country . It has been ensured that even if CONCLUSIONS are made, the government would be able to
 Hybrid warfare is built on capitalizing on weaknesses of a country, on flaws in its political system, administration, economy and society .
 If an adversary cannot detect sufficient weaknesses, then no full-scale attack can be launched . Hybrid warfare never reaches the second, attack phase, meaning that hybrid warfare never reach the second.
 In addition to a democratic political structure and wellfunctioning public administration, it includes respect for human rights, transparency, media freedom, the rule of law and proper rights . All in order to improve the domestic democratic legitimacy and support of the government .
 Special attention needs to be paid to the fight against corruption, at all state and societal levels . Special attention is needed to fight corruption at all levels, including state and society .
 Corruption is one of the main means of Russia’s infiltration into the political, administrative, economic and security structures of Ukraine . Corruption has been a key part of Russia's infiltration into Ukraine's political and administrative structures .
Anti-corruption control of public officials, armed forces, police and security services are key to defence against hybrid warfare .
In order to detect and prevent foreign infiltration intentions and efforts in time, the strengthening of intelligence and counter-intelligence capabilities is called for, along with a thoroughly prepared recruitment and training strategy . In order to prevent and preventForeign infiltration intentions, the strengthened of intelligence, counter- intelligence capabilities is
Western analytical capabilities in Russia and the post-Soviet region need to be built up again . Western analytical capabilities have largely diminished since the end of the Cold War .
 A proper legislative framework needs to be established to efficiently counter separatism, anti-constitutional deeds, hate speech and other actions that may serve as bases for foreign hybrid war efforts .
 balance between preserving democratic rights and freedoms and strengthening security needs to be maintained . However, the balance between protecting democracy and security is needed to be kept .
 In order to implement the laws, a properly trained, staffed, led and equipped police force is essential . Police force must be properly trained and equipped .
 Special attention needs to be paid to criminal intelligence and riot control capabilities, as these are the main 92 RUSSIA’S HYBRID WAR in UKR AINE areas .
 No absolute defence is possible due to the predominantly legal, mostly covert nature of the preparatory phase of hybrid warfare, no absolute defence.
 A committed adversary will always be able to conduct certain diplomatic, intelligence, and particularly information operations, such as media campaigns . A committed adversaries will always conduct some diplomatic, Intelligence, and information operations .
 A properly functioning state is able to keep these actions at bay, and a well-governed society is highly resistant to them . However, a proper functioning state can keep these activities at bay .
 The resilience of the society in question towards hybrid threats, particularly towards disinformation, propaganda, and sabotage actions, needs to be reinforced .
 It is important to strike the right balance between strengthening resilience, but not generating paranoia . The right balance is needed to strike a right balance.
 society needs to be made aware of the importance of defence spending and properly informed about its purpose in order to secure lasting public support .
 All in all, an informed, conscious, conscious and wellgoverned society is the best defence against the threat of hybrid warfare .
19 Vladimirovich Fomenko. Translated by Yakov files/1946/19 46-1946-h.htm .
 Polity Press, Cambridge, doesnt-have-a-warlord-problem-russia2013, 354. donbas/, accessed 15 April 2015 .
 Pomerantsev: 'How Putin is Reinventing and Societies and Cultures. Case of ‘Soft Power’?’
 The U.S. military has been involved in several wars in the past two years . The United States has been engaged in both of these wars .
Russian Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine are a new Russian Military Aspectations of the crisis .
 The Hidden Hand edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/889/798, by John Barron’s, Christian Science Monitor .
 The Concept of the Political, 2015, is published on 5 May . It is the first time this year that a political party has been in existence .
 Russian military units lined up along the border with Ukraine . The actions were accompanied by a strong and intensive, well-coordinated diplomatic, economic and media campaign .
 The form of warfare Russia employed in Ukraine in 2014 has been aimed at defeating the target country by breaking its ability to resist without actually launching a full-scale military attack .