 CIUS officially established the Stasiuk Program for the Study of Contemporary Ukraine in June 1990 . The program was funded by a generous endowment from the family of the family .
 CIUS funds a number of CIUS projects . The Government of Alberta has matched a 2:1 matching grant from Canada .
 The Stasiuk Program was founded to take advantage of the enormous quantity of material available on this subject . The program is based on the material available in the U.S.
 The purpose is to provide accurate analysis of events in Ukraine for those engaged in Ukrainian studies, government and non-government organizations .
 Since 1994, the program has been associated primarily with the name of Dr. Dr.
 The Stasiuk blog site “Current Politics in Contemporary Ukraine’s” was established in 2007 . The blog site is based in Ukraine.
 The Stasiuk Program has conducted and disseminated research on contemporary Ukraine . The past year has been the breakout one in conducting and disseminating research .
 The 2013-14 academic year has been the busiest in the history of the Stasiuk Program . The program responded to events in Ukraine and acted as a resource base for local, national, and international media .
New challenges have been added to those already facing the institute, which he discussed at the beginning of his directorship .
 The reorganization of CIUS began in 2011 after its formal integration into the Faculty of Arts . It is accompanied by generational change and reform of institute activity at all levels .
 The radical change of Ukraine’ political situation raises the existential question of whether independent Ukrainian statehood is “to be or not to be,’ brings new intellectual challenges to the fore .
 CIUS activity in the academic year 2013-14 and outline prospects for the development of the institute . CIUS is a U.S. state-run institute that is based in New York .
 The integration of CIUS into the Faculty of Arts has encountered a number of problems . CIUS's integration of the faculty has encountered many problems .
 A special commission was created in May 2013 by Dean Lesley Cormack of the Faculty of Arts to assess the state of affairs at the institute has not yet completed its work .
 We await approval of a new organizational structure for the institute and a change of job descriptions for its support staff . We await the approval of the new organization structure .
Dr. Zenon Kohut is director of the Kowalsky Program for the Study of Eastern Ukraine . He is also the head of the study program for the study of Ukraine .
 David Marples is the director of the Stasiuk Program for the Study of Contemporary Ukraine . He is also the head of the study of the Ukraine's contemporary Ukraine .
 Marples has been appointed chair of the Department of History and Classics . Marples is a member of the department of history and Classics.
 I would like to express my deep gratitude to both our esteemed colleagues for their dedicated service . I hope that their constructive association with the institute will continue. I would also express mydeep gratitude to the institute .
 Oleksandr Pankieiev has drafted plans for a Ukrainian studies portal . I expect to see the results of his activity in the near future .
 A process of staff renewal and professional development is under way at CIUS . I can assure our readers that it will continue, says editor .
 This geographic disadvantage can be overcome only by means of a well-developed academic information and communications network .
 Lectures and presentations organized by the institute are now available for viewing on the Internet . The institute's lectures and presentations are nowavailable for viewing online .
 The next step will be the creation of an electronic archive of Ukrainian academic studies . The archive will be created by the end of the year .
 We plan to approve a number of special issues of the journal, also to be issued in printed form, and to solicit contributions from young Ukrainian authors .
 The institute's system of communication with the world at large and Ukraine in particular is steadily broadening its reach . The institute is also expanding its reach in Ukraine .
 CIUS has established a new annual award for research and publications in Ukrainian studies . The award was established in 2009 .
 Natalia Yakovenko worked diligently to select candidates for the award . The institute recently announced this year's winners .
 The Shoemakers Guild of Lviv from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century, and Dr. Dr.
 The growing intellectual potential of Ukrainian studies will become fully apparent only when Ukrainianlanguage publications are available to English-language readers .
 A special program for translation into English of outstanding academic works by Ukrainian authors must be undertaken . The institute has such well-qualified specialists as Myroslav Yurkevich and Roman Senkus .
 I call on interested members of the Ukrainian community to promote the development of such a program . I call for interested members to promote such a programme .
 This will be a major contribution to the modernization of Ukraine's academic milieu . This is the first time the country has been able to modernize its education system . This will help Ukraine's education system become more sophisticated .
 The acute political crisis that initially engulfed Ukraine and then took on international proportions is perhaps the most serious challenge to European security since the Second World War .
 Ukraine became the next victim of Russia’s policy of aggression after Georgia and Moldova . Russia is meant to revise existing political borders and destabilize the situation .
 The annexation of the Crimea, the instigation and support of an armed separatist movement in southern and eastern Ukraine, and naked aggression against a sovereign neighbouring state all came as a shock to the international community . Leading states to review many principles and mechanisms of their foreign policy .
 During the past academic year, events in Ukraine have set the tone for CIUS and its activities . CIUS has been in Ukraine for the past year .
Taras Kuzio, David Marples, Frank Sysyn, Bohdan Harasymiw, Boh Dan Klid, Jars Balan, Marko Stech, Andrij Makuch, Uliana Pasicznyk, and Mykola Soroka are
 Taras Kuzio gave hundreds of interviews in several languages to the mass media of Canada, the United States, Ukraine, and many other countries .
 CIUS organized several roundtables, seminars, presentations, and conferences on these subjects . CIUS also organized a series of seminars, conferences, and seminars .
 The institute provided financial and intellectual support to the Euromaidan web project and the international Maidan publishing project .
Roman Shiyan and Oleksandr Pankieiev supported this activity with outstanding organizational and information resources . Roman Shiyan, Olekandr Panksieiev were both involved in the project .
 In assessing recent developments on the territory of Ukraine and Russia, I consider them in historical perspective .
 The process began in the late 1980s and has only now taken on irreversible tendencies . On the one hand, they mark the final disintegration of Soviet national and cultural space .
 Ukraine is witnessing a new process of national consolidation among Ukrainians and Russians, respectively . On the other hand, we are witness to a new national consolidation.
 Soviet and East Slavic Orthodox identities are continuing to erode and give way to more contemporary Ukrainian and Russian identities . This means that previous transnational identities are still being erode .
 In eastern Ukraine today, we see a process of national differentiation somewhat similar to the one that took place on the western, Polish-Ukrainian border in the mid-twentieth century .
 A true rather than an illusory border with Russia is now taking shape in the east . A true instead of an illUSory border is now being taken shape.
 It requires substantiation not only in engineering terms but also in symbolic ones . It is required to be substantiated in both engineering terms and symbolic terms .
 Russia's nationbuilding is accompanied by the activization of archaic premodern symbols and social practices .
 Sooner or later, Russian Orthodox-cum-imperial identity will find itself confronting challenges of modernity .
 The prospective “reset’ of Ukrainian national doctrine can make it more flexible and open to change . The prospective "reset" of Ukraine's doctrine can be more flexible.
 territorial political symbols and social values are likely to play an increasing role in Ukrainian national development .
 Ukrainian administrative and territorial space will be reorganized as a whole . This in turn will make it necessary to reorganize Ukrainian administrative, territorial space as a entire .
Developments in Ukraine have taken both Kremlin-based Russian nationalists and Brussels bureaucrats by surprise . Developments in the Ukraine have been taken by both Moscow and Brussels .
 Once again, Ukrainian, Russian and Russian, national, European, and postcommunist studies find it necessary to revise their resources .
 Some national governments have eliminated research on Eastern Europe as a whole and Russia, Ukraine, and post-Soviet space in particular .
 That policy produced a manifest decline in the professional standard of those disciplines in Western universities . That policy has led to a decline in those disciplines.
 The place and role of CIUS in yet another reconceptualization of social studies and the humanities in general has yet to be determined . CIUS is in the process of re-thinking social studies.
 Ukraine's progressive transformation into a genuine subject of international law will confront the institute with increasing competition . It is already apparent, however, that Ukraine's progress will be challenged by the internationalization of studies .
 CIUS has no monopoly on knowledge about Ukraine and its interpretation in the Western world . CIUS also has a monopoly on its interpretation of Ukraine .
 It needs a clearer definition of its research priorities and professional identity . It needs to be defined as a professional identity, it says .
 I favor a think tank that would allow Ukrainian studies to develop in a broad intellectual and interdisciplinary context . I favor the model of a thinktank that would let Ukrainian studies be developed in a broader intellectual and Interdisciplinary context.
 The first steps toward a thematic reorientation of the institute’s research programs have already been taken . The institute's research programs are being reorientated .
 Research on contemporary Ukraine has been designated as a priority of the institutes scholarly activity . Research on modern Ukraine is a priority for the institute scholarly activity.
 We have begun work on creating a milieu of the requisite expertise and providing the financing, technical resources, and premises required to sustain it . We have been working on creating the necessary expertise and facilities for the company .
 Stasiuk Fellowship Program will make it possible to host international experts on modern and contemporary affairs on an annual basis .
 The Ukrainian Studies Fund at the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute is supporting the Ukrainian Studies fund .
 Taras Kuzio has begun work at CIUS on a study of the political elite in the eastern regions of Ukraine .
 CIUS is working toward establishment of a Centre for Political and Regional Studies as part of CIUS . CIUS has financial support for the centre .
 CIUS has organized several international conferences on problems of the trafficking of women, European integration, and political boundaries of Ukraine .
 The institute is planning new long-term research programs to study the Ukrainian-Russian border zone and the phenomenon of Ukrainian regional diversity .
 The project directors have confirmed their intention to complete the project by 2017 . They have confirmed they will complete them by 2017.
 The Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine (Roman Senkus) must be reconceptualized in order to meet the requirements of today’s information society . Other traditional projects undertaken by the institute, including the Internet encyclopedia of Ukraine, must be re-conceptualised .
 CIUS will be marking its fortieth anniversary in 2016 . It will assess its role in the development of academic Ukrainian studies in the West .
 I call on all those involved in founding the institute to help us establish an electronic archive of Ukrainian studies at CIUS . CIUS also prepare anniversary materials, contribute to series of oral history interviews, and work on publications devoted to the subject .
 CIUS Monitors and Studies the Situation in Ukraine The Centre for Political and Regional Studies at CIUS have been especially busy this past year in view of political developments in Ukraine . CIUS has been particularly busy this year.
 The European Union summit in Vilnius is scheduled for November . A historic association agreement was to have been signed with Ukraine .
 Experts from Ukraine and Canada were brought in to explain its significance . They were brought into the study to explain the significance of the country's history .
 Lori Thorlakson, professor of political science at the U of A and director of the EU Centre of Excellence on campus, served as discussant .
 The idea for the conference was suggested by chancellor emeritus and CIUS founder Peter Savaryn and Professor David Marples .
 Amanda Paul is policy analyst and programme executive at the European Policy Centre, Brussels, Belgium . Taras Kuzio and Bohdan Nahaylo are independent scholar, veteran Ukraine watcher, and former senior official with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .
 The presentation was well attended by students, professors, and the general public, as well as the media .
 Paul, Kuzio, and Nahaylo repeated their performance that same evening before an attentive and lively audience at St. Paul's . The trio's performance was followed by a lively audience .
 John’s Institute, co-sponsored by the Ukrainian-Canadian Congress, is co-sponsored by the Alberta Provincial Council .
 Bohdan maceda is the leading North American specialist on energy politics in the former Soviet Union .
 Her most recent book, The Politics of Energy Dependency, exposes how trading in natural gas has made certain individuals connected to government very wealthy . Ukraine is more vulnerable than ever, leaving Ukraine itself more vulnerable.
 Robert Murray is an adjunct professor of political science at the U of A and vice-president, research, at the Frontier Centre for Public Policy . Murray is a former U. of A political science professor .
 During the first quarter of 2014, CPRS acting coordinator, Professor Bohdan Harasymiw, and in-house round tables organized at short noCIUS Newsletter 2014 .
 On the Brink of War, featuring CIUS director Volodymyr Kravchenko, David Marples, Bohdan Harasymiw, and Heather Coleman .
 Its participants were David Marples of CIUS and by Skype from Toronto, Taras Kuzio .
 The conference brought together experts from Ukraine, Finland, Austria, and Canada . They identified feasible policy alternatives for governments of postcommunist nations such as Ukraine .
Long-term aim of CPRS is to become a world-class hub for research about present-day Ukraine in all the social-science disciplines .
 Ukraine is a vital twenty-first-century nation-state, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Ukraine is one of the most important nations in the world .
 ULEC has had a vibrant year promoting Ukrainian language education, developing learning resources and conducting research regarding enrollment sustainability . The organization is expanding its professional, academic and community partnerships .
 ULEC promotes Ukrainian language education by supporting teachers, disseminating research findings, and enabling students of Ukrainian to take international exams .
 Second national conference of Ukrainian Teachers of Canada was held in Edmonton on 2-4 May 2014 . The conference was held to address vital issues of Ukrainian language and culture education in the twenty-first century .
 The conference was organized by the National Ukrainian Education Council of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress . It received support from ULEC and other organizations .
 At the conference, ULEC was recognized as a leading centre of Ukrainian education .
 Alla Nedashkivska, acting director of ULEC, addressed the future of Ukrainian education at the post-secondary level .
 Changing for Engagement” (Edmonton, October 7-8, 2014) Along with her graduate students, Ms. C. J. R.R.
 In her keynote speech, ULEC’s senior advisor Dr. Ukrainian at the Post-Secondary Level, Dr. Ukraine is a senior advisor .
 Hands-on support from ULEC team members Halyna Klid and Mykola Soroka was welcomed by attendees .
 This year, 20 Alberta students took the exam, and almost all scored well over 60% . They were eligible to study at universities in Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian Bilingual Program is offered in Edmonton Catholic Schools, Edmonton Public Schools, and Elk Island Catholic Schools . The students come from three school districts .
 Olena Hartsula, the Ukrainian language advisor at Alberta Education, facilitated the oral component of the exam and assisted with other educational projects throughout the year .
 The centre has also embarked on the digitization of the popular Tut i Tam series, beginning with the textbooks that are now out of print . Nova 5 and 6 will soon be available online free of charge .
 This project takes advantage of new technology and its broader outreach potential . This project will use new technology to take advantage of the new technology .
 ULEC’s third learning resources development project is directed at the post-secondary level . The project will benefit from the latest teaching methods and new technology .
 Alla Nedashkivska is an associate professor in the Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies . She is researching and developing online modules for a blended-learning method of delivery of the Beginners' Ukrainian course .
 U. of A students will be able to have two hours of independent online study in addition to three in-class hours of instruction per week . Students will have three hours in- class hours per week.
 Nedashkivska also worked on redesigning the online Business Ukrainian textbook for compatibility with all electronic platforms .
 The project is a rapid-response real-time research project . It brings together four universities from Edmonton and Ukraine .
 The project partnered with four universities in Canada and Ukraine . It extended participation to universities in the United States, Brazil, Europe, and Ukraine.
 Oleh Inytskyj launched a special interdisciplinary course in which students use newly created online materials . Students use the newly created materials .
 Sustaining student enrollment has become a major concern for Ukrainian language programs from pre-school to university . The language programs have become a concern for language programs.
 ULEC has initiated research, public discussions, and surveys with parents, children, teachers, and alumni on expectations, strengths, and visions for the UBP and Ukrainian Saturday schools .
 A needs analysis of the Ukrainian Studies Program at the U. of A further facilitates the redesign of curricula . The U of A also provides a need analysis of Ukraine's Studies Program .
 Community partners are helping to fund research assistants for these studies . Community partners have been helping to pay assistants for research assistants .
 A paper elaborating on these ideas is currently under peer review for a Canadian scholarly journal . The paper is currently being reviewed by a Canadian journal .
 National Ukrainian Education Council, Alberta Provincial Council-Education Committee, Faculty of Education, U of A, and parent groups .
 ULEC has been successful in obtaining donor support for immediate projects . The Alberta Ukrainian Education Society, the Alberta Ukrainian Commemorative Society, and the Ukrainian Canadian Foundation of Taras Shevchenko have been successful .
 ULEC will be crucial to bringing Ukrainian education to a new level in the twenty-first century . Additional support for ULEc will be key to bringing Ukraine education to new level .
 Many interviews focus on the interwar period and World War II, when these women lived through remarkable historical events . Many of the interviews focus upon the inter war period.
 The volume includes a preface by Yaroslav Hrytsak and an introduction by Iroida Wynnyckyj .
 A CD recording of portions of the published interviews is accompanied by a CD recording . The CD is accompanied with a CD record of the interviews . The interview was published in 2008 .
 The volume initiates the series “Memoirs, Diaries, and Interviews’ of the Library of the journal Ukraina New Publications Moderna .
 Ushkalov's "Shevchenkos encyclopedia" sheds light on many unknown and insufficiently studied aspects of Shevchenkov's life and works . It is presented in a lively and very readable form .
 Bohdan Medwidsky is an academic, program builder, community activist, fundraiser, and philanthropist . The collection is a collection of academic essays and greetings in honour of him .
 His academic research has focused on Ukrainian proverbs, the historiography of Ukrainian folklore studies, and Ukrainian oral traditions .
 Contributors to the volume include North American and European colleagues, as well as former students .
 The volume includes biographical information, a bibliography of works by Bohdan Medwidsky .
 The academic articles, some written in English and others in Ukrainian, encompass several disciplines, including folklore, history and literary studies .
 The author recounts the courage and dedication of human-rights activists in the former USSR and efforts by their supporters in the West to lobby Western governments to implement the human- rights provisions of the Helsinki Final Act .
 The author also provides insight into the evolution of the Helsinki Process and the development of Western commitment to human rights . All of which contributed to the revolutionary changes of the late 1980s and early 1990s in Eastern Europe .
 This Ukrainian translation of Ukraine between East and West presents twelve essays by the distinguished Byzantinist Thor Sevéenko . The essays explore the development of Ukrainian cultural identity under the disparate influences of the Byzantine Empire and Western Europe .
As the author points out, Byzantium was the source from which Kyivan Rus’ received Christianity and a highly developed literary and artistic culture that stimulated Kyiv’s own achievements .
 The effects of the Counter-Reformation and of Polish lay and clerical institutions on early modern Ukraine's political and cultural life were important .
 The collection offers a wealth of detail and the author's richly informed analytical perspective . Overall, the collection offers an excellent collection of information .
 The essays will be a rewarding read not only for students of Byzantine and East European history but also for anyone interested in cultural formation and development .
 Oleh Pavlyshyn’s meticulously researched volume draws upon numerous documents from the archives of Lviv, Kyiv, Warsaw, Munich, and Ottawa . The volume sheds light on previously unknown or little-known aspects of Petrushevych's life and professional and political
 The book contains the first detailed description of the activities of the Petrushevychss External Representation Centre in Berlin in the years 1923-32 .
 Yevhen Petrushevychss biography is presented in the broad context of the Ukrainian struggle for independence and political situation in East Central Europe in the early twentieth century .
 The publication of this richly illustrated booklet has been sponsored by CIUS and Ucrainica Research Institute, Toronto .
Baturyn was the capital of the Ukrainian Cossack state from 1669 to 1708 . It was the residence of hetmans, high-ranking officials, church hierarchs, Cossacks officers, and the cultural elite .
 The prosperity of the town under Hetman Ivan Mazepa and its destruction in 1708 by Russian troops during his antiMoscow rebellion are described in detail . The town was destroyed by Russia's troops during the 1708 rebellion .
 The authors examine the CanadianUkrainian excavation project conducted in 2012-13 at the site of Mazepa’s ruined villa in Baturyn .
 Archaeological data provides insights into the lifestyle, education, intellectual pursuits, and cultural interests of the Cossack officers and officials .
 The first issue of the Journal of Ukrainian Graduate Studies was published in the autumn of 1976 .
 The Journal quickly attracted contributions from established scholars as well as students . In 1980 it was renamed the Journal of Ukrainian Studies to reflect this reality .
 Roman Senkus contributors include Olga Andriewsky, Marko Bojcun, Yury Boshyk, John-Paul Himka, Oleh Ilnytzkyj, John Jaworsky, Alexander Motyl, Bohdan Nahaylo, Markos Pavlysh
 In its first decade, JUS had from eight hundred to a thousand subscribers . JUS now has more than 1,000 subscribers .
 Until 1982 JUS was edited by ProfesJOURNAL of UKRAINIAN GRADUATE STUDIES . Inaugural issue of Journal sor Luckyj and managing editor Roman Senkus at CIUS Toronto Office .
 Mr Senkus continued editing JUS until the end of 1985, when his duties as senior manuscript editor of the Encyclopedia of Ukraine became too onerous .
 Roman Senkus was reappointed the JUS editor in chief at the CIUS Toronto Office . Kohut was appointed acting director of the CIU and work on the Encyclopedia of Ukraine project was wound down .
 Mr Senkus solicited articles and book reviews from scholars in Ukraine . He expanded the book-review section in each issue .
 Mr Senkus was appointed director of the CIUS Publications Program in 2001 . In 2003 he hired his erstwhile encyclopedia colleague Dr. Dr. Senkus .
 Zakydalsky ably served as the editor in chief until his premature death in November 2007 . He was a well-known journalist and author of The New York Times .
 From 2008 to 2014 Mr Senkus served as the editor in chief for a third term . Dr. Senkus has been in charge since 2008 .
Thirty-seven volumes of JUS were published from 1976 to 2014 . Altogether thirty-seven volume volumes were published between 1976 and 2014 .
 Professor Oleh IInytzkyj was appointed the editor in chief of the new journal . He was appointed as editor in Chief of the journal .
 Its first issue appeared in the summer of 2014 and can be viewed for free at ewjus.com/ojs/index.org .
 volume 10 of the History of the Ukrainian Cossacks was published by CIUS Press in 2014 . In 2014, volume 10 was the last in the subseries on The History of The Ukrainian COSSacks .
 Hrushevsky's three chapters constitute only the first part of the volume . The volume was planned for the first time .
 The Soviet authorities in Moscow had begun their sweeping attack on Ukraine's political and cultural autonomy .
After the historian’s death in 1934, his daughter, Kateryna, edited the incomplete volume 10 and managed to have it published in 1936 .
 The late hetman's son and designated successor, Iurii, was not yet of age and did not command the loyalty of the Cossack rank and file . Hetman was the son of the late Iuri, who died in 2011 .
 Vyhovsky emerged as a ‘caretaker’ identified with the Cossack officer establishment .
 He was soon faced with a revolt of Zaporozhian Cossacks led by a rival for command of the Host, Iakiv Barabash, and the colonel of Poltava, Martyn Pushkar .
 Vyhovsky routed their forces in battle, but his relations with Muscovy grew increasingly difficult . He suspected the tsarist government of exploiting rank-and-file dissatisfaction to depose him .
 In his introduction to the volume, Andrew Pernal discusses its sources and structure . Pernal also discusses the structure of the book .
 The complete twelve-volume set of the History is available at a subscription price of $1,100 . The complete 12- volume set is available for $1.100 .
 Volumes 7 to 10 (in six books) are available at a subscription price of $600 . The History of the Ukrainian Cossacks is presented in six books .
 Professors Martin Schulze Wessel and Frank E Sysyn are guest editors of the nine conference papers . They are the guest editors.
 Kerstin Jobst examines transnational (Polish, Belarusian, and Ukrainian) and transdenominational (Roman Catholic and Uniate/ Greek Catholic) aspects of the cult of St. St. Cult of St. St. John's
 Josaphat Kuntsevych illustrates how the cult of the saint was utilized by contending religious and national groups in a development that was far from linear .
 Polish and Ukrainian historians evaluated the 1595-96 Church Union of Brest . Burkhard Woller uses the historiography of the church to examine how it and the church it engendered were evaluated .
Martin Schulze Wessel aie Fone is the guest editors of the vo Tie . He accepted roles of the Orthodox and Greek Catholic clergy in the creation of Modern Standard Ukrainian . The language was largely a creation of laypersons in Russian-ruled Ukraine.
 Tobias Grill's study crosses and recrosses the border of the Habsburg and Romanov empires to show how the rabbinate was reshaped to fit into the contemporary world .
 Frank E Sysyn examines how Father Mykhailo Zubrytsky conceived his political and cultural agenda for his Greek Catholic parishioners as part of a reform movement that also changed religious practices . He also examines how he conceived hispolitical and cultural agendas for his parishionerers
 Liliana Hentosh studies the Vatican's policy on the Polish-Ukrainian War of 1918-19 in the light of Catholic views on nation and self-determination .
 Oleh Pavlyshyn takes up the questions of rapid political and social change in the first decades of the twentieth century in his discussion of the calendar question in the Ukrainian Catholic Church .
 Martha Bohachevsky-Chomiak examines tensions between the Ukrainian Catholic Church and the Ukrainian secular intelligentsia in the first third of the twentieth century .
 Leonid Heretz seeks to set out a model of modernization and the secular world’s penetration of Ukrainian village society . Former inhabitants of a few Boiko villages who were young in the interwar period.
 The remaining sixtythree pages of the volume contain reviews of twenty-seven books in Ukrainian studies .
 Marples took part in three events organized by CIUS concerning events in Ukraine . The events were held in Ukraine by the Ukrainian government .
Taras Kuzio in a round table on ‘Russia's Annexation of Crimea and the Future of Ukraine’ at the Telus Centre on the university campus .
 Among the media interviews on Ukraine were more than a dozen for CTV News . More than a half of Ukraine's media interviews were with the Ukrainian government .
 On 26 February he was on Alberta Prime Time, Global Television in Edmonton . He was on Global TV in Edmonton, Alberta .
 Marples was interviewed on the CBC Radio Radioactive program and gave three interviews to radio stations across Canada . Marples gave a total of 20 interviews to CBC Radio Syndicate .
 He gave separate interviews to CBC Calgary and CBC Saskatchewan . He took part in a discussion with Katrina vanden Heuvel, editor of The Nation, on a program titled “Finding Ways out of the Ukraine Crisis’s Ukraine Crisis.
 In March, he also appeared on Polskie TV for an interview that included the acting Ukrainian foreign minister, Andrii Deshchytsia .
 The program solicited articles by a number of prominent contributors . Dr. Dr. John Sutter's program was launched in 2009 .
 One was to the Legal Forum (a gathering of senior Edmonton lawyers) at the Royal Mayfair Club in March .
 He talked to Grade 11 and 12 students at Victoria School in Edmonton on 9 May . He also talked to students at the school in Edmonton .
 Empire, Violence, and Ideology in Eurasia from the First to the Second World War. Empire, violence, and violence in Eurasian from the first to the second World War .
Every year CIUS holds numerous public events that cannot be attended by all those interested in our activities . CIUS has held many events that, for a variety of reasons, can't be attended .
 CIUS has appointed an assistant for information research and communications . Oleksandr Pankieiev will help organize seminars, conduct interviews, and post materials on the web .
 This initiative will improve the visibility of CIUS in cyberspace and promote current academic knowledge in Ukrainian studies . The initiative will also promote current knowledge in Ukraine .
 The YouTube channel was activated during the recent crisis in Ukraine . It is no coincidence that the channel wasactivated during the crisis in the Ukraine .
 The institute's director, Volodymyr Kravchenko, presented his evaluation of the origins of Ukraine's political crisis . The first video posted on the channel featured an address by the institute's chief director .
 Within the first twentyfour hours of its posting, the address was viewed by close to a thousand individuals . The address is viewed by a thousand people .
 This significant number indicates the importance of conducting prompt analysis of current events in Ukraine and sharing it with those engaged in Ukrainian studies .
 CIUS staff are responding to interest shown by English-speaking members of the Ukrainian-Canadian community . They are also creating brief video blogs on recent developments .
 interviews with leading Ukrainian experts taken by Mr Pankieiev via Skype and posted on YouTube channel .
 Volodymyr Kulyk, an expert in media discourse, language policies, identity, and nationalism, has offered an invaluable assessment of the recent tragic events in Odesa . Vadym Khmarsky, an analyst in language policies and identity, has also offered an
 The institute's YouTube channel will soon become even more multifunctional . The institute will soon be even more complex and more complex .
 There are already plans to feature presentations by CIUS scholars in interactive webinars during which questions from the audience can be asked and discussions held in realtime format .
 The institute is finalizing plans to produce and air short films and programs covering its research activities . It is also paying tribute to members of the Ukrainian-Canadian community who are contributing to the development of Ukrainian studies.
 A Conference on the Eightieth Anniversary The Holodomor Research and Education Consortium launched in January 2013 . The conference has quickly established itself as a leader in HolodOMor studies .
 In its first year of activity, HREC organized two major conferences reflecting its main tasks . HREC's main task is to promote research and education .
 Nineteen early-career scholars received stipends to attend . They encouraged interaction between established scholars and a new generation .
 The Holodomor Education Conference is the first in North America devoted to the teaching of the HolodOMor . The conference brought together fifty educators, community activists, and students.
 HREC activities focused on education include consultations with school boards and ministries to ensure inclusion of the Holodomor in curricula and other educational venues .
 HREC representatives made numerous presentations in schools this Povo, # x aA past year, the eightieth anniversary year of the Holodomor .
 HREC held a Holodomor Workshop for early-career scholars on 6-7 June 2014, with representation from Ukraine, Russia, Kazakhstan, Italy, the United States, Canada, and England .
 Professors Andrea Graziosi and Liudmyla Hrynevych provided guidance on theoretical approaches and methodology .
 HREC ensures that the Holodomor will receive the scholarly attention it deserves into the future . HREC is supporting the development of a new generation of scholars .
 HREC supported the Kule Ukrainian Canadian Studies Centre in its investigation of Canadian Englishlanguage newspapers . HREC culled material on the treatment of topics related to the Holodomor .
 workshop led by Andrea Graziosi HREC awarded eleven project support grants through a competition to support new research and preservation of materials .
 HREC is also supporting the preservation of interviews undertaken in making the film Harvest of Despair . The film was made by HREC in 2011 .
 Professor Volodymyr Kravchenko takes over the directorship of the Kowalsky Program .
 The KEUI staff conducted planned research on the project “National and Regional Identities of Sloboda Ukraine in Historical Perspective, published a double issue of the journal East-West under the title Neo-Anti-Colonialism vs.
 The Relevance of Post-Colonial Discourse in Post-Soviet Space completed the editing of Johann-Christian Engel’s History of Ukraine and the Ukrainian Cossacks in Ukrainian translation and submitted it for publication .
 He has been a visiting scholar at the German Historical Institute in Moscow, the New European College in Bucharest, and the Institute for Eastern and Southern European Studies in Regensburg .
 He is a member of the international Association for History and Computing and the Association for Economic History . He is also a member.
 He heads the project on “Industrialization and the Urban Landscape of the Industrial South in the Russian Empire.’
 His scholarly interests involve the history of business, history of knowledge transfer, labour history, and digital history .
 Volodymyr Milchev was Elected for the last twenty-five years . Milchev's education and academic career have been inseparably associated with this department .
 He earned his doctorate in history there, becoming professor and chair of Primary Sources, Historiography, and Specialized Historical Disciplines . He is also a professor at the University of New York .
 The late Professor Anatolii Boiko belongs to the “school’s of the late professor Anatoli Boiko . Known for studies of various topics related to the history and culture of the Ukrainian steppe region .
Steppe Ukraine's rich past under the guidance of Professor Milchev . Both beginners and established scholars are studying the region's social history .
 The Kowalsky Program and CIUS extend their greetings to the new dean of history . They wish him a successful and productive tenure .
 The Zaporizhia branch of the Kowalsky Eastern Ukrainian Institute co-organized and held an international scholarly conference dedicated to the centennial of the First World War . The conference was held on 6-7 February 2014 .
 The conference has increased the scholarly importance of the conference and the publication alike . These undertakings have considerably increased the scholars' importance.
 More than 80,000 residents of Canada forced to register and report to authorities because they were deemed suspicious . Several thousand Ukrainians managed to enlist in the Canadian Expeditionary Force despite prohibitions from Austria-Hungary from serving .
 Plans are now underway to publish select papers from the conference . The goal was to shed new light on the challenges that confronted the “foreign element’s in Canada during the war .
 Research continues on the First Five-Year Plan in Soviet Ukraine . Research continues to focus on Great Famine-Holodomor .
 Investigations have already revealed that Canadian periodicals carried extensive if sometimes contradictory news coverage about Stalin's campaign of deliberate starvation and his brutal oppression of Ukrainians .
 Preparations are now beginning on initiatives to commemorate the 125th anniversary of Ukrainian settlement in Canada in 2016-17 .
 UDSI coordinator brings together news stories relating to Ukrainians outside Ukraine and sends them to recipients on six continents .
 The UDSI was established in late 2006 with a donation of $100,000 from Drs. The U DSI was set up in 2006 .
 In 2007, Peter and Doris Kule made a further donation to CIUS that led to the elevation of its Ukrainian Canadian Program to the Kule Ukrainian Studies Centre . The Kule Canadian Studies Centre has a Ukrainian Canadian program in Canada .
 Several news items in Ukrainians Abroad have concerned the topic of return migration .
 articles translated from Ukrainian and other languages into English . Now and then, articles have been translated from Ukraine to English .
 Ukrainian diaspora has been a focus of recent events in the country . The Ukrainian diapora is a part of the Ukraine-based diasporpora .
 Argentina is the eighth largest country in the world . 30 percent of the Argentine population was classified as foreign-born . The Making of a Community costs $29.95 .
 In 2013, the CanadianUkrainian archaeological expedition resumed its excavations of the site of Hetman Ivan Mazepas principal residence in Baturyn suburb of Honcharivka .
 Mazepa commissioned an ambitious three-story masonry palace there . It was destroyed during the razing of the town by Russian troops in 1708 .
 Research revealed that its main elevation was adorned with brick semicolumns crowned by limestone Corinthian capitals carved by local craftsmen .
 Initially, these order elements were painted in a red ochre colour and stood out distinctly against the whitewashed walls .
 The combination of red and white was probably borrowed from the ornamentation of some Mannerist and Baroque palaces, villas, or castles .
 Before 1708, the red order elements and entire facades of the Honcharivka palace were completely whitewashed . It was probably in keeping with the contemporary decorative practice of the Hetmanate .
 The floor of Mazepa’s palace was paved with ornate ceramic tiles of varied shapes covered with green and blue Artifacts found on the site.
 The application of carved-stone and numerous glazed polychrome ceramic details at Mazepa's main residence in Baturyn attests to the rich and distinctive nature of its embellishment .
 Archaeological research shows that the predominant Western baroque-style outer adornment of the Honcharivka palace was supplemented with local and Kyivan decorative methods .
 The ornamental glazed ceramic tiles were perhaps manufactured by expert Kyivan tile-makers . Mazepa invited the tiles to Baturyn.
 The expedition partially excavated the remnants of a sizeable service structure . Also, the expedition partially dug up the remains of a service structure.
 It was presumably inhabited by Cossack officers and adjutants or scribes/clerks working at Mazepa's court . It was probably inhabited either by COSSack officers or adjutant officers orclerks .
 artifacts testify to the high level of craftsmanship in Baturyn, to the penetration of European literature and art into the town . The town's extensive trade connections with the West and the Ottoman Empire .
 In 2013, a Turkish coin of Sultan Suleiman II dating from 1688 was found there . It was found in 2013 .
 Some articles of Cossack officers’ accoutrement have been reconstructed using computer techniques . Some articles have been re-created using computer technology .
 The broken head of a terracotta female figurine, possibly a doll, was unearthed in the Baturyn fortress .
 Conceivably, it was fashioned by a local artist in a naive realistic folk manner .
 This find represents a truly unique piece of art of vernacular toys of early modern Ukraine . The find is part of a series of artworks by Ukrainian artists .
ArThe broken head of a terracotta female figurine, possibly a doll chaeologists have exhumed eight graves dating from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries .
 The remains of a man with a broken skull can be identified as those of a victim of a 1708 Russian attack on Baturyn. The remains are believed to be that of the man who died in the attack .
 Baturyn has become the only one of several capitals of the Hetmanate where annual systematic field explorations have been carried out for 13 years .
 These are vital to the study of the hitherto little-known culture and lifestyle of the Cossack elite .
 The Baturyn project is sponsored by CIUS, the Shevchenko Scientific Society of America, the Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies and the Ucrainica Research Institute in Toronto .
 Volodymyr Mezentsev and Professor Martin Dimnik have taken part in the archaeological research and the publication of its materials .
 The 2013 expedition involved 70 students and scholars from universities and museums in Chernihiv, Kyiv, Hlukhiv, and Sumy .
 Ukrainian universities and Canadian counterparts visited Canadian universities . The visit was to promote academic ties between the two countries .
 The three Ukrainian visitors held a morning meeting with CIUS director Professor Volodymyr Kravchenko and staff . They were informed of the institute’s work, especially its activities in Ukraine .
 The dean of the Faculty of Arts held discussions with Professor Lesley Cormack . They discussed prospects of joint programs, joint degrees, summer school in Ukraine, and student exchanges .
Ukrainian guests discussed challenges and opportunities in this important field . Ukrainian guests discussed opportunities and challenges in the field .
 CIUS remains instrumental in facilitating contacts between Ukrainian universities and their Canadian counterparts . CIUS has been involved in facilitating contact with Ukrainian universities .
 Hirka discussed the importance and prospects of medical physics in Ukraine . Hirka also discussed arrangements for training specialists in this important field in Canada .
 This was an active year for public lectures organized by the Program on Religion and Culture . This was the first year for the program.
 The Ukrainian Commemoration of the 1025th Anniversary of the Christianization of Rus. The director of the program, Heather Coleman, spoke on the subject “Making a National Saint in the Southwest Borderland: St. St. St. ’s
 Father Hovorun spoke on recent developments in Ukraine . He described recent developments as a social awakening and the birth of civil society .
 He focused on the role of the Ukrainian churches in the protests, showing how the Maidan had a strong religious dimension .
 He suggested ways of building a new Cyril Hovorun Ukraine with the active presence of churches on the construction site . He also suggested ways to build a new Cevallos HovOrun.
 The first of these well-attended presentations was held on campus . The second was held at St. George's University . The first was on campus.
 In summer 2013, project members travelled to northern Saskatchewan to document Ukrainian church architecture, art, and spiritual culture .
 Co-investigators John-Paul Himka, Natalie Kononenko, and Frances Swyripa presented their findings at the Canadian Association of Slavists’ annual conference in St.
 Organized by the Ukrainian Self-Reliance Association of Canada, it was held at St. George's Hospital in Canada .
 The symposium brought together prominent historians, theologians, religious studies scholars, clergy, and activists from all Orthodox ecclesiastical formations in Ukraine . The Kyivan Orthodox tradition is within the context of world Orthodoxy and the current religious situation in Ukraine.
 At once a scholarly and a religious event, the seminar was welcomed by participants as the beginning of further research collaborations and co-operation .
 This book, to be co-edited by Heather Coleman, Paul Gavrilyuk, and Cyril Hovorun, will explore the religious dimension of the Ukrainian revolution .
 This year’s annual Shevchenko Lecture was organized by CIUS and cosponsored with the Ukrainian Professional and Business Club . Professor Tamara Hundorova is an internationally renowned scholar in the fields of literary studies .
 Few people seem to know that Taras Shevchenko wrote prose as well as poetry . Few people know that she wrote prose or poetry .
 Shevchenkos rich legacy offers a unique perspective on a deep and highly personal relationship between the poet and his beloved fatherland, Ukraine .
 The author seemed to change proverbial literary masks as he changed peasant clothing for a person of higher social standing .
 The sole purpose of Shevchenkos writing his prose was to address readers in the Russian imperial capital, St. Petersburg .
 Shevchenko’ mask of an author speaking and writing in Russian proved quite different from his “Ukrainian mask’ displayed in a letter from exile to his compatriots active in the Ukrainian national movement .
Russian-language prose is replete with play, irony, and deliberate mystification . Shevchenkoss Russian-language literature is repletes with play and irony .
 A textual analysis of Shevchenkos prose demonstrates the richness of his arsenal of literary disguises .
 In allowing his character to speak, shevchenko played with his imagination, splitting his personality . Shevchenko is a narrator and listener on the one hand, an author and literary character on the other .
 Shevchenko’s choice of Darmohrai as a disguise served an important therapeutic function, shevchenko says . Shevchen's choice of the disguise helped him overcome the social, geographic, and cultural isolation.
 Shevchenko-Darmohrai wandered the expanses of his beloved Ukraine in imagination . He remembered places he had visited and people he had met .
 Simultaneously, Shevchenko created Ukraine as an imagined entity, using descriptions based on ideas of ethnic and social transformations that were important to him .
 Those transformations involved human characters, languages, clothing, and landscapes . The transformations involved humans and languages .
 In one of his stories, Shevchenko offers a vivid composite portrait of his female “compatriot,” a member of his audience . In one, shevchenko says, “A Delightful Stroll Not Without a Moral,’
 This image must have served as Shevchenko's ideal embodiment of his mother, of Ukraine, and of a future wife .
 Darmohrai engages in masquerade, exchanging clothes befitting a lord for those of a servant in order to join common people's festivities .
 Shevchenko shares language, social status, culture, and ethnicity . This symbolic change of identity allows him to join his characters, with whom he shares language .
 To Shevchenko, the use of masks and disguises proved his ability to masquerade, play, and take on alternative identities .
 Darmohrai reveals to us a Shevchenko very different from the iconic image of him that we have all learned to know and cherish . The Russian-born Russian is known for his work in Ukraine .
 The round table was held at the Hrushevsky Memorial Museum at 9 Pankiv Street, where the historian and his family resided from the 1920s to the 1940s .
 The museum’s director, Svitlana Pankova, spoke on behalf of the coorganizers .
 Yaroslav Fedoruk noted the milestones of Professor Kohut’s academic biography . He noted the productive cooperation between CIUS and the Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography during his directorship .
 IUA's assistant director Oleksandr Mavrin recalled the timely support of Professor Kohut and CIUS in the fall of 2013 . The IUA and the Ahatanhel Krymsky Institute of Oriental Studies both faced closure by the Ukrainian authorities .
 The intervention of Ukrainian and international academia prevented the planned closure of the Ukrainian university .
Russian-inspired English-language historiography was dominated by Russian-inspired history . He recalled difficulties facing Western students of early modern Ukraine from the 1960s to the 1980s .
 Professor Omeljan Pritsak had to counter the prevailing trend in order to convince North American academics that Ukrainian history was a subject in its own right .
 Their efforts gave rise to a new trend in Englishlanguage historiography .
 Professor Kohut’s academic achievements in the study of eighteenthand nineteenth-century Ukrainian history featured in an address by Dr. Dr. Kohut .
 Imperial Absorption of the Hetmanate, 1760s-1830s (Cambridge, Mass., 1988; Ukrainian translation: Kyiv, 1996) and subsequent publications represented a breakthrough in studying the decline of Ukrainian Cossack polity .
 Thor Hyrych discussed Ukrainian “autonomists’ in the Russian Empire during the first third of the Si a photo at the celebration nineteenth century . He likened the importance of conceptualism in Professor Kohut’s works to that of Dr. Kohut .
 Viktor Brekhunenko concentrated on key developments in historiography of the late 1980s . In the 1980s, the image of Ukraine was still being formed by specialists in Russian studies .
 Professor Kohut’s monograph, published in 1988, was highly important in changing this situation .
 Brekhunenko also referred to the notable support for studies in the history of southern and eastern Ukraine offered by CIUS under Professor Kohut’ directorship .
 Taras Chukhlib focused on Professor Kohut’s contribution to the study of Ukraine in world history . Dr. Kohut's contribution to Ukraine's history was also discussed .
 Viacheslav Stanislavsky stressed the importance of his historical writings for the consolidation of the Ukrainian nation .
 Yaroslav Hrytsak edited the writings of Ivan Lysiak-Rudnytsky . He described Zenon Kohut as one of 24 people to write the books .
 Lysiak-Rudnytsky’s best students and one of the most prominent historians of Ukraine of the late 18th and early 19th centuries . CIUS Newsletter 2014.
 Other congratulatory addresses to Zenon Kohut were delivered by his colleagues Drs. Other congratulation addresses to his colleagues were delivered to him .
 Ferhad Turanli, Tetiana Yaroshenko, Dmytro Vyrsky and Oksana Yurkova were all named in the list of three women .
 Zenon Kohut spoke of his academic career and his overriding interest in the problem of identity . Kohut then spoke of the importance of identity in his career .
In his own words, biography played no small role in the development of such an interest, he says .
 Zenon Kohut was brought up with a strong sense of Ukrainian identity . But declaring it while growing up resulted in a host of problems .
Ukrainian political thought began with research on modern Ukrainian political thought . This led him to study the birth and development of the country .
 The genesis of that intellectual tradition is difficult to grasp without a detailed study of the liquidation of the Cossack Hetmanate . It became the focus of his monograph .
 This important question was largely resolved in Professor Kohut’s two collections of articles . The answer was mostly resolved in the two collections.
 The early modern Ukrainian political elite adapted the legacy of Kyivan Rus’ in order to formulate the concept of Cossack Ukraine as the ‘fatherland’ of the Ukrainian people .
 Another important factor was the continuing struggle of the Cossacks for their rights and freedoms . The Cossacked are still fighting for their right and freedoms.
 Alexandra Chernenko Lysiak-Rudnytsky passed away on 24 June 2014 at the age of 90 in Edmonton .
 Alexandra attended medical school between 1942-44 in Lviv, then in Danzig, Poland, and Graz, Austria . Alexandra went to medical school in Poland, Poland and Austria .
 Ivan Lysiak-Rudnytsky is a professor of history at the U of A A A specialist in Ukrainian literature . He is also a professor in the U.S. of a specialist in Ukraine .
 Shevchenko Scientific Society in Canada, Ukrainian Academy of Arts and Sciences . She was a member of the Shevchen Scientific Society. She was also member of Canadian Council for Ukrainian Arts .
 Volodymyr, Local History, and the First Celebration of the Christianization of Rus’ in Kyiv in 1888’s 3 October .
 David Marples is a professor at the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies . He is a former professor of the U.S. Department of History and Classics .
 Jelena Pogosjan (Department of Modern Languages and Cultural Studies, U of A) is a professor at the University of A .
 Oksana Kis is a member of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine . She is the head of the Department of Modern Ethnology, Institute of Ethnologists .
 Volodymyr Kravchenko, Jars Balan, David Marples, Bohdan Harasymiw, Heather Coleman and Heather Coleman are the authors of the book .
 Tamara Hundorova is a professor at the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine . She is the director of the Department of Literary Theory, Shevchenko Institute of Literature .
 David R Marples is the director of the Stasiuk Program for the Study of Contemporary Ukraine . He is also the research associate of the Centre for Political and Regional Studies .
 A History of the Nationalities Problem in the USSR (with Victor Swoboda, 1990), The Ukrainian Resurgence , and hundreds of articles and analyses .
 Nahaylo sees this “battle for Ukraine’ as a defining moment for Ukraine's struggle for sovereignty and freedom . Also for NATO, the EU, and the entire structure of international relations .
 Herstories: An Anthology of New Ukrainian Women Prose Writers, issued by Glagoslav Publishers .
 The Essential Poetry of Taras Shevchenko is published by Piramida in Lviv, Ukraine . Naydan presented a volume of his own translations .
 He discussed large number of works, including novels by Maria Matios and Irena Rozdobudko . He identified particular patterns of using folk motifs .
 The lecture was followed by a very lively discussion, with members of the audience posing questions to the lecturer .
 Naydan is only the second recipient of this prize, awarded for lifetime achievement in translating Ukrainian literature . Naydan was awarded for the second time in his career .
 The Peter and Olya Savaryn Award was launched in February 2014 . The award was awarded to the SOFRTINISY.
 The award is intended to support a range of scholarly and educational projects at CIUS . CIUS provides grants to scholars, organizing public events and supporting publications and translations in Ukrainian studies .
 CIUS will determine the allocation of the award, while CFUS will continue to manage the fund . CIUS is to decide the allocation, whileCFUS will remain in charge .
 Peter and Olya Savaryn are well known in Canada for their generosity, initiatives, and dedicated community work . They are also known for their generous, initiatives and community work.
 Peter Savaryn was born in the village of Zubrets near Buchach in Ternopil oblast . He was also born in Zubrets, near the city of Buchach .
 He began studies in Ukraine and completed them after the war in Germany . He began his studies in the country and completed his studies after the conflict .
 He was active in such community organizations as the Ivan Franko School of Ukrainian Studies, Plast, the Ukrainian Canadian Congress and the Ukrainian Professional and Business Club . He was also active in the Alberta Ukrainian Commemorative Society, St. St. St.
 Mr Savaryn served for five years as president of the World Congress of Free Ukrainians . He is currently chair of the Shevchenko Scientific Society, Edmonton branch .
 He was one of the founders of CFUS, serving as its president and then as a board member until 1997 . He was also the president and board member of the organization .
 Mr Savaryn has also excelled in Canadian political, educational, and cultural life .
 He was instrumental in numerous election campaigns at municipal, provincial, and federal levels . He was also instrumental in many election campaigns .
 Mr Savaryn was among those who inspired the provincial government to introduce Ukrainian language instruction in Alberta high schools . He established Gateway Publishers to prepare learning materials in Ukrainian language .
 In 1971 he was one of those who inspired Prime Minister Trudeau to proclaim Canada an officially multicultural nation . He was also one of the people who inspired PM Trudeau to declare Canada a multicultural nation.
 This proclamation led to the establishment of bilingual schools, the Ukrainian Cultural Heritage Village at Elk Island Park, and CIUS at the U of A . It also motivated the erection of the world’s first memorial in honor of the victims of the Holodomor in Edmonton .
 Olya Savaryn (née Kobzar Prystajecky) was born in 1930 in Zhyznomyr near Buchach, Ternopil.
 She began her studies in Ukraine, continued in Germany, and completed them in Alberta . She has been studying in Ukraine and Germany for years .
 A graduate of Alberta College, she worked as a legal secretary in her husband's office .
 The Ukrainian Catholic Women’s League of Canada has been conducting a musical radio program for the League for 20 years .
 Savaryn accompanied N ew or of Ukrainian ae where the need i is greatest . Savaryn was accompanied by N eW or ofUkrainian ae.
 Ukrainian immigrants came to Canada because of political and religious persecution in their homeland . She was the daughter of Ukrainian immigrants .
 She began her teaching career in Saskatoon and soon became known to her students as “Ann Landers’s” because of her generous, openhearted character .
 Moving to Ontario, CIUS Newsletter 2014 and assisted her husband in his numerous projects and business trips . Moving to Canada, CIU Newsletter 2014.
 The Peter and Olya Savaryn Award is another accomplishment of this unique couple . It is an award-winning couple .
 The Ukrainian community will serve the Ukrainian community in Canada and elsewhere . It will remind us of the generosity, caring, and visionary mindset of its founders .
 Mary and Michael Yacyshyn Mary worked in various teaching and administrative positions, including that of first female school principal . Mary was the first female principal of a school in the United States .
 Metropolitan Andrei Sheptytsky had lasting spiritual significance for Michael . He and his family had the opportunity to meet the much-re-vered  MetropolitanAndrei Shepttsky .
 Michael immigrated to Canada in 1948 and worked for the nation-wide Loblaw grocery chain in Toronto . He worked for Loblaw for more than 50 years .
 Mary and Michael Yacyshyn were active in the Ukrainian Catholic Church in Mississauga and the Ukrainian community of Toronto . Both were active with the Ukrainian Church in Toronto and in the Canadian community .
 Michael was a member of the Brotherhood of Former Soldiers of the First Division of the Ukrainian National Army . He is a former soldier of the Ukraine National Army.
 They believed that their lives had been blessed with the spirit of generosity and hope . They believed they had been lucky to have been given hope and hope.
 With foresight, they made a lasting contribution to their community and future generations .
 CIUS established the Dr. Donors Focus on Ukrainian Canadian Studies in October 2013 . The Dr. Focus on Ukraine is based in Ukraine .
 The endowment will support the activities of the Ukrainian Canadian Program at CIUS . It will also support publication of print and digital materials, organization of and participation in conferences .
 Nestor and Myrosia Maslo said they were very honoured to establish the fund . Nestor said that they were 'very honoured'
 From a young age, they became actively involved in the Ukrainian community . They became active in the community from the young age .
 Nestor was a member of the Shumka Dancers of Edmonton, and Myrosia of the city’s Dnipro Ensemble .
 Both participated in CYMK (Canadian Ukrainian Youth Association), including the Edmonton CYMK choir . Both took part in the choir .
 Myrosia earned a Bachelor of Science degree in 1979 and a Bachelor. of Education in 1981 .
 Myrosia Maslo cused on raising a family and engaging in community work . For a number of years, she taught in the Ukrainian Bilingual Program, after which she taught .
 Dr. Rudolf Fischer Endowment Fund was established in April 2014 with a bequest of $377,168 from Dr. Dr. Fischer .
 The fund is to be used for the funding of fellowships and scholarly projects in Ukraine .
 Fischer-Slysh was honoured at the launch of this volume in Toronto in March 2011 . He was honoured for his work in Toronto .
 Born in Kolomyia in western Ukraine, she escaped the Soviet occupation . She was born in the Ukraine, where she was born .
 After obtaining her medical degree in Munich, she emigrated to the of Canada .
 She was a volunteer with the Ukrainian Bilingual Association . She served as president of the Edmonton Medical Women’s Club .
 Nestor received a Bachelor of Medical Science degree in 1975 and became an MD in 1977 . Nestor was an MD for the first time in 1977.
 He subsequently earned his FRCPC for Radiology in 1983 and obtained certification by the American Board of Radiologist in 1984 .
 Nestor has enjoyed practicing radiology in hospital and clinical settings in Edmonton and rural Alberta . Nestor is a partner with Insight Medical Imaging .
 He is section head of General Imaging at the Misericordia Community Hospital . He holds many professional memberships and holds many pro memberships .
 He holds an appointment as a clinical lecturer in the Department of Radiology for the U of A As proud Canadians, Nestor and Myrosia appreciate and encourage the study of the Ukrainian Canadian experience .
 Maria Fischer-Slysh practiced as a pediatrician in Kankakee, Illinois . She also worked in the U.S.
 Hrushevsky Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography and Source Studies, Kyiv, is a Ukrainian archaeological research institute .
Remeza Family Endowment Fund i Natalia Havdyda ff Vladyslav Hrynevych, Kuras Institute of Political and Ethnic Studies, Kyiv . Remeza family Endowment fund i Natia Havdyslav. Hrynvych.
 Hrushevsky Institute of Ukrainian Archaeography and Source Studies, Lviv Branch, Ukraine . The Institute is based in Lviv, Ukraine.
 Stephania Bukachevska-Pastushenko Archival Endowment Fund Volodymyr Kulyk, Institute of Political and Ethnic Studies, Kyiv .
 Stasiuk Family Endowment Fund Volodymyr Masliichuk is independent scholar, Vilshany, Kharkiv oblast .
 Research I “Sustainability of Ukrainian language education from pre-school to post-secondary’s ‘Vision’ Research II “Vision.’
 Stasiuk Family Endowment Fund Dmytro Vashchuk, Institute of Ukrainian History, Kyiv, is the head of the Institute ofUkrainian History .
 The “Certificate of Appreciation first recipients are Parasia Iwanec and Jaroslaw Halchuk of St. Petersburg . The ‘Certificate Of Appreciation’ is the “certificate ofAppreciation first recipient’s’
 Ld otis oncom is a for students and research grants for scholars in Ukrainian studies . Ld Otis is oncom for students, research grants and grants.
 Mr Halchuk established the Mykhailo, Volodymyr and Olia Halchuk Memorial Endowment ‘ Fund in July 2007 in memory of his sons .
 The Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies is very grateful to all donors for their support . The Institute of Ukraine Studies is also grateful for all donors .
Your generosity and trust will be greatly appreciated and acknowledged . Your generosity and Trust will be great appreciated .
 Donations from both Canada and the U.S. are eligible for tax deductions . Donations are eligible to be eligible for deductions .
 CIUS encourages you to donate to our general CIUS Endowment Fund . CIUS is used to support all our activities and programs wherever the need is greatest .
 Canadian studies, Literature, Language, Education, Social Sciences, Economics, Diaspora studies, Womens studies, Law, Library Sciences, and CIUS Press .
 You can donate online at www.ualberta.ca, send us a cheque, establish an endowment, enroll in a deduction program, leave a bequest in your will, transfer part of your stock portfolio, and donate property or your life insurance .
 Listed in order of establishment, amounts include all donations received by 31 July 2014 . The amount is in order to be established .
 The Steven Kobrynsky Memorial Scholarship is awarded every two years to an undergraduate who excels in the study of the Ukrainian language . In April 1996, a $10,000 bequest from the estate of Steven KobRYnsky of Canora, Saskatchewan, established the Steven Kob
 The Government of Alberta matched the initial donation of $100,000 two-to-one . The government matched the first donation.
 In 1998-2000, the Kowalskys increased the capital of their endowment by $1,650,000 and redirected it to use for the Study of Eastern Ukraine program . The new program is for the study of eastern Ukraine .
 The initial donation of $33,500 was later augmented by club members and matched two-to-one by the Government of Alberta . The first donation was initially made by the club members .
 Vlas Darcovich died in July 1989 in memory of his wife, Helen, née Michalenko, to support Ph.D. students writing dissertations on a Ukrainian or Ukrainian topic .
 Oleh Zujewskyj of Edmonton in December 1989 to support the publication of literary works by Ukrainian writers living outside Ukraine . Zujewkyj's work was published by Ukrainian writer living in Edmonton .
 The fund provides fellowships for Ukrainian scholars and professionals to conduct research and study in Canada .
Until 2007, Xerox Canada received matching funds from Xerox. Until 2007, the endowment also received matched funds from Xerox Canada .
 Bohdan Klid, Myroslav Klid and Maria Zadarko to fund fellowships and research grants in Ukrainian studies .
 Andrew’s College to offer fellowships, supports independent research, and facilitates research and publication by scholars in the field of religious studies . Andrew's College also offers fellowships.
 Ukrainian Language Education Centre supports projects at the Ukrainian Language education Centre . It supports projects that promote teacher professional development and improvement of language courses .
 Anna Stelmaschuk and $10,000 from the late Nancy Shemeluck-Radomsky . Mary Orchuk and Jean Naciuk also received $1,000 .
 The fund supports extension education in Ukraine and distance-learning workers from Canada to help educate prospective extension workers in Ukraine .
 The fund offers fellowships at the M.A. or Ph.D. level to residents of Bukovyna to study at the Universities of Alberta, Saskatchewan, Toronto or other Canadian universities .
Myroslawa Iwanciw of Elmwood Park, Illinois, in April 2006 in support of CIUS activities . CIUS is dedicated to Ukrainian students and scholars conducting research in Ukrainian studies . The Illinois-based CIUS was founded in 2006 .
 Peter and Doris Kule with a donation of $100,000, matched by the Government of Alberta . The fund supports the work of the Ukrainian Diaspora Studies Initiative at the Kule Ukrainian Canadian Studies Centre .
 The Ukrainian Canadian Program is now known as the Kule Ukrainian Canadian Studies Centre at CIUS . The Institute's multifaceted commitment to documenting and sharing the wealth of the Ukrainian Canadian experience .
 1e name and address of someone who would like to be added to mailing list . MOWTOBI KOLUITY ONNAYeHI TIIbKI B KaHagii. 1e names and addresses of people who want to add to list .
 Gifts to CIUS are fully tax-deductible in both Canada and the U.S. Gifts toCIUS are tax- deductible in Canada and United States .
 Postal/Zip Code Tel E-mail. Please enter your change of address above or provide the name and address of someone who would like to be added to our mailing list .
 Akulo y Bac 3MiHunaca ampeca, aO0 3Ha€ETe KOrOCb, xTO 6arkaB 6 OTPUMyBaTu BioneTenb KIYCy, 6yb nacka, nOBIH
 Please fill out your name and address in the space above or enclose your mailing label and return it to CIUS in the stamped, self-addressed envelope .
 Christina Isajiw is one of the first insider accounts of efforts during the 1970s and 1980s on the part of Western NGOs and their workers to bring aid and support to Ukrainian dissidents and activists .
 The fund supports the activities of the Ukrainian Canadian Program at CIUS . The fund also supports the publication of print and digital materials .
 Maria Fischer-Slysh fund is to be used for fellowships and scholarly projects in Ukrainian studies .
 Albert AB 3,000 Sele nemibvil sp tole ponys Tesoro (ON at nena Walk Oslin on 3.000 Bautista, Amy & Ken St.
 You will be invited to an — annual lunch with the Chair of the Board of Governors, as well as to various campus events .
 New Trail and Folio will be available on the Library's website . You will also receive issues of New Trail, Folio and New Trail . The Library will also have access to the Library .
 YKpalHy i ioe coves Ilouaroxk fiambHoctu IIporpamu BUBYeCHHA CydacHol Ykpainn im. YKPalHy iioe cove IlouAroxkfiamb
 CracloKiB — 4epe3 HU3Ky 3HAYUHMX BOCATHeHb Sas ee 3a.HHA — We aKkypaTHa aHasli3a NogiM B YKpaiHi J
 Y 2007 BiH 3all0uaTKyBaB Oor CracioKis: HuHIMHA WOMITMKa Cy4acHoi YKpalHM. 3a Ba JECATUMITTA icHyBaHHA IIporpama im
 Aeusuo Mapna3; cmydenmu y Kemopidmcokomy yHisepcumemi . EBdokia Cmacrwk YMMasIO YCIIX1B, 30KpeMa, 3a OCTAHHIN Pik, AKMM
 BUCTYIaB 3 JOMOBIAMM Ta 6paB yuacTb B OOTOBOpeHHAX: 3a KPyIIMM CTOJIOM; jJaBaB iHTepB 10 JIA 3MI
Hypxye a cipooyto fat KOPOTKy XapaKTepMCTUKy. Hypxye is a cipsooy to fat . KOPotKy is a akayemiuHomy pOul U HakpeciMTM Fe
 B TpaBHi 2013 jlekKaHOM MDaky/IbTeTy ryMaHiTapHux Hayk J|-poM Jlecni KopMak JIA OWiHKU CTaHy CIIpaB B iHCT
OpraHi3aljiMHOl CTpyKTypu InctTntyty Ta 3MinM dyHKuWioHaIbHux 060B A3KiB JOMOMOMPDKOTO Mepconally. Oprahi3
 My € CBiJJOMi TOFO. My €CBi JJOMi ToFO, I.O BACHOBKM Ta peKomehjii Komicii .
KoBasIbcbKUX, i n-p Jlenpugy Mapnas3, yupextop IIpoTpaMu, i-n-PKeHHA Cy4acHol YkKpainn im. KoBasIBCbKux
JepHisauiero MeToyu4Horo IeHTpy yKpalHcbKoi MoBnm. Jep's is the name of a man named Azza Heyjaliki . Jep’s is the first time
 OntexkcaHGP IlanKees npeycTaBuB KOHIerIit0 MOpTasly 3 yKpalHCbKMUx CTYyin, i A CHOMiBaloca HaMmO2VOK
 B KIYCi Big6ysaetbca powec OHOBJICHHA Kaj[piB 1 Wi BULJeHHA piBHA PiBHA ixHboro mpodecionanismy. B K IYCi.
 OkKpeMi JIeKUil Ta Ipe3eHTalLiil, opraHi3oBaHi IHcTMTyTOM, Tellep € JOCTYNHUMNM . IHCTMTYBauyiB
 A po3paxo byto Ha Te, WO HMHILIHI, KONMIUHi Ta MaMOyTHi CTUNeH ATU KIYCy Bi3sbMyTb aKTUBHY yUacTb y po
 IHCTUTYT 3allouaTKyBaB HOBY, UWOpidHy lpemiro 3a Kpallli JOC. IHHA BroaeteHb KIYCy 2014 Cnoso AupekTopa B ray
EKcTlepTHMM KOMITeT y Kuesi mig rono. EKc tlep THMM KomiteT. Ekc Tlep ThMM Kommitet y Kuedi migrono . E
 AxkajlemiuHa nomituka KTYCyCy B YKpaiHi MyCUTb Oa3yBaTMUCcA Ha IIpunuMnax WaptTHepctsa. Ha II puniHa is the name of a man who
 Spocraiunn inTeleKTyaIbHun NOTeCHIA YKpalHCbKUX CTYMiM MOXKHAa 6yHe OLIHMTU AMIMe TORI, Kon ykpaiHOMOBHi HyOjl
 Iloku iHCTUTYT Mae TaKUX KBamidiKOBaHMX CHeniAicTip, aK Mupocnas FOpKesuy i PoMaH Cexpkycb, HeoOxisHO 3aOalqy
YiposqoBxK MMHYIOLO aKafleMi4dHOTO poKy 3arajibHa atMocdepa B KIYCi BUSHayalaca MOMAMM B YKpaiHi. Yipos
IpakTm4Ho Bci HayKosi cniBpobiTHnKu IHcrutyty — Tapac Kysbo, Jlensuy Mapmn13,   Lapacumis, 3eH0H Koryt,
 J-p Tapac Ky3bo npoyjemonCTpyBaB rifHy MOAM. J- pisH“mu Mosamn.’s’S’TepB’10.
 KIYC oprani3syBaB WeKiibKa: CeMiHapiB, IpeseHTaliv Ta Kondepenuin Ha BiJMOBIPHI TeMu. KIYC: KPyIIMX CTOMIB
Opranisaljimue Ta iHMopMatliv. He is a 3acityra Pomana Ulnuana Ta Onekcanypa IlanKeesa . He is the son of a former member of the Royal Family .
 CporogHi Ha cxoyi Ykpainu TpuBae MIpowWec HallOHasIbHOLO posMerxkyBaHHA, Teuwjo MOZiOHMM DO Toro, IO BiOyBaBCA Ha
PaHOo 4M 1i3HO pociMcbKa IpaBocwa-iMIlepCbKa ifJeHTMYHICTb 3HOBY 3iNITOBXHETbCA 3 MOJEPHUMM BUK
 HaTOMicTb yKpalHCbKMM HaIOHAIbHMUM Wpowec 3.00yBae laHc fictaTu Oibil cyyacHMuM, eBporenCbkMM BUMip
 Ilogil B YkpaiHi cram HecmopiBaHKOI0 AK JIA KPeCMJIIBCbKUX poCiIMCbKMX HaljiOHaJICTIB, Tak i JIA OproccebcbKux
 Bonu Oe3MocepesHbO 3auillaiwoTb TaKOXK MDKHapOjIHE eKCIIepTHe CepeOBuilfe. He CepeobuilFe.
P.TOM TaKOl MO/ITMKM CTaNoO BI,YyTHe 3HYDKEHHA TpodeciMHoro piBHA BIAMOBIPHUX TMCWMIVMH y 3aXifHix yH
 Micue Ta ponb KIYCy B mpoueci YeproBOro MepeOCMNMCIeEHHA COMiAIbHUX i ryMaHiTapHUx cTypfiM Lye Tpeba Oye 3 acy
 IIpore Be 3apa3 CTa. IHTepHalliOHasisalil ykKpalHCbKMx crymim . IHTEPHalliHoro Hpoctopy, Nosyantbutoi IHTpHalliohasisal
 BignoBiqHo, BiH NoTpebye Oibi OibI ViTKOTO BU3SHAYeCHHA JOCHAYe CHHA JO CHAYECHHA. IpiOpuTerTiB i pOsyMiHHA
 Iapacumisa, IpucBayeHUX mpo67emam TOPTiB/li KiHKaMM, e€BPOMeNCbKOI iHTel pall, MOMTMYIHUX KOpyOHiB YKpain
 Cporogui KIYC, CIVIbHO 3 HallMMM WapTHepaMi B YxpaiHi, po3po6# HOBi, JOBrOcTpoKOBi HaykOBi IiporpaMn
Po3spo67eHi HMMM KOHIentii Ta WAH po6otu 6yfyTb onpumtroyHeHi Hait671/OKYMM 4acom. Po3spO67ehi HMMm KohI
 A 3aKmMKkato BCix, XTO 6yB Ipwue, 3ACHYBaHHA iHCTUTYTY, BCiX, xTO IiJTPMMye MOTO MiAIbHICTb Cb
 Koncdbepenuia Big6ynaca 3a yaacTro Onexcia lapana . EBreHa bucTpuijbKoro (Mixuapoguin doug: BigqpomKeHHa, Kuis)
 Iperto uiei KondepeHuii 6y70 3ampomoHoBaHo Ilerpom CagaPMHOM, KOJIMMIHIM KaHWIepom Ayib6epTCbKOrO yH-Ty Ta OAH
JenBuyom MapiivI30M, AKU BUCTYMMB 3 JIEKIiEO Tlepey, Bi,KpuTTAM koHdepenuil .
 Ipenta MaxlOeua, m0 cTamo TlepiUM MpukKajOM TaKOl CHiBIpali MbK J[BOMa 3akjlayiaMi. Ipukkajom TaKOL CHi
 Y nojiii B34 y4acTb Onexcin Tapanb, €Cpren buctpuupKnn, Banepin Uanmn i Tapac Ky3po. Ynojii B34 Y4ac tapanb. Y no
 Amanyja Ilon, 6puTaHka 3a 1Oxoj, 6p Ta KepiBHMK, 5p, 4p, 2p, 1p, 3p, 5m, 2h, 4m, 3m, 4h,
 Ia nogia 3i6pana TIpey. Ia. IpeyqCTaBHMLbKy aBJMTOpiro, Cepey . AKO pa30M 3 HayKOBLIAMM Ta CTY . Ipe
 Let 3axig, ipucBayennn Hopiam B YKpaini, 3i6paB Oararo 3alikaBJIeHMX MpesCTaBHUKiB rpoMagn, IKI He JIMUe yB
 Maprapiru baibmaceqn, AKa € OJ, HUM 3 mpoBigHuMx y [lipaivnim AMepmii (axiBliB 3 IMTaHb CHepreTM4HOi No/ITA
 Maprapita bampmaceyja o6iimMae T0caly ipodecopa AunNOMaril Ta MiKHaPOWHIiX BIJHOCMH B YHipepcuTeTi CeToH Ton Ta cnis
 B o6roBopeHHi CMTyallii B YkpaiHi B3AIM y4acTb Bonoyumup KpapyeHko (AupekTop KIYCy) Apocias Banay (koopynna
 Kynis KIYCy, Tenspug Mapms3 (roroyacHun qupextop IIporpaMiM JOC) Kyni YkKpainu (KYCy) Ykkpainu is a U.S.
 Cracioxis KIYCy, borax TapacnMiB (KoopauHatop Llentpy noniTn4HMX Ta perioHaIbHUXx cTysin KTYCy) Ta Iesep Koma (
 Y pooTi kKoHdepenuil, 3aBaHHA AKUX MOMATANIO B MOWYKy MOACHEHb mpowecaM Ta YAHHMKaM, LO CIOHyKal0Tb J {O
 Bci BuujesrajjaHi nopil, 6e3y3yMoBHO, Clipuau (opMyBaHHIo KpalioTO pO3yMIHHA) CMTyallil B YKpaini Ta 30
 Le WiIKOM y3rOI. 3aBaHHAM Llentpy nomiTM4HMXx Ta perioHa/IbHUX CTYIN MepeTBOPUTMCA Ha 3HaHMM y CBITI EKCIIEP
IloiOHUM MOCTyM Biepesy, HEMOKIMBUM 6e3 MiljHoro diHaHcoBoro Misr pyHTTa. IloiohUMMOCTym Biepese, HemOKIMbUM
 Came Tomy Lleutp 3aujikaBieHun y CTBOpeHHi baraTOMIbMOHHOTO BidHOTO (POHAY, HasXOPPKeHHA Bifl AKOLO JOSBONATMUM
 W Mipor byze 3alexKaTU, 4M 3M 3m 3M3m 3moxe LlenTp momiTH4yHMX Ta perioHaIbHUX CTYMIM BIIOBHI JOCA
M texae ykpaiHoMoBHy OCBITY IWIAXOM Iif. Iif[TPUMKM BUMTENIB Ta PO3NOBCHOJ>KeEHHAM JJaHUX JOCII[DKEHb
 Kondepenuito opraHi3yBayla HaljioHaib HaibHa yKpaiHcbKa WIKijIbHa pajja 1p Kourpeci yKpainuis Kanagn. Kour peci ykpain
 Y migrorosyi MLY. My go kondepennii B3anmu yuacTb lpaliBHUuku WeHTpy lammna Katia, i Mukona Copoxa . My gokondepenii.
 Papi KaTOAMUbKMX WIKI Enk-AWIeHLy. Papi nyOmivHux wKin EqMoutony Ta PapiKaTOAM UbKMX w Kin EqmoutonyTa Papi Ta Pap
 Mamxe Bci yuHi OTpumMasIn Bue 60%, WO CBIJYUTb IIpo Te, WO BOHU MOXKYTb HaBuaTMca y Oyfb-AKOMY yHiBepcnuTeri
 KopnctTarounch i3 WepeBar HOBITHbOl TEXHOJIOLil, AKa BIAKPUBae OCTY WO pecypciB WMpmuin aBAMTopil cryfeutis, MIYM
Y paMKax boro JOcif4Oro MmpoEKTy J-p bina Ta cniBgMpeKTop J-P Poman Iletpuumu (Yuispepcutert im. Y paMKX boro
 Ipenta MaxlOeua. Ipent a Maxl Oeua is a city in South Africa . The city is home to many of the world's most famous cities .
 Ipodecop Bigpiny cyyacHMX MOB i KYAbTYPOMOLiYHUX CTY AjibOepTCBKOrO YH-TY, IpesCTaBMB BOceHut 2014 HOBMM MDK
 CravlicTb Ki/IbKOCTM YUHIB Ta CTyJJCHTiB € OJHMM 3 HaMOibi rocTpux IMMTaHb WIA yKpalHO3Ha3HaBUMx Mpor
 BuBueHHa noTpe6 cTyfeHTiB ykpaiHcbkux cTyfim AnbOeptcbKoro yH-Ty CIIPMATMMe OHOBJICHHIO HaBYayIBHUX MIpor
 CraTTa, B AKiM MIpoctTe*KYIOTHCA Wi pospoOKu, NogaHa WA KPUTMUIHOTLO OIALy Ta Jpyky Oo KaHajICbKOrO HayKOBOLO Kyp
 BinbulicTb 3 WAX iHTepB 10 CTOCYETHCA MDKBOE€HHOLO Mepiosly Ta 4acis. Mepioi CBITOBOI BIMHM, TOOTO 4aciB, KOAM Li
 IIpaua Tako MICTUTb MepeqMoBy, Hanncany ApocnaBom IpulakoM, Ta BCTYN, aBTOpOM akoro € Ipoiga Bunuuupxa . Ipoga Bunuu up
 Jlo 36ipKn WOy4e4e 4e4iHO KOMKT JMCK 3alMcaMu dparMeHTiB JeaAkux 3 Wx iHTepB Io. Jlo 36ipKn Jlo 36
 UotTupucTa IpMMipHUKiB iei 30ipKu Oyn0 TlepeqjaHo 6e3KOMITOBHO Jo 6ibmioTeK Ta HaBua/IbHUX 3akafliB
KuyoxkkKa lipiicpadena 35-i pivHuii 3aCHyBaHHA Apxi . KuyoxkKa lipIbopy: 35.i piv Huii 3 aCHy BaHHAApxi . Ak
 Came B yen 4ac BiH 3aljikKaBMBCA BABYCHHAM YKpaiHCbKOrO (OMKIbOpy, 30KpeMa IIpupiJIAIOUM 3HAUHY YBary JOC
MenBigcbKomy B Amb6epTcbKoMy YH-Ti 6y710 3aCHOBaHO i pO3BUHYTO IIporpamy yKpalHCbKOoro (ONKIbOpy, CTBOPeHO)
 Meppigcexoro 3 [lipniaHoi AMepuku Ta EBponn Ta exAKi 3 Moro KOJIMIMIHIX CTYHeCHTIB. 36iPHUK TAaKOXK MiCTUTb Oiorp
 TibHe Mice y ipalji 3amMae aHasli3a TOTO, AK IA yrOfa EBOLOMIOHyBala IpOTATOM JIaHOrO MepiOfly pasoM 3i 3pocTa
 I icTopii Ta 10 BroaeteHb KIYCy 2014 Kate[pi KIACMYHMX, BISAHTINCbKUX i CepeqbOBIYHMX CTYAIM pu J[bBiBCbKilt O
 J.J. J.HafWATb eceiB BUAaTHOTO Paxi Paxi is a 3 BiZaHTIMCbKMX CTypiM mpod . J.KpalHCbKOIO MOBOW
 IMMepil Ta 3axifHboi EBporn, W0 NOTpal1AyIM JO yKpalHCbKMX 3eMe/Ib 4epes Ilonbuity . IMMEPil Ta. Ta 3xifhboi
BaIMCb MaTepiAIM 3 APXiBiB JIpbBosa, Knexsa, Baputasu, MronxeHa Ta OrraBn.Kpema, IlaBanuimHum Bileplile MOfae
KeHb 1p JIbBIBCbKOMy HalllOHaJIbHOMy. JOCMKeHHA CyYacHoOl icTOpIi Yxpainn mpu Lentpi im. Kuyypxky Bug
 Kynomypa Ko3aubKol eslimu cmosiuui Mazenu. Bykiet: "Poskonku y barypnui 2012 poxy. Kynmypa ko3aUBKol Eslimucmosiu
 APXeO/IOTiFHi 3HaXiJ. Kpallle 3po3yMiTU cmoci6 (MTTA, OCBITY) iHTeeKTYya/IbHi 3allUTU Ta KY/IHTe
 MMUHysie Ta Cy4aCcHICTb Ha ac, komm KIYC posnouas cBor0 JMAJIbHICTB y BepecHi 1976, OAMH 3 3aCHOBHOBHMKi
 Yci Wi IpOeKTU 6yno posmoyaro y Bizpini iHCTUTYTYy pn TOpoHTCKOMY yH-Ti, ne tOpin Jlyupkum 6yB mpodec
 Hesabapom lle BAJAaHHA TMIpMBepHy0 Ao cebe yBaly 3HaHUX HayKOBIIB, AKI TAKOK mova J]pyKyBaTMca y HbOMy .
 Pomau Cenpkycb Cepey: paHHix aBTOpiB-acilipaHTiB KYPHasly, AK 3 YaCOM CTa/IM BiOMMMU TipodecivHumu yKpainictamMn
Ykpainu 3MycyiM Moro Bi;MOBUTUCH FOpit Ayupkuii Bij. CHU MKIONepil YkPainu 3 mycyi M MoroBi; MOBUTuCH FO Pit Ayupuii
 Y 1986 POLI pefaklia KypHasly Mepenuia no KIYCy B AnbOeptcbkomy yH-Ti, fe mOcafly rOOBHOTO peffakTOpa MOCiB Mup
 Y 1993, 3 IpM3HaveHHAM JJ-pa Koryta qupektopom KIYCy i 3aBepWICHHAM poOoTM Haj, BUJaHHAM 5-ToMoBoi, PomaH CeHb
B. Bin akTuBi3yBaB y4aCTb HayKOBIiB 3 YKpaiHn AKTOPIB CTaTTeU Ta peleH3ili Ha IUMabTaX BUAHHA i 30i1bIIMB
 J|-p 3akufaibcbKun CYM/IiIHHO BUKOHYBaB CBO. OO0B A3KM aK is aK . OO3KU is a 3-3-3
 Cepey, TOMIB *KypHary Oyo 12 cneuBUTycKiB, IIPMCBAYEHMX pallAM aBCTpamiMcbKux ykpainictis YHipepcutety im.
 Cim iHIMMX TOMIB CTaHOBMIM 30ipHUKM lipalib Ha MowlaHy Wpodecopis lOpia Jlyupxoro . Merpa M1. Cim IHIM MX TOMIB.
 Journal of Ukrainian Studies: "Onopyum pejakTOP boro boro"
 Ilepue uncio 3 ABUIOCA BIITKYy 2014 i be3nmaTHO JJOCTYMHe Ha BeO-calTi ewjus.com/ojs/ index.php/ewjus .
 Ipymescpxoro: "Ictopia YxpaiHM-Pycu" IpucBaAYeHMX icTopii YKpaiHCbKOrO KO3allTBa. IpukBaayeHMx icTopi YK
 IpyuesCbKMM BCTUT 3aKiHYMTU 3aHOBJIATD mepiity Moro yactnuy . IpyueuesCBKMM 3aBKM 3aY, WO CTA
Camoro IpyuiesCbKOro Oys10 3aapeuiTOBaHo y OepesHi 1931 1 BucnaHo fo Mocxsn. Camoro I pyuies CbKORO Oys 10 3 aapeui TOBa
 Kipcrin Vlo6cr nocniIDKY€ MDKHAaliOHAbHi Ta MDKKOHMeCciMHi ACIIEKTU KYIbTY cp. KipCrin V lo6cr. NocniidKY€
 Mocadhata Kynyesuya 3 nosmuiit mepeBaxHo peniriitHUX CHiJIbHOT pPaHHBOMOJEPHOTO Mepiosly Ta Sibiu CeKy/APM30BaHM
 MOBM BIIIMHy/IM MepeBakHO MpesCTaBakho MpesctaBHUKM TpOMaf . POCIMCbKOIO BaOlO Ta Ta JyYXO beHCTBO Ta6
 Oper Ilapamumu mpupinae rono. Oper Ilapsumumpupinaa rono . Oper IlAPamumumu.
 JleoHig, lepeub mpomoHye TeopeTu4Hy MOJle/Ib MOJ€PHisallil Ta IPOHMKHEHHA e/IeEMeemeHTIB CeKy/1ApHOi KyAbTY
 O ixHi icTOpM4 Hi HacmifKN B YkpaiHi: B paMKax CeMiHapiB JJOKTOpKOI MporpamMu: ABcTpilcpKa laynyvHa Ta ii Oara
IpMMHATHI KOMIIpOMiCM Ta B3a€MHe JIMLeMipCTBO. IpMMhathI KomIIpomiCMTa B3A€M, Ta 4 2*KOBTHA —
 Ipenta MaxOeua. 6bepesua 2013 q-p Mapmi3 Bucryms Ha 3acifja . 3ac ifja. 3acIfja is a crony crony KIYCy npo kpumCbKi
 The Kysbom, BiH B3AB ydacTb and 3aciflaHH1 Kpyroro crosy are all crosy . The Kyproro Crosy is a crosy.
 Cepey, uncieHHMx iHTepB 10. 26 moToro 7-p Mapmz3 6yB 3alipoWeHum Mporpamor: Alberta Prime Time . TemeBi3i3iMHol craHu
Oxpemi iHTepB 10 BiH JaB KaHayiaM Ci-bi-Ci B Kanrapi ra B CackayeBaHli. Oxpemi IHTepb 10 Bih JaBKaHayiam Ci-Bi-B Kan
 IIporpama 3amosyara CTaTTi y 3HaHMX aBTOPiB, TOM AK J-p Mapii3 caM HallMcaB MaypKe IlOJIOBUHy 3 ycix nyOnikain.
 J\-p Mapm3 BucBiT/10OBaB MoOpil B YkpaiHi HU3KOI0.0 3allpOlleHMX JJOI0Biffeu. J.S. J\.P Mapm 3 BucBi
OHA 3 HUX. OHA 3. HUX: Ha 3acijaHHi TIPOBIJHUX tOpucTis EAMOHTOHa: "LOpuamannn dopym" OHA 2: "H
 Mu 6axKaemo Halllo's Ko7es3i mpodecoposi Jleipugosi Mapnzsy yCIlixiB y CIlixIB y MOrO HOBIM HayKOBiNM Ta aj{MiHiCT
 A.C. CaiiTi Bimeorocruury YouTube.com is a popular YouTube channel . The site is based in the United States .
Crisppo6irHuKu KIYCy Takox HaMaralorTbca CUCT €MaTUYHO TOTYBATU KOPOTKi Biffeo-O710rM po HewjopaBHi Nopii B
 Y nepcnextusi KIYC nianye posWIMprOBaTM MOKIIMBOCTI 3aCTOCYBaHHA cBoro YouTube kaHamy . Y necnextusIYC is a popular YouTube channel .
 Koeanecekux 6 KIYCi 28 KBiTHA 2014 Ha YeproBOMy 3acifaHi Pag AupeKTOpis Nigpo3spiAiB iHCTUTYTY AMpeKTop [lporpamn
 A.Hou E Koryt TIOBIJOMMB IipO 3aKiH4eKiHy cBoro HepeOyBaHHa Ha Wit mocap 30 4ePBHA TOTO X%K poKy. oragy
 Ha nigctaBl Wiel Mponosuuii Paya yxBannna pilleHHA po Npu3sHayeHHA Mpod . Ha nigCTaBl. Mponsuuii paya Yxbannna. Paya
 KoBaJIbCbKMX y XapKosi, le Wocayly WupekTopa MOciB icTopuk Bonogumup Kyiikos, 3acTylHUK JjeKaHa icTOpU4HOTO
 Kopayibbkux y KIYCi gaa nommpenHA yKpalHOsHaBYMx CTyAiM y Cxiguin YxpalHi.
 Ko6@anecoKux 27 6epesHA 2014 pagoro icropryHOrO @aky/bTeTy 3amopi3bKoro HalsioHaJIbHorO yHiBepuctety 6byno IIpOB
 AHaTomia Borika, Biqomoro mpaAMM Ta MporpaMotro JOCIIipP. AHa Tomi Borika. A HaTomi Borik, Aha Tomi, A Ha Tomi . A Ha
 I CcbOroyq{Hi MOJIOMI Ta JOCBIA4eHI HaYKOBI1 MpOAOBKYIOTH 3a JOMOMOMOrOLO MepwMoKepell Ta pesy/IbTaTIB
 KoBaJIbCbKMX Ta ipaliBHuKu KIYCy IMUpO BiTatOTb KOJIely Ta HOBOTO jleKaHa icropu4Horo Pakynbtety 3HY i OaxKalo
 Y Bepecui 2013 HOKBI 3aIpocus JO TopouTo Wo yyacTu B KOHepeHUii MpoBIMHUXx PaxiBuiB 3 MpoOMeMaTUKM . Ykpainn, icrop
 Y Tpasui 2013: 61m3bKo mW ATUZeCATU OCBITAH . The show is based in Temowo, in the U.S.
 TakoxK IIpOTATOM poKy l1peyscTaBHUKn. 6-7 uepBHA 2014 FocmiPHUKU 3 Ykpainu, Pocii, Kasaxcrany, Iramii, CIUA, Kan
 Lev 3axig, HayaB MOKAMBICTb MOMOJMM HayKOBIJAM IpeyctaBUTM pe3yIbTaTU BAACHMX JOCMI . OOMiHY YMKaMnu Ta 3
 KoxxeH 3 I ATU HayKOBUIB 3pOOMB JONOBIAD, Mica AKOi Biq6yBanoca O6bropeHHA 3a ydacTIO 3HaHMX (axiBli
 IIpodecop HeanonitanCbKoro yH-Ty Augpea Ipariosi. Iparioi — oun 13 MeplIMx iCTOPNKiB, AKi CBOrO acy 3BePHY/IM yBary
 HaykKOBO-OCBITHIM KOHCOPIIOMOM 6y710 HaflaHo HifTpuMKy MpOeKTy LleHtTpy yKpaiHCbKO-KaHaJ{CbKMx
 Kynis y gocniJ>KeHHI TOTO, AK pesakUil KaHaCbKUX AHTIOMOBHMX Ta3eT (30KpeMa TUX, IO BuxogMin y Bininesi) niq
 IlepBMHHO BOHM O6yim nodapOoBaHi y YepBOHO-pyaMn BOXPMCTUM KOMIp 1 BUpasHo BUAIIAIIMCB Ha NoGimeHMx CTiHax
 Ha OCHOBI Ma/JIIOHKy pyil Ijboro namaiy 1744, wo 36epirca y HatjioHasibHoMy My3ei Crokro7bMy, Ta OCTAHHIX apxeOJIOTIMH
 The World Cup is held in London, England, on Sunday . It is the first time the World Cup has been held in the United States .
 IIpapgonopfi6Ho, noms AHi KepamiyHi IWIMTKU BUTOTOBMIM JOCKOHamI KMIBCbKi MaMCTpM Kaxili, 3allpouleHi Masen
Tlo6mu3y nanayy excnenuuia YaCTKOBO pO3KOMla/la 3a/IMUIKU BeyIMKOI Cily2*KOoBoi cnopyyn. Tlo6m3y Nan
 Tam Mori MellikaTM KO3albKi CTaplunHN (odiWepit), a. OTAaHTM, MOKOEBI, MMcapi 4M KAHUeIAPMCTU, AKI Wpalwo
 MoowxHa raaTn, WO I BUIMMB MiCL, is the name of the university of the University of HapowHin MauHepi .
 Ha WBMHTapi 3pyMHoBaHoro Tpoilj[bKOoro coOopy Ha TepuTopii PopTelli ApXeOJIOIM EKCryMyBasIM BICiM moxoBaHb XVII
 BaTypMHCbKMM IIpOeKT CMOHCOpyroTb KIYC, HTL Amepnxn, IlontnikalbHUM iHCTUTYT CepeqHbOBIYHUX crymin
 Y cnipnpawi 3 lactutytom aABCTPIMCbKMX Ta I|EHTpasIbHO-eBponmencbKnx cTypin im. Y c nipnpawawaw, a ABCTPIMcbK
I. I.o6 o6ropoputu, AKI HaClif, AKM Masa BitHa Ha 2WUTTA KaHajJ\CajJ-CbKMX iMMIiI'paHTi, ocobm
 Y Tom CaM Yac, WEHTp MposoB*Kye poOuTM FociipKeHHA MyOnikauim y KaHaf, 30cepesp: Ky10uN yBary Ha poxu Tonogomopy
 YxKe crae oueBUJJHMM, WO KaHajCbKi MeploqMyHi BUJJAHHA JOCUTb WIMpOKO, XOU¥ ¥acOM CyIlepeWIMBO, B
 HOBMHA Ta nornagu: 3 HaromN BUXODYy B CBIT COTOrO: 4uNCcna GroneTeHA Y 6bepesui 2014 BuMUINIO BCBIT coTe YMC eeEKTP
 Cymy loxepTBu Oyo ni3Hille MOABO€HO AjbOepTCbKMM yHiBepcuTeTOM 3a paxyHoK koumTis @ougy. "I nax y MamOy
 Y 2007 nancrBo Kynis 3po6uno ue OWHY Wenpy lox*xept . Y 2007nancr Bo Kyn is 3po 6uno ua OWHy WenpyLox*Xept .
 CraHom Ha cporogni IY] oprani3aliMHO Ta Ta CTPYKTYPHO BXOJMTb JO ckany Llentpy imenn Kyis KIYCy. IYYCy .
TonosHa MeTa Typy NlOMArana y MOfaIbIOMy PO3BUTKy HayKOBUX Ta OCBITHiX 3B A3KiB MDK yKpaiHCbKMMM Ta KaHayjC
 Y CyMpoBofii 1paliBHMkiB yHiBepcutery J-pis Kenrmm Ilirepcen . BorfaHa Katina Ta Pomana LInana rocti 3 YkpaiHu B3AIM y
 The World Cup has been held in the U.S. since 2008 . The event was held in New York City, New York, on Sunday .
 Toro camoro JHA BifOynaca 3ycTpiy yKpalHCbKMx rocTen 3 BUK/Iayja4aMu AnbOepTcbKOrO yH-TY, cepa HayKOB
 Cepex yuacHnkis 3ycTpidi 6ymu mpucyTHi upodecopu Ojienka bina . AHapin HarayescbKuu (cyaacHi MOBI Ta KyMIbTYP
 Aecai Kopmak, deKaHom dbakyAbmemy eyMaHimapHux HayK KY Ii€l BaXxKIMBOI rasly3i ryMaHiTapHMux JJOCM>KeHb. A
 HactynHow cravia 3yctpiy 4-pis lipxu, Xo63ea Ta Kaira 3 Jjarom BewpoM, BUKOHaBYUM JMpeKTOpOM Bilgiy CTY€CHTC
 BBeyepi 22 muctonaya q-pu Tipxa, Xo63eu Ta KBit B3AJIM y4acTb y 4actb y fpOMaj. BBeyEPi 22muctonay q-pom Tip
 HacrymHoro gua -p lipka B34B yuacTb yu-Ty. (B34B) Yuac Tpivax is a 3yctpiyi (3ycTpibax)
 J>xino Danio0HoM, J-p Tipka MiHAB IMTaHHA IIpo BaxKJIMBICTb Ta MepCieKTMBU TaKOl JMCUMIVNHM, AK MeqM4Ha dis
 OOroBoproBaiMcb. BaiMcB is a former member of the U.S. National Security Council . Bai McBai is a member of a national security committee .
Haj, 30KpeMa Mixx AjIbOeprcbKMM Ta XapKiBCBKMM HaljioHasIbHMUM yHiBepcuTetom im. OHMM 3 HaCiIi{KIB b
 Ha yporopisnin WlesyenkiBcbKin jekiil, 30praHi3oBaHint KTYCom 3a diHaHcoBOi MiFTPpMMKU e. Mpod . Mpod is the
TyHqoposa orpumazia cTyTiHb JOKTOpa PistoOriMHMXx HayK y 1996 3 BoHa 3aBiflye BiAiNOM Teopil iTepatypu B IHcTu
 Mpo3n, WA MasOBiOMa, ayle BAKIMBa FaCTUHAa MOTO TBOPYOcTM IIpMBifKPMBa€e 3aBicy Ta JO3BOIAE Kpalljle 3po
 Wlesyenko 3Min1oBaB JiTepaTypHi MaCKM 3 TaKOIO CaMOW JlerKiCTIO, AK BiH llepeBOUpaBCA 3 CeAHCbKOI CBUTU B O
 JlirepaTypHa: "MacKa," "makoro LleBueHKo TIMCaB IIpO3y POCiMCbKOIO" " MacKa" is "macKa"
TubHMXx MacoK onoBijjaya has been named as one of the world's most popular Macosos . The Macos are also known as the Macos.
 Tlepeqatoun cioBo KoO3apeBi JJapmorpato, IllesuenHko rpae 3 yABOW, po3qBoro104n ceOe Ha cllocTepiraya i CIOCTe
 Vioro aBTopcbKa is a BUKOHYE TepalleBTM4Hy PyHKUil0 i clIpuae TepeOopeHHt0 COLiAIbHOTO, reorpa@Horo i KyIbTypHO
 BifipBaHMn Bil PiHOl 3eMI1i i Big, CBOIX J[Py3iB, IIMCbMeHHUK Y BulacHIN yABi MaHGPye pasom i3 JJapmorpaem Ipoct
 CumBOJIYHMMM MPOCKIIAMM Ii CJLy2KaTb 1 MaTM, i YKpaina, i MamOyTHA pyKMHa. i MamoyTHa pyKmHa .
 He BIN3Hae y Tempasi JJapMorpas, cipuMmMaroun MOLO 3a BACHOLO YOOBIKa. Ka WOMUHO BUMIUNIa 3aMDK .
 The World Cup is held every year in the U.S. and Europe .
 Hosunn Mporpamn penirinHux Ta KyIbTyPONOri4HMXx CTYAIN Mnnyinn akayjeMiuHun pik BUABMBCA OBO HACMYeHMM IIporpamu pem
 Biktopa €neHcbKoro (YkpaibCBKoro) is a biktop a €nehbkoro . Bik topa is a kpaibkoro, a kpcutet .
 WepKBa y TpOMaj: BBeYepi TOTO %*K JHA y KY/IbTyYPHOMY: WeHTpi IpaBoOcwaBHOl Kateypu cs. WeHTPI Ipa BoOc
 O. q-p K [opopyx foKayqHo 3ymnHMBCA Ha CyYacHMx Mopiax B YKpalHi, AKI BIH OXapaKTepU3yBaB AK COL|IAIbHe I
Bigad 30KpeMa 3BepHYB yBaly Ha 3HauHy PO/IHO IepKBU, AKY BOHa BiflirpaBasla Mig, 4ac IPOTeCTHUX pyxis Mampany .
KaBa Ta Hala, i BUCIIOBMB IlepeKOHaHHA y TOMY, IIo Ie OyTiTiBHULTBO HEMOKIM be 6e3 yaacTu wepkBu.
 W-p K. BpaHlji JaB iHTepB 10 Ha e7/MOHTOHCbKIM CTyMll Ci-bi-Ci papio .
 PesyibraTu UMx FocntipKenb Oyu mpepctaBieHi IsaHom-Ilapiom XumKow, Harankoro KoHOHeHKO Ta DpaHko Ta Dpasui 2014 mig 4ac .
 MuHyle, cy¥acHe Ta MaliOyTHE», WO BiqOyBCA 3 80 10 10 10 tpaBua 2014 y Konerii cs. He was born in Mali and his name is Ta Mali .
 BroaeTeub KIYCy 2014 Hosunu KIyCy 2014. Konerii ce. Broaeteub K IYCy. 2014.
 Y poborti CMMMO3iOMY, Wig Yac AKOTO O6TOBOPIOBAaIMIMCA IMTAHHA POM KMIBCHKOI WpaBOciaBHOl TpawUil y CBIT
 Broaeteub KIYCy 2014 DS. Kpyrnun ctin 3 ictopit fetbMaHWMHM 3 Harogn 70-niTTA Npodecopa 3eppHa Koryta 26 ueppha 2014 Big6y
Ilerpa Anka Ta IHCTUTYT yYKpalHCbKOI apxeorpadii Ta 7>Kepeno3HaBcTBa im. Ilerpa Ta IhCTUTyT yyKpal HCKOi ap
 Koryra y 2004 lonosytounn Ha IbOMY 3acifjaHHi Apocias Deopyk 3yIIMHMUBCA Ha OCHOBHMX Bixax Oiorpadii maHOBHOroO lOpi
IactutyTy apxeorpadil ta [ucruryty cxof03HaBCTBa im. InctnTyTy apXeorpadils ta (inctutyty y BAKKMM Yac BOCeHu) 2013, Kom BUP
 Ha ton VYuacHuku KPyeAO0eo CMOAY yac Taki JOcIi~pKeHHA Oyu WiTKOM HOBaTOPCbKUMU i POpMyBaIIM HOBMM HalI
 Jonosigay Tako 3yMMHUBCA Ha BHeCKOBi J|-pa Koryta y po3BUTOK KIYCy nig, yac cBoro AMpeKTOpcTsBa .
 B. B. [puma fap Tako dbaxosy xapakTepuicTuKy JBOXx 30ipHNKiB CTaTeM TOpisapa. TepaktuicTepak tepakktep
 Bixtop bpexyHeHKo 30cepequB yBaly Ha K/IKOUOBUX MOMEHTAaXx y posBuTKy ictopiorpadii kinya 1980-x poKis, Kou o6pa3
 iMeHu 26 BroaeteuHb KIYCy 2014 KO3all, AKI KiIbKa MiCALIB crosmu Ha Mamyani, migquic mpod. Halil y CBITOBiM icTopil.
 B’auecnaB CraHiciaBCbKUn, OH 3 HaliKpalMx BUJaBLIB KOpIycy AMCTIB IpaHa Masenn y cyaacnin YKpaiui, aKTyasli3
 Koryta, MifKpecsIt01ouN 3Ha4E4e4eHHA ICTOPMUYHMX 3HaHb. Mepiog.
 Mouorpadia Aye ZoOpe moKa3ye BUTOKM alpecuBHol nomituKu Mocks ill TpayMuil. MouorPadia Ayes ZoOpes moKa 3ye BUT OKM al pecuB Hol nomitu Ku M
 Apocnas Ipuyak MaBUCTYII Bil, iMeHM ciiBopra. Hisaropis — Ilporpamu JOCIJPKeEHHA Cy4acHOl iCTOpil Ta cyciliibcTBa
 Ilerpa Aymxa.i wympnMM BiTaHHAMM IOBiIApOBi BUCTYNMIM Takox Depxay Typanau, Jmurpo BupcpKknn Ta Tetana ApoieHko.
 Hacmif7KoM Mx 3altiKaBJIeHb CTajia MOHOrpadia, IpucBaueHa JIKBifjaljil ABTOHOMII leTbMaHLMHM Ta ll i
 BaxkimBoto € TaKOXK TEMaTUKa OOPOTBOM KO3aKiB OnekcaHgpa YepHeHko JIncaKkPyguuubka Onekcanypa Uepko J
 BeamkumM HaTXHeHHAM is the latest in a series of high-end artworks . The artworks were created in the late 1990s .
 JAKYBaB OpraHisaTopaM 1 BCiM TIpuCYTHIM 3a y4acTb y IbOMy KpyT7IOMy cromi. JAKyBaBOpraTopAM 1BCi
 B Mysei Muxauna Ijbomy Beyopi came in for the title . The winner of the award was B Myse Muxaun Ipymescpxoro .
 Broaetenb KIYCy 2014 Dil, Hosunn KIyCy Cemivapnu nu nekyil K IYCy B AnbOeptcbkomy yHipepcuteri 19 Bepecua .
 Biktop EnencpKun (YKpaincbKuM KatonM KaTONMUbKUM yHiBepcutet, JIbBis, Ta HayionanbHun MeqaroriuHun yHibepcntet im
 Epren buctpuupKun (MixuapogHin doug), Banepit Uanun (Lentrp im. MOKIMBOCTI Ul WepeuikoyM) is the name of the town of Epren .
 Pasymkoga, Kuis, Jxou ebapgene6eu (KapntouCbKMM yH-T, OTTaBa), Jlepex Dpet3ep (konMMIHIN MOCoN Kanagu B
 AY. AKO JOpororo nige Ykpaina?.
 Ha Mexi BIMHM: Bonoyumup Kpasyenko, Apc banau and Apc Banau . ApcBanau: Apcbanau. Apc bansau .
 Jlenpuy Mapnis (IIporpama BuBueHHA cydacHoi Yxpainn im. Kynis, KIYC, AY), JlenPuy Mapni (II porpamabuBuehHA) Jlen
 Cractoxis, KIYC, AY, Tapacumis Ta lesep Komman (IIporpama fociigKenHa penirii i kymbTypomoril, K IYC, aY). 25 6epesHa. 25
 Cractoxis, KIYC, AY and Tapac Kyspo are among the most popular names in the world . AY is also known as the "Kyspo"
 Onena Knimosa, Biggin aBauty Ta PinaHcis, JjoHeubKUM HayioHatbHun yHiBepcutet, HcTUTYHiNHa KoHYenyia Bceponoga lony
 Jjanuna Tycapa Crpyxa Big6ynaca 3 tpapya 2014 y TipMMilleHHi DakybTeTy COB AHCHKMX MOB Ta JliTepaTypm TopoHTCBkoro yHiBepcu
 Ljporopisny JIEKUIEKO BUTOJIOCUB q-p Muxanno HanjjaH, AKUM MOcifae mocafly upodecopa yKpalHCbKUXx CTYMIM im
 JIyypxoro. JiyypXoro is the name of a group of people who live in the city of Oxcana . The city is known as the "Bpyyenua Haropoy"
 JIyUbKOTO, WO Hafja€TbCA 3a MOXRKUTTEBMM BHECOK y CIIpa . JIYUbKoto, W O Hafja €Tepa 3aMOXRkUTTE
 Bomooumupa Ajustunceko2o [poropiuHa Memopianbua jekuia, AKy Oyo BUrooeHO 4 KBiTHa 2014, Biq6ynaca 3a cipuaHHa TopoHT
 IIpoMOBIM Ha Hit BUCTyIMB J-p borgan Haranuno — mucbMeHHMK, JOCHIJHUK Ta PaxiBellb .
 Bix OYOMOBAB FOCHIPHIPHUUKUM Biggin 3 WpoOmematTuKM CPCP mupu .
Cy KUT rpomapi y motomy 2014 KIYC pasom i3 KaHajcbkolo. Cy KUT Rpomapapi y Motomy 2014. KIcy pasom  3aCcHyBaHHA Haropogn im.
 Iletpo u Ona CaBapunu qo6pe BiJJOM1 B KaHafii 3a CBOIO WexpicTb, iHIMIATMBHICT 1 MOABYOKHULbDKY Tpomajic
Ilerpo Capapnu HapoguBca 1926 yc.y6peup Oinaz Byuyaua Ha TepHonimbuyni . IlerpoCapapnu. Hapuguyni was born in 1926 .
IipaljtoBaB. AKTMBHO Iipalj toBaB is the name of a new building in the city . The building is located in the heart of the city of Kypcu .
 MapTii AmbOepTu, qieHOM Pay upaBiinHa Ambb6eptCbKOrO yHiBepcnuterTy Ta Il IpeycTaBHMKOM y ceHatTi, mi3Hite KaHLJ
 Y 1971 BiH 6yB OJHMM i3 TMX, XTO BIUIMHYB Ha lIpem €p-MiHictpa Kanagn Il’s epa Tprwqo i mporomomenHA nomiTM
 HapyaHHA posmoyazia B YxkpaiHi, 1posoB Kia B HimewuHi, a 3aKiHuMia BxKe B AjbOeprTi, a. 3aHHAposmoy
 Ilani Capapnu cynpoBoy>KysBasa i WOMOMarasia CBOEMY YOJIOBIKOBI B MOTO YMCIICHHMX MpO€KTAX 1 1013 . 3acHyBaHHA Haropogn
 HanekornaAgHicTb MeljeHarTiB cnyKuTume rpomapi a Mai6yTHIM NOKONIHHAM Y Bepecui 2013 y KIYCi 3acHoBaHo Biunni doug im.
 Dong nNigZTpuMyBaTMMe IIpO€KTU, HporpamyM uM nyOnikayil Ta ini JiIAHKM . Ini JiiaHKM [iAIbHOCTM IHCTUTY
 BoHa — JOHbKa yKpalHCbKMx iMMilpaHTiB, AKi MepeOpamuca Jo KaHagM depes NOTM4Hi MU penirinHi llepeciifyBaHHA Ha OaT
 M1060BM WO 3€M/Ii CBOIX Iipeq{KiB. 3 paHHbOro Biky Mapia mpiama craru [MpeKTopom wkou. Wkou: MpeK topom w
 Bona HaByaaca y TIM CaMiU OJHOKIMHATHIN MOUaATKOBIN WKOMi, B Aki On . ceHaTop Ilapro lO3nk 6ys yantenem .
 YuntTembcbKy Kap epy posmouasa B CackaTyHi, Je 4epes CBO JOOpocepypyeyHictTh ii MOpiBHtioBas 3 MONYIAPHUM aMepuKaHCbK
 Mapia i Muxanno Sym 6yIM aKTUBHMMM B YKpaincpKilt KaTOMMUbKiit YepKBi Miccicaru Ta _ B yKpaiHcpKit rpomagi Te pOHTa
 Muxaino — nigrpumysas i 6yB yleHOM bpatCTBa KOJIMINHIX BOAKIB 1. i qupisii a YpaiHcbKoi HayionanbHoi apMii . i
 Pony NiqTpumMyBaTUMe CbKOi IporpaMM iHCTUTYTY, 30KpeMa nyOmikawii JpyKOBaHMx i eeKTpoHHMUX BUaHb,
O6oe Hanexamnu Fo Corsy yKpaiHCbKOi Mojopi KaHayu Ta 11 3HAaMeCHMTOro xopy. O6oeHanexam nu Fo Corsi Fo Corsie yKapiHCbkoi Moj
 Mupoca orpumazia cryteni 6aKaylapa Hayk y 1979 Ta Oakanlapa ocBiTu y 1981 Bona kitbKa pOKiB BUKaflala BUKAFlala bUKafLala B Y
 OuositoBasia KOMiTeTH, TaKi AK: "CaWOYOK," "P BisAI cB. lBaHa, mpeycTaBisiouwu ToBapMcTBO"
 Hecrop upaktukyBaB pajiOOrito y WIMMTaAX 1 KHIKaX EQMOHTOHY MU cimbcpKoi AbOepTu. Byayyuu nap.
 BiH Takox o6iMae Mocajly NeKTopa KJMHIFHMX CTYAIM BiPFiy pagionorii AmpOepTcbKoro yHiBepcnTery. BiH. Takox O6i
 MouecHa rpamota KIYCy y 2014 KIYC 3acHysBaB nouecny rpaMoTy Ha Bi3HaBi3HaHHA MeljeHatTiB iHCTUTYTY, AKi 3pOOM
IBaHeyb 3acHyBana BiaHum doug im. q-pa Bacuaa i Iapaci IBaxwis y 2010 y nam’aTb Mpo cBoro yorOBika 67. IBaHeyBana b
 Muxaiina, Bonogumupa ii Omi Tanpuyk 2007 B am’s aTb po cBoix cuHiB Muxaina 1 Bonogumsupa Ta apym*KHHy Osto .
 Meroto ously € nisqTpumka crumensin Ta HayKOBMX IIpO€KTIB 3 yKpaiHCbKMx cTyfin. Meroto OusqTPumka is a crumenka cr
 Jo ocTaHHix is the name of the author of the book, "IcTopito Ykpainn-Pycn" The book, published in 2009, is based on the book "The World of the Year"
 Wlanosyy metteHaTKy BIWaHyBaMU Ili, 4ac Mpe3eHTaljii TOMy B Topouti y 6epe3Hi 2011 Hapom . BOHa 3MylleHa Oya NOKMH
 OTpuMaBUIM JMIMIOM ikapa y Mtonxeui, emirpyBaza Jo CINA, qe mpatoBaza MesiaTpoM B M Kankaki, wiTatT [inonc. 
 Kravchenko \_, 7, CIUS Director ae a Wie ALMERIA ENO NN PRL NG ah ee NS BAK ‘ SE NS EAS 3.8’ Haropomn Crunengil Ta gotault CTVine
 HenopaHux Jjanien Peyoposny, Biggin dinocodil B nomitTuyi, OkchbopycbKuM yHiBepcutet. HenopaJjanien Puyi is the name of Henopa Hux J
 Hlonpuya MU YKpaina nig yac JIpyroi CBITOBOI BIMHM. F j ery i [punesu4 Anactacia CajibHukosa, Bisfim MomiTomporii, YHi
Aocnigui poTauii Iletpo bomxo, Inctutyt yKpaincpKoi apxeorpadii Ta f>Kepemo3HaBcTBa im. Aocnigsui po tauii poTao
 Harania lapguga, TepHoniibcbKum HalioHayIbHUM TeXHi4HUM yHiBepcuteT im. Harania Lapguga is the name of the lapgugugu, which is a lapg
 Bnayucnas Ipnnesny, lacruryT NomITMYHMX i eTHOHALiOHALIOHANbHMX JOcTip>KeHb im. Bnaysnny, Lacruryt NomitmyHMX
 Tapac Aynya Bonogumup Macimuyk, HesanexKHUM FOcniPHMUK, BisbulaHn, XapKiBcbKa OOsacTb. The group is based in the United States.
 Biranim Terppak, J[poroOuypKun fepxKaBHMM MeqarorivHunm yHiBepcutet im. Biranim terppak .
 BaraTo 4eHiB Halllol rpOMajIM BILAHOBYIOTD aM ATb pO CBOiX Apy3iB, KoNer, OU3bKMX i pifHMX, AKi Bip