 Putin launched efforts in 2013 to avoid losing Ukraine as part of his Eurasian integration project . These efforts were launched by Putin as early as the beginning of 2013 .
Pro-Russian political forces were weak, clandestinely suppressed by President Viktor Yanukovych and his party . In Ukraine, however, pro-Russian politics were weak.
 Moscow’s major efforts, including the Rus Baptism anniversary, failed to turn the tide . Some backfired, consolidating support for the European project among the Ukrainian elite and public .
 Putin interrupted the signing of the EU Association Agreement by taking advantage of Yanukovych's personal weakness . He became increasingly frustrated with the Ukrainian president, who “sacrifices Russia’s strategic interests’ He sought to become an “all-Ukrainian national leader�
 Russian policy was at an impasse, without any viable instruments to restrict the westward drift of Ukraine . The situation is now totally different from that of 2004 .
 In the fall of 2016, email accounts allegedly belonging to Vladislav Surkov, the Kremlin's ideologue and Putin's aide on the Ukrainian issue were made public by Ukrainian hackers .
 The Internet is filled with fake “leaks,’ but multiple digital forensics experts have confirmed the authenticity of these particular communications . The Internet has been full of fake "leaks"
 Unlike screenshots and PDF documents, which can easily be forged, the leaks involved nearly one-gigabyte data dumps of whole mailboxes, including valid metadata such as IP addresses, which are almost impossible to fabricate .
 Many trivial details had not previously been made public, including the names of Surkov’s secretaries, as well as that of his essay reviewer living in London .
 The mailbox of Kirill Frolov, a researcher at the Russian Institute for CIS Countries and head of the Association of Orthodox Experts, was disclosed in 1 Rupert Cornwell .
 The author found little evidence, both in main body text as well as in metadata, in favor of possible forgery or modification of all or part of the leaks .
 Most of the leaked emails and attached documents are routine and of little interest to sensation-seekers . A quick examination of the publicized data makes it clear that most of the leaks are routine .
Even if certain messages contain exciting assessments or assertions, they do not make an obvious contribution to policy formation . Even if certain statements contain exciting statements, they don't make a obvious contribution.
 A meticulous comparison of multiple emails with open-source information makes it possible to identify the Kremlin’s plan and elucidate its implementation .
 Frolov is Putin’s adviser on Eurasian integration and curator of Ukrainian projects . He is merely an occasional functionary for the Kremlin and not in a position to make any important decisions .
8 Putin approved and launched a program of covert influence operations to draw Ukraine away from its path toward European integration and back into Russia’s orbit .
 The party Motherland, co-headed by Glazyev, was said to be a Surkov project to split the communist vote in 2003 .
 The author challenges the assumption still accepted by a wide range of scholars and practitioners that the annexation of Crimea was a spontaneous response to the flight of Yanukovych .
 The Kremlin’s strategic and tactical insights into Ukraine, revealed in the leaks, provide background to the decision to annex Crimea . The findings need to be corroborated by further evidence .
 Russian policy found itself at an impasse by the middle of November 2013 . The core argument is that the Kremlin began comprehensive influence operations to block Ukraine’s integration into the EU as early as 2013 .
 The Ukrainian president, parliament and government, churches, oligarchs, the media and the public, as well as the Kremlin’s tireless efforts to nurture its own ‘candidate’ for the Ukrainian presidential elections in 2015 . This section further details the implementation of specific influence
 The final section summarizes the outcomes of the influence operations in 2013 and further attempts to interpret Russian behaviors in late 2013 and early 2014 . The final part summarizes the outcome of the 2013 and 2014 influence operations .
 Review of Narratives. Review of the Ukraine crisis remains relevant . The Ukraine crisis has been debated in recent years .
 The Russian Defense Ministry announced a tender for the production of medals in mid-December 2013 . It is also reported that the Russian Defense ministry announced a bid for medals .
 Some authors take public statements and assessments of Russian leader and his proxies at face value . Like Mearsheimer, some authors take the public statements of the Russian leader at facevalue .
 Others may not do so overtly, but their judgements are still distorted due to intensive communication with Russian actors . Others may also do so.
 What they tell us is usually what they want us to see or keep guessing about . But seldom what they actually see is what they say .
 Treisman fails to correct the biased impression he gained from interviews with Putin and ex-Kremlin official Alexei Chesnakov .
 The second problem, in part a consequence of the first, is the extensive and discursive context in which the current crisis is projected and interpreted .
 They also tend to lump all “Western nations together as parties to the conflict, they say . They say they also lump all Western nations together.
 Tsygankov's analysis is comprehensive, covering the decade leading up to the eruption of the crisis, but lacks attention to the Kremlin’s insights into Ukraine in 2013 . Putin referred to the threat of NATO as the background of the annexation of Crimea as the
 Putin did not expect the downfall of Yanukovych “until shortly before it happened’s study says . Putin suspected that Yanukovych would be gone in two months, the study adds .
 Russia purchased a secure Eurobond governed by UK law . It is worth pointing out that Russia did not provide any bilateral intergovernmental loans .
 Russia is Ukraine's biggest creditor, according to Russian media reports . The deal gives Russia more say in Ukraine's international fund-raising efforts as its biggest creditor .
Part of the injected money might have flowed back to Russia via fraud, according to Wilson .
Russia only started a serious attempt to portray NATO as a party to the conflict four weeks after the decision to annex Crimea, Nimmo says .
 Russian strategic narratives displayed the Ukraine crisis as ‘a struggle for influence between Russia and NATO’ in the international arena .
 Former U.S. defense secretary says Yanukovych is the Kremlin's favorite . Yanukovych's habit formed during the Orange Revolution in 2004 may be hard to break .
 Answers to these fundamental questions can provide the basis for understanding the background of the Kremlin’s policy shift in Ukraine .
 Putin says he gave the order to annex Crimea on February 22 . Putin: "Way Back Home"
In February 2013, Sergei Tkachuk, project director of the Scientific Center for Eurasian Integration, told Sergei Frolov that he had begun to negotiate with Victor Medvedchuk’s political movement “Ukrainian Choice”39 . He asked him to send
 The authenticity of the leaked document was confirmed when Frolov forwarded ZN.UA’s article to Glazyev with the title ‘Zerkalo Nedeli published a text similar to yours’ and added, “ZN—NATO”
 The Complex of Measures has been scrutinized in the light of a series of events in 2013 . These observations underline the importance of scrutinizing the Complex of measures in light of events .
 Nedeli opublikovalo tekst, pokhozhe na utechku,’s 2013-08-19, 14.18:18:42 +0400 .
 Ukraine's accession to the CU will be closed, and its dependence on Brussels will sharply increase . After this act, the possibilities of Ukraine’s accessions to theCU will be shut .
 Ukrainian leadership will pass the initiative to the pro-Western forces. We will lose a promising goal, says the Ukrainian leader .
 We will have to wait for the collapse of the current political regime and prepare for the next “orange’s coup. We will be ready to prepare for next ‘orange” coup.
 Frolov was the agent connecting Glazyev to the latter organization . The Frolova leaks reveal the agent was a member of the Glazyov team .
 Putin proposed Ukraine join the Customs Union in July 2012, but Yanukovych rejected this invitation . Yanukovych proposed a sectoral approach to integrating the Ukrainian economy into the Union .
 Yanukovych restored the ‘superpresidentialist model’ by overturning the December 2004 constitutional changes that had shared power with the parliament . Yanukovych Yanukovych was elected president in 2004 .
President Obama has been in power for more than a decade . He has also been in charge of the judicial branch of the president .
Fears have been amplified by oligarchs close to Yanukovych and highly dependent on their Western partners and possibly intelligence agencies . In many ways, these fears are amplified by the oligarchs.
 Yanukovych will be extremely difficult to keep in power with only administrative and criminal resources . Given the overwhelming majority of voters, it will be very hard to keep Yanukovych in power .
 The Complex of Measures argues that Yanukovych could restore relative trust among eastern voters only by beginning economic integration with Russia .
 The pro-Russian trend remains unorganized and disoriented, says CNN's John Sutter . Pro-Russian forces are ideologically and organizationally ready to seize power, he says .
 The current consolidation of the Ukrainian public against Yanukovych contributes to the growth of antiRussian sentiments . Yanukovych's regime is perceived by many Ukrainians as imposed by Russia .
 The document author’s pathological suspicion about ‘Western intelligence agencies’ was observed in the articles written by him earlier . Objectively, this increases the threat of power seizure by forces hostile 51 .
 The repetition of the “orange revolution in Ukraine, if the prevailing trends continue, is highly likely, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 The Kremlin felt that in the public mind Yanukovych's regime was often associated with Moscow’s support . But this link was less and less real .
 Such a stereotype could mean that people’s anger toward Yanukovych was easily interchangeable with anti-Russian sentiments . Such a stereotypes could mean people's anger towards Yanukovych was interchangeable withAnti-Russian sentiment .
 The Complex of Measures should be the victory of our candidate in the upcoming presidential elections in 2015, he says . In case of the continuing drift of Yanukovych toward the West and the surrender of the sovereignty of Ukraine to the EU, he writes .
 Medvedchuk was chief of Kuchma’s presidential administration . Putin is the godfather of his daughter, who was born in 2004 .
 Putin's official meeting with President Yanukovych in Crimea in July 2012 was delayed by four hours . Putin stopped by Medvedchuk’s private dacha on the way back to the airport .
 Putin’s visit to Medvedchuk to be a signal that Moscow might be able to nominate its own candidate in the coming 2015 Ukrainian president elections .
 At the beginning of 2013, the political spectrum of the Ukrainian national parliament reflected the results of the October 2012 elections .
 The Complex of Measures admitted that the majority of Parliament, including 53 The similar Yanukovych-pro-Russian association is observed in the narratives of some international observers discussing the Ukraine crisis .
 As a rule, Ukrainian parliamentarians hold a flexible position, guided by their sponsors and leaders .
 We should engage businessmen, journalists, voter associations, and authoritative individuals who are sponsoring them . Changing their direction requires personal work, in which we should engage business leaders .
 Its oligarchic top will run to the winners’ side, and the demoralized party caucus will collapse . The party's top, maintaining ties with both the “orange’ and its Western partners, will immediately run for the winners.
 We will be confronted with the ramified network of influence agents infiltrated by Western intelligence agencies . We will face a host of agents, including the media, the educational system, the expert community, and law enforcement agencies .
 relations with the management of the “shadow vertical’ in Zaporozhye developed rather ambiguously, gradually escalating the conflicts both inside and outside the system .
 The change in the foreign policy vector in Kyiv from pro-Russian to EuroAtlantic, they began to charge the system I headed with suppressing the public activity of pro- Russian groups in the Zaporozhye region .
56 Broide’s secret testimony suggests that the criminal authority in Zaporizhia was instructed by the powers-that-be in Kyiv to press pro-Russian organizations in the region .
 As early as June 2013, preemptive measures were already in place to intercept possible pro-Russian campaigns against the EU Association Agreement .
 This notion also fits the Kremlin’s pessimistic view on pro-Russian forces in Ukraine . The Kremlin is also pessimistic about the Ukrainian government's actions .
 Yanukovych’s covert political maneuvers were, perhaps sensed by Russian political technologists such as Gleb Pavlovsky, a point that will be discussed later in this paper .
 Zaporizhia, Mykolaiv, and Odessa were given to Yury Ivanushchenko, a friend of Viktor Yanukovych, who had interests in the criminal world and shadow economy . The three were also given to Viktor Yanukovych's friend and friend of
 For example, his interests in Zaporizhia were protected by “watcher” Evgeny Anisimov, a local criminal authority .
 Vcherashnie predlozheniia.ru, email to prm_surkova@gov.ru,. “Fwd: Orientirovka,’s 2014-07-09, 13:07:27 +0300.
 Broide fled Ukraine in autumn under the threat of death from his employer as well as rivalry groups . Broide was killed by his employer and rivalry groups.
 Ukraine simply expressed a desire to become an observer of the Eurasian Economic Union in the future . Prime Minister Mykola Azarov signed the non-binding memorandum at the CIS summit in Minsk at the end of May 2013 .
 Some might interpret this move as Kyiv’s vacillation between the EU and Russia .
 Yanukovych was still fully geared toward Europe, he says . But as the suppression of pro-Russian forces suggests, Yanukovych was fully geared towards Europe .
 Yanukovych can get out of this situation, relying on democratic procedures that the West cannot object to . The West can't object to this, according to the West .
 He may agree to hold a referendum or to appeal to the Constitutional Court, postponing the signing until the completion of these procedures . He may also agree to have a referendum.
 Oleg Tsarev published the so-called “legal opinion on the compliance of the Constitution of Ukraine with the draft Association Agreement’s draft agreement . He maintained that it would be impossible to sign the Agreement without amending the Constitution .
 Vadim Kolesnichenko proposed abandoning European integration, registering a bill to amend the basic laws that define Ukraine’s foreign policy goal .
 "The opinion of the Ukrainian people [on the vector of the state foreign policy] was divided approximately 50/50," a deputy says .
 Yanukovych convened a meeting on September 5, where he made it clear that Ukraine would not turn from its Euro-integration course . He also assuring some party members that some provisions of the Customs Union would still be implemented .
 Yanukovych reportedly said that partnership and respect from Ukraine's northern neighbor should not be expected . Citing examples of Moscow’s unwillingness to fulfill obligations, Yanukovych reportedly cited the gas price discount allegedly promised during the 2010 Kharkiv summit .
 He also warned that if Moscow continued to exert pressure on Ukraine in the form of economic sanctions, trade turnover might drop by half . He said if Moscow continues to exertpressure on Ukraine, trade might drop.
 Brussels would take compensatory measures, including opening European markets to Ukrainian manufacturers . This damage, in his opinion, should be softened by Brussels, he says. This damage should be soften by Brussels.
 Participants unanimously agreed to vote for the laws necessary for EU association . Nobody seriously argued with the president, and the participants unanimously agreed .
 Oleg Tsarev commented to journalists that “three to five’ colleagues would vote against the proposed legislation . “Three to 5’s colleagues would voted against the legislation, he said .
 Orthodox expert Frolov sent to Patriarch Kirill’s assistant the talking points for a meeting between the Russian Orthodox Church and the Russian president scheduled for February .
 Ukrainian authorities were trying to turn the 1025th anniversary of the Christianization of the Rus into a triumph of separatism . Patriarch Filaret had parted ways with the Russian Orthodox Church in the 1990s . He established the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyiv Patriarchate .
 Frolov argued that Russia should use the Russian Orthodox Church to sway the Ukrainian and Belarusian publics toward Eurasian integration .
 The correspondence shows how the Kremlin prepares “cultural events’ by hiring local collaborators . Frolov and Igor Druz, leader of the Council of Slavic Peoples, are in contact .
 Dopolnennyi variant,’ 2013-01-27, 21:00:12 +0400. 67 frolov_moskva@mail.ru, email to glaziev@bk.ru .
 This proposal seems to have been approved by Glazyev, his assistant Tkachuk further inquired about logistics for procuring activists . This proposal appears to be a proposal by Glazeev .
 The list first enumerates 20 delegates from ‘the Russian Federation,’ including Glazyev, Frolov, and Tkachuk . Only then mentions eight Ukrainians, among them Petr Tolochko and Vadim Kolesnichenko .
 The account “sirius191919@ mail.ru’ belongs to Victor Voronin, an ally of Ukrainian education minister Dmytro Tabachnyk . The account is believed to be that of the account ‘sirious19
 Goebbels of the Patriarch, Recruitment of Ukrainian Generals and Baptism by Fire in Syria . The Patriarch is the son of the former President of the Ukrainian President .
 Other documents attached to the same email, Tkachuk indicated, “have been handed over by S.Yu. to his Holiness [Patriarch Kirill],” possibly for briefing the Patriarch before his visit.
 Tkachuk asked Frolov to kindly delete the files from the mailbox after copying them to the desktop . The step that, to all appearances, was not taken by the latter .
 Ukraine will lead in the long term to legalization of same-sex marriages and other manifestations of sodomy . It implicitly obliges Ukraine to fully legalize the activities of sexual minorities and their representative organizations .
 The United States and the EU will willingly pass him into the hands of their henchmen, commanding them to bring down Yanukovych . The U.S. and the European Union will willingly hand him into their hands .
 In the absence of our support, he and his son will end up in prison, their property confiscated and eternally shamed .
 This has already been the case with Hussein, Milošević, Mubarak, and many other dictators who trusted Western consultants . This has been the same case.
 The Foundation of Ukraine’s Civilizational Choice is organized by Ukrainian Choice . The foundation is based in Kiev, Ukraine .
 Putin, who occupied the seat between Glazyev and Medvedchuk, stated in his keynote address:78 Here at this site, at the baptismal site on the Dnieper River, a choice was made for all of us .
 Our ancestors who lived in these lands made this choice for our entire people . Our ancestors made this decision for our whole people .
 Ukrainian people and Belarusian people respect all the parts of this heritage, but at the same time, are the common spiritual values that make us a single people .
 Putin characterized the Baptism of the Rus as “a great event that defined Russia’s spiritual and cultural development for the centuries to come’
 NATO was added to the Kremlin’s expressed fears later to justify the illegal annexation .
 The concerted efforts by the state and the church to remind Ukrainians of their “common spiritual values’ were suddenly brought to nothing . The state and church were suddenly bringing to nothing.
Ten representatives of Ukrainian churches and religious organizations signed a joint statement supporting Ukraine’s European course .
 The document was signed not only by the heads of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyivan Patriarchate and Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, but also by Metropolitan Volodymyr, who leads the Russian Orthodox Church . The Complex of Measures had expected to ally to influence public opinion in favor of Euras
 Ukrainian business is heavily dependent on Russia . Oligarchs used to influence Kyiv’s decision-making .
 In 2011, Russia was the destination for 28 percent of Ukraine’s trade, while Ukraine received less than 5 percent of Russian exports .
 This ‘trade asymmetry’ had long given Russia “coercive power’ over the smaller Ukraine . This “trade asymmetric” had long been given Russia’s ‘coercives’
Ukrainian business structures are ready to meet Ukrainian partners in exchange for direct support for the integration process .
 Carrots were given in the form of business conferences targeting specific industrial sectors . Carrots are given, for example, in the forms of business conference .
Medvedchuk explained to the managers of shipbuilding companies in Mykolaiv and Kherson that accession to the Customs Union and access to the Russian market could save the Ukrainian shipbuilders .
 Moscow preferred sticks to carrots in its policy toward Ukraine . Nevertheless, Moscow preferred carrots to carrots.
 The most significant is the economic channel of influence that affects the personal interests of the most influential people in the Ukrainian ruling elite . sanctions against companies whose owners or leaders support political forces opposed to the accession or openly campaign for European integration .
 Preliminary analysis of Firtash, Akhmetov, Pinchuk, Poroshenko indicates their critical dependence on Russian creditors, markets, and sources of raw materials . The Ukrainian government has been accused of being anti-Russian and pro-Western .
 The first manifestation of a Russian trade war appeared on July 17, when the Russian government decided not to extend the customsfree export of steel pipes from Ukraine .
 Rospotrebnadzor announced a ban on the import of chocolates from Petro Poroshenko’s Roshen . The company says they found a toxic substance in the confectionary .
 40 major Ukrainian companies had been registered in the Russian Customs Service database as “risky’s” as a result of which all of these enterprises’ exports became subject to inspection .
 He even implied that Russia could no longer guarantee the status of Ukraine as a state . He said Russia could intervene if pro-Russian regions directly appealed to Moscow .
For the first time in Ukrainian history more than 50 percent of the population supported European integration . Less than 30 percent was in favor of closer ties with Russia . Former trade minister of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko expressed gratitude to Glazyev .
 In October, a nationwide survey showed that the number of those awaiting the singing of the Association Agreement had increased from 39 percent to 49 percent over the course of a month .
 Vladislav Surkov will be appointed aide to the Russian president in charge of Russia-Ukraine relations .
 Glazyev asked Frolov if he “still had a desire to 86 Shaun Walker’s. That same day, Glazyov asked him if he still wanted to 86 .
 "ot S.Tkachuka.ru" is the latest in a series of letters sent to Mail.ru. See serg1784@mail.ru, email to frolov_moskva.ru .
 The Kremlin had to ‘plan an effective propaganda campaign’ that would clarify the benefits of Ukraine’s participation in the Customs Union as well as defuse the widespread fears regarding integration with Russia .
 It was expected to achieve “personal agreements’ with TV channel owners and anchorpersons . It was also expected to create “a journalist pool’s” and develop a series of programs .
 OCHEN’ VAZHNO,’s email to glaziev@bk.ru, “Re: OCHen’VAZH NO,” 2013-0913, 22:24:22 +0400 .
 Surkov team did not think too highly of Frolov’s performance in Ukraine . The church expert eventually failed to get an official job in the Kremlin .
 See prm_glazyev@gov.ru, e-mail to frolov_moskva@mail.ru . No subject, 2013-1118, 10:55:59 +0400 .
 Glazyev asked Frolov to prepare a paper on religious instruments for Surkov . The paper was written by Frolova on religious instrument .
Vazhno.ru, email to serg1784@mail.ru . See frolov_moskva.ru for more information .
Ukrainian oligarchs were not entirely effective in the reaction to the trade war . But as we saw, efforts to coerce Ukrainian oligarchs weren't entirely effective .
 Surkov attributed the setback of Russian policy in Ukraine to the lack of an information strategy . Russia failed to convey its messages to the target audience in Ukraine .
 Vitaly Leybin was editor-in-chief of ‘Russkii Reporter’ and the news site polit.ru . Surkov began to recruit local political technologists and influential media figures through the Donetsk-born journalist .
 Leybin engaged in speechwriting and public relations for election campaigns in Russia . Leybin oversaw domestic politics in the Presidential Administration .
 It should be borne in mind that the national character has stubbornness and pride, and we must be able to create an illusion of free choice, equal partnership, but not subordination .
Leybin proposed small grants for free press, urban programs, small business, and academic exchanges . To improve the image of Russia in Ukraine, Leybin proposed, he proposed, paradoxical though it sounds .
 Surkov sent an inquiry to the minister of education and science on current conditions of education cooperation between Ukraine and Moldova .
 The ministry replied with detailed information on each entity, but the separate report on Crimea emphasized that the ministry “does not directly cooperate with the bodies of state administration of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea’s Crimea,” while mentioning some events to be implemented within the framework of
 At the end of October, Surkov appeared to consult multiple experts about the political situation in Ukraine and the prospect of Ukraine signing the Association Agreement .
 From Russian statements and publications it can be understood that Kyiv is making a choice between a “pro-Russian’ and a ‘pro-Western orientation’ This is not the case, according to Russian statements .
 Pavlovsky proposed to interpret the backroom politics of Bankova as revolving around the upcoming presidential elections .
 Yanukovych added the slogan of “Euro-integration’ as an effective means of winning additional votes in the western and central parts of the country . Yanukovych’s traditional election thesis, “friendship with Russia,” would not guarantee him victory .
 The summer Russian trade war against Ukraine had subtly changed the picture in favor of Yanukovych .
 The “consensus regime” established in Ukraine creates the basis for the consolidation of any oppositional force from Klitschko, Yatsenyuk and even Tymoshenko with the current authorities .
 Akhmetov and Kolomoisky come forward with identical positions in favor of association with the EU . Each is based on its own motives .
 Yanukovych is going to the bluff, as he is aware of Russia’s strategic interests in Ukraine .
 He cannot, under any circumstances, be a reliable partner of Russian politics, he says . He says .
 Pavlovsky’s assessment was tailored to his old colleague Surkov, contrary to those he deliberately released for mass consumption in order to manipulate public opinion .
 The Kremlin was frustrated with "the sole candidate for the Russian-speaking electorate of the East" The Kremlin did not see him as a trustworthy ally as early as October 2013 .
 Medvedchuk continues to monopolize the favor of the Russian president . Medveduk's project continues to focus on Russia's economy .
 Medvedchuk took a seat in the same row as Putin, Medvedev and Nazarbayev at an international sambo tournament held in Sochi on August 17 . Frolov sent to Glazyev an email titled “the campaign rallies breakthrough” with a list of
 Preparation of this concert revealed ideological frictions between Frolov and Granovsky . The concert will be held in Moscow .
 Ukraine would lose sovereignty and fall into colonial dependence on the EU, says Medvedchuk . The Customs Union would close markets to Ukrainian products, he says .
 The conference was ignored by local elites such as Oleksandr Yefremov and gathered only fringe politicians .
 Freeof-charge concerts with Russian and Ukrainian popular music groups were organized with the active support of Ukrainian Choice .
 Initially, Medvedchuk was expected to participate in the concert, but he later cancelled it, citing pressure from the authorities . He later cancelled the concert due to the pressure from authorities .
 Ukrainian artists refused to participate as soon as they sensed Medvedchuk’s involvement . Some Ukrainian artists refuse to participate .
 The concert was prepared under the direct supervision of Glazyev . The latecomer Surkov also showed an interest in its results .
 Znachit, moei metod ‘pravoslavnogo rok-nrodda’ rabotaet,” 2013-09-22, 12:41:58 +0400 .
 The approval ratings of Medvedchuk and Ukrainian Choice also remained low (under 1 percent) in opinion polling, making it highly unlikely that he would get back to major politics, much less be a viable presidential candidate .
 One of the largest Russian political technology projects in Ukraine ended up having no significant political impact on the eve of the Euromaidan . The project was possibly orchestrated by Putin himself .
 Putin's popularity in Ukraine did not help his proxy's ratings . For many Ukrainians, Ukrainian Choice was not a Ukrainian choice, but the Russian choice .
 Medvedchuk’s close relationship with Putin seemed to offer special value to the Kremlin . That being said,Medvedchuk's close relationships with Putin seem to offerSpecial value to Kremlin .
 After the trade war in summer 2013, Russia shifted to negotiating behind closed doors .
 Yanukovych even ‘applaud those who came out for European integration’ as long as the demonstration would not challenge his political ambitions for the 2015 elections .
 Yanukovych called it a “time out,” while Azarov described it as a ‘tactical break’ The decision was made under great pressure from Russia . Russia would offer loans and a discounted gas price to ensure his re-election in 2015 .
 Ukraine-Russia bilateral meetings in December only reiterated its readiness to join certain agreements of the Customs Union . The Ukrainian government did not put its full entry into Russia-led economic integration on the table .
 Russia had gained time to readjust its failed policy toward Ukraine . At the same time, by blocking the signing of the EU association agreement, Russia had gain time .
 The Kremlin’s efforts to create “an influential network of pro-Russian social and political forces’ did not pay off . Pro-Russian forces were marginalized both in parliament and government .
 Yanukovych's family suppressed pro-Russian activities in the east . This trend was aggravated by hostile maneuvers on the part of the “shadow vertical power,’e.e. The administrative and criminal resources of Yanukovych’s family were used to suppress pro-Russia activities .
 Taking Stock of the Performance of the Complex of Measures Performance is graded on the scale Excellent-Good—Good-Limited-Poor . Taking stock of the performance of the complex of Measures performance is graded as well as poor-poor .
 Opinion polling registered unprecedentedly high support for EU integration, with every second respondent backing it . Russia mobilized its regulatory authorities, imposing economic sanctions to punish Ukrainian oligarchs .
 Russian measures were counterproductive, creating a harsh backlash from Ukraine . It was obvious that the punitive Russian measures are counterproductive, says CNN's John Sutter .
 No "effective propaganda campaign" was developed under Glazyev, whose aggressive remarks only increased distrust toward Russia . No “effective propaganda’s” campaign was developed by the Russian leader .
 The Kremlin-backed concert tour calling for the unity of the Slavic nations did not achieve its concealed political aim of turning Putin’s proxy Medvedchuk into a viable pro-Russian presidential candidate .
 The scenario of “the victory of our candidate in the upcoming presidential elections in 2015’ was practically invalid, says the author . There were no other pro-Russian political forces in Ukraine on which Moscow could reasonably pin its hope .
 Russia knew Yanukovych was never truly devoted to European values, and assessed his pivot to Europe as tactical one . Russia knew that Yanukovych was not truly devoted.
 Yanukovych started to speak openly about pressure from Russia after the summer trade war . Moscow began to realize that the Ukrainian president planned to run his 2015 election campaign . The Ukrainian president is a national leader resisting Russian threats.
 Yanukovych certainly clandestinely suppressed pro-Russian activities in the country . This is perhaps close to the truth, according to the author .
 Yanukovych lost his previous “pro-Russian’s value and turned out to be harmful, jeopardizing its “geopolitical interests’ in Ukraine . For Moscow, Yanukovych lost its previous ‘pro- Russian’ value and became harmful, he says .
 Putin managed to dissuade Yanukovych from signing the Association Agreement at the last minute . Putin became increasingly frustrated by his Ukrainian counterpart, who kept flirting with him without making any commitment to Eurasian integration .
 Moscow's position on the eve of the Euromaidan was totally different from that of the Orange Revolution . It is noteworthy that the position in which Moscow found itself in which the city found itself on the verge of the Euro 2012 was completely different.
 In 2004-2005, Moscow was still sure that it was able to “co-opt Yushchenko by mobilizing Russia’s soft power and the two nations’ economic, cultural, and institutional interdependence,’125 while by November 2013 it had run
 The Russian policy toward Ukraine was thus at an impasse, their hands were tied . Russia's policy toward the Ukraine is at animpasse, according to reports .
 There were no alternative pro-Russian political forces left in Ukraine, according to a report . There were also no alternative political forces.
 The observations made in the assessment of the Complex of Measures. The observations further allow us to construct a nuanced interpretation of Russian behavior in late 2013 and early 2014 .
 These behaviors suggest a possible review and change of Ukraine's policy toward Ukraine .
 Some of the earliest manifestations of the preparation of the Crimea operation appeared in November 2013 . The Kremlin found itself without any other means of controlling Ukraine’s behavior .
 The Kremlin's extraordinary attention to Crimea was first exposed on November 29, when his close aide Boris Rapoport reported to Surkov about the election system of Crimea and Sevastopol .
 The Frolov leaks also registered the activization of Russian actors in Crimea during the same period . It was still possible that the Agreement might be signed at the Ukraine-EU summit scheduled for February-March 2014 .
 The expansion of the Simferopol office of the CIS Institute was first considered in late November 2013 . The CIS Institute's expansion of its office was first thought in late 2013 .
 Anatoly Filatov, deputy director for the scientific work of the Ukrainian branch, sent to CIS Institute director Zatulin . The Ukrainian branch is based in Ukraine .
 The relatively moderate agenda for the round table on “the Role of the Republic of Crimea in Eurasian Integration’ on November 23 in Simferopol was radicalized to instigate separatist sentiments as well as advocate historical ties between Crimea and Russia .
 The institute@materik.ru, email to frolov_moskva@mail.ru.ru .
In 2013, Russia did not have significant political instruments in Crimea, as is the case with the rest of Ukraine . In 2013, Crimea was not the case in 2013, as was the case for Ukraine .
 The political scene on the peninsula was subtly different from that of South-Eastern regions . There were potential tensions between the “Macedonians’ and indigenous Crimean elites .
 i-sng@yandex.ru, email to frolov_moskva@mail.ru.ru .
 "Analitika" is the name of a new institute. See institute@materik.ru, email to frolov.ru .
 The official chronology of ‘the Crimean spring’ is silent about this two-month gap .
 Crimea parliament speaker Konstantinov was on a visit to Moscow on that day . A strange coincidence is that he was visiting Moscow on the same day .
 On December 1, a reported 200,000-250,000 people took to the streets in Kyiv to protest against the attack on students and journalists .
 The violence made the process increasingly irreversible . The demand of the protesters shifted from European integration to the resignation of the president and the government .
 The Ukrainian politkum has been consolidating under the slogan of Euro-integration . Pavlovsky warned the Kremlin perhaps saw a “consensus regime’s taking shape once the national crisis unfolded .
 The first delegation included Russia Duma deputy Dmitry Sablin as well as Russian orthodox magnate Konstantin Malofeev . The trip was part of the Gifts of the Magi tour .
 Mogilev’s deputy, Rustam Temirgaliev, later said that he felt some “center of management’ was behind them .
148 instead of persuading him to cling to power and defend Russian interests in Ukraine . On the contrary, he actively intervened to help his Ukrainian counterpart to flee the country “for humanitarian considerations”
 Some observers argue that Surkov’s task was to keep Yanukovych in power, a task he obviously failed to fulfill .
 The Kremlin's political technologists perhaps needed the ouster of the “legitimate’ president, which would become the last piece of their grand narrative on the ‘coup’ to justify the planned annexation of Crimea as well as the demand for federalization.
Multiple Kremlin “experts’ and political technologists exposed in the leaks, such as Chesnakov and Pavlovsky, orchestrated a series of narratives that the Crimea annexation was responsive, spontaneous, even improvised action by Putin, who was “infuriated
 Treisman accepts the testimony of Russian journalist Mikhail Zygar . Treisman says Surkov was allegedly sidelined temporarily before Crimea annexation because he disappointed Putin by not keeping Yanukovych in power .
 Alexei Chesnakov and Sergei Markov. For the comments, see Steven Lee Myers for the comments .
 It was far from improvisation by Putin or Russia’s seizing of a tactical opportunity during the escalation of the Ukraine crisis .
 Surkov took over the position of Ukrainian curator in the autumn . The initial idea of engaging in Crimea perhaps belongs to Surkov .
 The findings suggest that when Russia found it impossible to achieve its strategic goal, it did not stick to flawed tactics and was quick to take a piece of its territory hostage .
 He extends special thanks to the journal’s editors for their meticulous attention to the details of the manuscript . He also extends special Thanks for the journal's editors.