 Ukraine has been host to mass public protests at the Maidan Nezalezhnosti in 2013 . The Euromaidan is a conflict in opinion between the majority of the people of Ukraine and the then President of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych .
Russia wanted Ukraine to join its own alliance, the ‘Eurasian Union’ and a customs union with Belarus and Kazakhstan . Russia was unhappy with these developments, having always perceived Ukraine as being within its sphere of influence .
 Sergei Glazyev, adviser to the President of Russia Vladimir Putin, publicly announced that Ukrainian authorities are making a mistake in thinking Russia would be neutral in the years to come by . Ukraine needed to join the customs union with Russia to balance its trade with its largest creditor Russia .
 Russia would no longer recognise Ukraine’s status as a state and would intervene if Pro-Russian regions of the country directly appealed to Moscow . He then proceeded to frame a clear threat that if Ukraine signed the agreement and associated with the EU, Russia would feel that
 Glazyev threatened to increase economic sanctions if the agreement was signed . Russia had already imposed import restrictions on certain Ukrainian products . The threat was very credible but probably counter-effective as Ukraine and the European community felt the seriousness of Russia's threats .
Russia has always been keen to retain Ukraine as their ally, away from the influence of the west . The recent animosity between Ukraine and Russia is set in historical precedents . The election of Viktor Yushchenko instead of the Pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovyc.
 Russia renews the lease of the Russian Black Sea Naval base at Sevastopol in Crimea . It allowed Russian troops to stay on in Crimea beyond 2017 which was against the Ukrainian Constitution .
 Russia agreed to buy 15 billion dollars of Ukrainian debt and reduce the price of Russian Gas supplies by about a third on December 17, 2013 . This was a clear case of altering the consequences to make Russia look like an attractive alternative to the European Union .
 Russia also re-affirmed it’s serious resolve to ensure a pro-Russia Ukraine . Russia also offered this reward .
President Yanukovych signed the EU Backed Agreement on settlement of the political crisis in Ukraine to end the protests and fled to East Ukraine . The Russian deal failed to stem the protests at Euromaidan .
 Arseniy Yatsenyuk was appointed as prime minister in 2004 . He restored the constitution of 2004 .
 The new government annulled a bill which provided for Russian to be used as a second official government language in regions with large Russian-speaking Populations . This was later vetoed by the acting president of Ukraine, Oleksander Turchynov .
 Russia viewed it as an anti Russian act and distrusted the new government with the Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev condemning it . The Russian PM said it was a real threat to Russian interests and to the lives and health of our citizens there .
 The new Ukrainian government was formed of politicians who all agreed on the need to integrate with the European Union . The new government was led by former foreign and trade minister and incumbent president of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko .
 Poroshenko criticiser the words of Sergei Glazyev at the conference where he issued that explicit threat against Ukraine . Poroshenko said that it was these actions of Russian officials that brought for the first time in Ukrainian history .
 Ukraine defying Russia’s threat, Russia could either back down or carry out the threat . Ukraine could either return to the U.S. with the threat.
 Russia annexed Crimea on 18 March 2014 after staging a disputed referendum . The majority of the people of Crimea voted to join the Russian Federation . Russia militarily intervened and painted the incident as a ‘Re-Unification of Crimea’
 Russian paramilitaries were reported to make up to 80% of the combatants . Russia also militarily supported the separatist movements in Donbass in Eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s perception on the Russians following up on the threat was miscalculated . Today Ukraine is still wary of another invasion.