 President Petro Poroshenko introduced it in response to violent seizure of 3 Ukraine military vessels and arrest of 24 sailors by Russian coast guard ships in the Kerch strait .
 The election is now officially scheduled for March 31, 2019 . Some viewed the exercise of legislative checks on the president as an example of Ukrainian “messy democracy’s at work .
 Since then president Poroshenko has sent mixed signals about his intentions . Since then, he has been seen as a more cautious leader .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has dismissed the possibility that ‘martial law’ would be a pretext for canceling election . He said that it would only be to the benefit of Russian President Putin .
 'martial law' could be extended as long as Russian aggression continues, he said . Russian aggression in Donbas and occupation of Crimea could continue, he added .
 Only 10% of respondents indicated in the recent poll that they were willing to vote for him in the first round . The presidential election is just four months away .
 Every second Ukrainian says they will not vote for the incumbent president under any circumstances . Also, every second Ukrainian say that they won't vote for incumbent president .
 Losing the re-election bid will become not only a political setback for Poroshenko, but represent a personal threat for theoshenko .
Over the last few years he was the target of multiple corruption allegations by former political partners and activists . He has been accused of corruption allegations.
 The loss of power raises the risks that the new institutions established during his presidency may ultimately turn against him .
 The president is likely to succeed in imposing his preference on the parliament . If he ultimately chooses to demand the extension of the ‘martial law’ and hence, postponing the election, he could impose his preference .
 Ukraine’s premier-presidential model still allows the president to overpower the parliament on key issues, such as composition of the cabinet and tenure of prime minister .
 In all successful cases Ukrainian presidents had an advantage over other actors in informal powers . Ukrainian presidents reached well beyond the constitutional limits on their formal power .
 presidents could use their informal leverage to achieve favorable outcomes in confrontations with the legislature and the cabinet . As long as they had a decisive say over the security apparatus and the courts, presidents could have a decisive says over security apparatus .
 The emergency powers granted to president Petro Poroshenko extend into three broad spheres and reinforce his informal authority . The new emergency powers extend into two broad spheres .
 Based on the presidential decree the head of state can unilaterally limit some of the fundamental constitutional rights and freedoms of Ukrainian citizens guaranteed under the twelve articles of the Constitution . Based on a presidential decree, the head-of-state can unilaterally limits some of those freedoms .
 Among them are the rights to privacy and confidentiality of personal data, freedoms of speech, movement and assembly and ownership rights . Among them is the right to privacy.
 The president can now rule to expropriate personal property, ban rallies, introduce curfews or restrict individual movement . The president is now able to rule to restrict individual movements .
 The second sphere is the intra-executive relationship with the cabinet and prime minister . The third sphere, the second sphere, is the third sphere .
 The law on the ‘State of Siege’ allows the president to supersede prime minister informing regional executive administrations .
 The heads of military administrations are selected by the president on recommendation of the General Staff of the Armed Forces . In this case the president selects the heads of the military administrations .
 This, in effect, excludes the government from exercising any serious influence over the local governments . This is in effect.
 The third sphere is the functioning of democratic institutions, particularly media and elections . It is the third sphere of the democratic institutions .
Key institutions of accountability of the authorities would either become suspended or seriously circumscribed in their operation . The key institutions would also become suspended.
 Together these ‘emergency powers’ give the president broad discretionary powers over citizens, state officials and politicians . The president has broad discretionary power over citizens and state officials .
 Commander-in-Chief now having final say on key national matters . They also elevate status of presidency above other state institutions .
 The new arsenal of informal powers improves president's chances of persuading parliament to extend the ‘state of siege’ beyond 30 days if he chooses to do so .
President Yulia Tymoshenko is expected to leave the country in the summer . He will be able to negotiate with current front runners on security guarantees . The move will allow the president to start informal bargaining with the current front runner .
 It also allows to shift the focus away from economic problems and increase the salience of national security issues int he campaign .
 Over the last two weeks Poroshenko frequently appeared in army uniform meeting military personnel and planning defense operations .
 martial law may serve as an elite coordination instrument that can help, for now, to prevent potential defections from his party . For now, martial law can help to prevent possible defections.
 Since the imposition of the ‘martial law’ anywhere in Ukraine automatically prohibits removal of the president, the government and the parliament . Poroshenko will find many allies in key positions of power interested in minimizing the uncertainties related to the upcoming electoral cycle .
 This strategy, however, can only be a temporary solution for the ruling elites . This strategy is a short-term solution to the problem of power .
 If Poroshenko decides to choose existing security threats as a justification for extending his power at home and abroad, he will inevitably suffer greater instability than following President Yanukovych’s ouster in February 2014 .
 This entry was posted in Europe, Ukraine and tagged election, martial law, president on December 12, 2018 .
 The decree was put forward by President Poroshenko on advice of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine in response to Russia's seizure of three Ukrainian naval vessels and 23 sailors in Kerch Strait on Sunday .
 Before the martial law was approved, the President was forced to compromise on a number of points .
 First, the initial decree requested that martial law be introduced for 60 days . First, it requested that the law was introduced for a 60 days.
 It came into effect at 9am on November 28 and will be in place until December 27 . It comes into effect on November 27 .
 Initial proposal also suggested that martial law would be introduced on the entire territory of Ukraine .
 Law will cover only 10 regions and territories along the Russian boarder, the Sea of Azov and the Black sea .
Lawmakers insisted on relaxation of the proposed limits on the rights and freedoms of citizens . Second, lawmakers insisted on the relaxation of a proposed limits .
 The President also noted that neither partial nor full mobilization was envisioned unless the conflict escalates further . The President said neither partial or full mobilized was envisioned .
Lawmakers demanded assurances that introduction of martial law will not affect presidential elections early next year . Lawmakers also demanded assurances of assurances that martial law won't affect elections .
 Parliament voted in favour of martial law just 5 minutes after the vote . The law officially sets the date of the next presidential election for March 31, 2019 .
 First, of course, comes the issue of security, territorial integrity, and independence of Ukraine .
 Other countries and international organizations have supported Ukraine . However, other countries and organizations have support Ukraine .
 NATO’s chief stated that “there is no justification for the use of military force against Ukrainian ships and military personnel’ He demanded that ships and sailors be immediately released .
Concerns about what the attack and declaration of martial law could mean for the security in the region are high .
 President Poroshenko was careful to insist that “martial law does not mean declaring war.’s ‘martialLaw’ doesn’t mean ‘ declaring war’
 Ukraine will continue to comply with the Minsk agreement and all other international obligations . He also noted that it did not mean that Ukraine either gave up or was not amenable to diplomatic solutions to the crisis .
 The opposition has accused the President of using martial law to divert public attention from his failing popularity .
 Some expressed concerns that martial law will allow the possibility of postponing or cancelling the election complete . Some even expressed concerns.
 According to opinion polls, only 5-10 percent of citizens were ready to vote for him in the last couple of months .
 Other presidential candidates have similar low levels of support and trust . However, other presidential candidates had similar low level of support .
 Yulia Tymoshenko is one of the main candidates running for president next year . 75 percent of those surveys did not trust her .
 This entry was posted in Europe, Ukraine and tagged martial law, president, presidential election, Ukraine on November 29, 2018 .
 The process of replacing CEC commissioners whose terms expired has started more than 2 years ago . The process has been underway for more than two years .
 The appointment of new commissioners has been determined to be one of the main tasks on the agenda of the 9th session of the Ukrainian parliament . After years of failed attempts, the appointment of the new commissioners is determined to become the main task of the parliament .
 Parliament appoints and dismisses 15 members of the CEC on the proposal of the president .
 The president is supposed to take the proposals of political parties into account during the nomination process .
 The terms of 12 of the 15 commissioners expired in 2014, and another member reached the end of his 7th year in office in 2017 . The term of 12 commissioner's terms expired in 2013, and the term of another member expired in 2016 .
 The issue could no longer be postponed and had to be addressed as soon as possible . With quickly approaching presidential and parliamentary elections in the country, the policy-makers have agreed .
Since 2016, its chairman has been under investigation for receiving illegal bribes . Since 2016, he has been accused of receiving bribes . The chairman is under investigation.
 The process of appointing a new CEC in Ukraine has been on-going for a couple of years now . Given the salience and importance of the composition of the commission, the commission has been in place for years .
 The first attempt to replace the commission was made in June 2016 but at the time the process stalled . The commission was set to be replaced by a new commission in July 2016 .
 The members were proposed by political parties in proportion to their representation in Parliament . The members of political parties were proposed to be members of Parliament .
 The new CEC will organize the upcoming presidential and parliamentary elections . It will play a critical role in ensuring that elections are conducted in a free and fair manner .
 This entry was posted in Europe, Ukraine and tagged central election commission, elections, president on September 27, 2018 .
 The concept of coalitional presidentialism is not new, until recently . The question of how presidents form and manage their coalitions has been explored .
 We know little about how and whether these theories travel outside Latin America . However, we know little.
 With few exceptions, the country has been governed by multiparty cabinet coalitions since 1996 . The country has a rich macro-level data.
Ukraine is also a difficult case with which to test institutional hypotheses . Ukraine is also an difficult case to find out if institutional hypotheses exist .
 Many scholars of Ukrainian politics have questioned the applicability of notions of coalitional behavior to the country . They say coalitional solutions to the problems of limited legislative support are difficult to operate in the Ukrainian context .
 Presidential coalitions in Ukraine frequently contain cabinet parties as well as parties that do not have cabinet representation . Finally, presidential coalitions often contain parties that don't have cabinet representatives .
 This allowed us to explore the non-cabinet strategies that presidents used to manage the support of coalition parties . This allows us to look at the strategies used by presidents to manage coalition parties.
In the first part of the paper, we test a now well-established hypothesis in Latin American literature that cabinet portfolio payoffs to coalition allies raise the level of legislative support for presidents . The paper also test a well- established hypothesis that cabinet portfolios payoffs raise the levels
 It is measured as the percentage of legislators belonging to cabinet parties who voted in favour of bills introduced by the executive branch . It is also measured as a percentage of MPs who voted for the bill .
Cabinet coalescence has a positive and statistically significant effect on cabinet coalition discipline in Ukraine. We find that cabinet coalescence had a positive, statistically significant impact on cabinet unity .
 To put it in substantive terms, an increase in cabinet coalescence by 10 percent increases cabinet coalition discipline by 2. percent . To put the increase in Cabinet coalescence into substantive terms. To put them in substantive Terms, an increased cabinet coalescent by 10 per cent .
 The dynamics of coalitional presidentialism in Ukraine are similar to those that we find in Latin America, says the author .
 The presidents who compose their cabinets more proportionally can expect a higher degree of satisfaction from allied parties and thus higher levels of discipline . The president's cabinet can expect higher level of satisfaction.
 Ukrainian presidents rely on the support of parties that do not receive portfolio payoffs . However, Ukrainian presidents also rely on support from parties that don't receive portfolios payoffs.
 The number of non-cabinet coalition parties is significant in the Ukrainian case .
 In fact, the inclusion of non-cabinet parties was crucial in giving each president minimum winning majorities or near majorities .
 The number of Ukrainian parties in cabinet and floor coalitions, 1996-2011, is the highest in Ukraine .
 50 legislators were members of the coalition in 2012, of whom 60 per cent were members . To answer these questions, we interviewed 50 legislators .
 We designed an interview sample and a number of structured and semi-structured questions to help us explore whether the perceived benefits of coalition membership differed significantly between coalition parties that had and did not have cabinet representation .
 The motivation to support the president differed between coalition parties that were members of the cabinet and those that were not . As figures 2 and 3 show, that the motivation for support differed between the parties .
 Percentage of non-cabinet and cabinet coalition party members identified the importance of extracabinet benefits in the formation of coalitions .
 Members of the cabinet party were significantly more likely to identify policy influence and cabinet positions than members of non-cabinet parties within the floor coalition .
 In contract, members of non-cabinet parties were more likely to mention budget influence and especially the informal exchange of favours .
 Percentage of non-cabinet and cabinet coalition party members selected as the first or second most important reason why a political party might join a presidential coalition .
 The Ukraine case validates extant analysis on the effects of cabinet management on legislative behaviour .
 coalitional presidentialism is not simply a unique Latin American phenomenon, it is not a unique phenomenon . It gives us good reasons to expect similar dynamics in other regions of the world, say experts .
Presidential cases across other parts of Europe as well as other regions including Africa and Asia .
 The Ukrainian case highlights the multivariate nature of the strategies that presidents deploy to maintain their legislative support .
 This adds a new dimension to the extant literature, which has mainly focused on the tools deployed by presidents at the cabinet level . This adds to the existing literature, that has mainly been focused on tools used by presidents .
 By distinguishing between cabinet and floor coalitions, it is possible to identify parties motivated to join presidential coalitions .
 This entry was posted in Europe, Ukraine and tagged coalitional presidentialism, government formation, president on September 21, 2017 .