 Since 3 joining the Foreign Service in 1992 he has served among other 4 postings in Warsaw, Poland .
 impeachment inquiry was conducted by the House Permanent Select Committee on 10 Intelligence . George 9 Kent conducted the inquiry on September 24th .
 I am the senior adviser and 3 director for investigations for the HPSCI majority staff . I am a senior adviser. I am also the director of investigations for HPS CI majority staff.
 Neither the questions asked of you nor the answers that you provide or your counsel provide will require discussion of any information that is currently, or at any point could be properly classified under Executive Order 13526 .
 If any of our questions can only be answered with classified information, we will only be able to answer them with classified info .
 The transcript of the deposition will be limited to the three committees in attendance . The deposition is not being taken in executive session .
Before deposition, I would like to go over some of the ground rules. Now before we begin the deposition, we will discuss some of those ground rules .
 The U.S. Department of State has instructed him not to appear, he says . "I have been instructed by my 6 employer, the United States Department of state," he writes .
 I worked in Washington from 2012 to 2015 . In 24 policy and programming positions directly affecting 25 U.S. strategic interests in Ukraine .
 I will do my best to answer your 15 questions today and I understand there are going to be a lot 16 of them . I will also answer 15 questions. I will answer 15 of your questions .
 I'm ready to answer all your questions regarding the subject of the subpoena, which has ordered me to appear before you today . I'm prepared to answer your questions about the subpoena. I'll answer all my questions about it today .
 I'm going to pick up just where you left off there about the documents. I'm gonna pick upjust where you leave off there. I'll pick up on the documents . I'll be able to find out what happened to you .
 I asked in email form whether I should start collecting documents, because I had received a personal request . And initially, when asked inEmail form, it was not clear if it should start .
 The first interaction was a formal request for a document production request . "I was instructed to await formal guidance, meaning formal guidance"
 She needed to go and give a response to ISO people about taking care of your people . A woman needed to give a reply to ISO. She needed a response.
 The 11 first meeting was the first time that we were discussing guidance for being responsive to a subpoena . The first time we were 12 discussing guidance is the first meeting of the meeting .
 The 21 conversation ended at that point, but later on when I then 22 picked up this issue of guidance and our responsibilities, he 23 raised his voice again, suggested, as I told you before .
 I 24 should not be talking to you, it is against the bar ethics. 25 for me to contact and talk to you directly, it's not against bar ethics .
 I 20 don't think it is appropriate for you to go back into that 21 room . I don't believe it is. I'm in a 21 room room .
 The State Department asked you if you had conversations with anyone else in the State Department about your interaction with A Yes . Did you have any conversations with any other State Department officials?
 My great-great-grandmother changed to anglicize it to K-e-n-t. K-i-N-T. and then my great- great-granddaughter changed to K.e-N. T. T-T-T.-T.
 He was looking to basically engage in a con game out of revenge because he'd lost his job . I had full faith that it was bunch of hooey, and he was looking for revenge . He was trying to get revenge for losing his job, but he
 A to the best of my recollection, to my awareness based on the email exchanges. A To the best, to his recollection, based on his email exchanges .
 Giuliani may have had between two and three conversations with the Assistant Secretary in that period of time . Giuliani to Risch may have been between two to three conversations .
 Former Mayor Giuliani attempted to call the White House, and deputy chief of staff, his understanding . The State Department was not being responsive, he says .
 Lutsenko's comment about Giuliani's trip and meeting with Giuliani was and his comment about the trip was and the meeting was and not .
 "By the way, probably the last thing he said before we finished the meeting. Oh, by the way," he said .
 Q You said there were some, I think you said, surprising Twitter . I honestly -I have forgotten my Twitter password. I honestly, I honestly. I have forgot my Twitter passwords .
 The initial media guidance that we released and was quoted extensively was. Q Clear statement of support, and obviously there was a media statement .
 Prosecutor General Lutsenko's allegation that somehow we had misdirected assistance met for the prosecutor general. I think, complete fabrication, utter nonsense as well as in rebutting the allegation, he says .
 Lutsenko says NABU threatened to unravel a key component of our anticorruption cooperation . He says efforts to destroy NABu as an organization were threatened by both Petro and Lutsko .
 It included a person who was a 74 1 friend of the current -the ex-President Poroshenko and was 2 head of the overseer of the defense industry .
 Yanukovych told us that he'd hiredafort, and that was the spring of 2005 . To the best of my recollection, it's actually quite good because I was with Ambassador Herbst at the time .
 A I first became aware of the owner of Burisma, 80 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 9 10 11 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 24 25 Mykola ZTochevsky .
 The Russians were pushing the final push to take as much territory as they could, that they needed an extra officer . He was going back to 'to go out' because so much was happening at the time .
 U.S. Serious Crimes 3 Office had already opened up a case against 4 Zlochevsky . The first case that U.5., U.K., 81 1 and Ukrainian investigators worked on was a case.
 I'd previously been the director of the office which provided that funds to 10 find out what had happened and why were our monies being wasted . I had a fiduciary responsibility -I'd previously 9 was the director.
 Poroshenko appointed a new deputy prosecutor 13 general named David Sakvarelidze . That's a Georgian name . The new prosecutor is a Georgian.
 Former President Poroshenko asked for a former New Jersey State prosecutor in one of his 6 calls with then-Vice President Biden . The former prosecutor general spoke Ukrainian fluently .
 Prosecutor General Shokin exploded in what was known as the diamond prosecutor affair . One of the things they confiscated from his former driver was a cache of diamonds - his support levels .
 Poroshenko's support levels, as polled by the International Republican Institute, plummeted from about 55 percent to the mid-20s over that period of time .
 Mr Jordan, I've had very little luck in getting 18 members to abide by that rule .
 I want to just ask you a few questions to 4 follow up on my colleague's questions . Then I'm going to 5 turn it over to Mr Mitchell to continue going through the 6 timeline with you .
 Attorney General Bill Barr and others at the 2 Justice Department are essentially doing an investigation of 3 the investigators into the origins of the Russia 4 investigation .
 Mr Solomon published the article in which there was 12 video of part of the interview that he had with Mr Lutsenko .
 Normally the acting assistant secretary is the one who engages officials above our bureau . Normally the Acting Assistant Secretary of Political Affairs is the head of the bureau .
 David Hale, who has oversight over our bureau, is the Secretary of the Department's counselor . David Hale is the secretary of the department, Ulrich Brechbuhl .
 Avakov had been in the U.S. in February, he had communication 14 that Mayor Giuliani had reached out to him . Mayor Giuliani invited him to meet the group of Florida residents in Florida .
Mr Avakov had a conversation with Mr Avakov in February. Q If I recall when you had this conversation with him in February .
 Q Now, you indicated that you had another conversation with -I can't read my own writing. Q Now: You indicated that the conversation was not over .
 Yuriy Lutsenko has said publicly 17 that he investigated Burisma on nonpayment of taxes . He has said that Burisma is not paying taxes .
 At the 16 request of Petro Poroshenko, 18 let that contract lapse after roughly 9 months . It was 19 clear that Lutsenko was not going to push forward reform as 20 he had promised to us .
In 13 of the first 2 weeks, he was caught trying to 14 suborn a witness, coach him to lie and obstruct 15 justice . He was caught in an effort to bribe the minister of health, Ulyana Suprun, f So agreed to wear a tap 18 for N
 Tyler Brace is a former staffer for Senator Portman . Brace has a specific interest in Ukraine and Russia, as well as the acting assistant secretary .
 At this point, she was back in the United States, and so we did have reason to have communications, yes .
 It's several days later, 17 depending on what day the call happened, during the week, it could have been the 19 Friday . It's possible that the call could have happened over the week .
 President Zelenskyy 23 raises desire to purchase more javelins, President 24 says . Ukraine has been through a lot and Ukraine knows a lot about it .
 CrowdStrike says Ukraine's situation with Ukraine is under investigation . "I would like you to find out what happened with this whole situation," says CrowdStrike .
 Most of the billionaires in the country became billionaires because they acquired state assets for largely under valued prices and engaged in predatory competition .
 Going back to that July 25th call, there was a lot of exchanges between Ambassador Sondland and Ambassador SONDland .
 Mr Volker. and also the Charge Taylor about whether or not the aid would be forthcoming .
 Former National Security Advisor Bolten weighed in at some point in the process . In the end, Secretary Perry, Lieutenant Colonel Vindman representing the NSC, Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker, and then our Charge in country .
 Sondland's visit to Ukraine to Odesa for 11 the U.S. port visit was the start of his involvement . I don't remember when the ship visit was to 10 OdesA .
 There was no conversation, but that was the first time I had met him, without a substantive conversation, in January .
Fiona Hill is a member of the committee that spoke to Fiona Hill yesterday . The committee talked to her about her role on the committee .
 When I came back from my New England vacation, I had three different versions of the conversation in my inbox .
 The Ukraine Reform Conference was held in Toronto on July 1 and 2, 2013 . President Zelenskyy himself was there for the conference . Volker described it to a number of interlocutors .
 Presidents Zelenskyy and Trump had talked about a visit to the White House in April . By the end of the meeting there was agreement that they would work towards an Oval Office visit .
 It was 5 probably past midnight in Ukraine on election night on Sunday .
 Ukraine is an 8 important country that Congress appropriates roughly in the 9 ballpark S700 million a year in assistance . Zelenskyy won 10 a clear mandate for change and so we were supportive of a visit to the White House .
 The President of the United States is a longtime acknowledged leader of the free world . Ukraine is Ukraine's strongest supporter . The U.S. is the country's strongest support .
 The foreign policy argument is it's a very important country in the front lines of Russian malign influence and aggression . It's important to be on the front line of Russia's malign Influence and aggression.
 Ukrainian leaders feel they have the mandate to take the lead on coordinating efforts to engage the new Ukrainian leadership . They say they briefed the President coming out of that meeting .
 Ambassador Volker from the State Department, Acting Assistant Secretary Reeker, my direct supervisor, Tyler Brace, all attended that meeting in Secretary Perry's office . They also connected recently arrived Charge Taylor from Kyiv .
 Chris Anderson's readout was from Kurt Volker and a third readout from someone in the State Department who worked with our mission to the European Union that would have had Ambassador Sondland's version . I believe I got an email with of a conversation with Fiona, Chris Anderson.
Kupperman's impression was that that came from Kupperman who was in the meeting. A My understanding from what I heard from what he heard from Fiona was that his impression came from the meeting .
 A To the best of my knowledge, the principals -209 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 10 11 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 24 25 Q Ambassador Volker .
 The NSC does not want to allow the State Department to be on the secure video conference system, but apart from specific meetings that I'm invited over .
 I 17 believe, until early March, so 3 weeks after Vice President 18 Biden's visit in December 2015 . I 17 believes, until March, that Biden will visit the U.S.
I was in -briefly in Ukrainian language 10 training at the time of his visit so I was not in Ukraine . I was in-briefy in Ukrainian Language 10 training. I was also in - briefly. in Ukrainianlanguage 10 training .
 We would probably have some documents to inform us that we could ask for more information . We could also ask for additional information on 25 more documents .
 Vice President's trips were managed by the Vice President. But specifically about how the VP's trips messaging was managed .
 The day before Thanksgiving, he was in the United States for 3 months for language training . He then returned to Kyiv in late March 2016 and returned to the U.5.
 State Department would dispatch legislative liaisons to talk with Senators or their Senator's staff to -A Honestly, again. Q If the State Department found out about this, do you think they would dispatch their liaisons?
 I was in Kyiv at the time, so I do not have knowledge of any interaction between the Senate's -three senators, their staff . Q Fair enough. Q Fair Enough .
 A To be honest, I have no knowledge of that, and I can't say either yes or no. A To Be honest, he says he has no knowledge about that .
 Mr Lutsenko has held many positions on many 20 issues that are mutually exclusive, including on this 21 issue . He has also been on many issues that have been mutually exclusive .
Kurt Volker and Kurt Volker were ranking United States officials who attended for the U.5. 5.5 .
 The dates that 23 were discussed in the June 18 meeting that Secretary Perry 24 chaired . We'll aim for that perhaps next week, and hopefully 21 that will lead into a meeting by the end of the month .
 The call is not normal for officials that are at the Embassy or 4 at the State Department . I've never been on a Presidential call, and 3 that is notnormal for officials at the embassy or 4.
President-elect 9 Zelenskyy is running as a candidate for President in 2019 . He met with President-elect 7 Under Secretary Hale, Ambassador Yovanovitch, and myself, 8 when he was president .
 There is a full paragraph of President 5 Zelenskyy in the middle of the page, and towards the bottom 6 of that paragraph .
 She would not accept me as the new President well 13 enough, end quote says .
 I just don't want to put any words in 12 your mouth, that's why I'm asking the question . I just want to ask you what you say about your mouth . I'm not going to say anything.
 A Generally, again, I've never worked at the NSC, but my general understanding is it's 1-year renewable . A generally, Again, I'm not sure what it's like, but it's renewable .
 A Well, he's obviously in his second year now, and I get the sense that there are mechanisms to allow for renewable, even though that's not standard. A Well's second year, he says, and he's clearly in hissecond year now .
 The State Department travel on their own, but they often accompany principals .
Documents apparently found at the former estate of the previous President who fled to Russia .
 It indicated individuals who had been receiving payments by the former ruling party . Viktor Yanukovych was the leader of the Yanukovych regime .
 I know that he was an investigative journalist, and there were, as I recall, hundreds of names . He was a journalist and journalist .
 I met him for the first time in the 18 fall of 2004 when he was the think tank -19 Q . And he had written an op-ed. He was the first person to meet him in 2004 .
 11 State Department official uses WhatsApp by U.S. official, 11 State Dept. official .
 I flew out to Ukraine to take part in that conference as did Ambassador Volker . I flew to Ukraine for that conference and was there for the first time .
Bill Taylor: U.5. policy is wrong, and we shouldn't be doing that as a matter of U. 5. policy . He says he told Bill Taylor, that's wrong. And I told him, that is wrong .
 I said the 15th and 16th and 17th, 17 because the next day, I had a conversation with Charge Taylor 18 in which he amplified the same theme . The next day he said the same thing to Charge Taylor .
 The President and his private attorney, Rudy 21 Giuliani, were interested in the initiation of 22 investigations . 25 it should be done officially and put in writing, essentially mouth, but there was a significance to August 15 and 16 .
 Mr Vindman was uncomfortable and the sensitive nature of the call, you did say. Q When you described that readout, you said he wasn't comfortable talking about it .
 President Trump mentioned that there was a -that President Trump had discussed extreme narratives that had been discussed publicly .
 At the end of June, Ambassador Taylor told CNN that there was a conversation with Ambassador Taylor . That at the end 8 of June.
 I don't recall the last time 10 we had a conversation, and when we had the conversation would 11 be important to what we talked about . I'm not sure when we would have a conversation about what we talk about .
 Charge Taylor spoke to Charge Taylor about the three amigos, Rudy Giuliani and Rudy Giuliani .
 Acting Assistant Secretary Reeker relayed the message from Under Secretary Hale . Reeker's message was relayed from under Secretary Hale.
 A Well, she oversees policy for six countries, and this was a day or two before she was going on leave to go visit . She was going to go hiking in Maine .
You're not going to hear me talk about any country for the next week and a half . Fine, you're not. Fine, I'm not talking to any country .
 State Department policy discussions and dealings with Ukraine were cut out of the loop in terms of Ukraine, says Volker .
 He went 13 around to the Ukrainian side of the table and pulled 14 Zelenskyy . His chief of staff has been in charge of his staff for 13 years .
 I 15 was standing about 10 feet of the way when I introduced myself to 16 Andriy Vermak . I was talking to him when I was 10 feet away from him. I was standing 10 feet in the way .
 I 24 would say that Kurt Volker had not provided additional 25 details . I would say he had not given additional 25 additional details .
 Georgia is a country which Congress appropriates over $100 million a year . It was more that President Zelenskyy needed to be Georgia.
 The direction in how we spend that money is usually determined in a joint military 25 commission between EUCOM and the Ukrainian general staff administrative heads .
 The Defense Department says there's broad support among both parties in Congress and among the Defense Department .
 Senior 2 Director Morrison was looking to schedule a principal small 3 group meeting that would involve the Secretary of State 4 personally . Morrison was also looking to set up a meeting with Secretary of state 4 personally.
 Secretary of Defense and Ambassador Bolton could discuss the issue and then take it to the 6 President . The issue will be discussed at the 6th President .
 Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney had attempted a rescission at the end of the year . The next week, he sent out a data call with the intent potentially to execute a rescissions .
 Under Secretary Hale represented the State Department . He says he cannot recall the exact outcome of the case .
 This conversation with Charge Taylor was that over WhatsApp or was that in person or -A That was a part of our regularly scheduled Monday secure calls, video conferences .
 I recounted to the best of my knowledge what those conversations were . A recounting of the conversations was a good memory for me .
I didn't have to worry about that hypothetical because it was resolved essentially as I arrived in Ukraine . I didn't worry about it because it wasn't a hypothetical. It was resolved basically as I arrive in Ukraine.
 The next conversation would have happened at the breakfast table Sunday morning, which I believe was September 15th .
 Andriy Yermak is the close personal aide of President Zelenskyy . He met with ambassador -Charge Taylor and Special Representative Volker .
 A Well was the one meeting on Kurt’s schedule in Ukraine that he felt uncomfortable with joining .
 Charge Taylor was referring to 18 prior conversations that he had with Yermak and prior advice, 19 meaning you should deliver the messages as we've discussed 20 before .
 The President's engagement of Orban included a 1-hour one-on-one and then subsequently the Hungarian foreign minister .
 There were two institutions that were the instruments of oppression in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was one of the most oppressive institutions .
 The SBU and reform of the prosecutor general’s office are the fundamental keys to transforming the country . The security service is known as the SBU .
 There are 7 other information that people want to provide context to try 8 to trigger additional information . And if there is 7 more information to provide, there will be more information .
I would not have -no, I did not review them before coming to testify . I would not. have - no, I didn't review them. I would. not have. 14 reviewed them before going to testify.
 He did not feel at liberty to share substantive details of the call, he said . What was different was that he was concerned that he didn't feel at Liberty to share the details . He said he was not at liberty.
 President Trump and a head of government of the six countries for which I have responsibi1ity. To the best of my knowledge, these were the only two calls between President Trump.
 The National Agency to Prevent Corruption went after based on asset declarations of high ranking officials and members of parliament . As far as I recall, those are only two individuals or officials of Ukraine that the agency went after .