Experts say countries aren’t doing enough to limit dangerous global warming . But experts say countries are not doing enough.
 Coups, Military Rule, and Ethnic Conflict The 2021 coup returned Myanmar to military rule . Myanmar has been beset by decades of conflict and repressive regimes .
 The swift development of effective vaccines against COVID-19 was an unprecedented scientific achievement . The swiftDevelopment of effective vaccine against COV-19 is an unprecedented science achievement .
 production challenges, vaccine nationalism, and omicron and other variants have all presented hurdles . But production challenges and vaccine nationalism have all present hurdles .
 The U.S. should assist South Asian countries in assessing Belt and Road Initiative risks and benefits . The United States should support its allies and partners in South Asia .
 The International Affairs Fellowship is based in Washington, D.C. The Fellowship is part of the U.S. National Security Council . The Fellowship was established in 2007 .
 Conflict at the Crossroads of Europe and Russia. Ukraine’s Westward drift since independence has been countered by the sometimes violent tug of Russia, felt most recently with Putin's 2022 invasion .
 A protester sits on a monument in Kyiv during clashes with riot police in February 2014 .
 Russia’s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine in 2022 is viewed by some experts as part of a renewed geopolitical rivalry between great powers .
 Ukraine has long played an important, yet sometimes overlooked, role in the global security order . Ukraine has been a key part of the world's security order for years .
 Today, the country is on the front lines of a renewed great-power rivalry . Many analysts say the rivalry will dominate international relations in the decades ahead .
Stephen Sestanovich Ukraine should wait on Cease-Fire Talks with Russia .
 Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022 marked a dramatic escalation of the eight-year-old conflict and a historic turning point for European security . Robert D Blackwill CFR's Blackwill on U.S.-China Relations, Ukraine, United States Pivot to Asia
 Many of Ukraine's cities have been pulverized by Russia's attack . One-quarter of its citizens are now refugees or have been displaced .
 Ukraine’s place in the world, including its future alignment with institutions such as the European Union and North Atlantic Treaty Organization, hangs in the balance .
 Ukraine was a cornerstone of the Soviet Union during the Cold War . Ukraine was the archrival of the United States during Cold War.
 Russia was the second-most-populous and -powerful of the fifteen Soviet republics . It was home to much of the union’s agricultural production, defense industries, and military, including the Black Sea Fleet .
 Ukraine was so vital to the union that its decision to sever ties in 1991 proved to be a coup de grâce for the ailing superpower . The union was so important to Ukraine that it was called a 'coup degrâce' for the country .
 Kyiv struggled to balance its foreign relations and to bridge deep internal divisions . However, Kyiv struggles to balance their foreign relations .
 A more nationalist, Ukrainian-speaking population in western parts of the country supported greater integration with Europe . A mostly Russian-speaking community in the east favored closer ties with Russia .
 Ukraine became a battleground in 2014 when Russia annexed Crimea and began arming and abetting separatists in the Donbas region in the country's southeast .
 Russia’s seizure of Crimea was the first time since World War II that a European state annexed the territory of another. Russia's seizure is the first since World war II .
 More than 14,000 people died in the fighting in the Donbas between 2014 and 2021 . The conflict is the bloodiest conflict in Europe since the Balkan Wars of the 1990s .
 In February 2022, Russia embarked on a full-scale invasion of Ukraine with the aim of toppling the Western-aligned government of Volodymyr Zelenskyy . Robert D Blackwill CFR’s Blackwill on U.S.-China Relations, Ukraine, United States
 Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, is sometimes referred to as ‘the mother of Russian cities’ on par in terms of cultural influence with Moscow .
 Christianity was brought from Byzantium to the Slavic peoples . It was in Kyiv in the eighth and ninth centuries that Christianity was introduced to the people .
 Christianity served as the anchor for Kievan Rus, the early Slavic state from which modern Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarussians draw their lineage .
 Approximately eight million ethnic Russians were living in Ukraine as of 2001, according to a census taken that year . Most were in the south and east .
 Moscow claimed a duty to protect these people as a pretext for its actions in Crimea and the Donbas in 2014 . Moscow claimed to have a duty. to protect them as a justification for its action in Crimea .
 Many Russian politicians viewed the divorce with Ukraine as a mistake of history and a threat to Russia’s standing as a great power .
 Losing a permanent hold on Ukraine, and letting it fall into the Western orbit, would be seen as a major blow to Russia’s international prestige .
Since the fall of the union, many Russian nationalists in both Russia and Crimea longed for a return of the peninsula .
 The city of Sevastopol is home port for Russia’s Black Sea Fleet, the dominant maritime force in the region . The city is home to the Russian Black Sea.
 Russia was for a long time Ukraine’s largest trading partner, but this link withered dramatically in recent years . Russia is now Ukraine's biggest trading partner .
 Russia had hoped to pull Ukraine into its single market, the Eurasian Economic Union . Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan are among those in the union .
 Russia has relied on Ukrainian pipelines to pump its gas to customers in Central and Eastern Europe for decades . It pays billions of dollars per year in transit fees to Kyiv .
 The flow of Russian gas through Ukraine continued in early 2022 despite the outbreak of wider hostilities between the two countries .
 Russia had planned to transport more gas to Europe via its new Nord Stream 2 pipeline . Berlin froze regulatory approval of the project after Russia’s invasion .
 Russia has been keen to preserve its political influence in Ukraine and throughout the former Soviet Union . Ukraine's preferred candidate for president in 2004, Viktor Yanukovych, lost to reformist competitor as part of the Orange Revolution popular movement .
 Russia’s interests in Ukraine came after a similar electoral defeat for the Kremlin in Georgia in 2003, known as the Rose Revolution . The Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan in 2005 was followed by another in 2005 .
 Yanukovych later became president of Ukraine, in 2010, amid voter discontent with the Orange government .
 Ukraine's ties with the EU brought tensions to a head with Russia in 2013–14 . It was Ukraine’s ties to the EU that brought tensions with Russia .
 Many Ukrainians perceived Yanukovych’s decision as a betrayal by a deeply corrupt and incompetent government . It ignited countrywide protests known as Euromaidan .
 Putin framed Euromaidan as a Western-backed “fascist coup that endangered the ethnic Russian majority in Crimea. Putin framed the ensuing tumult as a "fascist coup"
 Putin ordered a covert invasion of Crimea that he later justified as a rescue operation . In response, Putin ordered the covert invasion, he later said it was a rescue mission .
 Putin: "With Ukraine, our western partners have crossed the line" Putin said in a March 2014 address formalizing the annexation .
 Putin employed a similar narrative to justify his support for separatists in southeastern Ukraine . The region is home to large numbers of ethnic Russians and Russian speakers .
 He famously referred to the area as Novorossiya, a term dating back to eighteenth-century imperial Russia . He famously called it NovorOSSiya .
 Armed Russian provocateurs are believed to have played a central role in stirring the anti-Euromaidan secessionist movements in the region .
 Russia continued to deny its involvement in the Donbas conflict until it launched its wider invasion of Ukraine in 2022 . However, unlike Crimea, it continued to officially deny its participation in the conflict . Russia launched the wider invasion in 2022.
 Some Western analysts see Russia's 2022 invasion as the culmination of the Kremlin's growing resentment toward NATO's post-Cold War expansion into the former Soviet sphere of influence .
 Russian leaders have alleged that the U.S. and NATO repeatedly violated pledges they made in the 1990s to not expand the alliance into the former Soviet bloc .
 NATO’s enlargement during this tumultuous period for Russia is a humiliating imposition for Russia . They view NATO's enlargement as a humiliation about which they could do little but watch .
 Russia went to war with Georgia, seemingly showcasing Putin's willingness to use force to secure his country’s interests . Months later, Russia went on to fight Georgia, seeming to show Putin's desire to secure Russia's interests .
 Despite remaining a nonmember, Ukraine grew its ties with NATO in the years leading up to the 2022 invasion . Ukraine is still a non member of NATO .
 Ukraine held annual military exercises with the alliance in 2020 . In 2020 it became one of just six enhanced opportunity partners .
 Kyiv affirmed its goal to eventually gain full NATO membership . Kyiv has said it wants to be able to gain full membership .
 Russia made major security demands of the U.S. and NATO in the weeks leading up to its invasion . Russia made several security demands, including that they cease expanding the alliance, seek Russian consent for certain NATO deployments .
 Alliance leaders responded that they were open to new diplomacy but were unwilling to discuss shutting NATO’s doors to new members . NATO leaders said they were willing to talk about new diplomacy.
 Putin's fear that Ukraine would continue to develop into a modern, Western-style democracy that would inevitably undermine his regime in Russia . Other experts have said that perhaps the most important motivating factor for Putin was his fear of a modern democracy in Ukraine .
 Putin's Russia has been described as a revanchist power, keen to regain its former power and prestige .
 By seizing Crimea in 2014, Russia solidified its control of a strategic foothold on the Black Sea . Russia has gained control of the Crimea in the past year .
 Russia can project power deeper into the Mediterranean, Middle East, and North Africa . With a larger and more sophisticated military presence there, Russia canproject power into the region .
 Some analysts argue Western powers failed to impose meaningful costs on Russia in response to its annexation of Crimea . They say only increased Putin’s willingness to use military force in pursuit of his foreign policy objectives .
Until its invasion in 2022, Russia's strategic gains in the Donbas were more fragile . Until its invasion, Russia’s strategic gains was more fragile than ever .
 In July 2021, Putin authored what many foreign policy experts viewed as an ominous article explaining his controversial views of the shared history between Russia and Ukraine . The article was published in July 2021 .
 Russia amassed tens of thousands of troops along the border with Ukraine and later into allied Belarus under the auspices of military exercises . Throughout that year, Russia amassed Tens of thousands.
 In February 2022, Putin ordered a full-scale invasion, crossing a force of some two hundred thousand troops into Ukrainian territory from the south . east and north . In an attempt to seize major cities, including Kyiv, and depose the government .
 Putin said the broad goals were to ‘de-Nazify’ and “de-militarize’ Ukraine . Putin said he wanted to “ de-Nazifying’s’ Ukrainian government .
 Ukrainian forces marshaled a stalwart resistance that succeeded in bogging down the Russian military in many areas, including in Kyiv . In the early weeks of the invasion, Ukrainian forces Marshaled astalwart resistance .
 Many defense analysts say that Russian forces have suffered from low morale, poor logistics, and an ill-conceived military strategy that assumed Ukraine would fall quickly and easily .
 Moscow could curtail its aims and try to carve out portions of southern Ukraine, like it did in the Donbas in 2014 . By March, some Western observers said that, given unexpected setbacks it incurred on the battlefield, may curtail its goals .
 Others warned that continued attacks on Kyiv belied any of Moscow’s claims of a shift in military operations away from the capital .
 Washington's priority was pushing Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan to forfeit its nuclear arsenal . Only Russia would retain the former union’s weapons .
 At the same time, the U.S. rushed to bolster the shaky democracy in Russia .
 Some observers felt that the U.S. was premature in this courtship with Russia . It should have worked more on fostering geopolitical pluralism in the rest of the former Soviet Union .
 Former U.S. National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski described a healthy and stable Ukraine as a critical counterweight to Russia . He advocated the new United States grand strategy after the Cold War .
 The United States, the United Kingdom, and Russia pledged via the Budapest Referendum to respect Ukraine’s independence and sovereignty in return for it becoming a nonnuclear state .
 Twenty years later, as Russian forces seized Crimea, Ukraine's sovereignty reemerged as a top U.S. and EU foreign policy priority .
 Following the 2022 invasion, U.S. and NATO allies dramatically increased defense, economic, and humanitarian assistance to Ukraine, as well as ramped up sanctions on Russia .
 The U.S. remains committed to the restoration of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty . The United States is committed to restoring Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 It does not recognize Russia’s claims to Crimea or to the Donetsk and Luhansk republics . It encourages a diplomatic resolution to the war .
 Western powers and partners have taken many steps to increase aid to Ukraine and punish Russia since it launched its 2022 offensive . Russia has launched its own 2022 offensive against Ukraine .
 The United States provided Ukraine with more than $1 billion in emergency security assistance in early 2022 . The U.S. also passed a supplemental law that includes several billion more dollars in aid .
International sanctions on Russia have vastly expanded, now covering much of its financial, energy, defense, and tech sectors . The sanctions are targeting the assets of wealthy oligarchs and other individuals .
 The United States and some European governments also banned some Russian banks from the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication, a financial messaging system .
 Many Western companies have shuttered or suspended operations in Russia . Many influential Western companies are shuttered.
 The Group of Eight, now known as the Group of Seven, suspended Russia from its ranks indefinitely in 2014 . The group of eight has now been suspended indefinitely by Russia .
 The invasion also looks to have cost Russia its long-awaited Nord Stream 2, after Germany suspended its regulatory approval . The invasion is also likely to cost Russia's long- awaited Nord Stream2 .
 Critics say natural gas pipeline would give Russia greater political leverage over Ukraine and European gas market . U.S. and Ukrainian officials opposed the pipeline, saying it would give Russian power over Ukraine .
 Russia's aggression in recent years has galvanized public support for Ukraine's Westward leanings . Russia’s aggression has galvanised public support of Ukraine”s WestwardLeanings .
 Euromaidan is a staunch proponent of EU and NATO integration . President Petro Poroshenko is the country's richest businessman .
 Zelensky defeated Poroshenko in a sign of the public's deep dissatisfaction with the political establishment . In 2019, Zelenski defeated the president in a show of public dissatisfaction.
 Before the 2022 offensive, polls indicated that Ukrainians held mixed views on NATO .
 In the weeks after the invasion, a public opinion poll found that large majorities of Ukrainians supported the armed resistance against Russia .
 Just over half of those surveyed said that Ukraine should not concede future NATO membership to end the war .
 This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.4 . The work is based on the Creative Commons attribution-nonCommercial-noDerivative 4.5 .
 Authorities are failing to contain the chaos, risking the future of Africa’s powerhouse, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Iran is facing international pressure over its nuclear program and assassinations of top officials . Iran's Regime Iran is under pressure over the nuclear program .
 The leaders of the U.S., Australia, India, and Japan held their fourth Quad meeting in May . The Quad is getting more ambitious in the Indo-Pacific .
 After a year dedicated to fighting the pandemic, here's what they pledged to take on next .
 The U.S. sending Rockets to Ukraine United States rocket shipments to Ukraine will not trigger Russian cyberattacks against the United States .
 Russian is too focused on attacking Ukrainian systems and defending their own networks to mount a response to the weapons shipments . Russian is not focused on attacks on Ukrainian systems.
High-carbon energy sources continue to provide most of the world’s power .
 On average, 83 percent of tracker countries’ energy comes from high-carbon sources such as oil . 17 percent comes from solar and other renewables .
 Low-carbon sources, however, are on the rise, particularly in developed countries . Low- carbon sources are on a rise, especially in developing countries .
 The Keys to the Kingdom The Time is Ripe to Reset U.S.-Saudi Relations . The Keys To the Kingdom the Time is a guide to the future of Saudi Arabia .