 No candidate won an absolute majority in the first round held on 31 March 2019 . On 21 April 2019 the Ukrainian people are casting their ballots in the second round .
 The Council library has complied a bibliography to help readers understand better the political developments in the country over the past 5 years .
 The list includes books, articles and papers from our Think Tank Review . The list also includes books and articles .
 This bibliography is not exhaustive; it provides a selection of resources made by the Council Library . The Council Library's bibliographies are not exhaustive .
 Most of the titles are hyperlinked to Eureka, the resource discovery service of the Council Library . You can find additional materials on the subject on the council's website .
 Access to some resources might be limited to registered Council Library users or to users in subscribing institutions .
 The Council of the European Union or European Council do not necessarily represent the positions, policies, or opinions of the Council of European Union . The European Council is a member of the EU .
 Reuse of the covers is prohibited, they belong to the respective copyrightholders . Reuse is prohibited .
Western countries countered with economic sanctions directed against Russia . As more territory was taken from Eastern Ukraine, Western countries countered .
 The conflict did not escalate to the levels originally feared, over time, it became apparent that President Putin had failed to affect the regime change intended in Ukraine .
 Sir Lawrence Freedman provides an account of the origins and course of the RussiaUkraine conflict through the lens of the theory and practice of strategy .
 Putin's near, medium, and long-term strategies are explored in a new book . He explores Putin's "near, medium" and "long-term" strategies .
 Many see Putin as a master operator who has resuscitated a supine Russia against all odds . Freedman is less impressed with his strategic acumen in terms of the long-term fallout .
 Freedman explores concepts such as coercive diplomacy, limited war, escalation and information operations . Freedman brings the story up to the present, where a low-level conflict between Ukrainian and rebel forces in the east grinds on .
 In this way, it presents a new perspective from which institutional practices in this specific area can be examined .
 This contribution is particularly valuable for scholars and students of EU foreign and security policy . It is also valuable for students and scholars of European foreign, security policy and international relations .
 The European Union in South Eastern Europe, Eastern Europe and Central Asia Marek Neuman Cham . This chapter analyzes the positivist dimension of the EU as a normative power .
 Ukraine is a country that in its still relatively short existence as an independent actor on the international stage has seen two episodes of revolutionary upheaval . Both of which were fuelled by their desire to establish close ties with the EU and to give a fresh impetus to the stalled process of political transformation .
 Ukraine appears more than willing to join the EU’s ‘ring of friends’ and to absorb the values of democracy, respect for the rule of law, human rights, and fundamental freedoms .
 EU seems only too happy to engage in close cooperation with its eastern neighbour and to act as a changer of norms . For its part, the EU seems to be too happy.
 The European side of the story is addressed by focusing on the various agreements, policy frameworks, and supporting instruments that have been designed to guide the relations between the EU and Ukraine . In the first section of this chapter, the first part of the chapter is addressed.
 The second section of this chapter focuses on the Ukrainian side of the story . It explains that a combination of elites with oligarchic tendencies and wavering foreign and security policies has stood in the way to pursue a European path .
 The U.S. and EU responded to the same crisis. It is explicitly comparative, considering how the United States and EU reacted to the crisis .
 It also adopts a “360-degree’s perspective, focusing on how the U.S. and EU interacted with Russia . It also focuses on how Russia and Ukraine have responded, and how they have responded .
 Chapters focus on each of the four protagonists – the EU, the US, Russia and Ukraine – and on key, cross-cutting aspects of the crisis . chapters focus on EU, US, Russian and Ukraine and on sanctions, international law and energy .
 In February 2014, Russia initiated a war in Ukraine, its reasons for aggression unclear . The reasons for the conflict are unclear .
 Each of this volume's authors offers a distinct interpretation of Russia's motivations, untangling the social, historical, and political factors that created this war .
 The exploration of these and other questions gives historians, political watchers, and theorists a solid grasp of the events that have destabilized the region .
 "frozen conflicts" continuously mark the political map of Europe . Barbara Budrich, 2015 Available at Council Library Main Collection .
 The analytical chapters and comments present different viewpoints on the cases of Northern Cyprus, Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Nagorny Karabakh and Crimea .
Crimea, Global Rivalry, and the Vengeance of History critically examines the causes and consequences of Russia's annexation of Crimea . It reviews differing annexations in history from the Seven Years War to today .
 It develops a unique comparative historical approach designed to compare and contrast alliance formations after Soviet collapse with alliance formations in previous eras .
 A nascent Russian-Chinese alliance can be compared to that between Weimar Germany and Soviet Russia . It argues that contemporary Russia-Ukraine conflict is more reminiscent of conflict during Bolshevik revolution than Hitler's annexation of the Sudetenland .
 The US-NATO-European-Japanese reaction is not that of 'appeasement' It is reminiscent of French reaction to Prussian annexation of Alsace before World War I, or European reaction to Russian annexations before Crimea .
Since 1945 it had been understood that the borders of States must not be the object of forcible change by other States . Ever since 1945 it was understood that it had not been understood.
 Russia has now revived long-buried historical claims, and prosecutes them by dint of arms . However, Russia is now trying to prosecute them bydint of Arms .
 The annexation of Crimea in March 2014 and the subsequent armed incursions in eastern Ukraine challenge not just one State's territorial integrity, but jeopardize the general settlement on which international law for almost three generations has rested .
 This is the settlement which enabled human rights and modern institutions of international law to flourish . This is a settlement which allowed human rights to flourish in the world. This is an example of the settlement that enabled modern institutions to flourish.
 Russia's rejection of human rights and its new geopolitics of territorial seizure in this light should be seen not in isolation but as connected developments, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Russia's domestic rejection of Human rights and new geopolitical seizure in the light should not be seen in isolation .
 The world was stunned when Vladimir Putin invaded and seized the seaport region of Crimea in March 2014 .
 In the weeks that followed, separatist rebels aided by Russia took over territory in Crimea in eastern Ukraine .
 The United States and its Western allies immediately imposed strict sanctions on Russia . They have continued to tighten those sanctions . The U.S. and its allies immediately impose strict sanctions .
 sharp deterioration in East-West relations has raised questions about Vladimir Putin's policies . This sharp deterioration has raised basic questions about the future of Russia .
 Marvin Kalb reported from Russia in the 1950s for Edward R Murrow and served as the CBS Moscow bureau chief in the early 1960s . Kalb argues that Putin did not ""suddenly" decide to invade Crimea and then instigate a pro-Russian rebellion in eastern Ukraine .
 He had been waiting for the right moment in the months after Ukrainians rose up in bloody protests against the pro-Russian president .
 Putin says Ukraine's opposition constituted an existential threat to Russia . Putin says the opposition is a threat to the country .
 Imperial Gamble examines how Putin reached that conclusion by taking a critical look at the recent political history of post-Soviet Russia .
 It also journeys deeper into the Russian past to more fully explain the roots of Russian nationalism that drives both Putin and the Russian people who support his actions in Ukraine . It also journeys deeper into Russia's past.
 Kalb argues that the post-cold war world today hangs on the resolution of the Ukraine crisis . Kalb says that the world is still in the middle of a crisis .
 Russia will remain a danger zone with global consequences if it is treated as a problem to be resolved by Russia . The U.S. and Europe, on the one side, and the United States and Europe on the other, will remain in danger zone .
 The consequences of the popular rebellion and Russian President Putin’s attempt to strangle it remain uncertain .
 Brothers Armed charts the history of military reform and progress in Ukraine and Russia from the collapse of the Soviet Union to the 2014 annexation of Crimea .
 Ukraine ist das einzige Land Europas, in der die Annäherung an die EU mit Blut bezahlt haben . Beobachter der Proteste am Majdan-Platz in Kiew.
 Sätze aus den den achtziger Jahren des vergangenen Jahrhunderts . Es sind SäTze wir wir sie von den Dissidenten in Warschau, in Budapest, in Prag kennen .
 In der Ukraine des Jahres 2014 hat es viele, sehr Viele Tote gegeben, bevor ein korruptes Regime weggedrängt werden konnte in einen Kampf zwischen der
 In diesem Buch, Buch kommen vor allem Stimmen aus der Ukraine zu Wort, Schriftstellerinnen, Dichter, Intellektuelle . In diesm Buch,  Buch, Buch, Buch, Ukraine,
 Deshalb geht es in diesem Buch immer auch um Europa, und Autoren aus aus anderen europäischen Ländern .
 The team is from Juri Andruchowytsch, Elmar Brok, Orlando Figes, Jörg Forbrig, Timothy Garton Ash, Rebecca Harms, Halyna Kruk, Maxym Kidruk, Adam Michnik, Martin Pollack
Journalist Mustafa Najem is a German-born journalist . Najem wrote "Wer kommt mit?" in November 2013 .
 Mehr als hundert Menschen wurden getötet, according to the Gewalt protest . The protest is part of a protest against Menschen .
 Nachbarland einmarschieren. Nach barland is the country's second largest country in the world . Putin is known as the leader of Russia's most powerful state .
 Während eine reife ukrainische Zivilgesellschaft die Bildung neuer staatlicher Strukturen bewacht . Bürger auf einen nationalistischen imperialen Kurs.
 Schriftsteller, viele von ihnen Aktivisten, erzählen von den aufwühlendsten Tagen ihres Lebens . The Tagen is the name of the Tagen.
 Historiker, Soziologen und Politikwissenschaftler versuchen sich an einer Anatomie des Augenblicks .
 The study identifies innovations in the three associated states’ justice sectors .
 It analyses changes to both the constitutional and institutional frameworks, as well as the ‘software’,e. Selection, appointment, promotion, promotion and disciplinary procedures . Other means to fight corruption.
 The signing of the Agreement in 2014 was an act of strategic geo-political significance . The agreement was signed by Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin .
 The Agreement is a defiant statement of Ukraine’s determination to become an independent democratic state. Emblematic of the struggle to replace Yanukovych regime at home .
 This book adds new value in charting Ukraine’s progress in putting the Agreement into effect . This book is the latest in a series of books charting the Ukraine's progress .
 Ukrainians on both sides of the Donbas front lines face a humanitarian crisis . Kiev and Moscow face a growing sense of abandonment by both Kiev and Russia .
 The goal was to identify the positions of stakeholders with an eye to defining the possibilities for future negotiations and paths out of conflict . The aim was to define the possibilities of future negotiations.
After decades of Soviet style top-down governance, local governments have been pushed to the fore . The role of local governments has been pushed into the fore by the Soviet style .
 If implemented successfully, it could increase local development and political engagement, ultimately contributing to increased political stability in Ukraine and Europe . If implemented, it would also increase political engagement and local development .
 The significance of decentralization reforms is often lost in the noise surrounding Crimea, the secessionist conflict in the east, and the political power struggles in Kiev .
 We have little evidence about the nature of trust and its implications for decision-making, in particular in times of crisis. Yet, there is little evidence of trust in the world .
 In the case of the Ukrainian crisis, this happened in parallel to the decreasing levels of trust in EU–Russia relations . This happened in a similar way to the decrease in trust in the EU-Russia relations.
 The EU was able to agree and implement the instruments of coercive power . The EU has now been able to implement its coercive power.
We look at the adoption of EU sanctions in reaction to the annexation of Crimea, the downing of the Malaysian Airlines MH17 plane and the war in Donbas . To illustrate our argument, we look at our argument.
 Ukraine since the annexation of Crimea and the outbreak of the conflict in the Donbass Gabriele Baumann . The principle of border inviolability within Europe was put into question in 2014 .
 He argues that many articles have been written using orientalist stereotypes of Russia, Ukraine and the Crimea that have deep roots in Western academia .
 It also considers whether Ukraine is ready to actually absorb and use such aid effectively . Ukraine is also considered to be ready to use it as a way to absorb aid .
 Russian strategy of deception and the conflict in Ukraine. 16.16 Access online . This report analyses Russian propaganda and disinformation .
 The strategic deception is not exclusively a Russian term, but it does capture what the authors think is an essential feature of the current Russian foreign and security policy .
 It is driven by attempts to put the adversary into a defensive posture and off balance, and thus, to create conditions for surprise . It's driven by attempt to put adversary into defensive posture.
 Civil society intervened to fill the gap created by the state's failure turning de facto into a security actor .
Post-Maidan civil society has displayed potential to act as a ""change agent" determined to induce substantial reforms in Ukraine .
 Volunteer battalions in post-Maidan Ukraine Rosaria Puglisi . Istituto Affari Internazionali.15 Access online .
 The new government had to employ battalions made of self defence groups of the Maidan . The Maidan government was forced to employ the battalions .
 This article describes their role, composition, how there are perceived by the public opinion, their political activism, and some reform proposals . It concludes with some proposals.
 The other two scenarios see Ukraine either in an unchanged position or in a stronger involvement in the Eurasian space . The other one scenario sees Ukraine in a strong role in the region .
 The EU overestimated the European aspirations of the Ukrainian government at that time . It underestimated the anti-European Russian authorities' plans for Ukraine .
 The disappearance of Ukraine as a sovereign entity would be a thunderclap in Europe as it would be very difficult to manage and might trigger a long civil war . The disappearance could trigger a possible civil war.
 If Ukraine survives it will be with the Crimean region in the best case under the supervision of an international agreement, and in the worst under direct supervision of Moscow .
 This paper focuses on specific aspects of the current crisis in Ukraine . It takes into consideration the positions of the major players in the international system .
 Russian assertiveness is a sign of extreme weakness which is not in the interest of the U.S. The approach of European countries risks becoming a factor of significant instability within Ukraine, says the US .
 Avoiding such a scenario would require substantial decentralisation of power and guarantees of cultural autonomy to predominantly Russian speaking eastern and southern Ukraine .
International loans that are expected to come in over the next one to two years are likely to be sufficient to prevent a sovereign default and collapse of the country's financial sector .
 The risks of a Russian military intervention will remain acute until at least June 2014 . Nevertheless, the risks of an intervention by Russia remain acute .
 Russia is likely to continue to maintain its troop levels close to Ukraine’s borders as a means of applying pressure . Even if a Russian intervention is not triggered by the crisis in eastern Ukraine, Russia will continue to keep its troops close to the border .
Political opinions in the regions will become more complicated, he says . This view will become a relic of the past, as political opinions will become complicated .
 The United Opposition will certainly be split between a pragmatic wing supportive of Poroshenko and a populist wing that remains loyal to Tymoshenko .
 It looks at pro-Russian unrest in the South East, the actions of Ukrainian far-right groups and Russian and Western policies toward Ukraine .
 Maidan should be seen as the first clear manifestation of a new generation of Ukrainians raised in an independent Ukraine, well-educated and familiar with new social media .
 The political opposition has lost a significant proportion of the control of the political opposition . The radicalisation and escalation of the protests following 19 January is a consequence of the radicalisation of the opposition .
 The author gives an outlook on the future of Ukraine by pointing out its most important determinants, namely Russia's projected model of Ukraine . Russia's possible role as a veto player in questions of EU and NATO expansion into Eastern Europe .
 The ‘Euromaidan’ protests occurred between December 2013 and February 2014 . This paper argues that the protests have provoked two fundamental changes that give grounds for cautious optimism .
 Second, state-society relations are being reconfigured, with citizens demanding greater oversight of and accountability from state institutions . civic activists pushing for a greater role in policy-making .
 The situation in Eastern Ukraine is often compared with that of Transnistria, the separatist region of Moldova . The situation is often similar to that of the Moldova region .
 Two cases differ for a number of reasons, all of which will make the "Novorossiya" project much harder for Russia to sustain than Transnistria .
 The step backwards into a bipolar confrontation in Europe could be prevented by a rejuvenation of the pan-European security cooperation instruments established in the 1990s .
 European Council on Foreign Relations needs a clearer and more unified strategy for a diplomatic settlement if Ukraine is to avoid becoming a frozen conflict .
 The world supports Ukraine not only with declarations and statements, but also with real actions, according to the research . The research displayed that the world supports the Ukraine .