 A lot of times there isn’t much coverage about the topics you are covering so for us it’s been a very good aid. A a lot of time there isn't much coverage of the topics.
 Owner of PR agency mm. It’s very useful to have the Russian perspective, says owner .
 This year, when morning headlines proclaimed doom and disaster day after day, it began to feel routine to hope, fiercely . The year began to be a year of hope for just that a grace would emerge from the evil and destruction afflicting the world .
 In late winter, a revanchist Moscow laid claim to Crimea, setting off months of violent, pro-Russian separatism on Europe's eastern periphery . More than 3,600 dead and hundreds of thousands displaced.
 The Islamic State is an Islamic State, an army of thousands that poured out of northern Syria into Iraq . It left a trail of death and wanton bloodshed .
 Ebola epidemic has ravaged the fragile states of West Africa, racial tensions in the American heartland . 2014 is the hottest year on record for the planet, and you have 2014 .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin, Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, Boko Haram chief Abubaltar Shekau are among those whose ideas have rocked the foundations of geopolitical order .
 It’s a metaphor for violence, certainly, but also one for defiance, for resistance, for unleashing the startlingly new. It's a symbol for violence but also for defiance and for resistance .
 The history books might remember this year as one in which people sowed chaos and fear .
Health workers risked their lives to save thousands of strangers in West Africa . But it was also a year when health workers were risking their lives in the West Africa.
 Bill McKibben notes in his essay that grassroots movements galvanized grassroots movements to guard humanity from approaching environmental calamity .
 Artists’ explosive creativity offered new visions of the past, present, and future, and advocates supported civilians caught in the cross-hairs of war .
Businesswomen who are reinvigorating marketplaces and chroniclers tell the most important stories of our time in pioneering ways . You have 2014. Add to this list of businessmen and businesswomen .
 FP's Global Thinkers are individuals who shook the world as we knew it . In this tumultuous year, FP’s Globalthinkers are people who shake the world .
 Norwich’s Master of Arts in Diplomacy online program can help you develop specialized skills . In doing so, many of them have helped build a far better one .
 Whether your background is business, military, government or non-profit sector, you'll gain a new perspective on the complexities of communicating and negotiating global affairs .
norwich.edu/fpp or caii 1-800-460-5597 ext.78 to iearn more . Visit dipiomacy.com for more information .
 No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher . The publisher is responsible for the content of this article .
 GW's Elliott School of International Affairs is located just steps from some of the most important policymaking institutions in the world . The Elliott School is located in the heart of the world's most important institutions .
 Our proximity to U.S. and international organizations puts our scholars in a powerful position to analyze policy problems . It draws world leaders to our campus to address some of the most important issues of our time .
Every school of international affairs bridges the theory and practice of foreign policy . Every school of International Affairs bridges the Theory and practice.
 Elliott School of International Affairs. The GEORGE WASHiNGTON UNIVERStTY CONTRIButors . "BASICALLY, we just pack a CLEAR GLASS bottle with a small amount of explosives"
 The walls are bulletproof; you never know where the shards of the bottle will go . And of course the walls are Bulletproof .
 We want to photograph the exact millisecond after we detonate, right when you can see the fire of the explosion . The shape of the bottle is still intact .
Highspeed flash equipment goes up to a 1/50,000 of a second, but it's still difficult to get the timing right . We often have to re-engineer the explosion multiple times .
 It’s nice, though, though; you see amazing details each time . You see all kinds of interesting textures and color combinations .
 Packer has covered the Iraq War, atrocities committed in Sierra Leone, civil unrest in Ivory Coast, and counterinsurgency worldwide .
 Since joining the FT, she has worked in the former Soviet Union, Western Europe, and Japan . She has worked for the FT in the past.
 Northrop Srumman's advanced platforms and tech nal ogles offer a wide range at new capabilities for every mission . The company has a range of platforms and technologies that can be used on any mission .
 'Needless Euphemisms' Polemicists, politicians, and tyrants have long understood that language does not just express ideas . It also shapes ideas and influences the way people think .
 Nowhere is the manipulation of language and perception more evident than in the contemporary debate about immigration policy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The battle over terminology pertaining to immigration can be as heated as the policy debate itself . "Illegal Alien" is the latest in a series of articles on immigration .
 If proponents of open immigration and amnesty for illegal aliens are to achieve their political ends, they must first control the language of the debate, he says .
 immigration laws must be a completely innocuous act, and perhaps even noble . They must create a false impression in the minds of the American people that violation of U.S. immigration laws is, at least, a completely harmless act .
 Rather than lawbreakers, people who settle in the U.S. illegally must be defined in euphemistic terms that obfuscate both their deeds and their impact on the people whom laws are meant to protect .
Illegal aliens can inflict significant harm on American workers and taxpayers, says CNN's John Sutter . Immigration may also serve some narrow domestic political and economic interests, he says .
 The use of the term ‘illegal alien’ clearly and accurately describes people living in the U.S. without legal authorization . The term “illegal aliens’s” clearly describes people who are living without legal permission .
 An illegal alien is a foreign national who is in a country in violation of U.S. law .
 Euphemism and neargobbledygook are the objectives of those trying to create the impression that taking up residence in the U.S. illegally is on par with forgetting to put a quarter in the parking meter .
 The "Media-Friendly Glossary on Migration" is funded by George Soros’s Open Society Foundations . It amounts to nothing less than a frontal assault on clear language .
 If there is to be actual reform of U.S. immigration policies that truly serve the interests of the American people, it must be framed with respectful language .
 Illegal aliens are not inherently bad people, but they are foreign nationals who have no legal right to be in America . They have no right to live in America.
 The White House's rhetoric during President Barack Obama's first term suggested he wanted to be more engaged and more transformative internationally than any U.S. president since John F Kennedy .
 In practice, Obama's foreign policy has been marred by a lack of interest, says David Rothkopf .
 The president's policy toward the Middle East, as well as al Qaeda and its affiliates, is in serious trouble . It is true that the president’s policies toward the broader Middle East are inserious trouble .
 He neglected Syria for three years, and now the Islamic State chickens have come home to roost .
In Iraq, Iraq's Foreign policy welcomes letters to the editor . In Iraq, special forces and military Foreign policy welcome letters to editor .
 FOREiGNPOLiCY.com.com will feature iReporters on CNN.com's iReport.com and iReporter's weekly news stories . Click here for more debate and discussion of stories .
 Obama's main failing is not his handling of the Benghazi attack per se, but the hands-off approach the U.S. has to help the country get back on its feet since Muammar al-Qaddafi's overthrow .
 The president's overall rhetoric about the need for minimalism and retrenchment in the U.S. is not adequate to the task at hand, he says .
 The allegations of weakness and irresoluteness now being made against the president are badly wrong, says CNN's John Sutter .
 On most of the big issues, his policies are at least pointing in the right general direction . In some cases, they are in need of refinement and reinvigoration, he says .
On Ukraine and Russia, Obama rightly began the US response with mild sanctions over Crimea issue .
 Moscow's actions in eastern Ukraine have not been supported by European allies . Russian President Vladimir Putin avoided pursuit of immediate escalation, in both military and economic terms .
 The current situation looks far more promising than it did just a few months ago . It is much too early to declare success, but the current situation is more promising .
 Obama’s April trip to the region restored some momentum to his ‘rebalance’ policy . On China (and North Korea) Obama”s April visit to China ( and North Korea).
 U.S. policy is not overly muscular, but that is correct for a situation in which the United States should be demonstrating resolve . James Steinberg and I argue in our new book.
 Obama has patiently put together progressively stronger sanctions using creative formal and informal means . The conditions that gave rise to President Hassan Rouhani’s election there are now in place .
 Conditions now give at least some hope for a negotiated settlement over the nuclear issue . These conditions now give some hope.
 If force does prove a necessary last resort, few will be able to say that Obama invoked the military option too soon .
 It is a decent grand strategy at the broad level, even if it has serious shortcomings with regard to the Middle East . Add it up, and it is a good grand strategy, even though it has a serious shortcomings .
 Some of the energy and focus of earlier times are the focus of the day . This week's FDCUS DF EARLIER TIMES will feature some of the most interesting stories of the year .
 The needed repair work is more akin to carpentry than to wholesale construction of a new edifice . The needed repairs are more like carpentry, than wholesale construction .
 The Mailing Addresses Publisher, Editor and Managing Editor SVP Global Advertising Sales . Amer Yaqub Same address as no.
 Morgan Stanley Smith Barney EEO, 1300 Thames St, Baltimore, MD, Morgan Stanley S Co. E. E., Jacksonville, FE, FE; Morgan StanleySmith Barney E.E., Morgan Stanley, FE and Morgan Stanley St, MD .
 Publication of this Statement of Dwnership will be printed in the December 2014 issue of this publication . 1 certify that all information furnished on this form is true and complete .
 FOREIGN POLICY 11 Special Advertising Supplement NIGERIA Fast Growth; Big Problems No. No other emerging market offers the potential of Nigeria .
 The oil-rich nation is trying to improve governance and modernize its economy . Projected to have the world’s fourth-largest population by 2040 and become an economic leader by the mid-21st century .
 corruption, oil theft, poverty, and a brutal insurgency are challenges for the government . But its challenges are immense-not least the corruption, corruption, and oil theft .
 T he International Monetary Fund predicts that Nigeria’s economy will grow by 7 percent this year and by slightly more next year . Then it will ease to 6. percent by 2019 .
 Nigeria’s problems can be overcome if Nigeria's problems are overcome. But what's really exciting is where this prolonged expansion path could lead, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Nigeria could boast the world’s 13th largest economy, right behind France and Germany . By the middle of this century, according to projections by Goldman Sachs, Nigeria could be the world's 13thlargest economy .
 Moody’s puts Nigeria in the top 15 within the same time frame . Nigeria is up from 28th place to 28th now .
 Former Goldman economist Jim O'Neill includes Nigeria in a select group of ‘MINTs’ along with Mexico, Indonesia, and Turkey . O’Neill: Four large emerging economies have ‘very favorable demographics for at least the next 20 years, and their economic prospects
 The IMF does not project so far ahead, but it is quite positive about the near-term outlook . The IMF doesn't project so much ahead.
 Nigeria is not without its share of problems, many of which dominate international press reports about the country . A Long Road Ahead Dealing with generational legacy issues is rarely quick or easy .
 A year later, he launched the Transformation Agenda, with an emphasis on bringing private investment into oil, gas and power . The Transformation Agenda was launched a year later .
 Nigeria has privatized much of the power sector, and essential investments are starting to flow . Since then, Nigeria's power sector has been privatized .
 Recent pension reforms, in addition to gradual easing of some old-age poverty, may help steer local funds into infrastructure .
 Inflation is under control, bureaucracy is improving, and welfare reforms are promised . Inflation has been under control and the economy is improving .
 Most of the reforms have so far benefited the more developed and peaceful south of the country . But they do little to help the underdeveloped northern region, where violence from Boko Haram feeds on poverty .
 Nigeria showed a dramatically different face in its recent brush with Ebola . The Lessons of Ebola often criticized for its corruption, social problems, and inefficiency .
 Lagos is one of the world’s largest metropolitan areas with a population of 21 million . Rapid response, well-organized public officials, dedicated health workers, and good preparations helped prevent the virus escaping .
 Vaz was speaking in late October, just three months after Patrick Sawyer, a Liberian-American, landed in Lagos with symptoms of fever, diarrhea and vomiting .
 Stella Ameyo Adadevoh, who refused to believe Sawyer’s denial of any exposure to Ebola, physically restrained him in his hospital bed, and resisted official pressure to discharge him .
After some early mistakes and initial hesitation, the government rapidly adapted an emergency-operations center . The center had been established earlier with foreign aid to fight polio .
 The widespread mobile phone network was crucial, as was the existing Lagos hospital and ambulance system, which is much better than in many other parts of the country .
 Nigeria conducted the iargest privatization of pubiic utiiities in Africa-a modei for other countries . Nigeria has conducted the most privatization of pubs in Africa .
 privatization was the reaiization that government aione couid not continue to run the power sector as a matter of sociai weifare . But it wasn’t just the government handing over the powersector.
 Government did not have the funds, and it needed to give Nigerians the ievei and quaiity of power suppiy that they ciamor for .
 In the past, some companies even ieft Nigeria because of inadequate power suppiies . Without power, none of this is possibie .
 The government is committed to taking eiectricity to the most distant rurai popuiations .
 ICT is a credible economic sector, possibly surpassing oil and gas in the future . We are going to position ICT as a credible economy, perhaps surpassing gas and oil and oil . ICT will be a credible sector.
 NITDA charged with promoting ICT development by drawing up standards, fomenting e-government, fostering ICT training, and sponsoring infrastructure development .
 Omobola Johnson, Nigeria’s minister of communication technology, is equally optimistic . Johnson is also the country's minister of communications technology .
 More people in Nigeria have mobile phones than have a bank account, she points out . The potential for going straight to mobile financial services is huge, she says .
 About 28 percent of Nigerians have some Internet access, but broadband penetration is just over 6 percent . Currently about 28 percent have some internet access, and about 6 percent have broadband .
 75 percent of people have mobile phones that use older GSM-2G technology and cannot access the Internet . However, around 75 percent have mobile phone that use the older technology .
 The challenge is to extend networks further into poorly served rural areas and upgrade the whole system to 3G or even 4G technology to allow for services such as mobile banking .
 Nigeria recently announced that it would license seven infrastructure companies to expand broadband networks and adopt an open-access policy . carriers will be required to lease network space to competitors .
 Subscribers would multiply fivefold, to around 50 percent of the national population . The population would increase to 50 percent, according to the government .
 Yeariy funding needs for power sector over the next five years . Conceived in 2004 as a fast-track pubiiciy funded initiative to add significant new generating capacity to Nigeria's eiectricity suppiy system .
 *70 licenses issued by NERC to iPPs to improve power in the country . There were independent Power Producers present in Nigeria prior to the privatization process .
 Power Holding of Public Enterprises to advise on privatization of 11 Company of Nigeria . distribution companies and 6 generation companies . Unbundling of PHCN companies commences.
 Manitoba Hydro International takes charge of TCN in a US$24. million contract . The contract is expected to run for three years . The company aims to reorganize TCN into a market-driven company .
 World Bank pledges US$100m to diversify Nigeria's reliance on oil . President Goodluck Jonathan formally hands over share certificates and licenses to 14 new core owners of PHCN successor companies .
 The privatization agency sends a request for proposal to 48 prospective bidders .
 The Patterson School can put you on the right track for a career in international affairs .
 Each year, just 35 exceptional students gain entry into our unique masters program . The masters program is a unique program that focuses on students from around the world .
Passionate colleagues hail from across the country and around the world with backgrounds as diverse as the challenges they hope to tackle .
 PROEESSIONAL Theory and practice are taught by top scholars and former officials .
 Classroom learning, corporate and government site visits, internships, and more are fused to provide the skills you need to achieve your goals in the global arena .
 E Is for E egalitarian I found an mstitution that was under shoek P.26 P.18 EPIPHANIES CHRISTINE LAGARDE o THE THINGS THEY CARRIED IDEAS THE CLIMATE SCIENTIST LORD of THE FLIES ANTH
 Freire encouraged his pupils-300 adult sugar-cane cutters-to learn from one another by sharing their life experiences . He encouraged pupils to share their experiences with each other .
 Freire then used the students' working vocabulary as untao united fogo fire tongue the building blocks for language lessons .
 The pedagogy rejected the normal hierarchies of the student-teacher relationship . It worked .
 His pupils were literate within weeks, and the initiative soon became a federal program . The initiative became a national program .
 When the military took power in 1964, Freire was ARTwork by JONATHAS DE ANDRADE . The military took control in 1964 .
 This new approach, however, ultimately denied prospective students the agency at the heart of Freire's mission . The agency's new approach is not a new approach .
 GO educational posters combine the science of knife brasil brazil faisca and the art of interpretation in Brazil .
In 2010, de Andrade worked with a group of illiterate seamstresses to choose 40 words to be displayed on the prints . In 2010, he co-opted the graphics-based teaching tradition from the military years .
Atrasado late tijolo brick exiled and his program was dismantled . By carefully juxtaposing 20 government vintage posters into the work, he not only introduced unique and, at times, provocative word combinations .
 Leonardo da Vinci writes Codex on the Flight of Birds, which specuiates that human air travei couid be modeied on the mechanics of avian flight .
 Just over a decade iater, the worid's first commerciai passenger flight traveis from St. St.C. The worid’s first commercial flight was on a St.C.'s first flight.
 Schmitt invented an eiectricai circuit modeied after the neurai impulse systems of squids in 1934 . Schmitt was a doctoral student at the time .
Schmitt's word catches on and, five years later, is adopted into Webster's dictionary . Schmitt's words catch on and are adopted into the dictionary .
 Small indentations tailed riblets are attached to the outer shell of an aircraft with adhesive to reduce drag in the air and make Jets more aerodynamic .
 Lufthansa is developing technology to "painf these grooves directly onto commercial aircraft exteriors" to lower fuel consumption by about 1 percent . The savings could yield significant environmental benefits .
 The United States alone consumes about 20 billion gallons of aviafion fuel . Annually, the United States only consumes 20 billion gallon of fuel .
 The large office and retail space does not have a conventional heating and cooling system . Instead, it uses chimneys that naturally draw in cool air to maintain temperate environment .
 The ventilation system costs one-tenth of that in a comparable, air-conditioned building, says Pearce . It uses 35 percent less energy than a comparable building, he says .
Benyus frames the concept of biomimetics around the urgent goal of ending environmental destruction . Benyus, now considered the field's chief proselytizer, frames the idea for biomimetic .
 The suit replicated the scaly skin and bioluminescence of certain fish . The suit was designed to replicate the skin and body parts of fish .
Nature might offer important keys to unlocking the cosmos, according to a new study .
After billions of years of evolution, nature has determined what is efficient, effective, and enduring . Human innovation should take cues from naturally occurring processes, some think .
 From airplanes to Velcro, inventors have long turned to flora and fauna for inspiration and instruction .
 biomimetics is generating product designs-not to mention hundreds of millions of dollars in capital investment-that are not just pioneering, but also potentially sustainable .
 Bonser finds that between 1985 and 2005, the number of patents worldwide containing the word "biomimetic" or "bio-inspired" increased by 93 .
 The device could store up to 3 liters of drinking water every hour . It would collect condensation on microscopic bumps on its back .
 Harvard scientists and engineers publish a paper in Nature introducing a new, metalfree battery that relies on naturally abundant, carbon-based molecules called quinones . Quinones store energy in animals and plants .
 Lavasa Corp. files for initial public offering, its second attempt in four years to raise 7. billion rupees to develop the country's first city based on biomimetic principles .
 The company has worked with biologists to develop the city's master plan . It incorporates reforestation efforts, rainwater harvesting, and green construction practices . The company also has worked closely with biologists.
 The firm consults for, trains, and educates companies on how to incorporate bio-inspired innovation into their practices . The firm's name is a reference to 3. billion years of natural life .
 The index aims to quantify the expansion of bio-inspired research and innovation . Measuring the frequency of biomimetics terms used in scientific Journals, patents, and grants .
 biomimicry could represent $300 billion of U.S. GDP annually, 1. million jobs, and $50 billion in terms of resources conserved . By 2025, biomimics could represent 1.1 million jobs and 1.5 million jobs .
 While Arctic sea ice continues to melt, down in the Antarctic, ice is actually accumulating-and at record levels .
 A small one for investigating the upper 5 to 10 meters of snow layering in great detail . That's a small one.
 The layers give a historical picture of what's happened there, like the rings of a tree . The layers of the tree give the historical picture.
 Australia's Starrett 5-meter measuring tape was used during an expedition led by Australia in 2003 .
 September 2014 saw 7.7G million square miles covered in ice . That's more than 500,000 square miles above the average documented between 1981 and 2010 .
 Glaciologist Ted Scambos and his colleagues are trying to figure out what, exactly, is happening .
Ice collecting samples and deploying ground-penetrating radar and other technologies to determine how the ice is changing . His trips typically run "eight weeks, door to door," he says .
Scambos notes that people shouldn't assume the Antarctic is in great shape . Despite this year's good news about ice, Scambos says people should not assume it's great shape.
 This year, two studies posited that the collapse of the Amundsen Sea ice sheet in the western Antarctic appears inevitable . It might raise global sea levels by some 4 feet, according to studies .
 Scambos says it can be a struggle to communicate the urgency of his work . The work is highly detailed and done in a faraway, isolated place .
 Scambos's next big trip likely will be to a ridge on the East Antarctic Plateau . It is thought to be the coldest place on Earth .
 Foreign Policy recently caught up with Scambos to learn what is required to live and work at the bottom of the world .
 A want to hear what the weather Mighty Wind was a favorite one is like-wind speed and year . The Mighty Wind is the most powerful wind in the world .
 Bumble Bee sardines, Lake Champlain Chocolates, Nature Valley granola bar Good pocket food is important . i aimost aiways lose weight in Antarctica .
 I never eat sardines while in the U.S., but in Antarctica I realiy like them. I never ate sardine while in U.N. But in Antarctica, I realy like them, says author .
 LifeLink avalanche shovel can dig out your snowmobile with this shovel . If you get into trouble, you can use this shovel.
 The way you work at -30 is you pull out your hands and work for maybe three or four minutes on some fine instrument . Then your fingers get so cold that you really can't do what you want to do anymore .
 Iridium satellite phone and Goal Zero solar panels that's become essential equipment .
 Scientists used to be issued big shortwave radios that required big batteries and antennas . The radios needed big batteries, antennas and antennas to be used .
 We use the solar panels to charge the satellite phone out on multiday treks . The solar panels are used to charge satellite phones out of the sun .
 It was designed specially for working at McMurdo Station in Antarctica . It's actually a bit of overkill for most of the work we do .
 When you're burying equipment and taking samples, you can heat up quickly . You really don't want to sweat .
 This is the field mountaineering gear we carry in a crevassed area . FOREIGN POLICY Grivel ice ax and climbing rope are the gear we use .
 We try not to work in places where falling into crevasses is a danger, but sometimes you can't avoid it . We try to avoid it, but it's not easy to do so .
 We always have a field mountaineer that works with us to be safe. We've been trained to rescue somebody, if we had to, if they had to . We've always been trained for rescue, but we always have an expert on how to do it .
 Give a man a fish, and you'll feed him for a day, says the Swedish Fish .
 Tell him he has more fish than his neighbors-and apparently he'll vote conservative . Tell him that he's a conservative .
 74 percent of respondents were off by more than 10 percentage points . They did not estimate the percentage of their compatriots who earned a yearly income below their own .
 The vast majority of those who guessed wrongly underestimated their own positions thought they were poorer than their compatriots . The vast most of those guessed wrongly.
 All those surveyed were also asked several questions meant to assess their political leanings . All the respondents were asked questions about their political leans.
 The subjects were asked what level of wealth redistribution they would prefer, which political party they supported, and what changes they would make to Sweden's income tax system . They were then asked again about their politics .
 Sweden Democrats are more likely to express support for the Sweden Democrats, the country's far-right party . They are also likely to support the Sweden Democratic Party .
 Why different countries have different predilections when it comes to wealth redistribution remains a puzzle for political scientists .
 Some experts have suggested that the United States prefers lower levels of redistribution relative to other developed countries . Many Americans have a skewed sense of how well off they actually are, experts say .
 Nordic socialism may be less about adhering to the Law of Jante-thatis, a mentality that emphasizes the collective- and more about a big misunderstanding .
 The Tsetse Fly had fundamentally shaped agrieulture aeross a wide swath of Afriea . The unpleasant little inseet, its nasty bite, and the sleeping siekness it earries had fundamentallyshaped agrieultry aeross .
 Nash was onto something, but it may have been an even bigger phenomenon than he imagined . Nash was on something.
 The tsetse fly may have left an indelible mark on many aspects of life in parts of Africa .
 A central authority could marshal taxes and provide public goods, and whether there was indigenous slavery . These traits include the degree of political centralization of a government .
 The ‘tsetse suitability index’ is a scoring system that gauges how hospitable a Alsan is . Alsan found that important societal traits could be explained by the presence or absence of the tsetse fly .
 A lack of agricultural development brought on by the fly meant a population could never grow dense enough for centralized government . The region’s climate is to the fly, based on temperature and humidity .
 Alsan found that important societal traits could be explained, in part, by the presence or absence of the tsetse fly .
 A lack of agricultural development brought on by the fly, for instance, meant a population could never grow dense enough for centralized government . The fly is a type of bird that flies that can be seen in the wild .
 A lack of domesticated animals to work equipment meant that slavery remained a relevant institution .
 Nigeria sits in the heart of the fly-friendly zone but has nonetheless grown into Africa’s largest economy .
 The ancient city of Great Zimbabwe has been relegated to the history books, despite its location on a tsetse-free highland, while present-day Zimbabwe is one of the world's most dysfunctional states .
 For its size, the study emphasizes, the fly was a surprisingly mighty force . The fly may still be a surprisingly powerful force, and might still be .
 A study in the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, due out in early 2015, looks at the connection between gender equality and how well a country's athletes-both male and female-have fared in the Olympics .
 The study looked at results from both the Summer 2012 and Winter 2014 games . It found that the better a country scored on metrics of equality between the sexes as measured by the World Economic Forum . The more medals it accumulated.
 Equality in education was an especially good predictor of performance by athletes . Equality ineducation was anespecially good predictor by athletes.
 greater gender parity at home seemed to provide female athletes with a boost, but it was also linked with male performance . More female athletes at home also seemed to have a boost.
 Men who are considered too feminine by societal standards may leave their sports early . For example, men who are too feminine may leave sports early.
 The results echo those of another study, released in April 2014, which looked at Summer Olympics between 1996 and 2012 . The study looked at the Summer Olympics from 1996 to 2012 .
 Athletes of both sexes had a better chance of medaling if they were from a more gender-equal country . It found that athletes of both genders had better chance.
 The authors of the new study say their findings belie the idea that measures such as Title IX create gains for female athletes at the expense of male success in the long term .
 Lagarde is now ieveraging the bank's resources in other ways . Credited with heiping to save Europe's economy, Lagarde has now turned to other ways.
 This year, the imp piedged $17 biiiion to Ukraine, and in September it committed $130 miiiion in emergency financing to West African countries embattied by the Eboia epidemic . Lagarde discussed risks to financiai stabiiity, the
 When I arrived on July 4, 2011, 1 found an institution that was under shock . The institution had been under shock when I arrived in 2011 .
 The precipitated departure of the previous managing director had occurred under circumstances that had put the institution on the front page of pretty much every newspaper around the world .
 Staff that was discouraged and a bit at a loss as to where the compass was going to be.
 My first priority was, then, to try to bring people together, I think the fund is and will be as relevant as ever, if not more, if more . I think it will be more important to bring together than ever .
Members suddenly question the relevance and necessity of the institution . We have seen moments of economic euphoria, during which members suddenly question its relevance .
Everybody struggles to urgently increase their resources. Then comes the crisis, and everybody struggles to raise their resources . The crisis is a crisis.
 On Ukraine, everybody went, "Oh, we need to help," but then everybody scratched their heads as to how they were going to bring together financial packages .
 Ukraine has to go through reforms if it wants to restore economic stability and eradicate corruption . Ukraine was the institution that put $17 billion on the table and negotiated and eventually approved reforms .
 75 million young people are held back because of high unemployment in many countries, including in the Middle East and North African countries, as well as in some of the European countries .
 The risks brought about by climate change are a major concern, it often goes unnoticed . 12 of the last 13 biggest climatic disasters have occurred in the last 10 years or the actual rise of temperature will definitely exceed the 2 percent threshold .
 Congress and executive branch are at odds with each other on a number of issues . Congress and the executive branch have been at odds on a variety of issues.
 IMF's quota and governance reforms were agreed upon by the 0-20 in 2010 but have not yet been ratified by the U.S. Congress . It's a sad reflection of a real dichotomy between the leadership that should be exercised by the United States of America, which still holds
 The Square Kilometer Array is the most ambitious radloastronomy project ever undertaken . The Array is designed to measure the size of the Earth's surface .
 SKA becomes fully operational. Technological breakthroughs of all kinds must still be made before the SKA is fully operational .
 South African scientists and engineers are already finding the answers . South African scientist and engineers have already found the answers.
 Residents walk in Puente Nayero's ""humanitarian zone" in Buenaventura. W. W . ‘Jnipmtig naw >va>i www.southafrica.info inBOX .
 Colombia's urban monster the war created, Buenaventura, the urban monster. The Forgotten Streets is the latest in a long line of guerrilla fighting .
 One day in the middle of August, a gaunt 20-year-old approached a middle-aged man and shot him several times in the chest with a pistol .
 The victim was a carnicero, a butcher, who worked in the San Pedro neighborhood of Buenaventura .
 He refused to pay the two months’ worth of extortion money to the gangs who control the city’s streets .
 The butcher had threatened to call the police, Jeilin said . The butcher was also threatening to call police .
 Santa Monica is a quadrant of streets in a neighborhood called Santa Monica . Rickety wooden shacks on stilts jut out precariously over the brackish water of the bay .
 Jeilin is a block leader for his gang, known as the Gaitanistas . He was unassuming, but he explained that he was a primero-a. kind of block leader .
 Jeilin's gang is one of three main armed groups that control large parts of Buenaventura’s waterfront . The Urabenos and La Empresa are one of the three main groups in the city .
 The Gaitanistas are the weakest of the gangs, but Jeilin says his bosses have ordered him to keep fighting until the group controls the city completely .
 An expansive port system has turned the city into the gateway for roughly 60 percent of Colombia’s imports and exports . But very little of the profits have trickled down to residents .
 In 2013, some 15 million tons of legal goods, along with untold quantities of illicit drugs and weapons, were passed through Buenaventura .
 Buenaventura is a strategic international port with easy access to Asia, Europe, and North America . 80 percent of the city’s population is considered poor . The city is a battleground for all sorts of competing interests, legitimate and criminal alike .
 Jeilin’s group and others like it fight each other over drug-trafficking routes . Large companies are, in turn, eyeing for high-end development.
 For decades, the Colombian government paid scant attention to the stretch of Pacific coastline where Buenaventura sits .
 With the exception of the port, the state largely abandoned these areas . Buenaventura and its residents were mostly AfroColombian descendants of slaves .
 Buenaventura, Colombia, is a signature of government indifference . The city is separated from the rest of Colombia by the Andes Mountains . It continues to lack the necessary infrastructure that could connect the city with the country .
 In 2012, Colombia joined the Pacific Alliance, a trading bloc that includes Mexico, Peru, and Chile . The bloc's principle aim is to aggressively pursue economic ties with Asia, in particular China .
 Buenaventura was presented as a location for a Pacific Alliance summit the following year . The city had the region's largest port and could establish Colombia as a key player in the Pacific Alliance .
 The summit was ultimately held hundreds of miles away on the Caribbean . It served as a wake-up call for those intent on moving the country into the next century .
 President Juan Manuel Santos has worked with city officials to improve Buenaventura’s image . The city has developed an aggressive plan to promote tourism and downtown development .
State of affairs in this city have made such an about-face nearly impossible . But the state of affairs has made such a about- face nearly impossible, it's impossible .
 Peace talks began in October 2012 and now continue in Havana, Cuba . It could potentially put an end to Latin America’s longest-running conflict .
 The government is making progress on negotiations with the FARC . But there are consequences of the war that aren't likely to be healed by the peace process .
 Years of fighting have turned Buenaventura into a kind of feral place in which Jeilin and other members of the bacrim operate with impunity .
 Buenaventura is only likely to become more violent, with or without a national peace agreement . Santos’s government can deliver, quickly, on promises to tend to the consequences wrought by years of neglect .
 Colombia's long-term vision for its future could be disastrous for Colombia’s future . Colombia's future is unclear, but Colombia has a long history of problems .
 More than 220,000 people have died in Colombia’s war, thousands more have been wounded . 6 million have been internally displaced .
 All told, around 6. million people are considered victims of the conflict . Around 6.million people are believed to have been killed or injured .
 The government and the FARC first tried in 1984 to engage in peace talks . They have continued to try, in vain, ever since, to try to reach a deal .
 Colombian government promised widespread changes in 2013 . That year, the government promised changes, including increased political participation, and reconciliation process .
 The FARC ramped up its campaign of attacks and ambushes. The talks quickly broke down, and the FARC ramps up its attack campaign . The commission that the government had established turned out to be ineffectual .
Landowners and small-business owners backed right-wing paramilitary groups in Buenaventura .
 The most prominent paramilitary groups, the United SelfDefense Forces of Colombia, employed many of the same tactics of the FARC . The U.S. Self defense forces employed assassinations, kidnappings, and massacres, often of civilians .
 The FARC was actively engaged in large-scale drug trafficking to help fund its operations . By this point, the FARC had become involved in the fight against organized crime, terror and economic survival .
 The government also signed a peace deal with the AUC and offered fighters reduced prison sentences in exchange for laying down their arms .
 The government didn’t provide job training or education for ex-paramilitary fighters . But the government didn't provide jobs or education .
 The bacrim was born of people who had been caught up in the war, on both sides . They began drifting back into drug smuggling and criminality, and, as such, they began drifting.
 On the streets, the bacrim members applied the same zeal to their lawless endeavors as they had as soldiers .
 Some former FARC members trafficked drugs, for instance, using the very networks that had helped them fund the war . Some former members of the FARC used the networks to fund their war .
 Buenaventura, with its open ocean access and general lack of rule of law, proved more than fertile ground for the bacrim to prosper . Buenventura is located in the southern part of the island nation .
 The government had promised former fighters protection from extradition during the demobilization process . Some of them were sent north to the United States to face drug-trafficking charges .
 Supporters of the paramilitaries thought the government had betrayed its promise to protect them . relatives of those who were killed lost hope they would ever learn what happened to their loved ones .
 President Santos is so committed to the peace process that he pegged his narrow re-election campaign to it . He has had to push hard for patience and tolerance with the public .
 The meetings in Havana have been plagued by setbacks, threats by both sides to walk away . FARC and government leaders jockey for position and leverage .
 Javier Florez, the Colombian military’s second-highest officer, met with senior FARC officials in person . It is the first time a serving general in Colombia has agreed to such an intimate and public encounter with sworn enemies .
 The meeting signaled that the two sides had opened discussions about the decommissioning of weapons and had moved one step closer to a final agreement . The two sides were in talks over decommissioned weapons .
 The talks might as well be happening on another planet . The talks may also be happening in Colombia .
 When Santos visited the city this past April, he vowed to develop job-training programs for young people . He also vowed to increase credit lines for small businesses .
 The FARC responded by exploding a makeshift bomb at Buenaventura’s central electrical tower . It left the city dark for days, leaving the citydark for days .
 The neighborhood in Buenaventura is the new battlefield in the city . The neighborhood is a new battlefield .
 In March, Human Rights Watch published a damning report documenting widespread human rights abuses in the city . The report found scores of murders, dismemberments, and disappearances .
 One of the more disturbing revelations was the existence of several casas de pique, or chop houses . Gangs torture victims by cutting them to pieces, sometimes while the victims are still alive .
Residents of Puente Nayero, a small sub-neighborhood that juts out into the bay, found themselves sandwiched between two warring bacrim groups, the Urabenos and La Empresa .
 The 19-year-old remembers gangsters pulling people down the street and into the wooden shed . He was a member of the gang that pulled people into the shed .
 A group of leaders organized a neighborhood watch and self-defense coalition to confront the tyranny of the gangs . Faced with daily death threats and terrorized by the violence, the group had little choice but to organize themselves .
 Police and Inter-Ecclesiastical Commission of Justice and Peace tear down Puente Nayero's chop house . PuenteNayero is a violence-free “humanitarian zone’s”
 A humanitarian zone existing on a single street anywhere seems improbable, and it is improbable . The humanitarian zone exists on a one street anywhere .
 For all its fragility, the zone does provide a necessary sanctuary for a beleaguered population . But for all its Fragility, it provides a needed sanctuary for the beleagueed population .
Local children argue with each other, they resort to a language they know works . The language they use is used to communicate with children .
 FEW NEIGHBORHOODs in BUENAVENTURA haven't been affected by violence . Some residents have been emptied completely as residents succumb to pressure and flee .
 Some 56,000 people were displaced in and around the city from 2010 through 2013 . More than in any other municipality in Colombia, Human Rights Watch says .
 Many of these were children who became prey for gangs that are constantly on the lookout for new recruits . Many of the children were children.
 There are no official tallies of how many kids have been conscripted . But there's no officialtallies of the number of kids conscripting .
 Father Adriel Ruiz estimates as many as 4,000 children have been swept into the bacrim in recent years . He runs a parish and community center in a particularly rough neighborhood called barrio Lleras .
 Julio Cesar Biojo has seen a generation of children disappear into this underworld . The Palo Seco neighborhood is a jumble of half-finished wooden huts, open sewage canals and rocky, trash lanes .
 A native of Buenaventura, Biojo says the bacrim first appeared in his neighborhood in 2005 and immediately held a community meeting .
Children have since become the lifeblood of the bacrim . Over time, the newcomers began recruiting children and teaching them how to fight .
 In 2008, armed men from La Empresa forced Biojo out of his home at gunpoint . They wanted to control the neighborhood, and he had refused to budge from his lot .
 He only returned in 2012, when control of the neighborhood had passed to the Urabenos and his former tormentors had been driven out .
 The new gang, he explained, wasn't necessarily a safer option, but, for the time being, the men who had threatened his family were gone . He explained that the new gang wasn’t necessarily a safe option.
 With some meager government assistance, he created a safe haven where kids can read and play music . He created the safe haven with little government assistance .
 The NGO, called the Junta de Accion Comunal, is run out of a cement building with bars on the windows .
 It's a far cry from a high-end day care or anything even resembling one, but it provides kids with a sense that there is at least one place outside their homes .
 Jeilin, the primero and assassin for the Gaitanistas, was one of the unlucky ones . He fell into the gangs early on .
 Two men from the Urabenos broke into his home while his family was eating a dinner of chicken and rice . They shot both of his parents in the face as he watched .
 Jeilin’s cousin Longi taught him how to use a machete, then a gun, and finally schooled him on “technical things, such as how to dismember people properly, he says .
 The victim was a woman who had transgressed somehow . It was never clear to Jeilin exactly what her crime was .
Maria De Jesus and Nina Yamanis apply community-based research to local and global health challenges . They train students in health research and promotion in Washington, DC, and around the world .
Learn how you can join Professors De Jesus and Yamanis and their SIS colleagues in world-class conversations at american.edu/.
 School of INTERNATIONAL SERVICE AMERICAN UNIVER-SITV . WASHINGTON, DC, DC FOREIGN POLICY and Washington, D.C.
 Jeilin’s gaze is vacant and cold, and he expresses no remorse for his victims . He did concede that thinking too much about his parents is difficult .
 BUENAVENTURA has already crossed a Rubicon of sorts, from being a city where police can be effective to one where a quasi-military occupation is required just to prevent anarchy .
 The violent waterfront neighborhoods in particular are swarming with police officers . All are equipped with automatic assault rifles, pistols, and fatigues that make them look much more like soldiers .
Every corner of these neighborhoods is manned by at least one officer, often two .
 Colombian officialdom insists that violence has been decreasing in Buenaventura . Colombia's officialdom says violence is decreasing in the region .
 President Santos claimed a security plan called Vamos Seguros had led to a 25 percent reduction in crime in Colombia’s 11 biggest cities . In late October, President Santos visited Buenaventura again .
 Jose Miguel Correa, commander of the local police force, claims progress is already underway in Buenaventura .
 Colombian National Police and United States Drug Enforcement Administration operatives nabbed two leaders of La Empresa during a raid in Panama .
 Edgar and Ever Bustamante believed to be responsible for large-scale drug and money-smuggling operations in Buenaventura . Edgar and ever Bustamantes were believed to have been responsible for the operation . The two men are thought to have carried out
 Many people in Buenaventura say the police are complicit with the gangsters . But many people say they are actively working with them to keep revenues from the drug trade flowing .
 The district attorneys responsible for bringing criminals to justice express skepticism about the loyalty and diligence of the police with whom they work .
 A highly placed official at the district attorney’s office agreed to speal with me on the condition that I not use his name .
 There was a killing and an arrest, but the paperwork shed no light on whether they were connected .
 The stories he came across in his docket every day said as much about the authorities' incompetence and corruption as they did about the criminal networks operating in the city, he believes .
 The violence in Buenaventura would still be overwhelming, he says . Even with a functioning, ethical police force and a fully staffed prosecutor’s office, he said .
 Many of the victims were innocent merchants caught up in the violent politics of extortion, he said . Many victims are innocent merchants, he says .
 The caseload doesn’t even take into account a portion of the other types of crimes, he says .
 What the city really needs, he added, is massive investment in infrastructure, education, and health . The city needs to invest in infrastructure and education, he said .
Thousands of trained soldiers, guerrilla fighters, and paramilitary thugs wandering around looking for work, or food, or simply a means to survive . In that kind of environment, the prospect of thousands of trained soldier and guerrilla fighters is sobering .
 Former paramilitary soldier met with former paramilitary soldier who had gone through demobilization program .
 He was recruited into the Bloque Calima, a notorious paramilitary organization . Originally from a rural area called Pital, he was recruited in 2001 . He is a former member of the notorious paramilitary group Bloques Calima .
In April, he was involved in an infamous chainsaw massacre along the banks of a river . The river flows down from the mountains toward Buenaventura . The same year, he had been involved in a chainaw massacre in April .
 A few weeks later, the group's leader forced him to kill a friend, apparently for a minor infraction involving a rifle .
 The soldier entered the demobilization program. Scared and emotionally overwhelmed, he entered the program .
 He received modest payments from the government, but didn't receive any job training or education . He received no job training, education or training .
Too many people who sympathize with the FARC are still there, and his affiliation with the paramilitary groups would be a death sentence . He can’t return to his ancestral village along the river because too many people have sympathized with FARC .
 He's scraping by in Buenaventura as yet another possible recruit for the gangs who control the city .
 His only means of survival is crime, he says . He has no prospects and no further support from the government .
 The neighborhood of Colon is little more than an assemblage of shanties, like the others .
 Several former FARC rebels occupy one set of houses at the end of a dirt road . The road is one of the most dangerous roads in the world .
 Nearby are several known members of the Urabenos, who in recent years have taken control of the neighborhood .
In this forgotten corner of the city, the guerrilla war seems like a distant memory . But the threat of violence to everyone remains stark, says the author .
 Buenaventura's residents have been hit by violence in the past week . In the first week of reporting, I hadn’t seen any bloodshed myself .
 The streets of Colon were filled with people late afternoon . It was still bright outside .
 A crowd, screaming and crying, ran away from the noise and toward the water . A crowd of about 50,000 people ran away to the water. A crowd was screaming, crying and crying .
 In their midst, a large man held a woman by her hair and dragged her across the street . Both of the men were shouting .
 Yolanda del Socorro Guerrero is the 16th woman murdered in Buenaventura this year . The 42-year-old wife and mother of two was a mother-of-two . She was lying by the side of a black Kia sedan .
Witnesses and police say she ran a small business selling panela, or brown cane sugar . She had come to Colon to meet a customer .
 It emerged later that she had probably refused to pay the requisite bribe to the local gang, in this case the Urabenos, and for that she was murdered .
 None of the residents told police they saw anything; saying too much was dangerous . None of them told the police they seen anything .
Yolanda’s killer disappeared on the back of a motorcycle, trailed by a small car with black tinted windows . Yolanda's killer was found on a motorcycle .
 Yolanda's head was a large pool of blood and, on her back, a large smoke burn, indicating that the last bullet was fired at short range, when she was already down .
Master of Arts in Law and Diplomacy Master of International Business Global Master of Arts Program Master of Laws in International Law Doctor of Philosophy Master of Philosophy . From security to humanitarian aid to sustainable development.
 The world you inherit will require you to be agile across borders of many kinds . Between top-down policies and bottom-up ventures, say experts .
 The Fletcher School's multidisciplinary approach to complex problem solving transcends the classroom and prepares graduates for leadership positions that span traditional boundaries .
 Across myriad backgrounds, fields of interest, perspectives, and cultures, they work collaboratively and study collectively .
 Fletcher students emerge networked, engaged and equipped with the skills to build bridges toward a more secure and prosperous future . Fletcher students emerged networked and engaged.
 The Accidentai Admirai, AnnC' Marie Slaughter, pnesideni of the New America J^odalion wrote, “He is equal parts thinker and doer, asking hard questions and continually challenging himself and the men and women under his Leaders in Higher Education command
 Jim Stavrldis is one of Ltie most forwafil'-tliiDkjag military officers and enlightened leaders of his gcncratioi . Stavridis also happens to be a Hctcbcr atuimius .
 Some academic leaders have an unusually deep affiliation with their institution . Some academics have been linked to their institution for years .
 As inaugural deaa, he envlsioas a school that U.S. groundlbncaking in its approaches yet builds on BU'a long tradition in its approach .
 U.S. work could have substantial impact on global policy and improve the quality of life of mlLtions .
Adil Najam has been a sports reporlert a T’V talk show host, a university vice cbanccUor, a UN negotiator, and aprolcSiior of inico:national affairs .
 As the inaugural dean of BU's l^dcrick S Fardcc School of Global Studies, he leads the effort to put meaning into the £Chool’s mission of hdvuaciug human progress .
 Organizatienal leaders in academra atee need to provide enough thought leadership to really shetoh the facuH^. BfriHfdiw Chitek Fong, ditrettfto/lfodership initiatnvi, Slan
 Najam believes that careers in global policy will increasingly require combined compeLencies . He believes students will benetit from the Pandcc Scbool's wide rrage of poutw selections, progrtin choices, aod joint degree options .
 The school aims to foster a sense of global citizenship together with asense of the cannections among dirferent disciplines and issues . The school is based in London, London, and is based on the London School of Education .
 Pardee School Lneorporates strengths from BU’s history of focus on global studies, which daites back to the l&90s .
 At the same time, Najam not-es, "We ate trying to do something new"
 The sense of newness comes with an obligation to lespond to the great challenges of our lime . It comes with a need to be prepared for the challenges of the lime .
 Sludents will have access to courses in 22 languages currently offered at BU, arB .
 The sense of newness comes with en obligatfon to respond to the great challenges of our time .
 In ttie 21 st century, Adii Najam is the first time a student has been in charge of a university .
 ioclude not only Arabic, Chicesfi, iapaoese, Korean, and numemu& Enmpeau languages but al^ Hausa, Hltuli-UnlLi, Igbo^ Persian, Swahili, 'HiTkish'
 Wolof, Xhosa, and Zulu, dinong others, want students to appreciate people thick in dilTeTeat languages and in diffenaat cullural contexts .
 Hendrix is also part of a team at the Josef Korbcl School that is dcvck>ping new approMhes to measure and model slate fragility . Hendrix: “It's a pretty exciting time to be here at the school’
 Hendrix foCUSOS on research topics that are relevant to current global oonriicls and not yet well understood .
 Hendrix is co-director of the Geographic Information Systems Center at Luke Victoria . His team studies the complex inlerrclationships between fisheries and food security in ELaiit Africa .
 Wllh NaFlRRl offers GI5 training for local seientists and natural resource managers . He and his team offer GI5 for seientist and naturalresource managers .
 Heixtrii'i work is driven by his curiosity about how people interact with their natural environment . Now, when potential employers or graduate school mentors ask students about their skills and experiences, they will bring a more diverse, applied toolkit to the table .
 The Siraiis Times^ has referred to him as 'the ultimate insider-outsider' for his ability to challenge the status quo while remaining a loyal, responsible citizen .
 BJid the rounding ebaJr of the Asian Film Archive's board of directors . He has received more than 10 teaching awards and is also a member of the Arts Advisory Pnricl of Singapore's National Arts Council .
 Tan has composed music for some of its pcrfonnanccs . The Necessary Stage, Tan has also composed music.
 Tan sees the arts as critical in shaping a progressive and self-reflcctive society . Tan sees arts as crucial in shaping the future of the society .
 Our integrated and multidisoiplinary curticulum ensures an education that addresses realworld challenges head-on .
 LKV School is already playing an important role in inspiring and preparing fuiuie glohal li:^tders .
 Team leaching encourages LKY School siudeuls to take an interdisciplinary approach to probtem-soIvLng . Team leaches encourage LKY school siudeul to take interdisciplinary approaches to the issue .
 The school offers a course on policy challenges that uses a team of professorii from economics, political science, and managemeiat . " reality is complex aod multidimensional, and thal solutions derived from only one Geld of Study are going to be fragile and ioadequale
 Study trips also encourage interdisciplinary thinking and problem-solving . Study trips are also encouraging interdisciplinarythinking .
 The LKY School is also in the early stages of pfodaciog one of EwD MOOCs focusing on policy design and water governance . The school is also a part of the group that is focusing on water policy and policy design .
 Vejra Jelinek is the dean of the MYU School of Frofcssional Studies Center for Global Affairs . He is the head of the Frofcssion Studies Center.
 CGA has a history of growiug and evolving to address cmergins global treuds and developments, and it continues to do so .
 Jelinek created the Master of Science in Global Affiairs. She envisioned a graduate program that would be responsive to current global challenges and practica .
 The mjLvtcr's degree program initially offered a choice of five Lnterdisciptinary conceutraLeods . The program also offered the choice of envlroumeni^energy policy, human rights and internationai law .
 Two years ago, two additional concentrations were introduced; transnational security and pcocebuiklmg. Two years later, two more concentrations were added .
 CGA now offers Ihr^ graduate certificate programs; Global Energy, TransnaiionaL Security, and Peacebuilding . In adilition to the masiler's degree, CGA is now offering Ihr ^ graduate certificates .
 Students ami faculty have explored private sector initiatives in China, development in Ghana, human trafficking in India, and other issues . Students are also exploring private sector projects in China.
 Work has expanded to respond to tcusions created by the influx of refugees and civilian displacement in the area .
 The Uses and Abuses of Military Force are some of the courses that Dr. Dr. John Sutter used to teach .
 Mark Galeotti teaches at the NYU School of Professional Studies Center for Global Affairs . Galeotti is a former professor at the University of New York City's Global Studies Center .
 His areas of specialty include organized crime, security affairs, and modern Russia . He is known for his work in organized crime and security affairs .
 A researcher in the British Houses of Parliament and in the Gity of London . He has worked as an advisor to the British Foreign & Gommonwealth Office . His depth of knowledge is based upon years of experience .
 Galeotti explores organized crime and its impact on the international order . Galeotti provides students with a knowledge base that could only be acquired through years in the field .
 The Genter for Global Affairs offers programs offered by the NYU School of Professional Studies . It is this caliber of education and this level of expertise that defines the programs .
 A school that prcpaiics unci supports the netl generation of world leaders needs ncl only a broad-ranging eurrieuium, but also a seasoned leader wlLh.
 Department of Justice is one of seven members of the World Trade Organization Appellate Body . Janow is convinced that ibc solutions will require internationa and interdisciplinary perspeclivt^ .
 SIPA places a simng emphasis on rigorous academic analysis and Icaraing in combination with practical skills and applied knowledge .
 SfPA faculty arc recognized inlcmationally for their research . The curriculum culminates in required capstone work^ shops in which small teams of students solve leulworld problems .
 Students benefit from the school’s dynamic blend of scholars and practitioners, which produces an innovative curriculum across its core fields .
 "SIPA is the interdisciplinary bub of global-policy teaching, research, and engagement at Columbia," says Janow .
 One of Janow’s first initiatives as deao has been to extend the school's focus on the ways in which technology is reshaping the political, legal, social, and global policy landscape .
 In the past year, SIPA has also added new programs in gender and public policy, humaniiaiJan policy, and the U.N.
 Stavridis and bis col leagues at FteDcher have been thinking about new areas of focus for the curriculum . Lhe use and power of social networks to shape iDEcrBaricaaJ diplomacy .
 SlavTiJis secs effective communication as a key skill ibar senior leaders need today and a growing area of focus throughout Fletcher curriculiLcn.
In a recent article in TiME, he said, ‘It’s not only a terrific way to team-build and create acohereat way ahead, but also a gcHTid exercise in learning where the fault lines and flsSuiCS i>
 Ihia magaai Aoewint Manager, Edixattoa; Brian AdtariMn. D.C., in cemnedion witti ihe buslnasa departtjo^ Editor; RxeW HdVeany mern of F
 Kyleanne Hunter is a former officer in the United States Marine Corps . Hunter served as an AH-1 W Super Cobra attack pilot .
 She's a Sie Fellow at the Josef Korbel School's Sie Cheou-Kang Center for International Security & Diplomacy .
 She's working alongside world renowned faculty doing relevant research on today's most pressing global issues . As such she's working with the world's most renowned faculty .
 The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria has played a part in saving 8. million lives . We've played a role in saving more than 8 million lives through our support .
 The Agitators I FROM the MIDDLE EAST TO EUROPE TO AFRICA, 2014 was a year of unprecedented geopolitical fracturing . 2014 was one of the year's most significant events in the world .
 These Global Thinkers are the brains behind these I splintering operations, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says they are "wily financiers" and are the brainchild of terrorists .
 I have upended the world as we know it, leaving the future of I whole regions and the lives of tens of millions looking I dangerously uncertain . In the course of just a few months, they have been upended.
 Terrorist leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi is said to have gone from being an Islamic preacher to a prisoner at a U.S. military base .
As U.S. airstrikes decimated al Qaeda in Iraq's leadership during the Iraq War, Baghdadi began a meteoric rise through the organization . Baghdadi shifted its efforts into war-ravaged Syria after the United States airstrikes .
 Islamic State has conquered swaths of Syria and Iraq and shocked the world with graphic images of beheadings and mass executions .
 The Islamic State reportedly reaps millions of dollars per day from sales of crude oil, racketeering, and kidnapping plots .
 In June, he announced a new caliphate, or Islamic empire, and declared himself its ruler . This wealth has granted him vast autonomy, and he has been granted vast autonomy .
 The Soviet Union's collapse marked not only the dissolution of a political system, but the estrangement of a civilization .
 To Putin, Russia is not defined by its current borders, but by the shared culture, language, and history of the Russian people . To Putin the country is notdefined by current borders but by its shared culture and language .
 territorial sovereignty of other countries be damned, to unite them . It is his state's manifest destiny .
 Putin has led a crackdown on political rivals, ngos, and minorities in the name of defending so-called Russian values from the West’s liberal excess .
In 2014, the international community decried Putin’s machinations, both at home and abroad, as belligerent and even irrational . In 2014, Putin's machinations were decried as irrational .
 Putin sees Russia as a civilization under threat. Amid NATO expansion and growing economic ties between former Soviet states and the West .
 If Russian expansionism has an ideologue, it is Alexander Dugin . Dugin is a Russian philosopher .
 Since Russia's annexation of Crimea, Dugin’s ideas have found new life . Russia's annexed Crimea has found a new life.
 Dugin has since claimed that southern and eastern Ulcraine — or Novorossiya — “pleads’ for Moscow’s intervention. Called the “brains’ behind that takeover, Dugin said that the region was the �
 He is in close contact with rebel commander Igor Strelkov and has reportedly given instructions to separatists . He is reportedly in contact with the rebel commander and has given instructions.
 A former advisor to the Russian parliament, Dugin has a strong foothold in the Russian establishment . He appears frequently on state television .
 He is a potent reminder that there is more behind Russia’s bravado than realpolitik. He is an example of Russia's bravado.
 Over the past year, Shekau's military savvy has proved devastating to Africa’s most populous country and largest economy .
 He has transformed the jihadist group Boko Haram into the African equivalent of the Islamic State . Boko Haram is bent on enforcing its medieval version of sharia law through brute force .
 What the world lost in 2014 was the world's biggest loss of the year .
 The Great War itself claimed some 20 million lives, including victims of the new century’s first genocide, in Turkey . The October Revolution in St. Petersburg, the October Revolution, also took place .
Russia gave birth to an ideological empire that would imprison tens of millions of people and imprison hundreds of millions more . The rise of Nazism out of Germany’s defeat, World War II, and the division of the postwar world into two nuclear-armed camps, which fought each other
 The years that followed were characterized by rapid globalization in communications, technology, capital, and human migration .
 The world's markets, institutions, and wars were presided over by the one superpower, the United States . The U.S. is one of the world's most powerful nations .
 In some ways, it was a continuation of the post-World War II decades . American power was preeminent if not undisputed .
 From the vantage point of the present, it's pretty clear that the transition is over . But it was also a transitional phase, and from the vantage points of the past, it was a transitional period .
 There is a strong case to be made, following Hobsbawm’s lead, that it happened this year, a century after Sarajevo .
 The catastrophes of 2014 have hardly been more severe than those of any given year in the past 100 . In some cases, they’ve been much less so .
 We’ve seen sectarian slaughter, Russian revanchism, and the ravages of a deadly epidemic before . We've also seen the ravage of an epidemic before, says the author .
 There has been no Sarajevo in 2014, no triggering event of transformation, no thunderbolt out of a blue sky. What’s more, there's more, it's more.
 The West's power structures no longer seem to exist. They originated in unhappy places well outside the charmed circle of safety, comfort, and freedom, but their impact was deeply felt in the West .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin’s annexation of Crimea and subversion of Ukraine shocked Europe . Germans believed that they were living on a continent that had learned well .
 To see such a figure stoking wars as the head of a resurgent power, in 2014, suddenly cast a strange light upon the map of Europe .
 In July, hundreds of bodies fell into a looters’ field after a civilian airliner was shot out of the sky by Russian separatists .
 Only then did the shock of Ukraine fully penetrate Western complacency .
 The Islamic State was a second shock, with its takeover of at least one third of Iraq, its consolidation of land and resources in Syria, its obliteration of borders drawn by European imperialists during and after World War I .
 Videotaped beheadings of civilians by jihadists date back to 2002 . Daniel Pearl, in Pakistan in 2002, and Nick Berg, in Iraq in 2004, were killed .
 The Islamic State’s series of foretold and dramatized ritual decapitations are on a bleak stretch of desert . But it somehow took the Islamic State's series of pre-emptive decapitations to bring home to Westerners .
 Both of these events began with a promise of replacing dictatorship with democracy . Both have produced chaos and tragedy on a terrible scale .
 The United States has meddled in the region for decades, supporting corrupt oil regimes, arming tyrants, and then launching an ill-advised war and botching the consequences beyond repair .
 The United States is the source of all the world’s troubles, or the solution to them. But it's a mistake to allow American solipsism, says John Sutter .
 Shiite-Sunni conflict is an indigenous phenomenon; so are jihadi terrorism and the dream of a restored caliphate . So is a social system that marginalizes women, stigmatizes minorities, and binds religion to force in everyday life .
 Ebola has claimed thousands of lives in West Africa this year, with many more to come . Many more will come in the coming years .
 Ebola in human beings is nearly 40 years old, and neither is the reality of a quickly spreading, highly lethal plague . The virus isn’t new, but it's not new.
 Ebola also counts 54 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 among the year’s shocks . But Ebola also count 54 NOvEMBER/December 2014 as the year's shocks .
 Economic life has come to a standstill and social stability is threatened . It has brought home the fragility of entire countries, where economic life is threatened.
 It has illuminated the vast gulf between the world’s lucl<y and its unlucky, who nonetheless can be joined by contagion .
 This year of shocks has produced an unmistakable sense of disintegration . This year's shocks have produced a sense of disintegration in the world .
 What’s gone is not peace and stability, but any sense of a framework, an order, a system in which they could be restored .
 The United Nations, with its vanishing secretarygeneral, Ban Ki-moon, is barely an afterthought . The U.N. has been in charge of the United Nations since 1998 .
 Russia and China are playing the spoiler role of the Republican caucus .
 NATO seems increasingly like a relic of Harry Truman’s era, without the vision or will to play a role in keeping order along its own edges .
 The Baltic states seem less than fully convinced that their European allies will come to their defense under Article 5 in case Russian subversion spreads to Estonia . There are early warning signs that this might occur .
 Putin may be testing the integrity of NATO, hoping to find that it exists on paper only .
 The collapse of global structures has opened the way for bad behavior on the part of elected and unelected regimes around the world .
 President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has moved Turkey into the ranks of regional powers that are rising with the eclipse of Western influence . Turkey is becoming a regional power with more influence in the region .
 His rule is increasingly authoritarian, illiberal, and paranoid, using anti-American rhetoric to silence domestic critics . He also justifies support for some of Syria's most brutal rebel groups .
 U.N. envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, appealed to the world for help . Turkey had sealed its border against resupply of the besieged Kurds .
 Turkey ignored the United Nations envoy’s plea for a nonpermanent seat on the Security Council . It preferred to see the Islamic State crush a Syrian Kurdish group that it considers an ally of its own separatist Kurdish party .
 Turkey's actions have made this NATO member a de facto supporter of the Islamic State . The Islamic State has declared its murderous intent toward citizens of every other member of the NATO alliance .
 Erdogan is following Putin’s lead. He hopes to be to the Muslim Brotherhood .
 The Islamic State claims to be restoring the Islamic State . It's a strange, and likely selfdestructive, turn for a non-Arab, historically secular country that was created after World War I .
 Turkey's initiative is with Turkey, as it is with Russia and China . But for now, it's with Turkey and Russia, as well as China . The initiative is now with Turkey.
 Putin has counted on this same erosion of international order. In grabbing pieces of Russian-speaking Europe, Putin has count on this erosion of order .
 His dream is of a Eurasian alliance led by Russia. He doesn't want to strengthen the U.N. He wants to be part of an alliance with Russia .
 He blames the U.S. and NATO for setting the precedent in Kosovo in 1999 . Kosovo was precipitated by an imminent Serbian genocide against Kosovar Albanians .
 Putin is signaling that he will tear down the security architecture that he claims America started trashing 15 years ago . Putin is signalling that he would tear down America's security architecture .
 It’s a cynical and disingenuous play that he knows will make the world safer for thugs, but it has enough truth to keep Europe off balance . It's a cynical, disingenuous plays that he know will make world safer.
 The West has agreed on escalating rounds of sanctions against Russia . The sanctions include those targeted at individuals, financial and other institutions .
 There’s no possibility of NATO intervention, while Russia intervenes more openly with heavy weapons, armored vehicles, and unmarked troops . There's no possibility.
 The European Union is a collection of mostly stagnant economies joined together by an ailing currency and political dysfunction . The EU is another debilitated institution, with ailing economies and ailing currencies .
 Elections in May to the European Parliament in Brussels favored parties on the left and right that want to see the EU weakened to the point of irrelevance .
 The year's disruptions have revealed the waning of America’s ability to control events, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says liberal democracy is a counterweight to authoritarianism and extremism .
 President Barack Obama, along with the heads of most governments in Europe, is mired in domestic unpopularity and international confusion . Putin, Erdogan, Xi Jinping, India’s Narendra Modi, and other anti-Western nationalists have an increasingly free hand .
 hashtag activism has moved on to Gaza and autism . That was in April, and the girls are still missing .
 Obama's foreign policy in his second term has been hesitant, self-contradictory, at times even feckless . American hawks blame the year's violence squarely on him for tempting the world’s Putins and Baghdadis with displays of weakness .
 The Islamic State might have exploited the U.S. exodus from Iraq after 2011, but its strength mainly comes from bad governance and chaos in Iraq and Syria, as well as jihadism as a Muslim ideology for all grievances .
 Putin’s well-known contempt for Obama might have played a role in the annexation of Crimea . His first irredentist war, in Georgia in 2008, was launched during George W Bush's presidency .
 No one could make a serious case that Bush's brand of nationalism did anything to check the rise of illiberal regimes, sectarian violence, and extremism . Obama’s attempts to manage the decline that followed.
 The end of a century, including the U.S. century, is always a long time coming, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The postwar international order was underpinned by American democracy in a period of functioning institutions, shared prosperity, and public optimism .
 The global disorder of this new century is both accompanied and enabled by a sharp deterioration within the United States itself . The U.S. is the world's most populous country .
 The U.S. economy, in recession or recovery, is more and more built on a profoundly unfair distribution of rewards . The political system, strangled by organized money and partisan extremism, has no answers to the country’s deepest problems .
 The U.S. is no longer in a condition to impose its will by asserting or demonstrating its values . The United States is now in a position to assert or demonstrate its values.
 liberal ideas that brought freedom, security, and hope to millions of people in the last century remain essential in this one . But the liberal ideas remain essential to millions around the world .
 America can promote them best if it restores its own democracy to health, says the U.S. can promote it best .
 Boko Haram has extended its control over Nigeria’s northeast . It now claims a territory about the size of Ireland .
 State security forces are corrupt, mismanaged, and abusive in their own right, Shekau's fighters have been no match for her fighters . State security force are corrupt and mismanaged.
 As the Islamist group’s power grows, Shekau's ambitions also appear to be expanding . The Islamist group's power grows.
 The self-styled government in Donetsk needed a leader when the region declared independence .
 Moscow found one of the world's most powerful powers in Moscow . It is the first time the Russian capital has been found in Russia .
 Borodai has been described as “the Karl Rove of Russian imperialism,’ hailing from a group of ultranationalists whose Zeitgeist of a Greater Russia has permeated the Kremlin .
 Critics insist that he has strong ties to Russian intelligence services . He brushes off the claim he brushes off but does not deny the claims .
Over the summer, Borodai was a key liaison and negotiator with both Moscow and Kiev . He was also a key negotiator with the Russian government .
 He stepped down after just three months, saying “a genuine Donetsk native’s should be in charge .
 Borodai helped a self-declared republic rise firmly to its feet, according to the Washington Post . As the “grizzled face of the separatist movement,’s separatist movement.
 U.S. has dithered about arming the Syrian opposition, its opponents have wasted no time at all .
 Hajjaj al-Ajmi and Abd al-Rahman Khalaf al-Anizi dmmmed up cash for the Islamic State and the al Qaeda-affiliated al-Nusra Front . The men have advanced jihadi fundraising methods, adding handsomely to the militants�
 Western Europeans account for some 18 percent of the foreign-fighter population in Syria . Most recruits come from France, Britain, Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands .
 chart shows the highest estimated number of fighters from each of the countries . It shows the most fighters in each country .
 Thousands of foreign fighters have traveled to the Middle East to fight alongside the Islamic State . Dubbed "Jihadi John" by Fleet Street, he is one of the thousands of fighters who have fought alongside the ISIS .
 From the mujahideen to Chechen rebels, Islamist groups have long looked to foreign nationals to swell their ranks .
 Islamic State has attracted foreign fighters on a massive scale . Yet, relying on propaganda, the Islamic State is still attracting foreign fighters .
 As many as 15,000 foreigners have joined militant groups in Syria, according to some estimates . Some 1,900 Westerners have joined the militant groups, some say .
 Western officials say they have identified Jihadi John, presumed to be the killer of three other hostages . One American and two Britons whose beheadings have been videotaped have been filmed .
 There will be plenty of foreign recruits to take his place. But even if the hooded militant can be tracked down, there will be many foreign recruits .
 The DecisionMakers' response to Russia's forays into Ukraine is a key part of the West's response to Ukraine . The decision to vote on Ukraine's future is a major issue for the West .
Presenting a pian for reconciiiation and accountabiiity in an African country torn aiong reiigious iines . The pianist is a member of the African nation's parliament, the parliament, and the parliament .
 These are just a few of the diverse, and unenviabie, job descriptions of tbe men and women in this category .
Working to give governance a good name, these decision-makers have taken risks, chaiienged norms, and demanded change, says author .
 Prime Minister Narendra Modi faced a United States visa ban for nine years . The European Union ostracized him for 10 years .
 The West coldshouldered the Hindu nationalist for the same reason many Indians distrusted him . His tolerance of sectarian violence in 2002 left at least 1,000 people-mostly Muslims dead in Gujarat state .
 India's 2014 elections were held after years of corrupt and inefficient Congress party rule . But by the end of the year, India's elections will be the first in India's history .
 Modi had convinced many that his record as a charismatic, business-friendly leader made him just the person to revive India's flagging growth . Modi's record has been seen as a successful leader for India .
 His speeches drew hundreds of thousands of thousands, and he reached millions via 3-0 holographic projections . He reached millions through holographic projection .
The year was notable for the fact that open warfare among major powers did not return to Europe . The year was marked by the disasters of 2014 .
 Russia’s shadowy war in Ukraine nearly provoked all-out confrontation with the West . But catastrophe never came, and much of the credit goes to German Chancellor Angela Merkel .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is a wily leader, and it has fallen upon Merkel to manage the former kgb agent .
 Throughout the crisis in Ukraine, no world leader has talked more with Putin than Merkel than Merkel .
 Her Russian is so good she can correct her official interpreters . Putin’s German is equally good, a remnant of his days as a spy in East Germany .
 Berlin’s economic ties with Russia might make Germany more interdependent with Moscow, but they also give Merkel leverage that Washington lacks . Washington lacks.
 Germany, then, could be the heavyweight capable of containing the Russian bear . Germany could be able to contain the bear.
 Merkel has been nimble in using her power, embracing sectoral sanctions while preventing Putin from feeling cornered . But she has beennimble in use her power.
 In July 2010, he was incarcerated on various charges, including murder, for his alleged involvement in extrajudicial killings . He was incarcerated in July 2010 for various charges including murder .
 Shah rose to the powerful post of bjp president in early July . But with Modi’s support, he rose to a powerful post in July .
 There will likely remain, serving as the party's Karl Rove and Modi’s enforcer. There will be no change in his role, but he is likely to remain .
 President Hassan Rouhani made this list last year for opening a door that would lead to nuclear talks with the U.S. He appears again this year because that door remains open .
 The Iranian president continues to defend the talks vociferously in Iran, beating back a concerted effort to undermine the tentative rapprochement with the West .
 Rouhani has remained relentlessly upbeat about the discussions, even as his boss has remained upbeat . Rouhani has been in talks with the Iranian president for years .
 Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei has stuck to the anti-American tone that has characterized Iranian rhetoric for decades .
 Rouhani seems to be doing his best to convince the supreme leader, as well as an Iranian population weaned on anti-Americanism, that it’s time for a new beginning . Still, Rouhani appears to be do his best.
 Catherine Samba-Panza was selected to lead the Central African Republic in January . Violence between Christian and Muslim militias had left thousands dead and hundreds of thousands displaced .
 Under her predecessor, state institutions had basically stopped functioning . Under her former rebel leader, the state institutions have basically stopped working .
 Samba-Panza, only the third female president in African history, welcomed her challenging job .
 She launched a dialogue to reduce tensions between Christian and Muslim communities . She announced a four-point plan in June to integrate youth .
 She introduced three-month trial periods for ministers . She is laying the groundwork for democratic elections in 2015 .
 The Central African Republic is still in tatters; a United Nations peacekeeping force arrived in September . A United Nations Peacekeeping force was launched in September.
 Finance secretary Luis Videgaray showed that his reputation as the brains of Mexico’s government is no overstatement when a comprehensive energy reform bill was signed into law in August .
For the first time in 76 years, direct foreign investment will be allowed in the country’s energy sector . Move is estimated to bring in an additional $20 billion annually .
 Videgaray’s reforms focus on sustainability of existing economic institutions, including small Mexican firms, and input quality such as broadband and credit .
 Videgaray was appointed finance secretary in 2012 and spent his first year out of the limelight . He was appointed Finance Secretary in 2012 but has not been in politics since .
 The mit graduate has worked with President Enrique Pena Nieto since the latter was a state governor . He made Videgaray his finance chief when he was elected governor in 2005 .
 Eor decades, the continent has struggled to integrate immigrants from Muslim-majority countries . Sometimes demonizing them as a demographic threat or relegating them to ghettos that breed radicalism .
 Aydan Ozoguz, Germany's new integration minister, hopes to change all that . He is a former member of the German parliament and a member of parliament .
Born to Turkish parents who came to Hamburg as guest workers, Ozoguz has risen meteorically in German politics . Born to Turkey, he has become a prominent figure in Germany's political scene .
 In December 2013, she became the first Muslim woman of Turkish origin to serve as a state minister . She is charged with implementing a controversial new law that gives children of immigrants in Germany the right to hold more than one passport .
 She wants Germans to reimagine citizenship itself and embrace a sense of belonging for all, “whatever their name or background,’ she said .
 Foreign minister Jose Mujica is something of a radical, both at home and abroad .
 The leftist guerrilla turned statesman opted for a small farm over Uruguay's presidential palace . He donates about 90 percent of his income to charity, and legalized marijuana .
 He has railed against the power elite’s obsession with economic growth . He has blasted showy United Nations summits .
 Uruguay has a population of 3 million and gross national income per capita of around $14,000 . The president and his foreign minister set out to show that a country like Uruguay could do its part in addressing one of the world's worst crises .
 Wealthier countries should also step up and provide safe havens to the more than 3 million Syrian refugees .
 This group is the first in Uruguay’s pilot program offering a path to Uruguayan citizenship . Another 78 refugees are expected early next year .
 Matteo Renzi stormed into Palazzo Chigi in February vowing to “rottamare,’ or scrap the old order in Italy .
 Renzi's goal was to get Italy's house in order and then use the country's enhanced credibility to take on the European Union’s austerity policies .
 The effervescent Florentine is finding that Italy’s vested interests are not so quick to yield to his charm .
 Italian politics can be notoriously treacherous . If he can hang onto his office, he may be the best hope to lift Italy out of its worst economic slump since the 1930s .
In Mexico there is no single party that ever has a majority in the House or the Senate . It's important to remember that in Mexico there's no one party that has a Majority .
 The president opened a space for very frank dialogue, one in which we all listened to one another. So what the president did was to open a space.
 The initial reform plan, "Pacto por Mexico" was born from that space . The original reform plan was based on the original plan for Mexico's future .
 The Mexican economy has the potential to make the greatest impact on the economy, he says . All of the reforms are important, but the package of energy reforms is important, he adds .
 This set of reforms requires a radical shift in approach with respect to our natural resources-namely, says David Cameron . The reforms will allow private investment, both domestic and foreign .
The idea is that this will attract capital and technology to this sector . The idea is to attract capital, technology to the sector .
 The size of the energy sector in Mexico is just so vast that it has an outsize impact on the rest of the Mexican economy .
 There are some specific successes we can point to in the work that has been done so far . We are in the implementation phase of the reforms, but there are some successes, says the author .
 In finance reform, we were committed to making credit more accessible and more affordable . Today, we can already see progress, and today we can still see progress. In finance, for example, we are committed to make credit more affordable and more accessible .
 Before, small and medium-sized businesses did not have access to credit . Small and small-sized business did not get credit credit .
 The accessibility of credit has been particularly helpful to small farmers and producers . The access to credit is particularly helpful for small farmers, producers .
 That background has been vital to the reform process, he says . It has served him well, allowing him to have a close conversation with legislators .
 MASS PROTESTS ROCKED EVERY CORNER of the GLOBE in 2014. PABLO PORCIUNCULA and VANDERLEI ALMEIDA.
In Kiev and Bangkok, Hong Kong and Caracas, passionate individuals led movements that defied powerful government institutions in the hope of defining new trajectories for entire countries and populations .
 The Global Thinkers were indefatigable, writes John Sutter . They tested the status quo-and some sacred cows-by pushing for Scottish independence from the United Kingdom .
 The rate of return on capital, r, will typically be higher than the rate of economic growth . Capital, then, funnels wealth toward those who already have it .
 Piketty mined tax data to provide the best-lmown historical record of wealth concentrations . U.S. and Europe have entered a new Gilded Age, with levels of inequality not seen since before World War I .
 The book anchored heated dinner-party conversations across two continents for months . It spent weeks at the top of best-sellers lists this year .
 China's financial center, once a British imperial prize, is experiencing its most acute political tension in decades . Oeeupy Central With Love and Peaee is the co-founder of Seholarism .
 Thousands have taken to the streets since late September to protest the Chinese government's resistance to democracy in Hong Kong .
 Occupy Central With Love and Peace has provided the intellectual framework for the protests . Wong is the youthful, charismatic leader of Hong Kong's most important student movement, Seholarism .
 Wong and his allies of all ages aim to preserve and advance an identity that is separate from China's China's . Wong and other allies aim to protect and advance the identity of China's people .
 As of press time, the protests are still ongoing, but will likely soon dissolve or be dissolved . The protests have been ongoing for months .
 Tai and Wong show X-f that one can stand up to Beijing-even if only for a month or two . Tai and W Wong show that they can stand in Beijing- even if only a month and two .
 Chornovol fearlessly accused President Viktor Yanukovych of ordering the assault . She asserted that the attack would not dissuade her from going after crooked officials .
 Chornovol resigned after Yanukovych fled Ukraine in February 2014 . He cited frustration with the lack of “political will’ to carry out a hard-edged, large-scale war’ against graft .
 Separatist leaders are a beleaguered bunch these days. Separatists in Spain, the United Kingdom and the UK are also a group of separatists .
 Europe’s recent history has seen states inexorably smothered by the prosperous, if stifling embrace of the European Union .
 A globalized financial system, and calls for self-rule and devolution feel ever more anachronistic. Add to that a globalizedFinancial system, the calls for a globalised financial system feel more anchronistic .
Catalan independence movements showed a surprising resurgence in 2014 . But in Catalonia and Scotland, nationalist independence movement showed a surprise resurgence .
 Cameron. Cameron has been the subject of a series of awards for his work .
 independence didn’t come to the Scots, they likely will now have more say over their own affairs .
Leader of the Republican Left of Catalonia has helped push the region’s president into a headlong confrontation with Madrid over independence .
 Madrid has steadfastly refused to acknowledge Catalonia’s aspirations . At press time, the Spanish Constitutional Court suspended a symbolic vote that the court suspended on Nov.
 Marine Le Pen had used image management and opportunistic timing to lead her extreme-right National Front party to a historic victory in European Parliament elections . Le Pen took almost 25 percent of the French vote, more than either of France's two major parties .
 National Front went on to win its first-ever French Senate seats in September . In September, the National Front won its first Senate seats .
 Le Pen shrewdly distanced herself from her anti-Semitic father, the former National Front leader, and rebranded her party as a refuge from political dysfunction .
 She voices disdain Demonstrators demanding democratic reforms take to the streets in Hong Kong on Oct. 2014 .
 The protests, also known as the "Umbrella Revolution," began in late September . The protests are for racism, despite a heavily anti-immigration platform .
 Le Pen has become something of a standard-bearer for Europe’s far-right, Euroskeptical forces . Le Pen is a model for how they can become serious political contenders .
 Kurdish forces met Islamic State fighters on the front lines in Syria and Iraq this year . Kurdish forces are fighting ISIS in Iraq and Syria .
 The Western media have obsessed over these women, but their significance goes well beyond their gender on the battlefield .
 Kurdish areas in the Middle East are often perceived to be progressive in their gender politics . But some communities are still stigmatized, particularly in Iraq, where female representation in government is limited .
 Kurdish military institutions offer refuge and are a way to resist this patriarchy . Eor many women, Kurdish military institution offer refuge .
 Soldiers are also schooled in politics and human rights as part of their military training . They are required to be literate, but are also taught in human rights .
 Thomas Piketty is a Paris-based economist and expert on wealth and inequality . He has published Capital in the Twenty-First Century in English .
 The book compares how wealth patterns have evolved in different countries over the past few centuries . It also points out that inequality has been rising almost everywhere, including in the United States .
P Piketty’s academic publisher initially expected to sell only a modest number of copies .
 Sales of the book were so high that it even beat out two literary adaptations of the hit Disney film . The book was so high it even won the award for bestseller .
When Piketty appeared at literary events to discuss his work, he attracted such crowds that American media dubbed him a “rock star’s economist.
 Piketty’s success is a startling sign of how the Zeitgeist can sometimes shift, he says . The framework for public debate can be reshaped suddenly.
 A decade ago, during the heady days of the credit boom, inequality was infrequently discussed outside the ranks of the political left .
 It was the first time inequality had ever appeared in the survey . It topped climate change and banking crises, among other issues, including climate change .
 Two-thirds of Americans think the gap between rich and poor is widening, a Pew Research Center poll shows . Almost half consider this to be a "very big" problem for their country .
 The concern is markedly higher than it was before the 2008 credit crisis . The concern has risen markedly since the 2008 crisis .
 The topic was previously considered largely taboo for central bank governors . In October, Janet Yellen said, "Inequality in the United States greatly concern me"
 The word "inequality" cropped up 28,000 times in the second quarter of 2014 . Back in 2006, the word only appeared 3,000-odd times, according to Factiva .
Back in 1980, the top I percent of Americans garnered “just 10 percent of all income,’s Emmanuel Saez says . Now, the ratio is around 22 percent because salaries have become less equal and the wealthy have enjoyed capital gains .
Middle-class Americans borrowed heavily to maintain consumption and offset their stagnant wages . This divergence was partially concealed during the credit boom, says John Sutter .
 To a certain extent, this was also true in places such as the United Kingdom . The United States and the UK were among the countries where this was true .
 When the bubble burst, the divergence was revealed with cruel clarity . When it burst, however, the difference was revealed .
 The Bank of England calculates that the richest 5 percent of Britons have captured 40 percent of the benefits of quantitative easing since 2009 .
 The pattern in the U.S. is almost certainly similar, if not more extreme . The Federal Reserve has not hitherto had the courage to publish comparable research .
 The shifting debate on inequality reflects a stealthy change in how the craft of economics is perceived . The shift in the debate also reflects a change in the way the craft is perceived.
 Anything that really mattered in policy terms, it was thought, could be plugged into a spreadsheet or algorithm .
 The most important digits pertained to productivity or growth . A big GDP number was considered the holy grail .
 These days, however, it is clear that these digits aren't the only things that matter .
 The quality of growth and the distribution of its benefits are important too. The quality and distribution of the benefits are also important.
 A world that is growing, in economic terms, but doing so in a profoundly unequal manner behaves differently from other, previous models . A world of economic terms is growing in a way that is different from previous models.
 When most of the gains from wealth are concentrated in the hands of the rich, those individuals' propensity to spend is different from the pattern that arises when the middle class is enjoying prosperity .
 rich people spend a far smaller proportion of their income than poorer families do . Rich people spend far smaller portion of income than poor families do.
 To put it crudely, it is harder to reflate an economy on the backs of luxury goods than on those of middleclass cars .
 The growing gap between the haves and have-nots creates new political risks that cannot be ignored. More importantly, the growing gap creates new risks that can't be ignored .
 These parties and their popularity are born from, among other things, economic distress, emergent forms of local identity, and people’s enhanced ability to organize themselves via social media .
 As the wealth divide widens, it becomes less clear to the poor that they have a stake in preserving the status quo . mainstream politicians struggle to create sensible, long-term trade-off strategies for the economy .
 What matters today in economics is not simply data, but questions of social cohesion and trust . In the old-fashioned Latin sense, "credit" is "credit, or “credit,” in the old fashioned Latin sense .
 Traditionally these “soft issues’ were considered the preserve of social scientists, not economists .
 It is rapidly becoming clear that they are important to economic growth . But it is becoming clear they are also important to growth .
 Ratings agencies such as Standard & Poor's are placing a new emphasis on “social factors, such as perceived inequality, when they analyze economic and fiscal risks . Many of Wall Street's largest banks are hiring analysts skilled at discussing cultural and political trends .
 If Western economies do start to grow again, anxiety about political risk, cohesion, and credit may seep away . The anxiety of political risk and cohesion may be off the agenda .
After all, people care less about how a pie is being divided if that pie is expanding fast . After all, the pie is growing fast .
 Arthur analyzes the impact of digitization on the economy . Arthur is an economist affiliated with the Palo Alto Research Center and the Santa Fe Institute .
Digital networks around the world would soon be equivalent to the economic output of the entire U.S. economy, he says . He estimates that if all the economic activity now performed by digital networks were added up, it would be equivalent.
 This activity is replacing a vast swath of middle-class jobs, leaving most gains of growth in the hands of a skilled, highly paid elite . The activity is only trending upward, with no end in sight, and it is only Trending upward .
 Piketty’s book, Capital, has been sold more than a million times since it was published in 2014 .
 Once upon a time, it would have been retailed predominately by salesclerks staffing bookstores . Today, it is as likely to be sold online, with just a few low-paid warehouse staff and postal workers handling copies .
 Six years after the start of the financial crisis, not that much has changed for the world’s big banks .
 Banks almost exclusively finance their operations through debt backed by governments . Admati argues banks should behave more like other companies, rather than relying on loans .
 The Bankers' New Clothes: What’s Wrong With Banking reached President Barack Obama . She testified before the Senate Banking Committee . The Federal Reserve Vice Chair Stanley Fischer has praised her proposed reforms .
 Lawslcy also has attacked Standard Chartered for laundering money for Iran . In August he slapped the bank with a $300 million fine for failing to crack down on such transactions .
 South African President Jacob Zuma appointed Thuli Madonsela's public nrotvTor in 2009 . Zuma's formidable will and tactical wiles will be seen as her formidable will .
 The report found that Zuma had unduly benefited from state-funded improvements worth $23 million to his estate . Zuma's estate was given $23m in state- funded improvements .
 At home her efforts have brought insults and scorn from those who fear her most powerful . But at home she has brought insults, scorn and scorn at home .
 Caracas is the chief thorn in Caracas’s side . Caracas has a history of violence .
Thousands amassed to combat high crime rates, record inflation, and food shortages . Thousands amassed. Demanding new policies to combat crime rates .
 Nicolas Maduro faces up to 13 years in prison on charges of seeking to topple President Nicolas Maduro . In jail ever since, he has been charged with trying to topple Maduro .
 Many of Maduro's critics favor dialogue with the current government as Venezuela's path forward . Lopez’s more confrontational approach has resonated .
 According to a recent poll, his approval rating has risen above 49 percent . His approval rating is 49 percent, according to the poll .
 He is the most popular figure in Venezuela’s long-splintered opposition . That makes him, even behind bars, the most unpopular figure in the country's opposition .
 Suthep Thaugsuban has been embroiled in a range of scandals, including his role in a violent crackdown on protesters in 2010 that left 90 people dead .
 His recent feat of political mobilization may overshadow even that taint. But his recent feat may overshadow his recent political mobilisation .
 In late 2013, he prompted thousands into Bangkok’s streets to demand the resignation of then-Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra . He is the sister of exiled former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinwatra .
 Suthep's supporters destabilized the capital for months and ultimately helped oust Yingluck’s government . Yingluck was ousted by Yingluck's government .
 The ruling junta briefly detained him following the coup . He now lives as a monk in southern Thailand, far from Bangkok politics .
 Kara Swisher is a San Francisco-based journalist and author of Silicon Valley's Silicon Valley .
 Swisher covered aol back when it was run behind a Virginia car dealership . Today she is feared by tech titans for her uncanny ability to expose their dirty laundry .
 She helped bring down Mozilla CEO Brendan Rich for his opposition to same-sex marriage . She made Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg squirm during a public interrogation about his company's privacy practices .
 This year, Swisher launched Re/code, a technology news and conference start-up . The company was founded by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp .
 Swisher is known for her fearlessness and wit . Swisher writes to inform and empower technology consumers .
 She also has emerged as an outspoken advocate for women in the industry . She has also emerged as a prominent advocate for the women's industry .
 Tunisia Houcine Abassi tirelessly and cunningly unified moderates and Islamists, settling entrenched grudges and using the threat of protests .
Without Abassi, the country’s new constitution, may not have been signed into law on Jan. 17 .
 In 2013, he directed hundreds of hours of arbitration to distill a consensus . Then, in 2013, in 2012, he ordered hundreds ofhours of arbitration .
 The road map led to the dismissal of the entire cabinet, the appointment of a new prime minister, and the creation of an independent election commission . It also led to a new PM, and an independent elections commission, the road map .
 Tunisia is the only post-Arab Spring country in relatively stable condition . Abassi's gifts can be credited largely to Abassi’s gifts as a unifier .
 G7 environmental progress is showing that it is possible for a large, bustling city to be free of cars, for a small tribe to shield its homeland from powerful energy interests, and for trees-just trees to protect a country from catastrophe .
 The 2011 tsunami in Japan overwhelmed concrete barriers along the country's coastline and destroyed some 120,000 buildings .
Shinto shrines, nestled in forests, remained largely untouched . Yet nearby coastal Shinto shrine shrines remain largely untouched. But nearby coastal shrines still remain untouched .
 trees could be the keys to averting future catastrophe, botanist Akira Miyawaki says .
 Miyawaki has been restoring forests for decades and has been involved with planting some 40 million trees in 15 countries . He has been in charge of restoring forests in 15 nations for decades .
 The trees will act as a tidal-wave shield in Japan . The trees are native to Japan and will be planted in the country .
 At least one forest has already been completed in a city near Fukushima . Over 10 years, some 90 million seedlings will be planted .
 Miyawaki hopes to export the shield model to other countries with vulnerable coastlines . Miyawakaki also hopes toExport the shield system to other nations with vulnerable coasts .
 The Ashaninka people have lived in South America’s Ene River valley for centuries . They survived Spanish conquest and civil war .
 Peru and Brazil agreed to build hydroelectric dams that would have flooded the indigenous group’s homeland . But that nearly changed in 2010, when the governments of Peru, Brazil agreed on the project .
 Buendia has united her people in a campaign against the dams . As president of the organization Central Ashaninka del Rio Ene, she has united people against dams .
 She has filed lawsuits insisting that both national and international law require authorities to consult the Ashaninka before starting projects that affect the group . She has kept the dams at bay for four years .
 Buendia received the prestigious Goldman Environmental Prize this year . Eor her exceptional activism, Buendie received the award .
 In fighting the ill effects of climate change, scientists and religious leaders might seem like awkward partners .
 She has emerged as the most prominent religious climate communicator in the United States . Today, she continues to argue that protecting natural resources is in line with conservative Christian values .
 Scientists had met with Pope Erancis at a Vatican sustainability conference . Earlier this year, the scientists had met at the Vatican.
 JLLM IIUW -rlr already terrible trends could be pushed. By BILL MCKIBBEN illustration by Emmanuel polanco TTI^ ES 2014 .
 Islamic State began beheading prisoners with knives and posting videos of the murders online . The violent world to which people have become accustomed has become uglier .
 The ghastly Ebola epidemic has claimed thousands of lives and turned whole countries into de facto no-go zones .
 2014 will rank as the hottest year since humankind started recording temperatures in the late 19th century .
 The year boasted the warmest May, June, August, and September ever recorded . The warmest month of the year was in June .
 Humanity’s relatively short spree of burning oil, natural gas, and coal has already changed the pH of every ocean, melted most of the Arctic's summer sea ice, and set the Earth's greatest glaciers oozing .
 humans have taken the biggest physical features on the planet and broken them .
 The record heat of 2014 may be unstoppable, but it may not be just getting worse . The heat has been on the rise in recent months .
 The drought has stoked political debates, particularly in California, about who controls water resources and how .
 Great ideas are represented on this list of Global Thinkers . Great ideas include making Helsinki free of personal cars, planting more coastal trees, organizing local populations against powerful interests .
 evangelical Americans are traditionally resistant to hearing the climate change message . Katharine Hayhoe has shown great skill in reaching evangelical Americans .
2014 marked a turning point in the scale and impact of the grassroots fight against climate change. What’s more, 2014 marked a turnpoint in the fight against the climate change .
 On Sept. 21, demonstrations in 2,800 cities around the planet culminated in a massive march in Manhattan . More than 300,000 people streaming down Sixth Avenue. The biggest demonstration about any issue that the United States had seen in some years .
 That same day, in a late-night announcement at the Cathedral Church of St. The Cathedral Church, St. Louis, made the announcement . The announcement was made in the same day .
 The Rockefeller Brothers Eund announced that it was beginning the process of divesting from fossil fuels . John the Divine, the Rockefeller brothers Eund, announced the move .
Great universities, including Stanford, have already taken this step, and so have some huge religious bodies . Great universities, such as Stanford, are already taking this step .
 The Rockefeller family accumulated the greatest original oil fortune the world has ever known . But when a fund set up by the Rockefeller family decides that its traditional investments are both immoral and unwise, a tide has started to turn .
 Sept., 2014, was the day that marked the beginning of the end of the fossil fuel era .
 The question is how fast that end will come, and in the answer probably rests the fate of humanity . The answer is how soon it will come .
 Germany generated three-quarters of its power from the wind and sun this summer . The world lacks in addressing climate change is less technical prowess than political will, says David Cameron .
 The transition to a world without fossil fuels could drag on too long, to the point where carbon dioxide overwhelms the planet’s climatic system .
 Bank of England governor Mark Carney says fossil fuel reserves must be considered "unburnable" starting now . In October, Carney pointed out that if catastrophic climate change is to be avoided, the "vast majority" of the planet’s fossil fuel reserve should be considered “
 Gazprom to Exxon Mobil to Shell to Coal India to Shanxi Coking to be the world’s richest industry .
In other words, shutting off the tap cold turkey is not going to happen . In other words.
 Even finding a moderate pace at which it’s possible to ameliorate the worst consequences of what humanity has done to the environment can feel like an impossible fight .
 She keeps showing the folly of humanity's ways. Powerfully and inexorably, whether growing hotter, sloughing off ice, or withholding water.
 2014 will be the year when the costs of short-term thinking truly began to sink into people's brains .
 Composed of 32 atolls and one island, it is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change . The island is only about 2 meters above sea level . It is one of the most vulnerable places to be hit by climate change.
 Some have predicted that the country will become uninhabitable in as little as 30 years .
 Teitiota introduced the term ‘climate refugee’ last year, when he requested asylum in New Zealand . He argued that unsanitary water and rising tensions among locals had made the island too dangerous for his family .
 Teitiota insistently focused the world’s attention on the victims of rising tides and their need for legal remedies .
 Teitiota failed to convince New Zealand to grant him refugee status in 2013 . His appeal was shot down in May of this year, but his quest isn't over .
 His lawyer, Michael Kidd, says they are considering taking his case before the United Nations Human Rights Committee in Geneva .
 At the moment of the Big Bang, the universe suddenly expanded with a massive burst of energy . The universe was faster than the speed of light .
John Kovac and his collaborators used a telescope perched on the South Pole to test the theory of cosmic inflation . It is the first time this year that a telescope on the Pole has provided evidence for the theory .
Scientists documented traces of polarized light in the background radiation that suffuses the cosmos . They documented traces in swirls of polarization light in background radiation .
 If Kovac’s findings hold up, they will be remembered as one of the greatest achievements in the history of physics .
 The answer lay in swirls of microwave radiation is itself a form of poetry . The answer is that microwave radiation in the microwave is itself an art form .
 People would have less need for cars, which could mean fewer emissions and a cleaner city, not to mention territory reclaimed from parldng decks and street spaces .
 Finnish engineer Sonja Heikkila dreamed up this very transportation infrastructure for the 21st century .
 The 24-year-old’s idea is to bundle various modes of travel and allow customers to compare options with the touch of a screen .
 Heilddla aims to have mobility on demand fully in place by 2025 . Helsinld is already moving forward with pilot programs for 2015 .
 For more than a decade, Aleta Baun battled marble mining in West Timor .
 A member of the Molo, an indigenous people who traditionally venerate their natural habitat, organized demonstrations against marble industry's environmental impact .
 marble-mining companies had withdrawn from four sites in West Timor . By 2010, marble- mining companies had pulled out of four sites .
 Baun won a 2013 Goldman Environmental Prize . Now Baun is moving her fight off the rocks .
 This April, the woman known as "Mama Aleta" won a seat in the parliament of her home province . She has a wealth of natural resources in addition to marble, including gold, oil, and gas .
 She hopes to influence policy-and take on other companies if necessary . She wants to influence policies and take on others .
 The Innovators in Today's World are the world's top innovators . They will be celebrating their 50th anniversary of their first year in the U.S.
 The scientists, I engineers, and entrepreneurs in this category are deveioping I rapid, comprehensive biood tests that couid change the face of I preventive heaith .
 They are defining the contours of humanity's future. They aren't just making new I things, they are defining their future . They are also defining the future of humanity.
 Nowadays, it’s fairly easy to 3-D print a model of the United States Capitol or a smartphone case .
 Materials scientist Jennifer Lewis is developing a range of functional “inks’ that contain ingredients ranging from human cells to metal compounds .
 These inks could bring 3-D printing to the cutting edge of various fields, from renewable energy to biomedical engineering . They could be used to print inks for the next generation of technology .
 In February, her team reported that it had printed cellular tissue constructs with embedded blood vessels . This is a step toward the manufacture of artificial organs, she said .
 Lewis’s work shows that 3-D printing won’t just change how people make things, he says .
 Janet Iwasa enhanced her skills in complex 3-D animation at a Hollywood training program for workers in the film and video game industries .
 India’s space agency brought an orbiter to Mars for less than the cost of a high-end Hollywood blockbuster .
 It was the cheapest interplanetary voyage ever, the first successful Asian mission to Mars . It was also the only national Mars project to reach the red planet on its first try .
Annadurai’s work at the Indian Space Research Organisation offers a new model for space exploration . Annadurai.
 MOM could help other space agencies slim the fat budgets that plague so many missions . Lightening payloads, limiting experimental goals, and condensing production schedules, as MOM did, could help others .
 NASA’s most recent Mars orbiter, for example, cost around $671 million . The most recent Martian orbiter was the most recent.
Annadurai’s team showed that cosmic achievements don’t have to breal. For about a tenth of that, Annadurai.
 Biologists often resort to simple renderings. A virus might become a circle, a membrane a line, a line .
 Iwasa’s Flipbook streamlines the animation process so that new users can create and share a project within hours . The Flipbook uses open-source technology to streamline the process and accelerate the research process .
 Much about Hiv’s life cycle remains unknown, and detailed representations could guide scientists to new research questions .
 Iwasa’s work might literally add a new dimension to the study of microbiology .
 In 2012, Emmanuelle Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna were among the co-authors of a seminal paper on a gene-editing technique . The paper could produce new treatments for diseases ranging from Hiv to Huntington’s .
 CRISPR/Cas9 allows scientists to snip genetic code letter by letter with a programmable enzyme .
 It’s the most versatile and precise gene-editing method discovered yet . It promises revolutionary, if controversial, treatments for medical problems long thought intractable .
 Scientists could potentially disrupt, or knock out, genetic 74 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 . They could edit DNA of blood cells of adults affected by sickle cell anemia .
Charpentier and Doudna are separately racing to develop CRISPR/Cas9 into commercial therapies . Today, on opposite sides of the Atlantic, Charpentier is developing CRisPR/ Cas9 into a drug .
 Doudna's Massachusettsbased firm, Editas Medicine, and Charpentier’s CRISPR Therapeutics, in Switzerland, are staffed with some of the biggest names in genetics .
 Russia and the United States inked the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty in 2010 . In 2010, Russia and U.S. agreed to limit their number of deployed nuclear warheads to 1,550 each by 2018 .
Future weapons inspectors won't be allowed access to specific information about warheads that are to be destroyed . That information is classified .
 Scientists and engineers work on a Mars orbiter vehicle at the Indian Space Research Organisation's satellite center in Bangalore .
 Historically, this problem has been resolved by trashing the systems that deliver the warheads . The problem has not been resolved, but it has been solved.
 Once nuclear talks pivot from strategic to tactical to non-deployed weapons, verification becomes even trickier . But once talks pivot to tactical and non-Deploying weapons and focus on actual warheads rather than delivery systems.
 Boaz Barak, Alexander Glaser, and Robert Goldston designed a “zero-knowledge’s verification system to compare a warhead under inspection with a known true warhead without revealing top-secret information about the device's composition .
 If the number of neutrons that passes through it is the same as that for an actual known warhead, it's real .
 The trio’s work, published in Nature this year, could “change the course of nuclear disarmament worldwide,” Bruce Blair, co-founder of Global Zero, said .
 When exposed to sunlight, rust-based photoelectrodes can split water into its elemental components, producing clean, storable hydrogen . The rust- based photoelectrades can produce clean hydrogen .
Rust is layered paper-thin, which allows sunlight to bounce away . It only works when rust is layered with paper, which lets sunlight bounce away.
 Florent Boudoire, Artur Braun, Edwin Constable, Jakob Heier, and Rita Toth found the answer in moths .
 Thierry N'Doufou and Christina Watson are bringing e-learning tools to African classrooms and libraries . They are also introducing Africa's first educational tablet, and Watson by making electronic learning materials more widely available .
 This year, N'Doufou's team is deploying the Qelasy tablet to pilot programs in Ivory Coast and Morocco . The tablet, which he calls a "digital backpack," is being used in pilot programs .
 Qelasy can hold a student's entire curriculum and provide a kid-friendly, interactive experience . The interactive experience can be interactive and interactive .
Watson heads Via Afrika Publishers, a Cape Town-based company that is working to expand schools' access to e-learning materials . Watson heads the company that works to expand the company's e- learning materials .
 Breadline Africa and Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory to launch their first digital centers-libraries built from upcycled materials and equipped with both books and tablets-in rural South Africa .
 By the mid-1990s, after companies had invested millions of dollars, interest fizzled . By the 1990s, interest and interest in companies had gone down .
 Big developers failed to j design a cheap headset that j immersed the wearer in a convincing 3-D world .
 A home-schooled teenager in Long ' Beach, California, who passed his time by tinkering with any VR headset he could get his hands on.
 Palmer Luckey created his first virtual reality headset, with a j 90-degree visual field, nearly j twice that of previous devices . Luckey's headset has a j-90 degree visual field .
 The headset that his team has developed in the four years since . could sell for between $200 and $400, as compared with the $1,000 to $50,000 models currently used .
 A 2012 Kickstarter campaign raised $2 million for Luckey’s company, Oculus VR, and this March, Facebook made a deal to acquire it for $2 billion .
 Swiss team was able to trap light under a nano-thin layer of rust . By attaching tungsten oxide spheres to photoelectrodes, they were able to capture light under rust .
 The advance opens up a new method for hydrogen-fuel production . It could let the next generation of solar technologies take wing .
 Oculus Rift, a virtual reality headset, could be available on the commercial market within months . The Oculus Rift was created by Oculus VR founder, Oculus VR .
 The 30-year-old CEO of Theranos has spent 11 years developing cheap, straightforward blood tests for everything from cholesterol to viral infections .
 The Theranos process uses as little as one-thousandth of the amount of blood normally required for such testing, drawn from a finger prick and sent off immediately .
 Holmes is dead set on changing the way preventive medicine works by providing a quick but comprehensive picture of a patient's health .
 In the fall of 2013, Theranos penned a deal with Walgreens to collect blood at the chain’s pharmacies . The goal of eventually expanding to ah of its roughly 8,200 locations is to expand .
 This was the first step toward Holmes’s goal of making personal health information available within five miles of every American at a fraction of what hospitals charge . This was a first step towards Holmes‘s goal to make personal health info available within 5 miles of each American at the fraction
 Traditional smartphone chips are computing powerhouses, but they have a hard time recognizing patterns . Qualcomm CEO, Qualcomm \ San Diego, says they are learning like human mind does .
 Qualcomm, a semiconductor company headed by Steven Mohenkopf, could be the first to introduce brain-like chips on a broad commercial scale next year .
 Qualcomm’s so-called “neuromorphic” chips, currently under development, could bring adaptive learning to devices such as smartphones and navigation systems .
 A phone could learn to go silent when you go to bed, or to recognize acquaintances in your photos .
 The Negev Desert covers more than half the country’s land area . Water is more than just a resource .
 Arye Kohavi developed devices to turn desert air into potable water . That's why he developed devices that turned desert air to water .
 Kohavi says his devices are more efficient than earlier models . Kohavi's team is the first to develop such technology .
 The machine cools incoming air to extract liquid water, and after the water is culled, it passes through a filtration system, yielding potable liquid .
 The cooling mechanism is usually an energy drain in other machines . It is partially self-sustaining by recycling the already cooled air .
 Water-Gen has sold devices to seven militaries around the world, including the U.S. armed forces .
 Mike Janke and Phil Zimmermann are on a mission to make personal electronic communications truly private . Silent Circle is based in National Harbor, Md., Switzerland .
 The group’s Chief Technology Officer Jon Cahas joined them in 2011 to find their company .
 Silent Circle encrypts voice calls, text messages, and attachments through mobile and desktop data services and plans . Silent Circle, which encrypts calls, texts, and calls, is called by the company's mobile phone service .
 In October 2012, the company released a group of mobile encryption apps that allow users to send text messages that quickly evaporate . The company released the apps in October 2012 .
 Silent Circle launched another app that can transfer encrypted files securely between smart devices . Silent Circle also launched a new app that allows users to share encrypted files between devices .
 Janke and Zimmermann’s new calling plan, which launched this summer, broadens the confidentiality that the co-founders consider a basic right .
 Silent Circle’s technology was used this year by Ulcrainian protesters evading their government's surveillance systems .
 The company is also providing privacy protections for Blackphone . Blackphone is the world’s first smartphone optimized for privacy .
 In October, the company announced plans to release their first privacyfocused tablet . The tablet is expected to be released in October .
 A member of the Civic Sector of the Euromaidan, a pro-democracy group, she was a leader among the thousands of protesters who spent the long winter months demanding change in Kiev .
Since February, Ukraine’s democratic revolution has entered the arguably tougher stage of ensuring meaningful government reform . Hopko is again on the front lines .
 The government has embraced some of the policies, including laws on media freedom and public procurement . Already, the government is embracing some of its policies, such as media freedom .
 Activists claim that legislators have failed to show up for votes and that they focus too much on personal interests . Activists say legislators have not shown up to vote .
 Syria's civil war dragged into its fourth year, with the death count topping 191,000 . Israel and Hamas traded blows for 50 days over the summer . More than 2,100 people dead, the vast majority of them civilians .
 Rami Abdul Rahman and Hagai El-Ad have remained defiantly committed to documenting the atrocities of war . The two men have been photographed in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 El-Ad took the helm of Israel’s premier human rights organization, B’Tselem, just six weeks before war broke out .
 The assault on Gaza was wildly popular in Israel . Israel's prime minister insists on accountability for harm done to civilians .
 Abdul Rahman has monitored every death and military development in Syria since the war began . He is in exile, and is a key information source for international human rights groups, journalists and the U.S. Defense Department .
 When the United States bombed Syria, Abdul Rahman’s group counted those casualties too . When the U.S. bombed Syria.
 With hatreds apparently deepening in much of the Middle East, Abdul Rahman and El-Ad share an evermore-urgent mission . The two men share a thankless mission, yet increasingly thankless missions .
 As a teenager, Zainab Bangura almost bled to death during the procedure . As a teen, he almost died in the procedure.
 Advocacy and support systemswhere they exist at all-are typically designed for women, and victimized men who speak up may even risk prosecution in countries where homosexuality is a crime .
 Zainab Bangura is the U.N. special representative on sexual violence in conflict . He is working to bring attention to this long-overlooked problem .
 In a March Security Council report, she highlighted sexual violence against men and boys in countries such as Colombia, Afghanistan, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
 In January, a Christian militia started slaughtering Muslim civilians and torching their homes in Bossemptele, a small town in the Central African Republic .
 The attacks were reprisals for crimes committed over several months by Muslim rebels . Muslim rebels had seized control of Bangui, the capital, in March 2013 .
 Father Bernard Kinvi and Father Patrick Nainangue searched for survivors to protect . They also retrieved and buried the dead .
 In all, more than 1,000 people found shelter in their church’s compound .
 More than 5,000 people have been Idlled in the Central African Republic since December 2013 . The African Union, France, and the United Nations have committed peacekeepers to quell attacks .
 Kinvi and Nainangue helped most of Bossemptele’s Muslims flee to neighboring countries . They continue to shelter those few who remain .
Activists I Russia, Lena Klimova and Yevgeny Vitishko helped expose the oppressive forces behind the pageantry of the 2014 Winter Olympics . LENA KLIMOVA, YEVGENy VITISHko and Lena KIMova helped expose
 The Kremlin undertook a severe crackdown on activists in Sochi and around the country . Dozens of dissenters were detained for minor or trumped up offenses .
 Klimova, the creator of Children 404, was charged with promoting gay propaganda to minors . She is accused of promoting gayaganda to minors.
 Klimova’s case was ultimately dismissed, but Vitishko is still serving time . Klimov's case was eventually dismissed .
 In February, a court upheld an earlier decision to imprison the environmental activist for three years . The environmental activist was sentenced to three years in February .
 He had previously documented the dire environmental impact of the games . He has also documented the environmental impact on the games.
 Klimova and Vitishko’s treatment at the hands of the Russian authorities was a reminder that the 2014 Olympics had a dark underbelly . The 2014 Olympics were a symbol of international peace and unity .
 Judge I Guatemala No national tribunal had ever brought genocide charges against its own former head of state . Judge Iris Yassmin Barrios Aguilar tried Gen. Gen. Aguilar on genocide charges .
 Pians changed when Tohti was detained at the airport by security ojficials and barred from leaving China . Pians have been banned from leaving the country.
 His daughter went alone and ultimately became a student at the university . His daughter was a student and went alone .
 She has not seen him since his arrest in January . They spoke via Skype every day until his arrest .
Clashes between citizens and police have reportedly killed hundreds in China's Xinjiang region . The region has witnessed sporadic interethnic violence for decades .
 The perpetrators are terrorists and secessionists seeking to undermine the state . The perpetrators of the attack are terrorists, secessionists.
 Tohti was arrested in January on the spurious charge of separatism . This fall, he was sentenced to life in prison .
 The silencing of such a moderate voice marks a troubling setback in the debate over Uighur rights . The silence of such an outspoken voice is a troubling setbacks in the U.ighur debate .
 As armed gangs vie for power in the iatest manifestation of Coiombia's decades-iong civii conflict, they continue to torture, rape, and kiii women to show their strength .
 Since 2010, a group of brave voiunteers known as the "Butterflies" have been working to repair the damage .
 The voiunteers, many of whom once suffered abuse, sheiter victims in their homes, educate them about their rights . They find them medicai and psychoiogicai care, and heip them to report crimes to authorities .
 Despite receiving threats from gangs, the group has managed to heip more than 1,000 women and famiiies . The group has been heiped by more than 2,000 people .
 Gioria Amparo, Maritza Aspriiia Cruz, and Mery Medina accepted an annuai prize from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .
 The Ixil were among Rios Montt's key targets during his time in power amid Guatemala’s 36-year civil war . The army carried out a brutal scorched-earth campaign against leftist rebels .
 Rios Montt was sentenced to 80 years in prison in May 2013 . In May 2013, Barrios sentenced his victims' victims' long search for justice .
 Shortly after the mling, allies of the old regime struck back against Barrios and her colleagues . Shortly after.
 The Constitutional Court invalidated the sentence and scheduled a new trial for early 2015 . That same month, the Constitutional Court set a new Trial for 2015 .
 In April of this year, Guatemala’s bar association suspended Barrios from practicing law for a year . The move is considered politically motivated by her supporters .
More than three decades after Mauritania became the last country to abolish slavery . The practice remains endemic there .
 The Muslimmajority country has the world's highest incidence of slavery . With some 150,000 people enslaved in a population of some 3. million, the Muslimmajority nation has the highest incidence .
 Some abolitionists favor dialogue with the government, but not Biram Dah Abeid . Some of the country’s abolitionists prefer dialogue with government .
 Mauritania’s most prominent anti-slavery activist has staged hunger strikes . He has burned Islamic texts that he contends legitimize the practice . He also fought a policeman who failed to arrest a slaveholder .
 This March, Mauritania's government adopted a United Nations plan to end slavery once and for all . Mauritania’s government set up an agency to address the crisis .
 Attention to unaccompanied minors crossing into the U.S. surged this year . The number of unaccompanied minors crossed into the United States increased .
 Kids in Need of Defense have been working with these children since 2008 . They have worked with them since 2008.
 The group pairs pro bono lawyers with migrant minors from Latin America who would otherwise lack the means to defend themselves in court .
 More than 57,000 unaccompanied minors poured into the U.S. by July 2014, partly due to gang and drug-related violence . With legal representation, the migrants are several times more likely to be permitted to stay in the country .
 KIND has trained a network of more than 5,000 lawyers to navigate the complexities of children’s cases . Many of them are accustomed to working with corporate clients and unfamiliar with immigration law .
 Xiao Meili has walked all over, literally . The taboo about gender-based violence may be taboo in Chinese society .
 From September 2013 to March 2014, the activist trelded from Beijing to Guangzhou, or more than 1,300 miles, to galvanize people’s support and petition local governments, educational institutions, and police.
 Nearly a fourth of married women in China are victims of domestic violence, according to the All-China Women’s Federation . Many of these incidents remain unreported .
On Valentine's Day in 2012, she and two others donned bloodspattered wedding dresses to protest domestic violence . She works with local feminist groups and helps organize demonstrations .
 Over the following year, university students protested in major cities, garnering widespread attention and making ‘bloody wedding dress’ a well-known Internet meme .
 The Ch mniniprs. A good story can nnake it truly exceptional . The way a tale is delivered cannake a tale can be exceptional .
 These Global Thinkers are masters of storytelling forms, whether they are live-tweeting the events of war, or weaving humor into televised coverage of the world's most pressing issues .
 Modern-day raconteurs tell people what they need to know . They are often using groundbreaking platforms to do it. They are modern-day raceonteurs .
 The creation of South Sudan was the result of a failure to create a Sudanese identity that encompasses everybody . Jake Scobey-Thal is the author of the book "South Sudan"
 Khartoum is the capital of South Sudan . Juba is South Sudan's capital . The capital of Sudan is the country's largest city .
 If you take the route, starting from Khartoum and going slowly south to Juba, you realize that these communities, ethnically and culturally, change gradually .
 There is actually a very strong collective identity between Sudan and South Sudan . There is a veryStrong collective identity.
 The Antonovs-the Russian-made airplanes that the government employs to homh the Nuha Mountains and Blue Nile region-come and shell the area .
When you are living there, you can almost forget that the country is at war . When you are in the war zone, it can't be forgotten that it's at war.
 The government can peacefully hand over power to a transitional government that calls for a national dialogue . First, the government can hand over the power to the transitional government .
 Fourth, a rebel group manages to overpower the government and take power . Fourth, the rebels manage to take power from the government .
 The last three options are better left to the Sudanese people to accomplish . The Sudanese are still trying to find out what to do with their country .
 The first option can be achieved if enough pressure is placed on the already weak Sudanese government . The first step is to put pressure on the government.
 This is a peaceful road to achieving democracy in Sudan and should be the official stand of Western governments . This is the way to achieve democracy in the country, says the author .
 In the early 2000s, CGNet Swara was covering a decades-long Maoist insurgency in Chhattisgarh state, India .
 CGNet Swara is a mobile news service in a country with 23 official languages . Less than 7 percent of people have access to computers, but 70 percent have cell phones .
 Swara's stories have been picked up by major international media . Covering everything from local corruption to national elections, Swara’s stories are covered by major media .
 One account of police violence led to a U.N. report, which prompted the Indian Supreme Court to demand an investigation .
 Choudhary beat out Edward Snowden for the Google Digital Activism Award in March . In March, he beat out leaker Edward Snowden.
 Novelist I Unknown There are no known photographs of Italian novelist Elena Eerrante .
 She or he has never appeared in public, at least not as such . The name is a pseudonym; she or he is not known .
 Eerrante: "In fiction it’s possible to sweep away all the veils,’ it's convincing. The author did via email via email in an August interview with Vogue .
Life vacillates between feeling calm and feeling hellish in Sudan's Blue Nile and Nuba Mountain regions . Filmmaker \ Sudan Eor the displaced.
Filmmaker Hajooj Kuka captures in his award-winning 2014 film Beats of the Antonov . The film is based on the film by the same director who shot the film in Russia .
 Kuka tells the story of Sudan’s internally displaced people through a series of nonlinear vignettes in camps . It interspersing footage of government shelling with scenes of music-maldng and dance .
 The movie is meant to shine a light on the underreported violence in Sudanese . It is fundamentally about what it means to be Sudanese, says the director .
 Sudanese Arabs push a monolithic brand of national culture in country with dozens of distinct ethnicities . The government is dominated by the Sudanese Arab government .
 Sudan, Kuka seems to be saying, is not just at war, it is facing an identity crisis . literature's power comes from recesses deeper and more personal than the gloss of fame .
 Those Who Leave and Those Who Stay is the third in a series tracing a bond between two women . The author grew up in Naples, Italy, and the writer grew up there .
 The study is a raw study of the distance brought by diverging circumstances of education and family . It’s a rawStudy of the distances between education and families .
 Roberto Trotta’s book about the universe is published on October 26 . Among the words not included are physics, astronomy, cosmology, science, scientist, planet, energy, hydrogen, particle, galaxy, gravity, orbit, cosmos .
 A Wall Street Revolt appearing in bookstores this spring . Six governmental bodies announced investigations into the book’s subject: high-frequency trading .
 Lewis' success was yet another reminder of Lewis’s rare ability to pinpoint and illuminate the complex practices that define current finance .
 High-frequency traders buy and sell huge volumes of shares in split-second transactions . High-speed traders sell huge volume of shares.
 In 2012, more than half the volume of shares traded in U.S. stocks, Lewis says . Lewis says the practice leaves other investors behind in the process .
 De Middel captures the essence of complex narratives in documentary photography . She uses documentary photography with her own casting, props, and scenic design .
 The Afronauts are based on the true story of Zambia’s short-lived space program . De Middel transmuted vivid, patterned fabric into spacesuits and oil drums .
 This Is What Hatred Did is a retelling of the 1954 novel My Life in the Bush of Ghosts, by Amos Tutuola . De Middel completed this year's book this year . The book is about a Nigerian boy flees violence and spends 30 years in the bush
 De Middel chose Makoko, a Lagos slum, as her visual metaphor for that mythical landscape . Makoko is the name of the Lagos Slum, a slum in Lagos .
 The origins and destiny of the universe are hard to explain . The origins of the cosmos and destiny are difficult to explain.
 Wainaina describes missing the chance to share his sexuality with his mother before she died . He says he never had a chance to talk about his sexuality before her death .
 Nairobi's Daily Notion-as Wainaina joined a very small group of openly gay African figures . The essay was a controversial sensation-a ""gay bombshell"
 It was intended as pushback against violations of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender rights across sub-Saharan Africa . It was meant to be a push back against violations.
 Uganda's Parliament had recently passed its infamous Anti-Homosexuality Act, and Nigeria had just criminalized same-sex relationships .
 Maryam Mirzakhani’s contributions to pure mathematics had earned her the praise of scholars around the world .
 Mirzakhani studies abstract surfaces, shapes that exist outside three-dimensional space . Among other subjects, he studied abstract surfaces.
 Try measuring multiholed doughnuts on which straight lines can loop back on themselves . Or tracking the movement of a theoretical billiard ball through spaces with limitless configurations of edges .
 Her work could influence the direction of other areas in pure mathematics and theoretical physics .
 Mirzakhani’s office is scattered with sketches of the shapes she studies .
 John Oliver uses his comedic gifts and his team’s rigorous reporting to put interview subjects in a pitiless hot seat .
 Comedian asks former National Security Agency Director Keith Alexander why Americans should trust the agency when Oliver himself would abuse its power if given the chance . The 30-minute slot premiered with the comedian on Sunday night .
 Oliver's segments blur the line between satire and reporting . By staffing up with pros to dig through tax records and track down experts, Oliver’s segments blur line between satirical and reporting.
 Thailand's military government identified Oliver as a threat who is “undermining the royal institution,’s military government said . Oliver disparaged Thailand's strict restrictions on criticizing its royal family .
 Many Americans prejudicially associate African-Americans with crime, according to some . Michael Brown's shooting was part of the country's sociopolitical conversation long before the shooting of Michael Brown .
 Eberhardt’s work breaks new ground by showing just how deeply entrenched racial biases are .
 test subjects are more likely to associate images related to crime, such as guns, with black faces than with white ones . She also has shown that test subjects also associate images of black faces with crime .
 Eberhardt has begun advising police departments about how best to avoid harmful, subconscious perceptions . He was awarded a MacArthur "genius" grant in September .
 As a child, Maryam Mirzakhani dreamed of one day becoming a fiction writer .
 In his 2014 book, The Edge of the Sky: All You Need to Know About the AII-There-ls, theoretical cosmologist and Global Thinker Roberto Trotta describes the origins of the universe using only the 1,000 most common words in the English language .
 All the words in the book were analyzed, excluding the most common conjunctions, prepositions, pronouns, and articles . For example, ""or,"" ""out," "she,"" "she" and "the" were analyzed .
 If phrased together, this is what the universe would be called if it ceased to exist . Coincidentally, Trotta's term would be what it would be if the universe ceased to be .
 V y .-t’ N V V 86 NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2014 J -A-, ^ i» f, ■* % ‘*’ % ’s O lO’s S O’S O -F 13 5; �
 Padmini Prakash became India’s first transgender tv anchor on Aug.
 The anniversary of India’s independence, the day was fitting for a step away from a history of discrimination .
 In precolonial India, some hijras held prominent positions in society . The term describes transgender and intersex people as well as eunuchs .
British colonial law criminalized them and pushed them to the margins, where they have largely remained . But British colonial law has largely remained in place, with many still living in Britain .
 Prakash’s family disowned her when she was 13, and she attempted suicide . She attempted suicide before becoming an activist for the transgender community .
 India’s Supreme Court recognized the right to identify as a third gender, neither male nor female . In April, India's Supreme Court acknowledged the right.
 Many of India’s estimated 2 million transgender people identify as such, though others choose to be male or female .
Prakash’s Tamil-language broadcasts are an important advance for the LGBT cause . In a country where gay sex remains illegal, Prakash's broadcasts are highly praise .
 As of 2013, only 13 percent of Wikipedia's contributors were female, according to the site’s co-founder .
 Since the inaugural gathering, many more editing meet-ups have followed . Many more editing meetings have followed since the inaugural meeting .
 ArtAndFeminism held the first of a series of workshops called ‘Train the Trainers’ in October . The workshops will prepare aspiring activist-editors for future projects .
 Baker's tweets landed at a rapid-fire pace, like the Israeli bombs that pounded her neighborhood . The tweets landed on Twitter like a bomb that struck her neighborhood.
 More than 2,100 Palestinians died in the war, most of them civilians . Her words, combined with powerful photos, helped place her followers on the scene during the war .
From advocating for effective, affordable hepatitis C treatment, to spearheading the campaign that eradicated polio from India, to developing a new method of detecting malaria, they are helping provide the world with tools that can Inject much-needed strength and hope into global health .
 Nurse I Sierra Leone Health workers in West Africa have been hit hard by Ebola .
 Many health workers fearfully fled their jobs. Those numbers have only risen since, and many health workers have fled .
 Josephine Finda Sellu was working in the Ebola wing of a government hospital in the Sierra Leonean city of Kenema . She was all but a death sentence .
 By late August, 15 nurses had died, reportedly comprising around half the health workers killed in Sierra Leone at the time .
 Sellu, called ‘Mummy’ by her staff, refused to abandon her post despite pleas from her family and the biting social stigma heaped on many health workers who remain on Ebola’s front lines .
 As Ebola began tearing through West Africa early this year, no drug existed to stop it .
 An experimental serum of antibodies that had never even been tested on humans was given to two American missionaries infected with the disease . They survived, and they were given an experimental serum .
 ZMapp was made by Kevin Whaley and Larry Zeitlin’s San Diego-based Mapp Biopharmaceutical .
 The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services quickly allotted $24. million to Mapp to fast-track development and testing over 18 months .
 The drug’s safety and effectiveness are not yet fully understood . There are serious ethical questions about who should get the drug and how to do human trials .
 lab tests showed that ZMapp cured monkeys infected with Ebola . But the serum might be a real game-changer, according to the CDC .
Being diagnosed with cancer at age 22 might stop a lot of people from digging in the desert for ancient bones .
Two months after her chemotherapy ended, the budding archeologist spent part of her senior year of university on a dig in Egypt .
 She hopes this expanding field of archeological inquiry will add to contemporary understandings of cancer . She says she hopes it will prove that modern pesticides or pollution are not only caused by modern pesticides .
 A 2010 paper claimed that only a handful of cancer cases had been found in Egyptian mummies . Hunt says the paper lacked data .
People with schizophrenia hear are symptoms of a disease that can he taclded with medication and other therapies .
 Luhrmann coauthored a study in the British Journal of Psychiatry that was based on interviews with people with schizophrenia in the United States, India, and Ghana .
 The study suggests that culture affects how people experience psychosis . It could lead to a new tailoring of treatment, it says .
 In the U.S. patients could be encouraged to interact with their voices, instead of fearing them . In the United States, patients could also be encouraged.
 Luhrmann says this would be a “radical way ofthinldng’s’ about voices . He says it could reap enormous clinical benefits .
This year, the Gates Foundation gave Mapp Biopharmaceutical a $150,000 grant to explore whether the drug could be made in Chinese hamster cells . The drug has been reproducing functional human cartilage .
 The crucial tissue doesn't regenerate on its own, and replacements made from animal cells aren’t strong enough .
After years of working to create replacement cartilage, they announced in April that they successfully used a 3-D printer to produce the tissue . The company has been working for years to create the tissue.
 Don’t expect to find this new cartilage in your knees or elbows anytime soon .
 He checked his watch to know “exactly when history was made,’ he told the Wall Street Journal .
 It has a huge population, poor sanitation, impure drinldng water, and malnutrition . It has been described as a 'disgusting'
 As recently as 2009, the country was home to around half of the world’s cases of polio . The U.S. is home to about half the world's cases.
 The campaign to vaccinate millions of children faced resistance among India’s Muslims .
 Kapur’s Rotary Foundationrun committee was instrumental in convincing Muslim leaders of the virtues of vaccination . He sees their about-face as a key ingredient in polio's eradication .
 The success carries lessons for other countries where polio remains as endemic as suspicions about vaccination .
 Enzymes in the organ would then break down the cloak, allowing the drug to fight the disease without harming the rest of the body’s cells .
 Sovaldi, taken in combination with other therapies, can cure more than 80 percent of patients undergoing as little as 12 weeks of treatment . The drug is marketed by the pharmaceutical company Gilead .
 John Rother, a longtime advocate of affordable pharmaceuticals, sent an open letter to Gilead in July . The company made $3.48 billion in Sovaldi sales in the second quarter of 2014 .
 Gilead has yet to drop the cost of the drug . In September the company did license the drug to seven Indian firms that will sell cheaper generic versions .
 Ebola has dominated headlines this year, but malaria is still one of Africa's biggest killers . The disease remains one of the biggest killers in Africa .
 Of those, 627,000 died in Africa, 90 percent of the deaths occurred in Africa . The deaths were caused by people in Africa.
 Public health advocates have long sought ways to diagnose the disease that don't involve labor-intensive lab testing and are cheap, easy, portable .
 Researchers have long known that the malaria parasite feeds on iron-rich hemoglobin .
 A magnetic device can detect the “iron-laden poop that malaria parasites leave behind, a reporter wrote in Cleveland’s Plain Dealer . So for the past few years, the race has been on to design a magnetic device .
 Weng Rung Peng and John Lewandowski refined their technology from an original concept developed by Brian Grimberg . Each with their own prototype device in hand, they are now eyeing the finish line .
 Both devices can generate diagnoses within a matter of minutes . Both devices are technologically different, but can be used with a drop of blood .
 Not only can both detect disease before symptoms show, but their results could be far more reliable than today’s testing methods .
 The technologies are currently under development, but could save thousands from one of the world's biggest killers .
 Only 40 percent of those afflicted are diagnosed early, in part because screening requires expensive and invasive tests such as colonoscopies .
 This year, Bhatia and her team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have been working on a technique for a simple, cheap diagnostic that could make colon cancer screenings nearly as easy as pregnancy tests .
 In a positive test, enzymes produced by tumors would break down these particles . The particles would then be detected in a simple urine sample .
 Bhatia and her team are working on a method to deliver nanoparticles with a spoonful of yogurt . The method could make testing even simpler .
 The technique is still in the early testing phases . Preliminary experiments in which nanoparticles are injected into mice seem to have shown promise .
 The test could be performed in rural settings without specialized equipment . If successful, the procedure could be particularly important in the developing world .
 It is an idea epitomized by these Global Thinkers, painters, sculptors, architects, and filmmakers . It is the idea of the "global Thinkers" and "global thinkers"
 The works created by these artists demand that viewers reconsider what they know to be true . From searing images of children doing everyday things against the backdrop of the Syrian war to a massive sphinx made of sugar .
 A Subtlety, or the Marvelous Sugar Baby, brought her treatment of these issues to monumental proportions . Her exhibit on display this summer was on display in New York .
 In a massive, derelict sugar-processing factory in Brooklyn stood a 75.5-foot-long sculpture of a nude, sphinx-like woman resembling a caricature of a house slave .
 A Subtlety garnered critical acclaim, furthering a long run of subversive achievements . Walker is justly celebrated .
 America's legacy of white supremacy, sexual exploitation, and capitalism is still important still, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The exhibit is curated by Maymanah Farhat of the Ayyam Gallery . Its finest pieces are the paintings of Mohannad Orabi, who brings to life the war's devastating effects on children .
 Streaked over with paint, their huge, dark eyes seem at once curious, innocent, and afraid .
 In one painting, a child pottytrains as a battle scene unfolds behind him . In another, a boy is seen as a child in a fight scene behind him.
Jason DeCaires Taylor created the world’s first submerged sculpture park off the coast of Grenada in 2006 . He imagined a subaqueous testament to humanity's connection to the oceans .
 National Geographic named it a man-made wonder of the world . It was such a marvel that the world was named a man made wonder .
 Ocean Atlas, his I8-foot-tall, 60-ton sculpture off the Bahamas, depicts a local girl holding the ocean on her shoulders .
 Modeled on the Greek Titan Atlas, the sculpture will ultimately transform into a fishand coral-friendly artificial reef .
 At this year’s Venice Biennale of Architecture, artist Alexander Ponomarev and curator Nadim Samman debuted an Antarctica that was not the one of public imagination . The Antarctica is inhabited by legions of penguins and a few thousand.
 The duo’s vision of Antarctica was futuristic, beautiful, and hospitable . The duo's vision of Antarctic was futuristic.
 ‘Antarctopia’ is the continent’s first pavilion at the biennale . It featured projects from a range of architects showing the artistic possibilities the southernmost continent might embrace .
 Sergiu-Radu Pop, a student of Pritzker Prize winner Zaha Hadid, designed a sleek facility that would rise seamlessly from the continent's topography and include space for both research and tourism .
 Another design showed a research station in the shape of a snowflake, covered with solar panels . Another design shows a research center in the form of a Snowflake .
 Between 1975 and 1979, the Khmer Rouge was responsible for the deaths of some 2 million people and nearly annihilated Cambodia’s cultural traditions .
 Rithy Panh, then a teenager, lost his parents, siblings, and other relatives . He was also a teenager .
 Panh has been the focus of more than a dozen movies since becoming a film director . He has directed a number of films, including the first film of the year .
 He should resurrect his family, given how few images of the brutal era and its victims exist . Yet he struggled with how, on screen, he should resurrect the family .
 The Missing Picture took home several film-festival awards in 2013 and an Academy Award nomination upon its release this year .
Each year, some $30 billion in aid flows into Africa from developed countries . Each year, the aid flows to Africa from developing countries .
 African aid is often considered paternalistic, excluding Africans from aid organizations themselves . But the culture that surrounds this aid is considered paternalism .
 Sam Hopkins and Kiluanji Kia Henda were at the 2014 Dak’Art biennale in Senegal . Such was the message implied by Hopkins and Henda .
 European politicians are photoshopped with African hairstyles . European leaders are photographed with African hair .
 The artist's work is a comment on the “financial machine called charity,’ as the artist puts it . His work is the work of a "financial machine"
 Hopkins exhibited “Logos of Non Profit Organisations worldng in Kenya (some of which are imaginary),’s screen-print collection.
 Henrot's work insists that just as the past is limitless, so are the legitimate ways of interpreting and conveying it . Henrot’s work insists just as as the present is limitless.
 Camille Henrot’s work has captivated the art world by moving beyond that paradox and into new forms of storytelling .
 Erench artist creates novel epistemologies from an array of media, including film, sculpture, and illustration . Her first comprehensive American retrospective, at Manhattan’s New Museum this summer, is shown at New Museum .
 In one series, she paid homage to the books in her personal library with an installation of Japanese ikebana floral arrangements . She also transformed written information into pieces of ephemera .
 The South Sudanese singer's life was torn apart by civil war . The conflict between Nuer and Dinka fighters raged .
 The artist responded with an auto-tuned peace anthem that he wrote and recorded with 11 other singers from across the ethnic spectrum of the country .
 Silver X returned four years ago from a refugee camp in Uganda to be part of South Sudan’s budding music scene .
 In June, he turned his sights on the looming famine, helping to launch the Music Against Hunger campaign . In June he launched the campaign to fight the hunger crisis .
 Afghanistan Supply Shamsia Hassani with spray paint . The lasting effects of Afghanistan's war will be covered with street art .
 In Afghanistan, where women have historically been oppressed, murals run counter to stereotypes about the culture . Women have been oppressed in Afghanistan for decades .
 In one, a woman draped in a bright blue burqa stands before a cityscape . In another, a women holds a guitar, her flowered hair flowing in the wind .
 Hassani sometimes takes photographs of inaccessible sites in the city and paints the prints . Hassani often takes photographs.
 These projects are part of a collection called "Dream of Graffiti," and she has used the technique to transform a variety of areas around Kabul .
This year, her graffiti got her shortlisted for the Artraker Award, which honors artists in war-torn places . This year, she was nominated for the award for her graffiti work .
 In one painting by acclaimed artist Hong Sung-dam, the democratically elected president of South Korea, Park Geun-hye has just given birth to a baby resembling her late father .
 Park Chung-hee led the country for nearly two decades prior to his 1979 assassination . He was assassinated in 1979 .
 Park dances to Psy’s ‘Gangnam Style’ below a noose . The noose symbolizes the many people hanged under her father's regime .
 Critics say a poorly equipped coast guard and a disorganized government response heightened the disaster . Critics say the coast guard was poorly equipped and the response was disorganized .
 As a scarecrow controlled by her father, as he revealed in a collaborative work produced with other artists .
 The Aspen Art Museum opened its new building, designed by Shigeru Ban, in August 2014 . The museum's new building was designed by Ban, who has a theme in her art .
 A recent work, “Effacing Memory,’ features sketches of 12 dictators and members of their inner circles with their faces erased . The work, "Effaced Memory," is a work on memory .
 An accompanying video documents her almost violent erasures of their visages . The accompanying video shows her nearly violent erasure of their faces .
 She saved Enver Hoxha, the communist who ruled over her homeland for 41 years, for last . She saved her life .
 Rubiku's work has appeared in museums and galleries in Belgium, Albania, Montenegro, and France . In 2014 alone, Rubiku’s work has been in museums, galleries and museums .
 The artist crosses borders with equal frequency, ever attuned to the psychology of displacement . The artist is known for his artworks .
 Other Citizenships” featured a collection of hats embellished with written passages intended to reflect the thoughts of immigrants acclimating to new cultures .
 Artist I South Korea The Gwangju Biennale is one of Asia's most prestigious art exhibitions . It is held in Seoul, South Korea .
 This year, the biennale removed his painting under pressure from public officials “because of its explicit political intention,’ says a vice mayor of Gwangju .
 Shigeru Ban won a commission to design the Centre Pompidou-Metz, an art museum in northeastern France . He built himself a stylish studio at the museum's Paris branch out of paper tubes .
 Ban won the 2014 Pritzker Architecture Prize . He says frugality shouldn’t preclude elegance or function .
 Ban’s commitment to simple materials is the link between his high-culture commissions and his humanitarian projects . Ban's commitment to paper and cardboard is most famously,Paper and cardboard .
 Ban has designed spaces for fashion houses and art collections . He has also designed temporary shelters, schools, and churches for natural-disaster survivors in places such as Haiti and the Philippines .
 Jason deCaires Taylor's creative process is driven by his ecoiogical mission: to alleviate pressure on the globe's remaining coral reefs .
 The results are ethereal, underwater worlds in which time feels arrested and objects may appear magnified . The results of that effort are e shadowy, underwater world.
 The sea life that lives on and around the art-works will gradually transform and embrace Taylor's work .
 The sculptor works with pH-neutral materials that actively promote coral growth . He leaves rough patches on his sculptures to make them hospitable to larvae .
 A Bahamian girl supports the sea; flora and fauna coat the art with vivid colors in this silent underworld .
 The Global Thinkers are revolutionizing I e-commerce, welcoming women into long-unequal workplaces . They are bringing down the cost of medicine, making genetic sequencing I available to the masses, and striking deals that undercut traditional I East-West energy politics .
 Some of their aims are noble, and I others not, but all are original . Some of them are noble. Others are not . But all are undoubtedly original .
 Alibaba’s late-September initial public offering, which raised roughly $25 billion, was the largest in history and made Ma the richest man in China .
 The company’s market capitalization at press time is $271 billion . The company is worth more than Amazon .
 In May, the billionaire Russian oilman secured Moscow a 30-year, $400 billion gas deal with Beijing .
 Russia had been the company's only major client. Europe was not exactly thrilled with Russian expansionism .
 China shored up its energy security while Russia set the stage for a new era of lucrative trade with its eastern neighbor . China's energy security has been boosted by China's focus on energy security . Russia is set to set up a lucrative trade deal with China .
 In March, he was hit with U.S. sanctions for being a close associate of Putin . He has sold off stakes in companies to protect them .
 Gennady seems to be on Putin’s good side, according to CNN's John Sutter . The gas deal can make all the difference for a person's future prospects, he says .
 Biocon I India Kiran Mazumdar-Shaw started Biocon out of a garage in 1978 . The company was founded in 1978.
 Mazumdar-Shaw is the country's richest self-made woman . Her company is India's biggest biotechnology firm . She is also India's richest woman .
 India's 1. billion people need affordable health care, says India's health minister . She is using her position to expand access to affordable care among India's 2.5 billion people .
Biocon launched CANmab, a breast-cancer drug 25 percent cheaper than its nearest competitor .
 Around 150,000 people are diagnosed with breast cancer each year in India . Biocon's drug should significantly expand access to lifesaving treatment, says India .
 Mazumdar-Shaw funds an affordable cancer-treatment center, underwrites a health-insurance program for rural residents . She has promised to donate three-quarters of her $1. billion fortune to charitable causes .
 Xiaomi co-founder Lei Jun wears a black shirt and blue jeans like Steve Jobs did . Much of his phone's design shares similarities with Apple products .
Sales and marketing ideas behind sales and marketing edge are anything but imitative . But the ideas behind his sales and Marketing edge are not as imitative as he says .
 Lei’s cell-phone company, founded in April 2010, has passed Samsung to become China's leading cell- phone vendor . Lei's company claims 30 percent of the country's market share in the third quarter .
 Xiaomi is already planning to expand into foreign markets, including Russia, Brazil, and Mexico . Xiaomi didn’t release its first smartphone until 2011 .
 The money of a few corrupts U.S. politics, the money of many corrupts India’s.
 Arundhati Bhattacharya is chair of the State Bank of India . He is aiming to bring greater discipline to the country’s banking system .
 A tried-and-true tactic by politicians is to waive sometimes billions of dollars in farm loans in an effort to win the votes of the rural poor .
 Bhattacharya called out the newly elected leaders of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana for their proposed policies on debt forgiveness . She has suggested that Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government turn away from waiver policies .
 She admits that this would benefit her bank, but it would greatly benefit India as well . Yes, she admits, this would help her bank. But it would also benefit India, she says .
 More than half of Saudi Arabia’s university students are female, yet women make up less than a fifth of the country's workforce .
 Princess Reema Bint Bandar A1 Saud, CEO of the Saudi luxury retailer Alfa International, is working to tip the balance .
 Princess Reema has hired dozens of female salesclerks at the Riyadh branch of Harvey Nichols . She has created in-house day care, and provided transportation stipends to female employees .
 It's an encouraging model for female hiring in Saudi Arabia . It introduces women to work outside the home, but also helps them integrate their private and professional lives .
 Princess Reema's high-profile example could lead the way to gradual but profound changes far beyond the workplace .
 Illumina's system will sequence a human genome for less than $1,000, making far more affordable a process that has typically cost around $10,000 .
 The HiSeq XTen completes sequences faster and more accurately than previous designs . The device, called the HiSeQ XTen, completes sequences quicker and better than previous versions .
 It sells for about $10 million and could be a game-changer . It could allow doctors new insights into diseases even before symptoms start .
 Illumina has grown to claim about 80 percent of market share . Under Flatley's leadership, which began in 1999, it has claimed about 80 per cent of the market .
 Elliott Holt usually includes remarks on what she's reading, retweets of friends’ book news, and occasional political commentary .
 As Holt's followers watched, she retweeted the feeds of three guests at a swanky party .
 A nanny in a fictional White House tweets about her eerie visions . A fictional English B-movie star tweets about a "memoir in Tweets" by a fictional B- movie star .
 Much of the material seemed promising, but the festival felt a little below the radar . The festival was held in New York.
There, writers, editors, and readers milled around as tweets were projected onto TV screens . There, writers and editors were among those who tweeted .
 The app was conceived as a way for people to broadcast brief status updates . It caught on primarily as a means for users to connect with each other .
 Twitter has permeated the popular culture so deeply that the concept of Twitter literature was inevitable . But tweeting has been so deeply popular that it was inevitable, says author . Twitter is a social media tool that has become more popular than Twitter .
 Jennifer Egan, David Mitchell and Teju Cole are producing original works on the platform .
 Philippa Gregory's historical novels range in focus as far back as the 15th century . She created a fictional feed for one of her characters in her historical novels .
 If Twitter literature started out as a scrappy affair, it is now moving rapidly into the mainstream . Twitter literature is now becoming more mainstream .
 Twitter is a great place to share moments of literary beauty and wit . It's also a great way to share some of the best tweets .
 Many writers are attracted by the platform's casual immediacy . Others have been galvanized by the possibility of creating ambitious works fundamentally different from printed page .
 Twitter offers a platform for an increasingly sophisticated form of literary performance art . But their experiments show that Twitter is not just a new path for the novel, but a new form of art .
 Whether it works as literature, as we understand it, is another question . Whether it work as literature or as well as literature is a question .
 Twitter is a way to unspool a narrative gradually, moment by moment . It's not always the best way to use Twitter, but it's a good way to do so .
 Egan, Mitchell, and McCall Smith have tried to put this method into practice . But when some novelists have tried it, results have been mixed .
 Egan had been wondering “how to write fiction whose structure would lend itself to serialization on Twitter’s Page-Turner hlog .
 The story was written in a notebook, by hand . It's a step-by-step primer for Twitter users .
 Some readers enjoy watching these sorts of stories unfold, but others don't, and for good reason .
 If the tweets aren’t sequenced by an external site such as Storify, good luck finding them again .
 There are other reasons it doesn’t work to tweet a linear story line by line . There's also a reason it doesn't work.
 Twitter users are hyperaware of the down time between tweets . Deep, immersive reading suspends time, but attempting to follow a live narrative on Twitter makes readers hyperaware .
 It’s hard not to read those lines as a comment on our collective addiction to repeated pings of new information .
 British novelist also finds poetry in Twitter’s fictional constraints .
 Each tweet, Mitchell has said, ought to be a “balanced entity, as compact and elegant as a haiku. Each tweet should be a "balanced entity"
 Egan’s story was defeated by the mechanics of the Twitter platform . Mitchell's story, like Egan's, was rejected by Twitter's mechanics .
 A user following from the beginning of a story must wait for each new passage of text to arrive .
 Most readers join the stream in the middle of the sequence or after it has already ended . But that’s not how it works for most readers .
 Those users are forced to scroll back to the opening of the story, experiencing the tweets in reverse sequential order . Users are also forced to read the tweets again .
Serialization gained popularity in Victorian times as a way to sell newspapers, not as a spur for fictional experimentation . The serialization is a “standard way of writing’ for authors from Charles Dickens to Leo Tolstoy .
 Twitter is the latest way for authors to augment their readerships and market themselves . It's intended to add literary value to a story that’s intended to be read as a whole .
 Twitter has gently discouraged would-be fiction writers from serializing . Even Twitter itself has discouraged writers from writing .
For Nigerian-American novelist Teju Cole, that “something more has taken a variety of forms’s taken a number of forms .
 Prince Monday Whiskey was arrested for theft in Mecca, Nigeria . He was whisked away by persons unknown .
 ‘Small Fates’ was inspired by the genre offaits divers, piquantly brief crime stories popularized by French periodicals around the beginning of the 20th century .
 He combed Nigerian newspapers for tales of especially resonant crimes and retold them in single tweets . He retold the stories in one tweet .
 His tweets relied on careful word choice and devices such as rhythm, alliteration, and puns . Like epigrams, his tweets rely on careful words and devices .
 Each tweet stood on its own, as Cole explicitly declined to weave them into a larger narrative .
 Cole became one of the more popular highbrow authors on Twitter with around 168,000 followers . The people responded, and Cole became a popular author on Twitter .
 F ounded in 1982 by former U.S. President J immy Carter and his wife, Rosalynn . The Carter Center was created to advance peace and health worldwide .
 The Center has helped to improve life for people in more than 80 countries by resolving conflicts and advancing democracy, human rights .
 T he Carter Center seeks a Vice President for Peace Programs . The Carter Center is a nonprofit organization that promotes peace programs .
 The Vice President is responsible for the overall direction, strategic planning, development, and implementation of initiatives aimed at advancing peace with justice in countries around the world, most commonly in economically poor states .
 The VP, Peace Programs oversees the leadership and professional development of 35 staff members and the development and implemention of 30 program activities with annual budgets of nearly $25 million .
 He/she reports to the CEO of The Carter Center and works as part of the senior leadership team with three other Vice Presidents of Health Programs, Finance, and Operations and Development .
 The VP, Peace Programs must have broad experience and a deep substantive knowledge of international affairs . The VP and Peace Programs will be in charge of the Peace Programs .
 Candidates must have proven managerial and leadership skills, including the ability to oversee several international multi-disciplinary initiatives simultaneously . Candidates need to have proven leadership skills .
 The successful candidate will be a team-builder with an inclusive and collegial approach . The successful candidates will be an inclusive, collegial candidate . The candidate will have an inclusive approach .
 Africa, Central America, South America, the Caribbean, the Middle East, or Asia . Asia, Central American, South American, Caribbean, and Asia .
 This is an Atlantabased full-time position with domestic and international travel as required . This is a full- time position with international and domestic travel as needed .
 The novel, while brief, is discursive and ruminative, written in a style very different from Cole’s Twitter voice . But the novel is ruminate and discursive.
 Twitter is not a delivery system for the kind of fiction he had been accustomed to writing, but as an impetus to create something entirely new .
 Finishing ‘Small Fates’ freed Cole to try out yet another method of using Twitter .
 In January 2014, he disseminated a story called “Hafiz,” composed as a series of tweets, to a number of friends who had agreed to tweet .
 Cole retweeted the story, line by line, so that the narrative appeared in sequence in his own feed . Cole then retweeted it, line-by-line.
 In March, Cole published a long narrative essay, “A Piece of the Wall’ , about a visit to the U.S. -Mexico border in Arizona .
 Literary journalism is a hybrid work of literary journalism and journalism . For this hybrid work, he incorporated the voices of people he interviewed .
 Conversations usually take place out in the open, where anyone can listen to them . Conversations are usually taken out of the open .
Proustian poetry slam is an open-mic poetry slam, with the audience constantly interrupting to clap or boo .
 Cole’s recent efforts mimic this interactivity, but they function effectively as literature because they do not actually surrender.
 In selecting and arranging the tweets to suit his purposes, he remains the puppeteer behind the scenes . In selecting, arranging and arranging his tweets, he is the puppeter.
Best-selling fantasy author Andrea Cremer responded to comments from her roughly 16,000 followers . Cremer tweeted a story about a person who finds a mysterious unopened letter in an attic .
Writers must maintain control over their work. But serious fiction has to be hermetic, because writers must maintain their control .
 Some regard Elliott Holt’s Manhattan murder mystery, from the original Twitter Fiction Festival, as the most creative use of the platform .
 American author Chris Arnold recently did something similar with his piece “#PolarVortex,’ which depicts the fictional @NEX_Airport in the throes of a winter storm .
 Public relations tweets from fictional airlines and ads for the airport’s sushi bar mingle with stories of stranded passengers and crew members . One anxiously en route to a job interview, another watching his relationship fall apart via text .
 Arnold's narrative takes advantage of Twitter's visual capabilities, coilaging weather maps, photographs, and video in his feed .
 The thrill they provide is primarily that of seeing a recognizable world faithfully duplicated, with ah its attendant conventions and idiosyncrasies . But the thrill of seeing the world faithfully duplicate is the thrill that it provides .
 The most successful works of fiction on Twitter have been compelling precisely in re-creating the experience of being on Twitter . So far, the most successful work of fiction has been compelling .
Burney is an environmental scientist focusing on global food security and climate change . Burney is also an expert on climate change and food security .
 She designs technologies for poverty alleviation and agricultural adaptation . She studies the links between energy poverty and food security .
 Zhang is an environmental economist focusing on climate change, water resources, renewable energy and fisheries . Zhang is also an environmental expert focusing on East Asia .
 Zhang teaches classes on sustainable development and Chinese environmental and energy policy . Zhang is also a teacher at the University of Shanghai .
 Walter is an expert on international security, with an emphasis on internal wars, bargaining and cooperation, and terrorism/counter-terrorism . Walter is a former member of the British National Security Council .
 Walter teaches classes on international politics and security and policy responses to global problems . Walter teaches class on global security and security issues .
UC San Diego is an established leader on economic development and global public policy . Earn a two-year professional or one-year executive master's degree in international affairs .
 His research focuses on energy markets in emerging countries and environmental regulatory law . He also focuses on the environment and environmental law .
 Victor teaches energy policy, international law, and climate change courses . He also teaches climate change and energy policy .
 McCord focuses on understanding the changing role of geography in economic development . He also focuses on the changing roles of geography and economic development.
 His research explores using weather to model the effect of malaria on child mortality and fertility behavior . His research also explores the role of geography in Chinese city growth .
 They do something fundamentally different from what novels and other ambitious works of fiction are meant to do . In other WORDS they do something different from the novels and others .
 Twitter fiction, so far, has been best at showing us how Twitter works . Twitter fiction has been the most successful Twitter fiction so far .
 The way we experience Twitter is fundamentally different from the deep engagement that takes place when we read immersive fiction. More importantly, the way we view Twitter is different from what we experience on Twitter .
 A tweet is so brief that it can be consumed at a glance . A user can spend hours scrolling through the alwaysfluctuating stream of words and images, eyes flickering.
 We use various cognitive processes as we shift back and forth between paper and screen . We use several cognitive processes. We use different cognitive processes to shift between the screen and paper .
Excessive screen reading can cause our deep -reading skills to atrophy and our comprehension to slack off . Our brains are adaptive and plastic throughout our lives, so excessive screen reading causes us to slack .
 The paperback in our hand the same way we allow our eyes to wander in and out of our Twitter feeds . We wind up skimming through novels the way we read novels, says author .
 If we are doomed to end up reading novels the way we read Twitter, it doesn’t follow that we read novels, says John Sutter .
 The feed simply does not lend itself to that kind of reading experience . The feed just does not lending itself to the kind of read experience .
What it does lend itself to is conveying short bursts of beauty. What it does lends itself to, even more so than conventional literature, is convey short bursts.
 Pentametron is a hot that finds tweets written in iambic pentameter . It matches them with others that rhyme, pairing strangers in odd duets .
 A new way of making sense out of the stories the world tells all day, every day, is what writers have tried to do .
 These organizations produced almost 12,000 events, papers, and research reports over that time . The organizations produced more than 11,000 reports over the time .
 The Middle East, the war on terror, and China are linked closely to whatever was in the headlines at the time . Of these topics, the vast majority concentrated on just a few topics .
 Other areas, deserving of focus but outside the “buzz zone, got much less attention .
 Science and technology are responsible for most of the changes redefining life on the planet . Many of the emerging threats with which humanity is grappling are emerging .
 The city most in need of big, new ideas may be home to the most dumbed-down smart people of all .
 Washington is sleepwalking into America’s future, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A symptom of this problem is seen in FOREIGN Policy’s list of the Leading Global Thinkers of 2014 . The problem has been highlighted in the top 10 list of top global thinkers .
 Neither of them works in the U.S. government .
 This year, when it came to Washington, there just weren't that many choices. But candidly, this year, there were many choices, says CNN's John Sutter .
 At the moment, the Beltway is pretty close to brain-dead, especially according to our criteria . The Beltway has a history of being brain dead .
 People in D.C. did not take actions that affected many people, but when they did, those actions did not flow from new thinking or anything remotely like a big idea .
 There are many thinkers out there who deserve recognition for challenging convention, stimulating thought, improving lives, disrupting the status quo . The good news is that there are many who deserve the recognition we hope our list brings .
 They are scientists, engineers, designers, artists, writers, leaders, politicians, and more . They show that America is finding ways to flourish PEACE and SECURITY .
 Peace Fellowship invites recent college and graduate school graduates to apply for six to nine month fellowships in Washington, DC . Peace Fellowship focuses on arms control, peace, and international security issues .
 Scoville Fellows work with one of more than two dozen participating public-interest organizations . Scovile Fellows is a member of the National Security Council .
 They may undertake a variety of activities, including research, writing, and advocacy on a range of security issues . They may attend coalition meetings, policy briefings and Congressional hearings .
 Fellows are supervised by and learn from senior level staff and often have the opportunity to publish articles or reports . Fellows can publish articles and reports.
 The program arranges meetings for fellows with policy experts . The program also arranges Meetings for the fellows withpolicy experts .
 Many former Scoville Fellows have gone on to pursue graduate degrees in international relations . They have taken prominent positions in the field of peace and security with public-interest organizations .
Candidates must have an excellent academic record and a strong interest in issues of peace and security . Candidates must also have a good academic record. Candidates should also be interested in the issue of security .
 The program is open to all U.S. citizens and nonUnited States citizens living in the United States eligible for employment . It is also open to non-U.S., non-US citizens who are eligible for jobs .
 The next application deadline is January 5, 2015 for the fall 2015 semester . The next year's deadline for the next semester is January 6, 2015 .
 There are bad guys too, offering up bad ideas and translating them into bad acts . Without strong leadership and ideas in Washington, the world may find itself at greater risk for tumult and chaos .
Before the anti-government types start saying it was ever thus, let’s not dismiss the impact of the birth and growth of American democracy . The push westward fostered by federally sponsored expeditions, such as that of Lewis and Clark, and the abolition of slavery .
 When Washington has been a source of creativity, America and the world have benefited greatly, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says Washington is a great place for creativity and creativity .
 The absence of Washingtonians on our Global Thinkers list isn't just a reflection of the fact that we thinl< America’s capital has hit a new low . We worry about how that low is linked to the broader dumbingdown trend limiting America .
 We are also casting light on the situation in the hope that it triggers a discussion about how Washington must change .
 It is high time for America to identify and work to reverse the developments that have led to the quashing of imagination in Washington .
 This work includes bringing new perspectives to a city that has far too many lawyers and lobbyists and not enough scientists, technologists, entrepreneurs, and others .
 The world does not always need Washington to function, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The world doesn't always needWashington to function . The past few years have proved that .
 Washington is stunted by fear of new ideas, as seems to be the case today . But it is clearly better off when the business of Washington is driven by new ideas rather than when .
 Periodicais Postage Paid in Washington, D.C., and at additionai maiiing offices. The Washington Postage paid in Washington.
 They are perfectly happy to celebrate genius, provided it doesn’t make them uncomfortable or require too much of them .
Parents are more concerned that their children get into college than they are that those kids are graded against tough standards . They are more worried that their kids are being graded against the kind of tough standards that might ensure understanding of important concepts .
One particularly odious element of it is what might be called pop intellectualism . One particularly odous element is what may be called 'pop intellectualism'
 Big, buzzy ideas are boiled down into short books that provide more cocktail-party conversation than significant concepts that require little work to grasp .
 TED talks phenomenon offers the intellectual equivalent of diets in which someone can lose 10 pounds in two weeks without giving up ice cream sundaes or pizza .
 In just 18 minutes, a person can be exposed to breathlessly earnest genius . A slickly marketed brand of chicken nuggets for the brain .
 The talks enable non-scientists and non-technologists to feel smart, but that is not the same as actually being smart or feeling dumb . Instead, they make you feel dumb when you first encounter them .
 Perhaps worst among the consequences of the dumbing down of America is the hyper-politicization of discourse, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Media outlets are tailored to specific audiences who seek out viewpoints that support already-held beliefs . This has led to the rise of media outlets and debates that are tailored for specific audiences .
 People watching or reading the news tend not to see both sides of any issue . So people watching or watching the news tends to see the two sides of the issue .
 Litmus tests and the ability to articulate already-popular views are valued more than what is really new or challenging .
 Washington is the epicenter of political polarization and the wellspring from which all litmus tests flow . Unsurprisingly, this trend’s impact on creativity and imagination in Washington has been particularly egregious .
 In doing so they run the risk of offending someone on Capitol Hill who might not vote to confirm them in top jobs . That is to say, originality is not only frowned upon, but it is actually quashed .
Too little bold thinking goes on in the country’s think tanks, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is safer to write an article that doesn’t offend than it is to write one that actually breaks new ground .
SoldIers and MARINES call it a SAFE RIDE HOME Wars ane won on the ground . A SAFe Ride Ride is a safe, safe and safe home.
 The new Joint light Tactical \^hkle (JLTVj from Lockheed Martin and BiAE Systems conies in. You also need to bring them safely home agsin, Thait's .
 JLTV offers the best crew protection, peiiormarce and payload . Not to mention greater reliability, outstanding fud efficiency, and lower operations and sustainment costs .
 With a demonstrated capacity for growth, protected mobility isn't just back. And with a demonstrated ability for growth.
 Our surveys in Afghanistan over the past decade provide a powerful resource for decision makers and an unmatched barometer of Afghan opinions over time .