 A military trainer with Ukraine’s 112th Territorial Defense Brigade works with civilians during a military exercise outside Kyiv .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said that a "special military operation" would begin in Ukraine . Putin said the operation would begin Wednesday night .
 Multiple news organizations reported explosions in multiple cities and evidence of large-scale military operations across Ukraine .
 Russia has built up tens of thousands of troops along the Ukrainian border . The act of aggression could spiral into the largest military conflict on European soil in decades .
 President Joe Biden said this week that Russia had amassed some 150,000 troops near Ukraine . Biden said that Russia has amassed some150,000 soldiers near Ukraine.
 diplomatic talks between Russia and the U.S. and its allies have not yet yielded any solutions .
 On February 15, Russia had said it planned “to partially pull back troops,’ a possible signal that Russian President Vladimir Putin may be willing to deescalate .
 The United States alleged Putin has in fact added more troops since that pronouncement . President Joe Biden told reporters on Friday that he's “convinced’s ‘convincing’ that Russia had decided to invade Ukraine .
 Learn the history behind the conflict and what Russian President Vladimir Putin has said about his war aims . Learn about the history of the conflict in Russia and what he's said about the war .
 The stakes of Putin's war Russia’s invasion has the potential to set up a clash of nuclear world powers .
 The United States and its European allies have responded to Putin’s aggression with unprecedented sanctions . The U.S. has no plans to send troops to Ukraine for good reason .
 How to donate if you want to assist refugees and people in Ukraine. How to help Ukraine? Donations can be made on Facebook and Twitter .
 Ukraine is a larger stage for Russia to try to reassert its influence in Europe and the world . But Ukraine is also a bigger stage for Putin to cement his legacy, and for Putin.
 Putin may decide to launch another incursion into Ukraine. Putin's actions could lead to tens of thousands of civilian deaths, a European refugee crisis, and a response from Western allies .
 The United States and Russia have drawn firm red lines that help explain what’s at stake . The U.S. and Russia are the two countries that have drawn red lines .
 Putin demands NATO stop its eastward expansion and deny membership to Ukraine . NATO roll back troop deployment in countries that had joined after 1997, which would turn back decades on Europe's security and geopolitical alignment .
 The ultimatums are “a Russian attempt not only to secure interest in Ukraine but essentially relitigate the security architecture in Europe’s Europe, says Michael Kofman .
 Both the U.S. and Russia know Ukraine is not going to become a NATO member anytime soon .
 Some preeminent American foreign policy thinkers argued at the end of the Cold War that NATO never should have moved close to Russia’s borders .
 NATO’s open-door policy says sovereign countries can choose their own security alliances . But sovereign countries are able to make their own alliances .
 Putin's demands would hand the Kremlin veto power over NATO's decision-making, and through it, the continent's security . Giving in to Putin’s demands would give the Kremlin the power to veto the decision.
 The world is watching and waiting to see what Putin will do next .
 Moscow continues to deny that it has any plans to invade, even as it warns of a “military-technical response’ to stagnating negotiations .
 If it happened, it could be devastating to Ukraine, with unpredictable fallout for the rest of Europe and the West . But war, if it happened.
 Ukraine, a former Soviet republic, had the third largest atomic arsenal in the world . The current crisis grew from the breakup of the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. and Russia worked with Ukraine to denuclearize the country . Kyiv gave its hundreds of nuclear warheads back to Russia in exchange for security assurances .
 Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014, when it invaded Ukraine . Russia's annexation of Ukraine was a test of its sovereignty in 2014 .
 Russia annexed Crimea and backed a rebellion led by pro-Russia separatists in the eastern Donbas region . Russia annexed the Crimean Peninsula and backed the rebels .
 U.S. diplomats visited demonstrations in symbolic gestures that further agitated Putin .
 President Barack Obama was slow to mobilize a diplomatic response in Europe . He did not immediately provide Ukrainians with offensive weapons .
Post-Soviet Europe is also helping to fuel today’s conflict. But the very premise of a post-Soviet EU is also contributing to the conflict, it is claimed .
 Putin has been fixated on reclaiming some semblance of empire, lost with the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Putin has said Ukrainians and Russians “were one people — a single whole,” or at least would be if not for the meddling from outside forces that has created a “wall” between the two .
 An expert explains Putin’s endgame in Ukraine isn’t joining NATO in the near future . President Joe Biden has said as much as he has said .
 The core of the NATO treaty is Article 5. An attack on any NATO country is treated as an attack on the entire alliance . Any Russian military engagement of a hypothetical NATO-member Ukraine would theoretically bring Moscow into conflict with the US, the UK, France, and the 27 other NATO
 The U.S. is the fourth largest recipient of military funding from the US . But intelligence cooperation between the two countries has deepened in response to threats from Russia .
 Putin finds Ukraine's orientation toward the EU and NATO untenable to Russia’s national security .
 Demonstrators with Ukrainian national flags and posters march in the center of Kharkiv, Ukraine, on February 5 .
 Kharkiv is Ukraine’s second largest city, just 25 miles from some of the tens of thousands of Russian troops massed at the border .
 It created expectations in Ukraine and Georgia, which then were never met . It created Expectations in Ukraine, Georgia and Ukraine, which was never met.
 No country can join the alliance without the unanimous buy-in of all 30 member countries . Many have opposed Ukraine’s membership, in part because it doesn’t meet the conditions on democracy and rule of law .
 The Russia-Ukraine crisis is a continuation of the one that began in 2014 . Russia is threatening Ukraine now, according to Russian media .
Recent political developments within Ukraine, the US, Europe, and Russia help explain why Putin may feel now is the time to act . But recent political developments in Ukraine, U.S. and Europe help explain what Putin may be feeling now .
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky is a comedian who played a president on TV and then became the actual president . He is the current president of Ukraine .
 Zelensky promised during his campaign that he would “reboot” peace talks to end the conflict in eastern Ukraine . He also promised to deal with Putin directly.
 It saw Zelensky as someone who might be more open to Russia's point of view . It saw him as a political novice.
 President-elect Volodymyr Zelensky claps during his inauguration in the Ukrainian parliament in Kyiv on May 20, 2019 .
 Russia wants Zelensky to implement the 2014 and ’15 Minsk agreements, but would amount to a ‘Trojan horse’ for Moscow to wield influence and control .
 Russia may have exhausted all of its political and diplomatic tools to bring Ukraine back into the fold . That may have left Russia feeling as though it has exhausted all its political, diplomatic tools .
 Putin tested the West on Ukraine again in the spring of 2021, gathering forces and equipment near parts of the border . Putin tested Ukraine again this year in a bid to improve relations with the West .
 The troop buildup got the attention of the new Biden administration, which led to an announced summit between the two leaders .
 Days later, Russia began drawing down some of the troops on the border . Russia has been drawing down the troops in recent days .
 Putin’s perspective on the U.S. has also shifted, experts say . Putin's view on the United States has also changed, experts said .
 To Putin, the chaotic Afghanistan withdrawal and the US’s domestic turmoil are signs of weakness .
 Biden is still trying to put the transatlantic alliance back together after the distrust that built up during the Trump administration .
 Some of Biden’s diplomatic blunders have alienated European partners . Afghanistan withdrawal and the nuclear submarine deal that Biden rolled out with the UK and Australia caught France off guard .
 Germany has a new chancellor, Olaf Scholz, after 16 years of Angela Merkel . The new coalition government is still trying to establish its foreign policy .
 Germany, along with other European countries, imports Russian natural gas, and energy prices are spiking right now .
 France has elections in April, and President Emmanuel Macron is trying to carve out a spot for himself in these negotiations . France has an election in April .
 French President Emmanuel Macron and Russian President Vladimir Putin held a joint press conference on February 7 in Moscow . Washington is trying very hard to keep the divisions between the two sides .
 Putin may think such an adventure will boost his standing at home, just like it did in 2014 . Putin has his own domestic pressures to deal with, including the coronavirus and the struggling economy .
 Diplomacy hasn't produced any breakthroughs so far so far, the Biden administration says .
 The White House is preparing for sanctions against Russia, sending money and weapons to Ukraine, and boosting America’s military presence in Eastern Europe .
 Late last year, the White House started intensifying its diplomatic efforts with Russia .
 In December, Russia handed Washington its list of “legally binding security guarantees,” including those nonstarters like a ban on Ukrainian NATO membership . Russia demanded answers in writing .
 In January, U.S. and Russian officials tried to negotiate a breakthrough in Geneva, with no success . The United States and Russia have been trying to negotiate in Geneva .
 The United States directly responded to Russia’s ultimatums at the end of January . The U.S. responded to the ultimats at the start of January.
 The United States and NATO rejected any deal on NATO membership . Leaked documents suggest the potential for new arms control agreements and increased transparency .
 On February 17, Moscow issued its own response, saying the U.S. ignored its key demands and escalated with new ones . On February 18, Moscow said the United States ignored its main demands and continued to escalate .
 Biden's team internalized in response to failures of U.S. response to Russia's aggression in Ukraine in 2014 . European allies needed to check Russia’s aggression.
 The Biden administration has put a huge emphasis on working with NATO, the European Union, and individual European partners to counter Putin .
Max Bergmann of the Center for American Progress says the alliance is "at the epicenter’s epicenter" "They know it, they engage with us about it all the time," he says .
 In 2014, Putin deployed unconventional tactics against Ukraine that have come to be known as “hybrid warfare, such as irregular militias, cyber hacks, and disinformation . The tactics have been known as "hybrid Warfare"
 These tactics surprised the West, including those within the Obama administration . The Obama administration's tactics surprise the West .
In 2014, in the Donbas region, military units of “little green men’s” moved in with equipment . In 2014, soldiers in uniform but without official insignia moved in.
 Moscow has fueled unrest since, and has continued to destabilize and undermine Ukraine through cyberattacks on critical infrastructure and disinformation campaigns . Moscow has also continued to undermine Ukraine by attacking critical infrastructure, disinformation campaigns, according to reports .
 It is possible that Moscow will take aggressive steps in all sorts of ways that don’t involve moving Russian troops across the border .
 It could launch sweeping disinformation campaigns and hacking operations . It could escalate its proxy war, and launch sweeping misinformation campaigns .
 Russia hasn't gotten closer to its objectives. But this route looks a lot like the one Russia has already taken, and it hasn't taken .
 It doesn’t seem to have had a massive damaging impact on Ukraine’s pursuit of democracy, says Margarita Konaev .
There are plenty of possible scenarios for a Russian invasion of Ukraine, including a full-on war . Russian troops could be sent into the breakaway regions, seizing strategic regions and blockading Ukraine’s access to waterways .
 Any of it could be devastating, though the more expansive the operation, the more catastrophic . The more expansive operation could be more catastrophic, though .
 Russian and Belarusian forces conduct training exercises at a firing range in the Brest region of Belarus on Feburary 3 .
 A full-on invasion to seize all of Ukraine would be something Europe hasn’t seen in decades .
 It could involve urban warfare, including on the streets of Kyiv, and airstrikes on urban centers . It could also involve airstrikes on city centers and on streets .
 A refugee crisis would cause astounding humanitarian consequences, including a refugee crisis . It would cause incredible humanitarian consequences .
 The U.S. has estimated the civilian death toll could exceed 50,000 . The United States has estimated between 1 million and 5 million refugees .
 The colossal scale of such an offensive also makes it the least likely, experts say . It would carry tremendous costs for Russia, and it would carry enormous costs, they say .
 Such an invasion would force Russia to move into areas that are bitterly hostile toward it . Such an attack would force the Russian government to move in to areas bitterly hostile to it .
 That increases the likelihood of a prolonged resistance, and an invasion could turn into an occupation . That increase the chance of a protracted resistance .
 Ukraine has derailed the grand plans of the Biden administration . China, climate change, the pandemic and climate change have become a top-level priority for the US .
 Russia again and again shaping geopolitical events, says Rachel Rizzo, a researcher at the Atlantic Council's Europe Center .
 The United States has deployed 3,000 troops to Europe in a show of solidarity for NATO . The Biden administration has been firm that United States soldiers will not fight in Ukraine if war breaks out .
 The United States, along with other allies including the United Kingdom, have been warning citizens to leave Ukraine immediately . The U.S. and other allies, including the U.K. have been warned to leave immediately .
 The U.S. shuttered its embassy in Kyiv this week, temporarily moving operations to western Ukraine . The United States shuttered the embassy this week .
 The Biden administration, along with its European allies, is trying to come up with an aggressive plan to punish Russia if it invade again .
 The so-called nuclear options, such as an oil and gas embargo, seem unlikely, in part because of the ways it could hurt the global economy . The electronic messaging service that makes global financial transactions possible.
 Russia isn’t an Iran or North Korea; it is a major economy that does a lot of trade, especially in raw materials and gas and oil .
 A worker at a compressor station for the Nord Stream 2 offshore natural gas pipeline, in Ust-Luga, Russia, in 2021 .
 Nord Stream 2 pipeline will supply gas from Russia to Germany . Once operational, the pipeline will be used to supply gas to Germany.
 The Biden administration is reportedly considering some level of financial sanctions on Russia’s biggest banks . The Obama administration didn’t take in 2014, and an export ban on advanced technologies .
 Penalties on Russian oligarchs and others close to the regime are likely also on the table . Some other forms of targeted sanctions are also likely to be targeted .
 Nord Stream 2, the completed but not yet open gas pipeline between Germany and Russia, may also be killed if Russia escalates tensions . The pipeline is not yet yet open, but it could be killed by Russia .
 Putin has put himself in, which makes a walk-back from Russia seem difficult to fathom . This is the corner Putin has placed himself in.
 Putin's demands for a diplomatic solution don't mean it can't happen, but it doesn't eliminate the possibility of some sort of diplomatic solution . Putin has enough cover to declare victory without the West meeting all of his demands .
 Ukraine caught in the middle and under sustained threat from Russia . It also doesn't eliminate the possibility that Russia and the United States will be stuck in this standoff for months longer .
Financial contributions from our readers are a critical part of our resource-intensive work . Financial contributions from readers help us keep our journalism free for all .
 The Weeds Understand how policy impacts people . Sign up for the newsletter to help you understand how policy affects people .