 On Thursday, I spoke with Ilya, a Russian anarchist living and organizing in Kyiv, Ukraine .
 We spoke about the relationship between Russia and Ukraine, the Maidan uprising and war in the Donbass . We also discussed conspiracy theories about Ukraine promoted by Russia and Russian-aligned media outlets .
 To hear interviews about resistance and repression in Russia from the last decade, check out our past interviews .
 You can also find an interview from the period of the Maidan protests as well as experiences from Belarus and Belarus .
 We're releasing this episode a little early to get this voice out at such an important moment . The episode will be released later this week .
 I am an anarchist from Russia, currently living in Kyiv and staying inKyiv . I am a member of an anarchist group from Russia .
 Ukraine has been in conflict with Ukraine for the last few months . The Ukrainian government has been blamed for the violence in Ukraine .
 Ukraine's relationship with Russia would be kind of helpful. But I kind of feel like a brief rundown of the sort of the relationship between Ukraine and Russia would have been helpful .
Tensions at least from the autumn are expected to be high in the autumn .
 Some threat of war was believed to be in the air. But it also happened through past several years, several times already .
 Putinist government on local authorities on the local system, also on local system. So this is how to say, how is this strategy of blackmailing and of pressure.
 Russia invaded Crimea and annexed Crimea and also invaded the Donbass region . Russia used some more loyal parts of the local population to Russia .
Historically, it doesn’t make a lot of sense to go really deep into the historical context. So historically, I guess maybe it doesn't make a much of sense, says historian .
 We are all still in the Eastern Slavic group, both Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarusians, which speak pretty close languages . We're all in the same Eastern Slavs, both Russian, Ukrainians and Belarusian .
 The pair's historical ways were different for some reasons . But then they really separated for some reason .
 The territory of modern Ukraine was incorporated into the Russian Empire in the late 18th century . By the end, it was already in the 17th century and finished in the early 1800s .
 The Russian empire is known for colonization of local territories by the Russian empire .
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War 3 of 17 aspects . Soviet Union still a very imperially designed state, with the center in Moscow with the predominance of Russian language .
 The political and economical system of Moscow, of Russia, is different in many ways . In many ways, Moscow's political and economic system is different .
After Soviet Union collapsed, all the republics which constructed the Soviet Union in general got actual state independence .
After Putin came into power in 1999, he started this, I would say, neo-imperialist or neo-colonialist organizational politics of restoring Russian State influence on the former Soviet Union area . But then after Putin came in power, he began this.
 His politics are about helping pro-Russian presidents to come into power like with Viktor Yanukovych in Ukraine . His politics were harsh reaction in situations like when these presidents were overthrown, especially by the Maidan uprising .
 It was a really popular movement which threw Yanukovych out of power and kept him out . It was even not electoral protest process, it was a popular movement .
 Yanukovych ousting and Crimea annexation. Since then, I think we can count the start of the modern stage of Ukrainian-Russian relations, since 2014 .
 I’m sure a lot of our conversations going to sort of play with that idea and break it down . I'm sure a few of us are going to play with it and break down. I'm not sure if we'll be able to do it.
 You mentioned this nationalist sentiment, which you mentioned previously. So maybe first we can touch on this nationalist sentiments, which we mentioned previously .
 Ukrainians and Russians are historically close and also linguistically and culturally close . Because our peoples, Ukrainians and Russian are traditionally close, they are culturally and linguistically close .
 There is widespread usage of Russian language around the country, especially eastern and southern parts of the country . It’s also because of years of some imperialist role that there is widespread use of language around here .
 Putin likes to speculate, and this gives space for speculations that actually we are one people as, for example, Putin . This gives space to speculations about us, and that we are actually one people .
 Some authoritarian power uses historical and cultural toys for their own benefit to make some speculative ground for their invasions . It's just a propagandistic tool for some authoritarian power with some geopolitical ambitions .
 NATO and EU could bring Ukraine into their zone of influence by NATO and European Union . If we then jump to this problem of NATO and the EU, we could also bring Ukraine in their zone.
 New authorities came into power after the Maidan uprising. Of course, it really takes place since 2014, especially since 2014 .
 A lot of locals have some pro-Western sentiment. They were clearly pro- Western and its’s hard to deny that a lot of them were also pro-West .
 Eastern Europe still creates a role model of lifestyle for people in Eastern Europe . In all post-Soviet nations, the Western world still creates role models of lifestyle .
 European Union is very close [geographically] and is not that culturally distant. I would say, because European Union are very close, and not that cultural distant .
 And still, still they have this, how to say, nice and comfortable Western life. And still they've this.
 Some political manipulators of so called pro-Western orientation. This is also a matter to be used by some political manipulator .
 Any expansion of NATO and European Union is actually superficial, because there were not even any suggestions or proposals for Ukraine to join these organizations . There were not really any suggestions for the Ukraine.
 Russian statehood is once again used as a tool to justify pressure and invasion . The threat to Russia is a very chimerical, artificial threat for Russia, says the author .
 Ukraine is a puppet state for Putin’s regime, or to wage war, as we see today. These attempts to make, as you said already, are already being made . These attempts are already made to make Ukraine a puppet states for Putin's regime, as well as war
 There are more people in the east and the south who speak Russian, maybe are in the Orthodox Church, or in some ways identify with Russia .
People's Republics in Donetsk and Luhansk. Can you say a few words about the quote unquote?
 The Duma just asked Putin to recognize the independence of these states . He said that it was years late, that he should have done this before .
 Loyalties don't necessarily at all construct some political loyalties, especially in terms like pro-Russian or pro-Western . So linguistic affiliations, as well as religious affiliation, don’t necessarily build some politicalLoyalties .
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War 5 of 17 very much Russian speaking . Yes, southern and eastern regions, they are the Final Straw radio station .
 In no way at all does the majority of the people support the integration with Putinist Russia. But in no way does a considerable number of people support it .
Both Ukrainian Orthodox Church and Ukrainian branch of Moscow Orthodox Church . We have both Ukrainian and Russian Orthodox churches .
 This separation somehow influence the political loyalties, but also not totally. This separation also influence the politics, but not totally .
 Even if a person is Russian speaking, it doesn’t necessarily mean that this person is loyal to the Russian government . The Russian Orthodox Church is in Ukrainian branch of Moscow Orthodox Church .
In Crimea, and in eastern and southern regions, there are more sympathizers for Russian state and also for the Putinist regime . But still yes, in Crimea and in the Crimea, there is more sympathizer for the Russian state .
Oppositional Platform, which is still present in Ukrainian parliament, holds clearly pro-Putin positions . The party is still mostly supported in southern and eastern areas .
 A lot of people who speak mostly Russian don't want to be integrated in some new Russian new empire, or to be subjugated by Putin’s regime .
 A lot of people, I would say, actually associated themselves with Russia in this territory . "A lot ofPeople ... associated themselves" with Russia, he said .
 The indigenous people of Crimea, the Crimean Tatars, are unhappy and disloyal to new authorities in Crimea .
There is also a split within Crimean community, I would say, would be correct to say . There is also split within the Crimean community.
 The Republic’s could never exist without direct support from Russian state, both in economical conditions and more important by military conditions .
 There is some support from the grassroots for this republic, but not nearly enough to hold any anti-Ukrainian separatists insurgency .
Mafias hold the power, since they are fully controlled and fully loyal and fully manipulated by Kremlin . And these mafias holding the power.
 More than 100,000 Russian troops along the eastern border with Ukraine . More than 10s of 1000s of Belarusian troops to the north, naval deployments in the sea south of Ukraine .
 shelling has started in other parts of Ukraine, the parts that aren’t occupied . There’s been shelling already in the Donbass.
 Western governments and the Ukrainian government say Russia is going to do a “false flag’s activity to claim a reason to do an invasion. There's also this issue that Western governments say Russia will do a 'false flag' activity .
 Russia was claiming it was a terrorist act and an activity by the Ukrainian government . There was a car bomb of the head of security forces in one of the quotes .
 Russian expansion is just Russian expansion, says CNN's John Sutter . "I guess we’ve sort of talked about how this is just Russia," he says .
 Every parts of Ukraine were actually bombed by heavy airstrikes from the Russian side .
 As far as now, the main targets were both civil and military airports, and also other military targets . The main targets are both civil, military airports and other military airports .
Up to dozens of civilians have been killed by Putinist forces from the sky . But they bombed pretty near to the civilian inhabited places, and as far as I know, up to dozens have already been killed .
Ukrainian state is a classic nation state, with all its obvious shortcomings, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I would not call Ukrainian state “super nationalist”
 Some politics for ethnic and national unification, which is unjust, are unjust, of course . And also with some politics forethnic and national unity, which are unjust .
 This is also very neoliberal and poor state, providing continuously and extensively neoliberal reforms . The poor people of this country, for the poor people, are very poor and very neoliberal . This is a very neoliberal state, for many of the working people .
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War 7 of 17 says the Russian language was absolutely the colonizer's language .
 Millions of Ukrainians prefer Russian language . But this is nonsense, from my point of view, because millions of Ukrainians prefers Russian language.
 All this creates splits within this society, and creates tensions and creates a space for some political advances .
 This is absolutely over-exaggeration, which is used consciously by Russian forces, by Putinist forces, I would prefer to say, to play this card of military invasion and of their political expansion . This isabsolutely over-Exaggeration. This is a very
 There is no repression and violence against people who may not fit well into Ukrainian nation state frame . There's no, how to say, forcing people to speak another language, for example, and there is no really repression .
 There are certain problems, of course, but what we see today is just an attempt to over-exaggerate all the problems . It is just a attempt to instrumentalize these problems for clearly imperialist aggression, he says .
Just now curfew is declared in Kiev from 10pm, but we still have a lot of time before it. Just now curfew in Kiev is declared.
 Russia is not just about saber-rattling, it was more about getting international attention and proving itself that it can destabilize the Ukrainian economy and bring other world powers to the table .
 A lot of people were saying beforehand that it didn't seem likely that the Russian regime would end up invading Ukraine . The military force that they could muster probably wouldn’t be enough to actually occupy Ukraine .
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War 8 of 17 crazy or something, but somehow they are really going wild . I am far from thinking that they are like stupid or the Final StrawRadio / Anarchist in Ukraine against War .
 Russia has lost popularity within Russia, and they need some more doping, I would say, to make it increase again, internal popularity . They have lost popularity in Russia, but they need more doping to increase their popularity .
 The so-called ‘international community’ is actually a weak and fragmented. They try to use these holes within the international community, and with this world establishment consensus, to make some game change .
 The Turkish state has its own behavior, but also extends its influence abroad its borders . I think we can compare it fairly well with the behavior of Turkish state, which has their own, let's say .
 The two new imperialist states make actually very similar politics, I think . So I think these two new countries make actuallyvery similar politics . I think they make really similar politics.
 Russia's economic situation in Russia has been worsening from year to year, he says . Since 2014, when European sanctions were imposed, the situation is worsening, he adds .
 Russian authorities feel themselves still very powerful, but at the same time they feel themselves a little bit like in the “Ragnarok’s film, like in some final battle for them to protect their privileged position and their full control over the country and abroad .
 Russia plays wild games, both inside Russia and abroad, says CNN's John Sutter .
 All political opposition, from liberal, far right, and anarchist and leftist side were smashed during the last year’s. At the same time, you need to know that all political opposition was smashed .
 "Network Case" against Russian anarchists was a popular topic in the U.S. For example, even in the United States, it was called “Network Case’s”
 Alexei Navalny is one of the biggest populist liberal leaders in Russian opposition . He was imprisoned by the Russian government .
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War 9 of 17 ly broad protest movements . Since 2011, we had several sparks of a resistance, I would say, of real the real.
 They were more or less co-opted or smashed by the state or they just died because time passed away and they still gained no results . But they didn't succeed finally, they didn’t succeed or they were more than co-optained .
After each of these sparks, the government uses their opportunity to suppress more and more opposition . After each of this sparks, government use their chance to suppress the opposition .
 Navalny returned to Russia in January 2021 and many of his supporters returned . One big last increase of the protests we saw last winter was last January 2021 when he returned .
 Many Russian cities have protested Putin's politics in recent weeks . But also more people were unhappy with the situation in the country .
Repressions became harder and dozens of people were imprisoned . And then repressions become even harder and many were imprisoned.
 At least 1,000 political prisoners in Russia are currently being held in Russia . Human rights defenders are speaking out about the prisoners .
 Human rights defenders do not recognize all the people who are being imprisoned for their political activities, says the author .
 There are no organizational tools, some movement tools, which could mobilize the people of Russia to protest against it . There are a lot of unhappiness with this war in Russia, but there is no organization tools, says CNN's John Sutter .
Several separate actions against the invasion and against the war in Russia in different cities of Russia . It’s still not a massive and organized movement. We already saw today.
 The government made conscious work to destroy an internal opposition. But up to up today, it doesn't exist, according to the government .
 When Coronavirus, vaccination started, this anti-vax movement gained also big grounds in Russian society . But still for example, it is interesting that when Cor onavirus started, it was interesting that it was also a big grounds for the movement .
 Authorities even had to go several steps back with this vaccination and certifications programs .
 Putin and from Russian authorities had to go any steps back because they really saw a large unhappiness growing within the population . The Russian government had to do so because of the unhappiness in the country .
 I'm still far from thinking they are almighty, even internally, not at all. So I’m still far away from thinking that they are, even though I'm not .
 There is some, how to say, some ghosts of protest and revolutionary movement within Russia, which still didn't take its forms . There is also some,how to say.
 Putinist government is wild enough to make such initiatives, let’s say, as they are today .
 In the West, media has represented a lot of protests over the quality of the shots that the Russian government was making .
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War 10 of 17 resentation . And maybe that’s a misrep.
 "There is actually a lot of how to say, this so called COVID skepticism, and a little bit of being skeptical about medicine, as well as which we can treat as some sort of ignorance which actually exists within the population"
 Russian population highly doesn't believe the authorities, it doesn’t believe that any good will come from above . But at the same time, another portion of this antivax motivation, which may differ from what we have in the West, may differ .
State officials want to resist any invasion of state programs within their private lives . They know that the write a lot of lies, going from TV channels, and from the heights persons of the state .
 They have experienced many tricks from there and because of that they just don’t believe the authorities . They just don't believe authorities .
 antivax sentiments blossomed in Russia. This was one of the factors for why antivax sentiment blossoming in Russia .
 The Maidan protests were in part a push against the rule by Ukrainian oligarchs . But maybe it was in favor of some oligarchs over others, some of them over others .
Russian oligarchs had vast control, in many ways parallel to the Russian oligarchs, who Putin rules alongside Putin . And they had huge control, with many of them having vast control .
 Some people who are arguing against the Russian invasion are positing it as supporting Ukraine . Some have already laid a critique that it’s a poor neoliberal state.
 "I do it with pleasure, actually, because this is, I believe, the most important point. Yes, I do this with pleasure," she says .
Even in the West, this word is in use now, like with this secret services set as the political center . I know that even in theWest, this term is in usage now, says John Sutter .
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War is based in Ukraine . 11 of 17 competing oligarch clans are struggling for power and for bigger zones of economical and political influence .
 Maidan uprising had a lot of anti-oligarchical intention, according to the opposition . Maidan is very poor and vulnerable, says the opposition leader .
 Both countries are absolutely neoliberal. At the same time, both countries are completely neoliberal .
 Putin has some social populism, but he has provided neoliberal reforms . Even though he has some of it, Putin has provided reforms, he has also provided reforms .
 The social vulnerability of the working people of the ordinary people is a key part of the campaign .
 It just has much less tools to control and to subjugate its own population . But it just has less tools than the government to control its population .
This is still somehow pluralistic, absolutely unlike the Russian situation . This is still Somehow pluralistic. This is not the same situation .
 There is still a much more free atmosphere around here. And I would say there is still much moreFree atmosphere around there .
 Many comrades from Russia and Belarus find shelter exactly here. This is not a coincidence that, for example, many comrades from Russian and Belarus they find shelter in Belarus .
 Because much less political repression and state violence is present here, there is less violence in the U.S. than in other countries .
 We still see a lot of grounds for making some grassroots initiatives, I would say, even social revolutionary developments . So here, we still see some grounds for make some grassroots projects, I'd say, and any, he says .
 While in Russia, we see just this authoritarian hammer, I would say, which smashes everything which it meets in its way . I would also say that it smashes all which it met in its own way .
 Ukrainian society should be protected from this totalitarian threat that it faces today. But the Ukrainian society has actually faced already for decades, since Putinist expansionist politics are starting to be implemented .
For this, exactly for this, and not for protecting some state sovereignty, it doesn’t make sense for us, says the author . But for this it doesn't make sense, he says, for this .
 Putinist invasions should be severely confronted by Putinists, says the Russian president . Putinist invasion should be met with severe punishment, he says .
 In worse situations, the grassroots very often is killed off. Self-organization, solidarity, mutual aid really take ground within the population, especially when elites betray the population .
 Several days before the invasions, many politicians of Ukraine flew away on their private jets .
 The state is not a friend at all for the Ukrainian people. So we see pretty clearly that the state isn't a friend for the Ukraine people .
 Our fight is for the people is for protecting the grounds for the future revolutionary changes, which is now being deadly threatened by the Putinist threat, says the group .
 The Maidan movement was a CIA operation to promote the farright groups such as Pravyi sektor or Svoboda, it has been claimed . It is not promoting leftist values on social justice, but often aligned with Russian regime .
 Gobbels said that if you want your lies to be believed in, you should use some kernals of truth in it .
 The far-right had a strong presence in Maidan uprising, as they were organizing for four years before it, says the author .
 It was also affiliated with the authorities, with the secret services as far as we can estimate, and also with some criminal business and so on . And it was also somehow affiliated with.
 The Maidan uprising gave them an opportunity to develop their organizations within Maidan . They faced this uprising on a pretty good footing .
 Ukrainian farright took more grounds for ethnic cleansing of Russian speaking population . But still, in first approach, this is the lie that the Ukrainian far right takes more grounds . There is still no actually ethical cleansing of this population.
 Really far-right nationalist parties are not even present in Parliament . And also, really far- right nationalist parties aren't even present .
 "I don't give a lot of shit who is present in Parliament," he says . "Because, honestly, I don’t give a lots of shit," he adds .
 I saw by my own eyes 100,000s of just ordinary people rebelling against the oligarchical rule, against their humiliation imposed by the uncontrollable criminal President Yanukovych .
 Some fake opposition parties were created by different local oligarch clans, which we already mentioned today . Not only from the Right, it was Liberals, some fake opposition party parties created by local oligarchs .
I would say, oligarch Poroshenko, which became next president, was pretty successful in it . And I would say he was pretty success in it, he would say .
 Maidan is once again a betrayed revolution, like a revolution which was stolen from the people by the oligarchs . And we can say that Maidan has been a betraying revolution .
 The Maidan uprising itself was definitely less of a nationalist movement and much more of a grassroot popular movement against the government . But the Maidan revolution was definitely not of a nationalists movement .
In some areas, like the Occupy movement, it was all sorts of different people coming for their own political reasons to be in that space . When I think to something similar in the U.S. in some areas it was similar in some parts of the United States .
 It definitely tried all over to either harness it or destroy it, if it couldn't be done . It's been trying all over, but it definitely tried to harness it and destroy it .
The relationship between the far right and security forces is ubiquitous and international . The relationship between security forces and far right is ubiquitous .
 Azov voluntary battalion was formed soon after Maidan and really was a Nazi initiative to intervene in this conflict in Donbass . Azov was a voluntary battalion.
 Soon after, they became a regular regiment of Ukrainian army and somehow integrated within the military hierarchy . The Ukrainian army is the largest in the country .
 As a part of the army, it must be declared to be apart from any politics . Now, now, they are not clearly “political’s” because they are part of an army which is part of a political army .
 The Nazis still have a core presence in there and leadership within it . But of course, it was a Nazi-originated, Nazi-built structure, these people.
Russian Nazis came to Azov to participate in Azov and also to train . I have no strict information, but I heard many rumors that many Western Nazis came .
 There are many Nazis in Pravyi Sektor, or many of National Corps. There are also many Nazis here, including Dmitro Yarosh .
 Dmitro Yarosh is from Dnipro city, and many of National Corps leaders, The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War . 14 of 17 they're from Kharkiv, from eastern cities, which are predominantly Russians-speaking .
Ukrainian-speaking population is not Russian-speaking, says author . "This is a pure hoax and tricks," he says .
 Nazis are present a lot in local political life, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Oligarchical forces are still much more weak than for example, but they are still very weak . But they are much more powerful than just Oligarchsical forces .
Ukrainian state, or a fascist state, is just a lie, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "When somebody tries to manipulate that Ukrainian somehow a “Nazi state,” this is of course, this is a lie"
Anti-imperialist movement needs to be today with us confronting this purely imperialist aggression. This is just a tool of manipulation for pro-Putinist forces, too, says Peter Bergen .
 It seems like an opportunity for anarchists and anti-authoritarian, anti-capitalists to reach out to their neighbors, provide alternatives, offer what you mentioned with mutual aid .
 People tried to do that during the Maidan and got outflanked, basically. Obviously, people tried to get outflanking, basically .
 Many anarchists had had to flee Belarus, for instance, to try to defend the population against invasion . I just saw messages this morning on social media of many anarchists who had fled .
 It seems like a lot of people are sort of hunkering down and making that decision to stay .
 Maidan was a hard blow and the source of depression for the anarchist movement, he says . Maidan provided a lot of splits about attitude and position about Maidan, he adds .
 Maidan appeared as this “betrayed revolution,’ as I already said before . But even more was the negative influence that Maidan actually appeared as a ‘betraying revolution’
 Some people really believe that it would lead to some positive political changes, but it hardly led to any good changes within the society .
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War 15 of 17 anarchist movement . In general, leftist movement in general, found itself in depression in Ukraine for years .
In the last few years, I think, we can speak about restoring movement because a lot of old participants and new participants are making some analytical work around what needs to be done for the movement to reconstruct itself, he says . He says the movement is trying to organize
 This national sentiment is widespread within the society, says David Frum . Of course, we need to confront a lot this nationalist sentiment, he says .
 This pro-Western sentiment I already mentioned about people dreaming of a good Western-like life . This is not the first time I've mentioned this pro- Western sentiment .
 Russia looks pretty stable, even though it’s not like this, actually, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Russia is pretty stable .
 The Russian Putinist regime is something super big which will collapse very quickly, i believe . I don’t know, good English words for it, but the Russian Putinists are something very big .
 This is naturally the ground for grassroots organizing and for some very different political alternatives to be developed and presented, including our ones .
 Crimethinc just put out a tweet about calling for tonight at 7pm or 6pm everywhere for the demonstrations .
First of all, I want to greet my comrades in Moscow, which yesterday held their actions against the invasions . First of all. I want the comrades to meet my comrades, whichYesterday held their action against theinvasions .
 It means that actually anarchist comrades and some anti-war actions there actually exist in Russia . It means there are actually anarchist groups and anti- war actions there already exist in the country .
 Will we be able to develop the narrative, the concept of libertarian participation, meaningful participation in this anti-imperialist resistance? Will we have a narrative to develop? We will have to find a way to develop this narrative.
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War 16 of 17 needs to be anti-imperialist resistance with some really social-revolutionary goals and prospects .
 The next challenge to us is to form our structures, both in terms of self-defense, and of civil organizing . We need growing support informationally, and also by some material support, of course, from our Western comrades .
 Any expression of solidarity already now is extremely appreciated and extremely needed throughout all the world. So any expression of support is extremely needed, says the group .
 If you want to make graffiti, do it, make it, if you want a demonstration against Russian or Belarusian embassy . Do it. If you have a problem with graffiti? Do it . If you don't want to be graffiti, make a demonstration .
 This is also a good point to support anarchists political prisoners, of which there are a lot of in Russia and Belarus .
 If you want to collect some money, do it, if you want it to spread our information . This is also a very good way to express your solidarity, says author .
 libertarian movement here would be good grounds for us to rely on, says author . And also providing material support for us, he says .
 Other anarchists talk about the difficulty of being engaged in or around official State organizations of defense, while keeping autonomy and keeping an anti-state, pro-social perspective .
 Every authorized self-defense is coming from the state, more or less, says the author . "Self-defense" is a hard question in terms of self- defense, he says .
 "There is a challenge, like if we want to have self-defense and not be confronted on every front as we are a very few," he says . "We need to collaborate somehow with the state military structures," he adds .
 The question is how not to assimilate to these structures, but still collaborate somehow having some sorts of autonomy and our own vision and perspective .
 "We will work and find some, I would say, tricky ways to do it to really have self-defense as independent from the state structures as possible" "I don't want to lie to say that we have a perfect plan"
 The Final Straw Radio / Anarchists in Ukraine Against War 17 of 17 really political movements should do, he says . "This maneuvering to protect their own perspective and sovereignty," he adds .
 In principle, this is at least in much less chaos than in Kurdistan, but in principle is the same as we are trying to do here. And in principle, it is in much more chaos than the Kurdistan in Kurdistan .
 In this situation to defend your country is pretty good, but this is not enough at all for the anarchist revolutionary. Well, in this situation, in the situation to defending your country was pretty good .
 You need to develop some perspective for changes, like some ideas on how you want to influence political and social situations within the country .
 This is also the matter of discussions of, somehow even very hot discussions, and our continuous thinking here. And this is also a matter of discussion, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Most of us agree that we need within this struggle, anti-imperialist struggle, our participation in it . But more or less, most of us think we need inside this struggle .
 We need to express, to develop and express our anarchist narrative and program and ideas . We must express, we need to develop, to express our anarchists' narrative and programs .
 I hope that this conversation helps get more people in the streets and good luck. And we’ll be sure to provide the links that comrades in Ukraine have shared to keep up . We’re sure to give the links we have shared.
 We are now here with the comrades finding out ways to do and we say greetings to you . We are here with them finding out how to do .
 The Final Straw is a weekly anarchist and anti-authoritarian radio show . It brings you voices and ideas from struggle around the world .
Sean Swain is an anarchist prisoner . Swain has been imprisoned in the U.S. since 2009 . He is a former prisoner of the Anarchist Prisoner of the United States .