 The rapid growth and success of the Russian mail order bride industry since the 1990s is dependent on the fall of the Soviet Union and the proliferation of computers and the internet .
 The MOB industry is based on the impacts of the most recent technological innovations on the Russian Mob industry . This paper concludes with a prediction of the future growth trajectory of the MOB.
 The Russian MOB industry has grown at a faster rate than other regions, according to the study . This examination will provide evidentiary support as to why the Russian Mob industry is growing faster than the other regions .
 National identity has been a powerful tool through which people identify themselves and relate to others . National identity is a powerful way to identify yourself and relate others .
National identity is an inherent sentiment that allows individuals to gather in a collective group . National identity is a sentiment that lets individuals gather in an individual group .
 In Eastern Europe, national identity grew even through periods of foreign occupation and was mobilized as foreign occupation came to an end .
Members of all three national groups lived together in Yugoslavia, which was dismantled and subsequently erupted into a bloody civil war in the early 1990s .
BiH wants to protect the national identities of these three ethnic groups . BiH is the largest group of ethnic groups in the country .
 The Bosniaks and Croats of the Federation are ethnically divided and corrupt . The Federation and RS have limited cooperation between the Federation and the Croats .
 This leads to the conclusion that BiH will eventually fragment just as Yugoslavia did . This is the same thing that Yugoslavia did, and it will fragment just like Yugoslavia did.
 Since 2011, a stalemate in the United Nations Security Council revealed irreconcilable policy divides between the U.S. and Russia . The United States and Russia have been at odds since 2011 .
 The root of the divide lies with a vague international law precedent regarding state sovereignty and international autonomy versus protection of humanitarian rights . The root is a vague law precedent on state sovereignty, not human rights .
 An idea has developed in the international community that state sovereignty does not override mass crimes against humanity . The international community has an implicit “responsibility to protect’s citizens, particularly regarding military intervention, according to the idea .
 Russian military action allows Russia to defend themselves against unwanted intervention . This is a consequence of Russia's military action, says Russian military official .
 Russia's own brand of intervention has an underlying geopolitical benefit, as with Georgia and Ukraine, it is because Russia’s own brand is responsible for its intervention .
 The lack of a clear legal framework on intervention causes strife between Russia and the U.S. Russia's lack of legal framework prevents a proactive international community to protect humanitarian rights .
 The main topic of discussion is the Dima Yakovlev law . The law is intended to outline the roots of Russian opinion regarding this law .
 The law was implemented in 2012 by the Russian Federation to restrict U.S. citizens from adopting Russian born children .
 The adoption ban was a Russian response to the passing of the “Magnitsky Act of 2012” by the United States. Despite Russia’s claim that this law came about as a result of various human rights abuses committed by U.S. citizens, the overwhelming majority
 The majority of Russian citizens do in fact support the Dima Yakovlev law, according to a report . The claim has not proved to constitute a clear-cut answer regarding the Russian point of view .
 Dima Yakovlev law is going to have a chance at being repealed, says author . For the time being and for the foreseeable future, Russian children will not be able to be adopted by American families .
 The conventional belief is that, in this atmosphere, scientific funding simply evaporated, forcing scientists to look for new opportunities in Western countries . This has resulted in an extensive brain drain from Russia .
 Russia's foundations made it possible for Russia to prevent most of its brain drain from occurring and indeed preserved Russian science . These foundations make it possible to prevent the brain drain.
 The ISF invested approximately $110 million from 1991 to 1996 to finance Russia’s fundamental sciences and to support around 40,000 scientists .
 The support of ISF allowed for major contributions by Russian scientists to the international research community . Russian scientists have made major contributions to ISF .
 European Union and United States funded the ISTC . ISTC commenced its operations in March of 1994 .
 The Western fear was that Russian scientists might offer their services to nations that sponsor terrorism . The fear is that they might offer services to countries that sponsor terror .
 Until 2011, over 75,000 Russian nuclear scientists received approximately $430 million to devote their knowledge and expertise to basic science such as chemistry, physics, and biology, rather than creating atomic bombs .
 The ISTC provided funding to ensure that Russian scientific research focused on peaceful activities . It also supported the transition to market-based economies .
 Russia has avoided a large brain drain by providing necessary funding for continuous scientific research . Russia has been criticized by some for its lack of scientific knowledge .
 Russia is one of the world's only HIV/AIDS epidemics that is still growing . South Africa and India have managed to get their epidemics under control .
 Putin and his administration have done little to combat the spread of the disease. Despite this fact, Putin's administration has done surprisingly little.
 The stigma surrounding HIV/AIDS, particularly the stigma associated with homosexuality, serves a political purpose to Putin, as it allows him to garner domestic popularity by protecting his citizens from the disease .
 The consequences of Putin's refusal to solve the HIV/AIDS crisis in Russia are far-reaching, as the HIV-AIDS epidemic in Russia is currently fueling a tuberculosis epidemic . Putin’s refusal to fix the problem is far- reaching .
 Trotsky and Khodorkovsky are two very different figures in Russian politics . The two are very different.
 Trotsky was a revolutionary and founder of the Soviet Union . Khodorkovsky became the richest man in Russia by the beginning of the new millennium .
 Trotsky and Khodorkovsky were widely considered the most powerful men in the country . When a power vacuum was created following Lenin's incapacitation after a series of strokes and Yeltsin’s departure from the presidency, they were considered the top men .
 Both Trotsky and Khodorkovsky publicly changed their image and ideology . To better contest these new opponents, both changed their images and ideology.
 Trotsky, the party’s disciplinarian against those who spoke out against the state and the proponent of the creation of a massive bureaucracy, suddenly began to decry the country's bureaucratization .
 Khodorkovsky had come to wealth and power through the Yeltsin administration’s corruption and the far-from-equitable privatization of the economy .
 In the end, Trotsky and Khodorkovsky lost their specific struggles, becoming disenfranchised from their power bases and leaving the country with no substantive domestic opposition . The two left the country in the end.
 Any attempt to create a consistent opposition in Russia is doomed to failure. By studying their narratives together, it becomes possible to understand how, even when led by some of the country’s most powerful men, it is possible.
 Ukraine on the Edge of ""Russkii Mir" It is clear that there are many factors that have contributed to the current crisis in Ukraine .
State policy was made official state policy in 2007 by President Vladimir Putin as a grand strategy to use soft power to peacefully promote Russian interests abroad . It was madeofficial state policy by President Putin in 2007 .
 It is inherently an ethnocentric concept based on Russian culture, values, religion and history . It has been used to increase and solidify Presidential and government power domestically and in the near abroad .
 Russkii Mir has become a guiding force behind Russian foreign policy in the post-Soviet space . He has been a leading figure in Russia's foreign policy since the 2014 Ukrainian Revolution .
 This is strongly evidenced by the annexation of Crimea and ongoing conflict in Donbas . This is strong evidence of Crimea annexation and conflict in the region .
 The ‘Russian World’ has shown it is not limited to the territorial borders of the Russian Federation . It threatens other states of the former Soviet Union .
Security of the European Union is threatened as war is waged at its borders in a state seeking integration . The security of the EU is threatened by the state of the country.
 relations between US-led NATO and Russia have not been this deteriorated since the Cold War .
Russkii Mir has shown that ethnicity and nationalism are still powerful tools in fueling conflict . At the global level, he has shown the power of ethnic and nationalism to fuel conflict .
 Since the fall of the Soviet Union, low level speech has been used by Eastern European politicians in public discourse .
 Vladimir Putin and Viktor Yanukovych have used this speech style during their political careers . Putin and Yanukovych have both used this style in their careers .
 Putin's use of low level speech has contributed positively to his public image, painting him as a hard-liner against corruption and terrorism . Putin’s use ofLow-level speech has led to his use of high level speech .
 Yanukovych’s use of low level speech strengthened his connection with a corrupt and unjust regime, tying him to criminality . On the other hand, Yanukovych's use of lower level speech strengthens his connection to a corrupt regime .
 Putin's use of a low speech style to have a positive effect on his political career had a negative affect on his own . Yanukovych’s use of this same speech style had anegative affect on himself, says the paper .
 Russia and Ukraine's unique history, linguistic background, political environment at the onset of Putin and Yanukovych’s careers, and additionally the two personal narratives of both politicians .