 He has been a Senior Associate Member of the Russian and Eurasian Studies Centre . He has also been a senior associate member of the St. Russian and Eurasian  Studies Centre, St.
 His doctoral dissertation analysed the political transition from the USSR to the Russian Federation . His dissertation was published in 2011 .
 "Post-Electoral Revolutions in Eurasia" was funded by the Spanish National Research Programme .
 José Enrique de Ayala Marín, Brigadier General, Spanish Army, is a member of the European Affairs Council and the Advisory Board of the Observatory of Spanish Foreign Policy , Fundación Alternativas .
 Ayala Marín holds Army Staff and Joint Staff diplomas as well as a diploma in Advanced International Studies . Marín also holds a diploma from the International Studies Society .
 He has served as Eurocorps Chief of Staff and Military Attaché to the Spanish Embassy in Germany . He has also served as the Chief of staff and Military attaché at the Spanish embassy .
 As an international political analyst specialising in the EU, he is a regular contributor to publications such as El País and Política Exterior .
 He teaches a course on the Russian economy for UCM's Master's degree programme in International Economics and Development . He has written articles related to his main research areas (the political economy of Russia and energy trade between the European Union and Russia)
 Ferrero Turrión is a member of the International Migrations Studies Group and the European Network of Labour Migration Experts . He is also co-editor of Eurasianet.es.
 Vicente Garrido Rebolledo is the Director of the International Affairs and Foreign Policy Institute and Secretary General of the Spanish-Russian Council Foundation . He is the head of the European Council of Foreign Affairs .
 His research areas are the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, disarmament and arms control . His main research area is the proliferation. He says his research areas include weapons ofmass destruction and disarmament .
 He is a member of the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters to the UN Secretary General . He is the Board of Trustees of the UN Institute for Disarmaments Research and the EU NonProliferation Consortium .
 Diego López Garrido is Chairman of the European Affairs Council, Fundación Alternativas . He is the chairman of the European Affairs Council .
 López Garrido is a member of the Spanish Congress of Deputies and Socialist Group Leader of the Congressional Defence Committee . He is also the leader of the Spanish Congress of Deputies .
 He serves as Vice-Chairperson of Mediterranean and Middle East Special Group and General Rapporteur for its Economics and Security Committee . He is a member of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly .
 He has been Leader of the Socialist Group in the Congress of Deputies . Secretary of State for the European Union and co-ordinator of the Spanish Presidency of the EU in 2010 .
 He was a member of the Convention that drafted the European Constitutional Treaty . He was also a part of the European Parliamentary Council of Representatives .
 Morato Ferro served as Deputy Commander of the Multinational Task Force West . Ferro was Commander of Spanish Contingent of the NATO Kosovo Force during 2008 and 2009 .
 From 2004 through 2008 he was Military Attaché to the Spanish Embassy in Moscow . From 2004 to 2008 he worked in Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan .
 During the period 1989-1990 he was a Senior Associate Member of the Russian and Eastern European Studies Centre of St. Petersburg . He was also a Senior associate member of the Russia and Eastern Studies Centre. He was a senior associate Member of a Russian andEastern European Studies Center of the St
 Vicente Palacio de Oteyza is Deputy Director of the Observatory of Spanish Foreign Policy . Fundación Alternativas is a Spanish government agency .
 Palacio de Oteyza has coordinated reports for the Socialist Group of the Spanish Congress of Deputies . The Spanish Government and the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation.
 Palacio de Oteyza is author of numerous articles on Spanish and EU foreign policy, transatlantic relations and EULatin America relations .
 He is a regular contributor to El País and a frequent guest on CNN en Español . He is also a regular guest on the Spanish network .
 Requena del Río was TVE's Berlin correspondent for Central and Eastern European from 1999 to 2004 .
 She served as a special correspondent in Jerusalem during the Gulf War . She has covered other conflicts in Georgia, Turkey, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Libya and Ukraine . She reported on Euromaidan in Kyiv and the Russian annexation of Crimea .
 She is recipient of the King of Spain International Journalism Prize and the Salvador de Madariaga European Journalism Prize . Author of the book Afganistán .
 A Diploma in Security and Strategic Studies from the United States Naval War College . An Imperfect and Unfinished System.
 His area of expertise is security and defence in the post-Soviet space . He has written extensively for specialized publications and given numerous conference presentations .
 His main area of research is the political dynamics of the post-Soviet space with a focus on Russia, Ukraine and Central Asia . He also focuses on the political and economic dynamics of Russia and Ukraine .
 His main areas of research are post-Communist economic transitions, 4 A More European Russia for a More Secure Europe defence industry transformation and the Russian energy sector .
 Nicolás Sartorius is Executive Vice-President and Director of the Observatory of Spanish Foreign Policy . He is also a lawyer and journalist .
 Sartorius Álvarez de las Asturias was imprisoned for political convictions for several years during the Franco dictatorship . He later served as a member of the Spanish Congress of Deputies for several terms up until 1993 .
 He was awarded a PhD in International Relations from UAB for his dissertation on relations between Russia and the European Union .
 Author of the book Rusia, la otra potencia europea and editor of Chechenia, rompamos el silencio . He also writes journal articles on foreign policy, ethnic conflicts and human rights in Russia .
 The chapters contained in this document reflect the personal points of view of the authors . The chapters do not necessarily represent those of Fundacion Alternativas .
 The law says you may not copy, modify, reproduce, republish or circulate the content from this publication . You may not use the content of this publication.
 The time has come to renew the Union's strategy towards Russia . The effort will entail not only the thorough analysis of long-term European objectives needed to make EU policy more efficient and bring it into line with European interests and values .
 The EU should accept Moscow as the great power that it is and a potential partner in the construction of a space of shared security . Instead of entering into a new Cold War focused on Russian containment, the EU should embrace Moscow .
 The best way to ensure long-term continental security and stability would be for Russia to increasingly feel and become more a part of Europe . Europe should make a sincere effort to get to know its Russian neighbour better, says the author .
EU's strategy for EURussian relations more effective and coherent with the EU’s interests and values .
 A military solution is not viable and that priority must be given to a de-escalation that will permit a speedy resolution to the humanitarian crisis and the initiation of reconstruction in affected areas .
 Ukraine's entry into a free trade agreement with the EU has been criticised . Ukraine's social expenditure stipulated by international institutions as a requisite for financial assistance . Ukraine has also reduced its social expenditure from international institutions .
 The OSCE's role as the main pan-European security organisation is respected . Promote good governance and the rule of law in Ukraine .
 The OSCE should play the main role in the resolution of this conflict in accordance with the Minsk II agreement . The OSce should play a main role, according to the agreement .
 Make the European Neighbourhood Policy flexible enough to accommodate the aspirations of countries that constitute a shared neighbourhood between the EU and Russia .
 Only Germany and France officially took part in the Minsk negotiations . The EU can now move beyond the format of the negotiations .
 Establish an EU-Russia dialogue on security that could serve as a platform for raising concerns that both parties may have and identifying common threats that they should work cooperatively to resolve .
 Establish institutional level dialogues between the EU and the Eurasian. Establish permanent institutional level dialogue between EU and Eurasian . The European Union is the largest body in the world .
 Economic Union and NATO and the Collective Security Treaty Organisation that will foster mutual trust will foster trust .
 Work to build a consensus on the future of European security architecture within the framework of the OSCE to pave the way for a common, indivisible security zone within Europe .
 Maintain and strengthen the economic interdependence between the EU, Ukraine and the Russian Federation as a means of ensuring the long-term stability of relations between them .
 Diversify the EU's sources of energy, ensure that no Member State relies excessively on Russian gas . New energy model will make the EU less reliant on gas and oil .
 Support the Southern Gas Corridor pipeline project from Azerbaijan to the EU . Also ensure supply via this route from other producers such as Turkmenistan .
 A reduction of European imports of Russian gas and an increase of Russian exports to China will have on EU-Russia relations . A better understanding between the societies of the EU and Russia Foster direct dialogue between Russian and EU counterparts .
 Relax visa policies so as to foster people-to-people encounters and build mutual understanding through tourism and educational and cultural contact . relax visa policies. Relax visas so as as to Foster people- to- people encounters .
 The Ukrainian conflict has provoked the worst deterioration in relations between the West and Russia since the end of the Cold War . A more European Russia for a more secure Europe.
 Russia illegally annexed the Crimean Peninsula and supported separatist revolts in Donetsk and Luhansk . The Euromaidan’s ouster of Ukraine's democratically elected president Viktor Yanukovych was accepted and supported by the U.S. and the European Union .
 These regions, collectively referred to as the Donbass, continue to be the site of armed confrontation . The Donbass are collectively known as the regions, which are collectively called Donbass .
 The EU cannot accept the existence of this focal point of instability in its eastern neighbourhood . The EU can't accept the presence of a focal point.
 A peaceful resolution to the conflict will only be possible if parallel progress is made on two points . However, a peaceful resolution is only possible if the two points are made on one point .
 The first is establishing and maintaining a direct dialogue between the parties currently involved in a military standoff . A political agreement that will pave the way for a definitive military deescalation will be reached .
 The second entails a rethinking of the EU’s global strategy towards Russia so as to avoid repeating errors committed to date .
 The EU's strategy for EU-Russian relations is more effective and coherent with the EU’s interests and values . This document lays out our recommendations to political decision makers .
 Any review of current strategy must be grounded in an analysis of the EU’s long-term interests regarding its relations with Russia .
 We reject pursuit of a new Cold War strategy that would affect relations in every sphere . We reject the pursuit of the new Cold war strategy .
 disagreements on given issues must not constitute stumbling blocks that prevent joint cooperation between Western countries and Russia on shared 10 A More European Russia .
 Russia will use that power to defend its national interests, which may, or not, coincide with our own. Regardless of the individual or political party that occupies the Kremlin, Russia will defend its own interests .
 EU must have the ability to anticipate Russian reactions to its policies in order to avoid undesirable consequences . It is therefore an actor on the world stage.
 The role of Russia in Europe's future will not be conditioned by the conflict that broke out in Ukraine last year . Europe's capacity to build a framework for longterm coexistence acceptable to both sides are mutually respected, says the author .
 The present situation has grown out of a competition between the EU (in concert with the US) and Russia regarding which will exert more influence over Ukraine . The situation has been growing out of an EU-Russia competition .
 Both sides have attempted to pull Kyiv in the direction of their foreign policy interests at the price of heightening internal divisions within Ukrainian society .
 Nevertheless, it cannot be said that the burden of responsibility for what has happened is equal .
 The EU and some of its Member States have limited their backing of Ukraine to diplomatic support and non-lethal military assistance . The Kremlin has resorted to direct military intervention and supplied weapons to pro-Russian separatist groups .
 Russia's responsibility for its own actions notwithstanding, the EU should openly recognise its own errors and learn from them . Russia's inability to foresee that Russia would take advantage of the Euromaidan revolution to occupy Crimea and its failure to act quickly enough to avoid the escalation of armed conflict in
 The EU must maintain an open dialogue with Russia geared towards achieving a negotiated settlement . But doing so does not imply turning a blind eye to illegal actions such as the annexation of Crimea .
 Minsk II agreement represents the only path towards a resolution of the conflict . It was this approach, championed by France and Germany, that paved the way for the Minsk agreement .
 In the long run, ongoing negotiation is the only context in which the EU will be able to effectively present demands to Russian leaders, defend its own values .
 An isolated Russia will be more aggressive and less likely to enter into constructive dialogues . It will opt to seek alternative partners on other continents rather than restore relations with the rest of Europe .
 The EU must achieve a consensus among its Member States on a unified stance towards Russia . This document lays out a road map for a cease-fire and the withdrawal of troops and weapons as well as a consensual political reform .
Overcoming the factors that have given rise to the current conflict will require sustained effort, political will and adequate resources . Overcoming factors will need sustained effort and political will.
 The European Union must promote the idea of a shared European identity within which both Russians and citizens of EU Member States perceive and recognise each other as belonging to the same civilisation .
 A Russia that sees itself as increasingly more European is the best guarantee of a safer and more secure Europe for everyone . Russia is seen as a more secure country than any other country .
 The present conflict is not a new version of the confrontation between the West and a Soviet bloc . Russia is supposedly represented at this point in time by Russia .
 The Ukrainian crisis has been a revolutionary process that has escalated into an armed conflict . The Ukraine crisis is a revolution that has been in the midst of a revolution .
 It is not by any means a standoff between two irreconcilable political or economic models that represent a threat to the existence of the states involved . But it is not a standoff, it is a standoff.
 The time when Russia, Ukraine and the rest of Europe were separate units sealed off from each other by physical and ideological barriers is far behind us .
 The world's economies are now fully integrated by means of a wide range of information and communications technologies . They are now full integrated market economies functioning within an international globalised society and interconnected .
 The web of interdependence that binds them is too intricate for any of them to contemplate a return to the past . They may have gone through periods of rapprochement and “Cold Peace"
 Russia is a part of Europe without which European culture would not be fully comprehensible . Russia has been, and is, and was, and has been. Russia is part of the European community, but is not fully fully understood .
 The EU must recognise that Russia and Ukraine form part of a common European civilisation .
 Denying their “Europeanness,’s right to participate in political decisions that affect the entire continent, serves only to strengthen the Eurasianist arguments . Radical Russian nationalists preach the incompatibility of Russian and Western cultures and assert that Eurasia, rather than Europe, is Russia
 Over the last few years we have witnessed a rebalancing of world power . We have seen some of the world's most powerful powers rebalanced .
 The unipolarity that followed the Cold War is giving way to an increasingly multipolar system . The difference between Washington's level of power and that of other potential world powers is gradually being reduced .
 The EU has failed to adequately assess the political, economic and security interests of an increasingly assertive and nationalistic Russia . Russia has recuperated its position as a great world power but also its willingness to defend that position .
 Strong public support for Putin's presidency is closely linked to his commitment to make Russia once again a major power . Putin's commitment to Russia's future is closely tied to his pledge to make it again a big power .
 EU and U.S. reluctance to recognise Russia's return to the world stage has made it difficult to establish a mutually acceptable framework of coexistence within which Russia could feel that its rising status was properly respected .
 The growing rivalry between Russia and certain Western countries has been exacerbated by Russia's perception of being the weaker party as well by the signs of Western influence in other countries of the former Soviet Union .
 The EU, for its part, has focused primarily on political and economic issues . The EU has paid much less attention to underlying security concerns .
 Institutional encounters and contacts between them to date have not been of the strength or calibre needed to overcome a legacy of prolonged confrontation .
 Moscow and the EU are not natural enemies and have interests in common . Moscow and EU are capable of working towards common goals, says the author .
 Russian mistrust of the West did not begin with the Ukrainian crisis, but this situation has aggravated it .
 NATO's intervention in Kosovo in support of KLA separatist guerrillas paved the way for Kosovo's declaration of independence in 2008 . Russia interpreted by Russia as a violation of the principle of the territorial integrity of states .
 Kosovo's declaration of independence was in line with international law as a sui generis case that would not serve as a precedent for other territories . Moscow continues to consider it as having been an illegal act that would give legitimacy to the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia
 The U.S. illegal invasion of Iraq, the implementation of an antimissile defence system in Europe, the expansion of NATO and its recent intervention in Libya have also contributed to Russia's perception of the West as a untrustworthy rival . Russia is seen as part and parcel of
 The failed reset in relations between Obama and Medvedev was a lost opportunity to restore this confidence . The failure to contemplate an enduring partnership between the two countries was a loss of confidence .
 Opposition protests on the increase since 2011 have also provoked a negative reaction . Opposition protests have been described by the Kremlin as being instigated by “Western fifth-columnists’s’.
 The EU and Russia have both regarded their exertion of regional influence in Eastern Europe as a zero sum game in all facets of which the other must be excluded .
 Ukraine was heavily reliant on export trade to Russia . The Association Agreement with Ukraine did not adequately plan for the impact that the accord would have on industry .
 EU policy towards former Soviet states has never been based on long-term strategy . Russia perceives all such cooperation initiatives as mere attempts to undermine its regional influence .
 Moscow has been more willing than the EU to take risks and mount a proactive defence of its presence in this region . Russia views these countries as being of great importance to its own national security .
 The weight of recent history in the minds of all the actors implicated has been a decisive factor in the case of the actors .
 Poland and Baltic countries continue to view Russia as an aggressor state . Poland and the Baltic countries have done their best to not only represent it as not sharing a European identity . But on occasion, Poland asserts its identity is diametrically opposed to that of its European neighbours .
 Russia's strategy of isolating Russia has only served to heighten Moscow's feelings of impotence . It has become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
 The EU cannot be said to have acted in a united fashion towards Russia . It lacks of a coherent, long-term strategy that would enable it to foresee changes down the road or balance its rivalry with Moscow .
 Russia has maintained a much more defined and stable strategy and employed all the means necessary to defend its interests . Russia has also maintained a more defined, stable strategy, according to the report .
 Russia's foreign policy preference for bilateral agreements with individual Member States rather direct institutional dialogue with the Union has fostered the proliferation of contradictory positions on certain issues within Europe .
 The differences between the language and style of these two foreign policies have also made mutual understanding more difficult . The differences are also making mutual understanding of these policies more difficult.
 Putin's Russia takes a much more direct approach to foreign policy than the EU, which it occasionally perceives to be a vague and contradictory counterpart . The EU sees Russia as a vague, contradictory counterpart.
 The EU has not been very realistic in mapping out its policy towards Moscow . It hopes for domestic political changes in Russia at moments when necessary conditions are not in place .
 The Union must be realistic and learn to negotiate with Russia such as it is. The Union should be realistic.
 The Kremlin finds the European discourse grounded in values, not always borne out in actual fact . The Kremlin bases its own foreign policy on traditional ideas of sovereignty and national interests .
 Russia has appropriated these same arguments to legitimise its interventions in South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Crimea and the Donbass . Russia cites the precedent of Western "humanitarian interventions" as a means of warding off criticism of its actions .
 Russia used the protection of Russian minorities as one of the excuses for its intervention in Ukraine . There have been precedents of discrimination against these groups .
 EU Member States such as Estonia and Latvia have denied — and continue to deny — citizenship to ethnic Russians . The EU member states have denied citizenship to Russian citizens .
 The groundswell of Ukrainian nationalist sentiment that surfaced with the Euromaidan protests has needlessly deepened inter-ethnic divisions in that country .
Russian speakers constituted ousted Ukrainian president Yanukovych's base of electoral support . It must be remembered that Russian speakers constituted Yanukovych's support .
 The EU must recognise the difference between its own declared values and those of Russia . It also has other neighbours that do not share these values and that this difference is an incentive to strengthen its relationship to Russia .
 The EU has neither the means nor the legitimacy to impose a transformation of Russia's political system . It can only support the right of the Russian people to freely choose their country's model of coexistence .
 The EU must impede the commission of illegal acts against Russian citizens or citizens of other nationalities within our territory . Alexander Litvinenko is one example, and whenever necessary, demand the extradition of those responsible for these crimes .
 We must convey the message that the EU does not enjoy a monopoly on democratic values . We must tell the EU that all peoples of the world may aspire regardless of their origin or place of residence .
 The most effective way to reduce the values gap that currently exists is to vigorously promote the contact between citizens of Russian and EU member states .
 Ukraine has been wracked by deep internal divisions regarding national identity traceable to the various ways it has been configured as a state over time . Ukraine has historically been, and continues to be, a country wracking by internal divisions .
 The Euromaidan revolution first took the form of civil, pro-European public protests but quickly devolved into a violent confrontation . Minority ultranationalist groups assumed a leading role they should never have been allowed to play .
 Moscow has aspired to a peaceful coexistence with Ukraine that would permit the continuity of bilateral trade and guarantee the culture and language of Ukraine’s ethnic minorities is respected .
 It also has a vital interest in maintaining Sevastopol as a Russian naval base and avoiding the establishment of a NATO base there . It also wants to avoid a NATObase there .
 The decision to annex Crimea was greatly influenced by the adoption of a pro-Atlantic alliance stance by the Euromaidan revolutionary movement . The Crimea decision was also influenced by an anti-European alliance stance . The decision was made by the pro-EU movement .
 Moscow initially preferred to seek a negotiated resolution to the crisis . Moscow initially wanted to seek an agreement to resolve the crisis.
 The unilateral violation of the agreement on the resolution of the crisis by opposition leaders . The opposition leaders had signed it on 21 February 2014 in the presence of European mediators .
 The EU committed two errors, the first being its failure to condemn the violence of the most radical elements of the Euromaidan movement . The second was its decision to recognise the new Ukrainian government instead of insisting that constitutional procedures for presidential impeachment be followed .
 The unconstitutional removal of Yanukovych triggered unrest among Russian-speaking citizens in the Donbass . They perceived a Kyiv government they perceived as catering to the most radical elements of Ukrainian nationalism .
 The Crimea state of affairs provided the Kremlin with what it saw as a pretext for its annexation of Crimea and its subsequent intervention in the Donbass .
 Russia considered the possibility of Ukraine entering NATO untenable . It has not demonstrated open opposition to other EU initiatives towards Ukraine that have not posed a threat .
 The EU made the mistake of attempting to draw Kyiv into an Association Agreement that entailed the creation of a free trade zone between them . The EU did not calculate either the negative impact that such an accord could have on bilateral trade between Ukraine and Russia .
 The EU and Russian were framed as incompatible options between which Ukraine was forced to choose . The agreement was presented to the Ukrainian public as a “zero sum game’s”
 sanctions have not brought an end to the Russian intervention in Ukraine . But sanctions have had a real impact on the Russian economy .
 Putin enjoys the domestic support he needs to hang tight for as long as these measures last . Putin enjoys domestic support. He enjoys the support of his country, as well as his supporters .
 Russia's embargo on agricultural and food imports from the EU is hurting the European economy . On the other hand, Russia's sanctions on food imports are hurting the EU economy .
 The release of all hostages and unlawfully detained persons and the extension of an amnesty on the part of Ukraine to those who have participated in the separatist insurrection . The release is part of the agreement to end the separatist uprising .
 Unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance to conflict zones under international supervision . The restoration of public services, payment of pensions and other social benefits, supplies, supplies and banking services between the zone of conflict and the rest of Ukraine .
 The withdrawal of all armed formations, military equipment and foreign combatants is announced . The withdrawal is part of the military's withdrawal from all military and military equipment .
 The organisation of local elections in the territory under dispute in accord with Ukrainian legislation and under OSCE supervision . The organisation is under dispute over Ukrainian legislation .
 The granting of special autonomous status to separatists territories within the Ukrainian state by means of constitutional reform . The granting is part of a constitutional reform in Ukraine .
 The restoration of full Ukrainian government control over its borders by the end of 2015 . Ukraine's borders will be restored to full Ukrainian control over the country's borders .
 Kyiv’s refusal to give an inch on this issue at the negotiating table impeded progress towards a mutually acceptable solution and contributed to the escalation of the armed conflict . Kyiv's refusal toGive an inch has contributed to escalation of armed conflict, according to
 Ukrainian government finally agreed to negotiate autonomy for regions held by separatists during talks in Minsk . In exchange for these regions’ renunciation of their unilateral declaration of independence, they declared willingness to remain a part of the Ukrainian state .
 A failure to reach a consensus between all parties could lead to a new military escalation . A failure of a consensus on these issues may lead to an escalation of military action .
 Ukraine lacks the military superiority necessary to win back territory under separatist control . Russia continues to control the border and by extension is in a situation to provide both supplies and combatants to rebel areas .
 Western military aid would not be 18 A More European Russia for a More Secure Europe 36 . It would be sufficient to tip the balance or raise the cost of Russian intervention to the point that would force Putin to back down .
 Such aid would give Ukraine a new incentive to abandon negotiations and resort once more to armed force . The action would only spark reciprocal escalation on the part of the Russians .
 It is clear that there is no viable alternative to a negotiated settlement between Ukraine, the separatists and Russia . It is also clear that no alternative to the negotiated settlement is viable .
 When the Euromaidan protests began, his approval rating stood at 61% . It was the lowest registered in public opinion polls since his rise to power in 2000 .
 Yanukovych's level of public support shot up to 80% in the wake of the ouster of Yanukovych and the Russian occupation of Crimea .
 One year into the armed conflict, it has risen even further, reaching 85% in March 2015 . It is one of the highest ratings of his entire political career .
 The results reflect the success of a Kremlin communication strategy based on tight state control of television networks that substantially neutralises the domestic impact of international punitive measures .
 The percentage that holds that opinion is much lower than the percentage that gives the president top marks for his performance . A majority of Russian citizens believe their country is headed in the right direction .
 support for the first option has risen as a result of the current conflict . Support for Russia has risen in recent years due to the current war .
 The Russian ruling elite must adapt to shifts in public opinion and effectively respond to social demands . The ruling elite should adapt to shifting public opinion to respond to demands .
 Temporary measures such as sanctions are not only unlikely to produce a drastic change in public opinion, but may also fuel a perception of Russia being surrounded by enemies . Russia is facing a growing perception of enemies that further consolidates support for Kremlin policy .
 The EU must work hard to reverse by strengthening the ties that bind Russian society and the rest of Europe . This increasing feeling of alienation has been driven by Kremlin propaganda since the outbreak of the Ukrainian conflict, says the author .
 The interdependence between the EU and Russia Politics, society and security 40. The Interdependence of the EU.
 Russia's position towards the EU has been conditioned by its people's perception of their country as a great power . Russia's desire for it to enjoy relations with other great powers commensurate to that status .
 The Russian public's lack of knowledge about the EU is a stumbling block to progress towards better mutual relations .
 EU leaders tend not to understand objectives and values of European integration . They tend to make distinctions between positions taken by the EU and those of other Western countries .
 Russian public opinion regarding the EU over the last few years has invariably run parallel to public opinion about the United States . The war that broke out in Georgia in August 2008 was the most recent crisis in the EU .
Russian public opinion regarding relations with the United States and the EU Fig.: Russian public opinion on relations with United States .
 Russian public opinion polls register consistently lower levels of mistrust towards the EU than towards the US . A percentage falls even more when people are asked their opinion about specific measures geared to strengthen rapprochement .
 48% expressed a positive opinion about the possibility of being able to travel to the EU without obtaining a visa .
 Russians' differing perceptions of European culture and society on the one hand and relations on a governmental level on the other offer a window of opportunity for gradually building a constructive relationship .
In the long run, such an effort will serve to build confidence in the concept of political cooperation . Bringing these two societies closer together is an essential step towards overcoming the stumbling block of intergovernmental disagreements, says the author .
 The instability that the conflict in Ukraine supposes imperils the security of the EU as well as that of Russia . Russia obligates both to draw resources away from their internal development in order to intensify troop deployment .
 Russia must also bear the economic burden of the human catastrophe supposed by the influx of refugees fleeing from the Donbass into Russian territory .
 The EU has a commitment to provide financial aid to Ukraine . Ukraine needs to maintain military operations as well as meet other expenses beyond its budget capacity .
 EU and Russian security are inextricably linked by global threats that affect them in equal measure . Some examples include those operating in the Russian North Caucasus, the expansion of Daesh in Syria, Iraq and Libya .
 Russia and the EU are economically interdependent, and the volume of trade between them has risen continually over the past few years . Russia and EU are economic interdependent .
 In 2013, exports to Russia accounted for 6.9% of the EU's total export trade and were worth 119. billion euros . In 2009, Russia's exports to that country stood at 65.billion euros .
 The same year, the value of EU imports from Russia reached 206. billion euros . The value of Russia's imports from that country reached 12.3% of its total imports .
 The UE is Russia's first trading partner and its main source of direct foreign investment . The UE has been Russia's biggest trading partner for years .
 Russia is the EU’s third largest trading partner after the United States and China . The EU's third largest trade partner is China .
 Manufactured, consumer, intermediate and investment goods make up the bulk of EU sales to Russia . Gas and oil accounts for the greater part of Russian 22 A More European Russia for a More Secure Europe 48 .
 A wide range of EU companies benefit from export sales of high tech goods vital to Russian productivity . The EU companies sell high-tech goods to Russian companies .
 Russia's economic interdependence makes sanctions against Russia and Russia's reprisal embargo on EU agricultural and food imports unsustainable in the long run for both . Russia and the EU have launched sanctions against each other .
 EU exports to Russia have been seriously affected, down 17.7% in August 2014 from the same period in 2013 . The EU's exports to the country have been down from the total in 2013.
 Russia is grappling with the fall in the price of its oil exports, which is having a heavy impact on its economy . In addition to the effect of sanctions and its difficulty in securing financing in international markets.
 The combined effects of sanctions, the devaluation of the rouble and the fall in the price of oil have had a negative impact on numerous foreign companies that do business in Russia .
 Companies most affected by falling sales include Ford, McDonald's, Volkswagen, Opel, Siemens, Adidas, Danone and Carlsberg . Ford and McDonald's are among the companies most affected .
 Sanctions have also impeded U.S. and European companies in the energy sector from moving forward with joint projects with Russian companies such as Rosneft and Lukoil .
 Germany is the EU's principal exporter to Russia . It has suffered the most from the imposition of sanctions on Russia .
 Its volume of exports to Russia for October 2014 was 22% lower than it had been during the same period the year before . Russia's exports were 22% less than they had been in the previous year .
 Approximately 4096 of the German companies with a presence in Russia have decided to reduce their investment there . Very few have withdrawn from Russian market completely .
 The deterioration of EU-Russian relations has also had a negative impact on Spain's presence in the Russian market . Spain is also in the market in Russia, where it has a strong presence in Russia .
 We exported 6.596 less to this country between January and September 2014 than we did during the same period in 2013 . We exported more than 6.6 million fewer than in the same time in 2013.
Official sources say sanctions will cost the Russian economy 40 billion dollars a year .
Only 1.1% of this contraction can be directly attributed to sanctions, according to a European Commission report .
 Industrial sanctions have had a special impact on the defence and energy sectors . Industrial sanctions are expected to affect the defence, energy and defence sectors .
 Russia has suspended the delivery of two Mistral class helicopter carriers that Russia had contracted from France . For the former, they have meant the suspension of the deliveries of the two carriers .
 The acquisition of these ships was already being questioned in Russia . Nevertheless, there are doubts about their future strategic utility and suspicions of corruption .
Military hardware, civil dual-use goods are not affected by the sanctions . sanctions do not account for a large percentage of total exports to Russia . The problems would affect European suppliers and Russian buyers .
Military sanctions imposed directly by Ukraine constitute a greater problem for Russia . If diminishing, if diminishing, integration between Ukrainian and Russian industry will be a problem .
 These affect the production of certain types of strategic missiles, its supply of helicopter motor parts and its military transport plane programme . The production of these types of missiles and helicopters affect the military's military transport programme .
 Sanctions will slow down Russia's current weapons programme for the next five years . But efforts to substitute imports will eventually impulse Russia's own reindustrialisation .
 The Russian economy may enter a recession over the next few years . But its recuperation could prove to be just as swift as its recovery .
 Financial sanctions that affect the mediumand long-term financing of Russian businesses have supposed to be the greatest burden to date .
 Russian economy may slow down and spark a search for alternative financing mechanisms . Their imposition may slow the Russian economy and spark an alternative financing mechanism .
 One example is the Russian-Chinese ‘Power of Siberia’ pipeline, for which China will provide advance financing . Another is the “Power of Siberian’s” gas pipeline .
 The majority of Russians are in support of forging ahead with current policy rather than buckling under international pressure . In spite of the real impact of these measures, 72% of Russians say they support current policy .
 Only 20% state that they have been seriously affected by the reduction of food stocks caused by the Russian embargo on EU imports .
 The Kremlin will continue to pursue its Ukraine strategy over the short term or for at least the next few months . Public ire may increase if sanctions are sustained much longer .
Russian gas company could wean itself completely off Russian gas . It would need to rely on more expensive suppliers . It could hamper European growth in already challenging economic environment .
 Russia must maintain its energy export trade with Europe, which provides between 30 and 40% of its budgetary income . Russia needs to underwrite its own domestic energy consumption .
 Sanctions against the Russian energy sector are already affecting planned projects as well as those now underway . Sanctions already affecting plans for Russian energy projects .
 Some of these projects have been designed to guarantee the future energy needs of the EU . The delay represents a setback for the long-term energy security of the European Union .
 Any undesirable effects of this type of sanction can be mitigated in the mid-term by substituting suppliers or importing via third countries .
 Russia energy has been hit by the suspension of sales of German technology . German suppliers have also been badly affected .
 Russia and the EU's mutual dependence makes it unlikely that Moscow will make a unilateral decision to cut off the rest of Europe's gas supply . Only possible exception is Ukraine in the event that it fails to make payment, which has happened in the past .
 Ukraine is receiving financial aid from the IMF that should allow it to make payments now due . However, at the moment, Ukraine is still receiving aid from IMF .
Tensions between Ukraine and Russia over Gazprom's delivery of gas to separatist territories in the wake of Ukrainian authorities’ decision to deny service .
 The dispute should be resolved with the implementation of the Minsk II agreement, by which Ukraine has agreed to restore all public services to these regions . This dispute should also be resolved, says the author .
 Ukraine is used to receiving a cut-rate price that Russia formerly offered Kyiv for both political reasons and commercial reasons . The most important of which was to ensure the uninterrupted flow of gas to the EU across Ukrainian territory .
 The EU's traditional insistence that the official delivery point of all gas purchased be on EU territory, a stance adopted to avoid assuming the risks supposed by Ukrainian leg of the supply chain .
 Ukraine has situated itself outside the Russian sphere of influence, but there is no reason why it shouldn't pay the same price the EU pays for gas . In the first instance, since Ukraine has placed itself outside Russia, there's no reason for it.
 The EU is now obliged to take a more hands-on approach to solving problems with the transport of Russian gas via Ukrainian territory . Ukraine is a signatory to a free trade agreement with Ukraine .
 Ukrainian industry was geared towards exporting its output to Russia . Ukraine must be prepared to ride out a mid-term period of severe deindustrialisation .
 Ukraine is receiving economic and technical assistance from the EU and other international institutions . Ukraine is getting economic andtechnical assistance from EU and international institutions.
 The IMF has granted it 17. billion dollars in loan money . World Bank has made a commitment to provide up to 2 billion dollars to the IMF in 2015 .
 Most recent aid packet approved by the EU in April 2015 is worth 1. billion euros . The most recent aid packets approved by EU are worth 1 billion euros.
 The IMF is demanding that it gradually raise consumer gas and heating bills to reflect real costs . The World Bank is offering aid to improve the country's infrastructure, public services and transparency of its energy sector .
 Consumers have been paying what amounts to between 20 and 30% of this figure for years . Up until now, consumers have paid up to 20-30% of that figure .
 It is calling for higher interest rates and a reduction in public spending as a share of Ukrainian GDP by 4.8% within five years . It is also calling for high interest rates.
 These cutbacks will have a very heavy negative impact on a population that has already suffered a long economic crisis and an armed conflict . The population is already suffering from an economic crisis.
 The EU must take measures to guarantee its energy security in any future scenario in which its supply could be interrupted . Finland, the Baltic countries, the Czech Republic and Bulgaria all import between 80 and 100% of their gas from Russia .
 countries such as the United Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark, Belgium and Spain do not import any gas from Russia at all .
 The EU must strengthen its capacity to import and store liquefied natural gas and establish two-way interconnected systems between Member States . To reach this goal, the EU should strengthen its ability to import, store and import natural gas .
 Europe needs to find a balance between the types of energy consumed in Europe and promoting renewable energy as a means of lowering European dependence on gas and petroleum . Europe's reliance on energy will also be of the utmost importance, according to experts .
 Russia's cooperation in ensuring Europe's energy supply continues to be essential for two reasons . At the same time, Russia's cooperate in ensuring European energy supply is essential for both reasons .
 The current standoff is making Russia rethink its relationship with Europe as an energy supplier . On one hand, the current standoff has made Russia rethink the relationship with the EU .
 It is currently constructing new natural gas liquefaction plants with an eye to supplying new clients by sea transport and pipelines . The company is currently building new naturalgas plants with the eye to supply new clients .
 Gas reserves exploited in the Yamal Peninsula will soon be shipped by the North Sea route to Asia-Pacific markets .
 The diversification of Russian energy exports neither points to the end of its role as a major supplier of Europe nor a direct consequence of the Ukrainian conflict .
 It is in line with established long-term strategic planning in response to a concurrent decline in European demand and a rising demand in China . It is also in line to a growing demand in the country .
 The May 2015 agreement on the construction of the Altai pipeline from Yamal to Xinjiang province of China would mean that the EU would need to compete with China for the same reserves .
 Russian Federation's plan to build a pipeline to Southern Europe is a long shot at best among the various schemes proposed to date . South Stream project conceived to transport natural gas to Bulgaria across the Black Sea . Turkish Stream project is intended to route gas to Turkey but may ultimately prove to be un
 Current tensions between Russia and the EU are driving Moscow to increase the volume of its sales to China . Russia is expected to increase its sales in China in the coming years .
 EU may find itself without an adequate supply of Russian oil due to increased global competition for this commodity . If its calculations for a gradual reduction of gas imports from Russia are not precisely on target, the EU may be without a adequate supply .
 The most attractive option open to the EU is importing oil from Azerbaijan via the Southern Gas Corridor, which will not run through Russian territory . In terms of reducing its energy dependence on Russia, the most attractive options are importing oil via Azerbaijan .
 It should be possible to reduce prices by negotiating with other producers using this infrastructure . It is possible to negotiate with other producer using the infrastructure .
 The financial advantages of importing via that pipeline hinge on the possibility of securing access to gas from Turkmenistan as well .
 The Turkish Stream presents its own set of potential problems, which includes a continued dependency on Russian gas . High infrastructure costs related to the transportation of the product across the Black Sea and the threat of a further deterioration of political relations between northern and southern EU Member States if Greece
 Russia will be left with fewer incentives for moderating its position on Ukraine as a means of restoring its relations with the EU within a reasonable period of time . If the political impact of energy diversification is not sufficiently counterbalanced by continued economic interdependence in other areas, Russia is left
 Our relations with Russia must be based on our own particular geopolitical situation, says Russian Foreign Minister .
 The U.S. should not prevent the EU from developing an independent foreign policy and pursue strategies perfectly aligned with its objectives .
 Germany, France and other proposals in favour of sending military assistance would have allowed Kyiv to continue the war . Germany and France called for halting the escalation of a conflict that posed a threat to our own security .
 Any progress achieved by means of negotiations with Russia will require a pragmatic approach that takes the particular interests of both parties into account and a proactive effort to find common ground .
 Cooperation on issues of mutual interest is the best way to create the atmosphere of trust necessary for fostering a constructive discussion of values . Russia and the EU express a desire to take up the challenge .
 The EU's foreign policy for states in our common neighbourhood should stress the importance of democratic values and standards . The EU should stress that good governance and rule of law should be understood as good governance .
 The free trade area between the EU and Ukraine must be implemented in a way that ensures that the entry of European companies into the Ukrainian market does cause the destruction of local industry or exacerbate the effects of government cutbacks that will entail the dismissal of public employees and the rise
 The successful modernisation of Ukraine and the reduction of inequality in that country would provide a positive example of cooperation with the EU that would enhance the Union in the eyes of Russian citizens .
 If the quality of life in Ukraine continues to deteriorate due to the armed conflict and economic cutbacks, Ukrainian citizens may come to the conclusion that their government and other institutions have let them down .
 If their deception is dashed, their deception could spark renewed civil unrest . If their hopes that an Association Agreement with the EU would bring a new level of prosperity are dashed .
 Financial and technical assistance from the EU, the IMF and the World Bank must be tied to reforms designed to reduce the corruption endemic throughout Ukrainian society . The over-bureaucratisation that is stifling the country's economic recovery.
 The EU has a decisive role to play in reconstruction of the Donbass once the conflict is over, says the EU . The EU will play a key role in the recovery of the entire country .
 The EU must be prepared to deal with the rise of different types of xenophobia in Ukraine and refuse to allow the Kyiv government to use the armed conflict with Russia as a pretext for legitimising the actions of radical rightwing groups .
 Ukrainian citizenship must not be determined by one's political opinions or ethnicity . Instead framed in terms of equal rights, respect for all cultural identities and protection of languages such as Russian . Russian is the mother tongue of a substantial percentage of Ukrainian population .
 The annexation of Crimea as a republic within the Russian Federation is illegal from the perspective of international law . There is very little possibility of reversing this state of affairs .
 The EU continues to acknowledge Ukraine's sovereignty over this territory . It must decouple this issue from the armed conflict in the Donbass in the interest of avoiding stalemates that could hinder progress .
 Kyiv must move forward with a constitutional reform that provides for the conferral of special status to the separatist territories of Donetsk and Luhansk within the Ukrainian state . The reform is in accord with the desire for local self-government expressed by these peoples .
 The only viable solution acceptable to local populations would be the concession of broad autonomous status within a federally structured or greatly decentralised Ukrainian state . It would allow people in the regions in question to elect their own leaders and preserve their cultural and economic ties with Russia .
 Moscow must withdraw all combat forces deployed from Russian territory . Moscow must stop sending supplies to the insurgents and pressure separatist leaders to respect agreement signed in Minsk .
 AII parties have the obligation to facilitate international observers' access to any area in which they must verify fulfilment of the agreement . They must also accelerate the restoration of communications and public services between the separatist zones and the rest of Ukraine .
 A pan-European dialogue at the institutional level to ensure global security is 84. The European Union wants to ensure the world's security is secure .
 Kyiv is not in a position to move ahead towards NATO membership, despite attempts by Kyiv to drive its candidacy forward . Kyiv has been inspired by political motives and a desire for legitimacy in the West .
 Ukraine's entry into NATO was one of the underlying causes of the current conflict . Russian leaders feared losing their country's military base in Sebastopol to the Alliance in the wake of the Euromaidan movement .
 NATO's own confrontational reaction to the standoff has not contributed positively to military de-escalation or furthered the negotiation process . The standoff has been laced with what could almost be qualified as new Cold War rhetoric .
 The OSCE, in its capacity as the main pan-European security organisation, must play a leading role in the resolution of this crisis . All EU Member States, Ukraine and Russia participate as full members .
After a settlement has been reached, this organisation must work hand-in-hand with the EU on post-conflict reconstruction, the demobilisation and reintegration of ex-combatants into civilian life .
 The OSCE should take advantage of its potential for reaching a consensus on the future of the existing European security architecture, says the U.S. and Russia . It is uniquely suited as the only forum devoted to security issues in which EU Member States, Russia, Ukraine and the United States
 A renewed OSCE carries 30 A More European Russia for a More Secure Europe 87 . However, this will only be possible in a scenario in which a renewedOSCE carries a More secure Europe 87.
 Permanent dialogues should be established between both the EU and the Eurasian Economic Union and NATO . NATO and the Collective Security Treaty Organization should also be established .
 The EU should establish a more flexible model for its Neighbourhood Policy that satisfies the aspirations of countries in our common neighbourhood with Russia . The policy is well synchronised with its strategy for EU-Russia relations .
 It is crucial to avoid a perception that the two are in any way competitive or mutually exclusive that could lead to both adopting a zero-sum game mentality .
 The 'Normandy format' used to reach the Minsk accords could continue to be useful as an informal mechanism . But it does not obviate the need for a common European position backed by all Member States .
 The EU must establish a new dialogue with Russia specifically devoted to security . It could serve as a channel for identifying mutual issues of concern and common threats .
 The format could be similar to that employed by the Atlantic Alliance for the NATO-Russia Council . If limited, practical cooperation through meetings and joint armed forces exercises, it would be similar .
 The EU must avoid, as has occurred in the case of the NRC, that relations are limited to superficial contacts insufficient to assuage underlying feelings of mistrust .
 The adversarial rhetoric in current NATO-Russia relations in the context of the Ukrainian conflict naturally limits its potential contribution to the positive resolution of the situation .
 The long-term objective must be to move ahead towards a deeper level of cooperation between the various European, Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian organisations .
 Sanctions against Russia should be gradually withdrawn as Moscow's fulfilment of each of the various phases of the Minsk II agreement is verified. Sanctions should be slowly withdrawn as the fulfilment. of each phase of the deal is verified .
 Russian intervention in Ukraine is hurting European export trade and the future of mutual relations . Russia has been isolating Russia from the rest of Europe and giving it an incentive to look for alternative partners elsewhere .
 Maintaining and strengthening the economic interdependence between the EU, Ukraine and Russia constitutes an investment in long-term stability . It creates a ""cushion of interests" capable of mitigating the effects of new crises as well as a strong incentive to resolve them quickly .
 The implementation of a new free trade zone between the EU and Ukraine need not be incompatible with existing trade relations between Russia and Ukraine . The new zone will not be compatible with existing relations between the two countries .
 The proposal of a similar free trade agreement between the EU and Russia in parallel with the implementation of the agreement with Ukraine would help dissipate Moscow's negative perception of EU enlargement and transform shared neighbours into bridges .
 The EU must diversify its sources of energy supplies and avoid the possibility that any of its Member States could be overly dependent on Russian gas . EU must strengthen its capacity to import and store liquefied natural gas .
 The EU should support the construction of the Southern Gas Corridor pipeline from Azerbaijan to the EU . It must also ensure its access to supplies from other producers such as Turkmenistan by this route .
 The political impact of the EU's reduction of gas imports from Russia and Russia's increase of export energy trade with China must be carefully managed so as to avoid the threat of a European energy crisis provoked by market scarcity .
 To facilitate the progressive anchoring of Russia in Europe, it will be necessary to go beyond intergovernmental contacts and promote direct contact between businesses, social organisations and average Russian citizens .
This exchange will allow us to effectively foster the spread of common values of tolerance and respect for human rights . This exchange will be used to promote tolerance, respect and tolerance of human rights in the world .
 Visa policy should not be used as a means of imposing sanctions on Russia . Visa policy shouldn't be used to impose sanctions on the country, says the author .
Denying visas is counterproductive, as it heightens Russia's isolation and by extension public receptivity to the Kremlin's anti-West discourse . Denying visas for Russia is counterproductive.
 It would be far more constructive to foster mutual understanding through tourism and educational and cultural contacts . It would also be more constructive for tourism and cultural contact .
 The European Higher Education Area launched in tandem with the Bologna Process, of which Russia forms a part, is an ideal vehicle for increasing cooperation agreements between universities in EU countries and Russia .
 A Russia that increasingly feels itself to be part of Europe and a Europe that seeks to develop a deeper understanding of Russia . Europe is the best long-term guarantee of maintaining our continent's security and stability, writes David Cameron .
 Ana Agündez García, Carlos Garcimartín Alférez, Juan López Rodríguez, Jesás Ruiz-Huerta Carbonell 63/2011 . Ana Agulz García was the first woman to
 La contribución of los estados miembros. La Contribucion of the estados is the largest in the world . La contibución is a part of the world's largest political body .
 Fátima de Valcárcel, Hadji Malick Cissé 68/2012 La política espaíiola de cooperación al desarrollo hacia África. FáTima of Valcacrcel:
 Miguel Ángel Lombardo, Érika María Rodríguez Pinzón 69/2012 Cooperación civil-militar y multilateralismo .
 Domingo Carbajo Vasco 71/2012 La Unión Bancaria desde una perspectiva española . The former president of the United States.
 The world's most famous and most famous people are known for their work in the United States . They are known to have worked in the U.S.
 Una propuesta de renovación ante la revisión de la Estrategia Española de Seguridad . Una Propuesta of renovation.
 The world's most famous and most famous people are known for their work in the United States .
 El papel de España en la seguridad marítima del mediterráneo occidental. El papal de EspAña in the seguridia del Mediterratneo is the first of its kind .
Michael Dauderstádt, José Enrique de Ayala, Vicente Palacio, Domenec Ruiz Devesa. Michael DauderStádt and José Enrique De Ayala are among those who spoke to them .