 The Case for the Breakup of the Ukraine 5 out of 5 based on 8 ratings . The case is based on user reviews .
Corporate media is not reporting that the Ukraine is falling apart, it is not. The U.S. and Russia are on a collision course which can end up in nuclear war .
Ukronazi saboteurs attack on Crimea. But the signs are all over the place, ranging from the outright bizarre attack by the Ukronazi .
Ukronazi project has outlived its utility and nobody gives a damn what will happen to the Ukrainian people. Frankly, the Ukronazi Project has out lived its utility .
 Stage 5 has already been reached, quite a while ago, according to reports . Even a cursory look at what is happening in the Ukraine clearly shows that Stage 5 is already reached .
 Somalia has millions of assault rifles circulating in the population . Major industrial sites are capable of triggering another Chernobyl-like disaster .
 There is no way it can ignore a Somalia on the EU and NATO border . The always Euro-centric West could afford to ignore the Somalia in Somalia .
 Once the inevitable, and this time catastrophic, final collapse happens the resulting explosion will simple take the path of least resistance . The explosion will take place at least once the inevitable .
 Russia has a superbly capable state security agencies, the newly created National Guard, large military formations deployed along the borders . Russia has an excellent understanding of what is taking place in the Ukraine .
 To the west we have basically Conchita Wurst’s Europe, unable to formulate any policy at all, with parade-type military forces mostly hallucinating about the ‘Russian threat’ and security services who can’t even cope with the current flow of immigrants
 Russia has already had to absorb about 1,5 million refugees . Western leaders were busy blaming Russia for everything and making absolutely crazy promises to the Ukrainians .
 When the explosion happens the Europeans will be the ones to get hit the hardest and who will have to scramble to cope with the situation . All this is to say that when the inevitable explosion happens.
 EU comprador elites make a total mess of the situation, as they always do, and end up worrying mostly about the political fallout resulting from the disaster .
I will never cease to repeat that Russia is much weaker than what most people think. I will never stop to mantrically repeat thatRussia is much stronger than what people think .
 Her landmass is immense and her military arguably the best on the planet . But population is relatively small, and her economy is a struggling one .
 The future does look bright for Russia, but presently she simply does not have the means to single handedly rescue the Ukraine .
 Crimea has presented Russia with major challenges. The reality is that even Crimea has present Russia with big challenges .
 Crimea needs to completely rebuild most of its infrastructure after 25 years of total neglect . Crimea has been in Crimea for 25 years .
 The Kremlin has poured billions of Rubles into numerous and large modernization programs, including an immensely expensive but vitally needed bridge over the Kerch strait . She will continue to rebuild Crimea in spite of the immense costs involved .
 Crimea will end up being very wealthy, courtesy of an immense touristic potential . Crimea will also have a much expanded Black Sea fleet and because of its strategic location .
 Crimea will remain a major burden which Russia will struggle to deal with . But for the foreseeable future, Crimea will continue to be a big burden for Russia .
 If Crimean was neglected, the Donbass has been almost totally destroyed, the Crimean region has been totally destroyed .
 Russians are paying the pensions of the local population because the Ukronazis have stolen them, in direct violation of the Minsk Agreements . Right now the Russian government is paying the pensioners .
 Russia is alone in supporting the Novorussian republics with humanitarian, medical, technical, administrative and military programs . Russia is also alone in support for humanitarian,Medical, technical and administrative programs .
 Novorussians have done an amazing job rebuilding much of Donetsk and a few other cities . Most of what lies within artillery range of the Ukronazi forces still lies in ruins . The economy is more or less at a standstill .
 Russia simply does not have the means to salvage the Ukraine. What is already evident is that regardless of who will be in the Kremlin and regardless of how much good will and self-sacrifice the Russians will have, Russia simply doesn't have the Means to salvage Ukraine .
 Polls show most Russians are opposed to a full reintegration of the entire Ukraine into Russia .
 Ukraine has turned into one bloody hell of a mess, but that an entire generation of Ukrainians has now been terminally brainwashed with russophobic hatred . They are not only acutely aware that the Ukraine has been turned into a bloody hell.
 Russia has no use for Nazis of any kind, even if they are fellow Slavs or other Slavs . And, frankly, Russia hasno use for Nazi Nazis, even though they are basically the same nation as the Russian one .
 At most, Russia will let the DNR/LNR get back the territories which belonged to their regions and Mariupol might be liberated .
 The Kremlin fully understands that if they grab it, they own it and they have to fix it . Even if by some miracle the Novorussian tanks end up in Kiev, I don’t see them staying there for very long .
 The Donbass will never go back to the Ukraine again, but even this process will take time . Eventually Russia will, of course, simply be forced to absorb the Donbass and make it a part of Russia .
 The Russians can't afford it, the Europeans can't do anything, and the Americans have left. So the Russians can’t afford it. The Europeans have left the U.S. so the Russians have left, the Americans are leaving .
 The situation becomes the stronger the need for an international effort will become. What happens next is that the worse the situation becomes . The situation will become worse the obvious need for international efforts will become .
 Once the Russians tell the Europeans in no equivocal terms “forget about our invasion, we are not doing it’ The Europeans will have to turn to their American masters and tell them that the EU will be regime-changed unless something is urgently done .
 Even if that happens, I don't see the main donors agreeing on a Ukrainian project . But even if that happened, he doesn’t see main donors agree on a project .
 In purely political terms, the most likely solution would be to have a neutral Ukrainian Federation of some kind .
 Somalis can’t even begin to imagine, and you have a country which can probably ‘absorb’ even a major donor’s help effort and remain in ruins . Add to this a level of corruption and an expertise in misappropriating funds which Somalis
Western Ukraine is not a "Ukrainian nation" with a common project, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: There is no such thing as a “Ukrainians’s nation” with acommon project .
 The unitary Ukraine was allowed to break-up, under international supervision, into several smaller states . If needed, even under international military protection, the unitary could be allowed to go into several states .
 A break-up of the Ukraine into several independent states could also make it easier for each newly created state to sign bilateral agreements with its neighbors .
Small states are much easier to integrate into larger unions than huge ones . Small states are more likely to integrate with smaller unions than large ones .
 Breaking up the Ukraine presents a number of advantages to peacekeeping/peace-enforcement efforts . Breaking up Ukraine also presents advantages to any peacekeeping efforts .
 The Russians would be willing to send in a peacekeeping/peace-enforcement force to provide security during a stabilization and transition phase . This operation is sanctioned by a UN Security Council resolution and has the support of all the major players .
 The plan does have major flaws and creates as many risks as it offers opportunities. Of course, just as any other break-up of a country, this plan does has major flaws .
 breaking-up any country no matter how artificial that country is, just creates more artificial borders . At least temporarily, breaking up any country just creates a more artificial border .
 What is left of the Ukraine today is already extremely violent and it is pretty darn clear that things ain’t gonna get better anytime soon .
 We have to compare the comparable and not compare an admittedly bad situation to an invented ideal one . So we have to comparison the comparable.
 Humpty Dumpty is broken now, and all that can still be salvaged are his various pieces . The Dumpty's various pieces will still be recovered .
 It’s not like we are discussing the break-up of Japan or France, say, Japan and France . So it's not like they are discussing a break- up of, say Japan or French .
 Some countries are considered prime candidates for break-up while other WWII borders would be sacrosanct . I don't see why some countries are considering break-ups .
 Some will accuse me of being a “Putin agent’ for suggesting that the Ukraine ought to be broken up . Some will, no doubt, say he's a Putin agent .
 Others will accuse me of being a CIA/Mossad agent for suggesting NATO might actually have a legitimate mission west of the Dniepr river . Others will accusing me of be a CIA-MOSSad agent .
Ad hominems come with the territory and I have long learned to ignore them. That kind of ad hominem come with a territory . I have learned to ignored them.
 The Ukraine disaster has become a common problem which will soon turn into a common threat which will require a common solution . All I will reply to those accusations is that while I lay 100% of the blame for the disaster on the AngloZionist Empire .
 I just don’t see anybody capable of bringing back law and order east of the Dniepr besides Russia. I justDon't see anybody able to bring back law. I don't see anyone capable of Bringing back Law and Order east of Russia .
 Kiev squandered one opportunity to reintegrate eastern Ukraine by not implementing Minsk in a timely manner . It should be obvious that Kievsquandered their one chance to re integrate eastern Ukraine .
 They have created extreme bitterness by shelling civilian areas for a year during the ceasefire . They have also created extremeterness by shelling civilians for ayear during the truce .
 Putin should propose a deadline where either Kiev 1. modifies their constitution to define a federated state for Donbass, 2. grants amnesty for the rebels, OR recognizes a referendum by Donbas where they either join Russia or become a separate state .
 NS was formed to fight against the spread of Zionism/Marxism . But all of their leaders are Zionist-Jews, who are arch nemesis of Europeans .
 The enemy now is the same enemy who funded the Marxist revolution in Russia. The enemy is now the sameenemy who funded it in Russia .
 London and DC funded the Marxist-Jew revolution that genocided Russians and Ukrainians and Europeans . London and D.C. funded the revolution .
Zionist leaders would arrest their Zionist leaders and fight valiantly against the UK’s-SAS in their country . They would also kick out NATO for good .