 NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen: Referendums by separatists in Ukraine, such as Sunday's in Donyetsk, “don’t count,’s Rasmussen says . The NATO secretary general tells CNN's Christiane Amanpour that the
 Pro-Russian separatists claim victory in a vote in the eastern Ukrainian region . They say 90% of voters wanted independence from Ukraine .
 Rasmussen: "I urge all actors to make sure that those general elections can be conducted in an orderly manner" Rasmussen told Amanpour .
 NATO has tried, through limited troop deployments, military exercises, and air flights to present an enhanced deterrent to Russia, its erstwhile Cold War foe .
 Amanpour asks if Russia could move against the Ukrainian port of Odessa or the surrounding area in an effort to land-lock the country . Amanpour asked if Russia would move against Odessa in an attempt to land the country.
 NATO has seen no evidence of Russian withdrawal from the Ukrainian border, as Russian President Vladimir Putin has claimed, he told Amanpour .
 Afghanistan just held the first round of presidential elections . Rasmussen also has much responsibility in Afghanistan .
 President Hamid Karzai has refused to sign a security agreement to keep foreign security forces in the country past 2014 . President Karzai negotiated the deal to keep the forces in his country .
 All of the major Afghan candidates have pledged to sign an agreement in interviews with Amanpour . Abdullah Abdullah is the front-runner in the presidential race .
 He praised the Afghan security forces’ performance securing the country for the presidential elections . He also praised the country’s performance in the presidential election .
 Russia should hire some mercenaries to overthrow the nazis in kiev using a bit of peaceful protesting . Instead, Russia should use some mercenaries for a peaceful protest .
 Putin has played this guys around to where he actually wants them all, says Putin . Seems like Putin has been playing this guy around to what he really wants .
 Not one Russian was ever harmed by a Ukrainian before Putin moved in an took Crimea and stirred up trouble in Donbas .
 NATO chief's message is a direct way to a civil war, he says . Many thousands of people who give their votes believe that thay are right, he adds .
 That is not a fair and accurate representation, that is rigged to one outcome only . That's not true, that's not fair, accurate representation. That's what we need to know .
Vote for me as much as you like, vote for him and never see the light of day again . Vote for me. Vote for him as muchAs you like .
I'd take a bit of glee in the west having its hypocrisy thrown in its face if there weren't a lot of real people being hurt by these worthless games . I'd take the west's hypocrisy to its face, if there were real people hurt by the games
 If they're no Kremlin trolls, then their ignorance about Russia and democracy is downright scary, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A referendum that is so badly organized that anyone can vote as often as one likes is a joke, it's a joke . The referendum is so poorly organized that it's so bad that it can't be a joke.
 The only difference I see is that most western nations are much more slick about it . I see that most Western nations are more slick than they are.
The difference is they threw a corrupt dictator out of Kiev through peaceful demonstrations . The difference is that they threw him out of Ukraine through peaceful protests .
 A corrupt dictator came right back in with guns and took what he wanted . Then a corrupt dictator come right back with guns. Then he came back with what he wants .
 The U.S. selecting the next leader of Ukraine sure doesn't sound like democracy to me. The United States selected the next president of Ukraine .
 You buy the U.S. and other western nations' propaganda because it's slicker. You buy U.N. propaganda because of its slicker .
 Even if one person disagrees with current goverment he/she must be listened and usderstood. Even if they disagree he/ she must be listen and wederstood .
 Yes, he should probably write Putin a stern letter in the strongest terms . He should also write Putin's stern letter .
 NATO dudes look like longing for the old days when SS goosestepped across Europe and Russians were killed by the hundred thousands . Somehow these NATO dudes do all look like wanting for old days .
 EU and U.S. observers recognized as fully legitimate. It was recognized by the EU and United States observers as fullyitimate .
 Merkel sides with her "foe" Schroeder in denying any real sanctions on their buddy Putin .
 Schroeder even mocks the west with his hugging & kissing of his master, Putin .
 Schroeder is not welcomed, period. As for Schroeder, sanctions should be put on him as well .
 Odessa, Slavyansk, Mariupol – murders there were carried out NOT by Russians . The murders were not carried out by Russians.
 Rasmussen is talking about further weapon deploying . He is now talking about more weapon deployment .
 Amanpour has always been a propaganda tool for CNN's agenda, she's just an image .
To think otherwise you'd either have to be braindead or brainwashed by russian propaganda . To think otherwise, you'd be brain dead or brain washed by russia .
 Lots of evidence of people voting several times at different polls, with no control . Many polls show no control of voters .
Ratmonger guy was happy with a fascist coup that removed a democratic government . So this Ratmonger was happy.
 Rasmussen and NATO leaders seem to have an obsession with Putin because NATO is the most powerful military force in the world . Yet Putin does not bow down to them, says Rasmussen .
 The hypocrisy is now so blatant that even European and American citizens are starting to question NATO's blind obsession . NATO's obsession could lead to a very destructive world war, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Donetsk region aspires to freedom from what they see as Ukrainian government with fascist partners . Everybody in the world has seen how loudly NATO has supported separatist votes in Sudan, Yugoslavia, Kosovo .
 This is a clear double standard and suggests an emotional obsession with Putin . This is the same double standard. This is also the same way Putin is obsessed with Putin.
 Ukrainian government forces have not gone in and simply shot the protestors like has happened in Egypt and other countries . One positive thing about recent events is that the Ukrainian government is not going in and shooting protestors .
 If left alone, Ukrainians can sort out their differences because they are both Slavic people . It suggests that if left alone. It suggests.
 Rasmussen must stay out of their affairs because he and NATO seem only to understand the use of force and violence . Rasmussen must keep out of his affairs, he says .
 Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan are all examples of why NATO should stay out of conflicts . Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya are among the three countries that have been involved in conflicts .
 With these kind of comments you can probably brainwash your own fogy people. With these kinds of comments, you can also brainwash yourself .
 Rasmussen is a piece of feces I really had no opinion before, but this is pure propaganda, he says . Rasmussen is an article of feces he really hadno opinion before .
 Any citizenry who would elect an american as president of Estonia deserves to be flattened .
 I recommend you move to Russia for a "working vacation" for a few years . I recommend a working vacation.
 Ethnic Russians have the right to seperate if they wish. Europe for Regions and Peoples: Ethnic Russians can choose their own life .
 Send NATO troops to these 2 states and squash the people there, that is right, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We're going to do it," he says .
 I don't expect my gardener to give me medical advice and if he does, I ignore it . If he does he will ignore it, he will do, he says .
Developing & poor countries, BEWARE, ban all the NGOs, stop trading in dollars & Euro . withdraw your Gold from federal reserve bank .