 Thousands of people have since died, towns and cities such as Mariupol lie in ruins . 13 million people have been displaced .
 The Russian leader's initial aim was to overrun Ukraine and depose its government, ending for good its desire to join the Western alliance Nato .
 His declared aim was to protect people subjected to what he called eight years of bullying and genocide by Ukraine's government . He said he wanted to protect those subjected to the abuse of people in Ukraine .
 President Putin refused to call it an invasion or a war . His adviser said Russian troops made two attempts to storm the presidential compound .
 The claims of Nazis and genocide in Ukraine are completely unfounded but part of a narrative repeated by Russia for years . The claims are part of the narrative repeated for years.
State-run news agency Ria Novosti made clear that "denazification is inevitably also de-Ukrainisation" in effect erasing the modern state . Russia is now accused by the international community of carrying out war crimes .
 Several countries including the U.S. and Canada go further and call it genocide .
 A month into the invasion, Russia pulled back from Kyiv and declared its main goal was the "liberation of Donbas" broadly referring to Ukraine's eastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk .
 More than a third of Ukraine was already seized by Russian proxy forces in 2014 . The Kremlin claimed it had "generally accomplished" the aims of the invasion's first phase . It defined as considerably reducing Ukraine's combat potential .
" Putin needs a victory," says Andrei Kortunov, head of the Russian International Affairs Council . "Putin needs to win," says Kortunova .
 Russian officials are now focused on seizing the two big eastern regions . They are trying to create a land corridor along the south coast .
 Russian general says they have hopes of seizing territory further west along the Black Sea coast . They have claimed control of the southern region of Kherson and a leading Russian general has said they have hope of seizing further west .
 Nikolai Patrushev has spoken of Ukraine disintegrating into "several states" The powerful head of Russia's security council has blamed Ukrainian and Western hatred of Russia .
 Russia said it was considering a Ukrainian proposal of neutrality . There have been no negotiations since the end of March . President Putin earlier declared negotiations at a dead end .
" Ultimately wanted to divide the country and I think it's becoming more evident," says Barbara Zanchetta of King's College London's Department of War Studies .
 Russia seized Ukraine's southern region of Crimea and triggered a separatist rebellion in the east and a war that claimed 14,000 lives . Russia then seized the Crimea region and then triggered a rebellion in Ukraine's east .
 He tore up an unfulfilled 2015 Minsk peace deal and accused Nato of threatening "our historic future as a nation" He claimed Nato countries wanted to bring war to Crimea .
 Russia's leader has one aim to split society in Russia and ultimately destroy it . Russia's 30-member defensive military alliance aims to split the country's society .
 In a Victory Day speech on 9 May he accused Nato of launching an active military build-up on territories adjacent to Russia .
 The West promised back in 1990 that Nato would expand "not an inch to the east" but did so anyway . That means Central Europe, Eastern Europe and the Baltics .
 Mikhail Gorbachev only referred to East Germany in the context of a reunified Germany . That was before the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Mr Gorbachev said later that "the topic of Nato expansion was never discussed" at the time .
 Nato maintains it never intended to deploy combat troops on its eastern flank, until Russia annexed Crimea illegally in 2014 . Russia annexed the Crimea in 2014.
 Ukraine's military setbacks in Ukraine may have paid to any wider ambitions beyond its borders . If he has, his military setbacks may have put him on the verge of a wider ambitions .
 The most immediate threat is to Moldova, which is not part of Nato . But President Putin's ambition to roll Nato back to the late 1990s has taken a hit . Finland and Sweden look closely at joining an alliance that now seems as unified as ever .
Nato has warned of a war that could last weeks, months or even years . Russia has already punished two Nato members, Poland and Bulgaria, for the West's support for Ukraine .
 Protest of any kind is banned and more than 15,000 people have been detained . More than 20,000 protesters have been arrested and detained .
 Austrian Chancellor Karl Nehammer gave a very downbeat assessment of a man who had entered into a "logic of war" He earlier declared negotiations at a dead end .