Russia-backed separatist rebels move to take their position at the new line of contact outside Petrivske .
 Taylor's remarks during the first open hearing of the impeachment inquiry repeatedly came back to the ongoing conflict between Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists that began in 2014 . Taylor’s remarks were made during the opening hearing of impeachment inquiry .
 The war broke out after a popular uprising in Kyiv sent the corrupt and Kremlin-friendly president, Viktor Yanukovych, into exile across the border .
 Russia's President Vladimir Putin feared Ukraine would leave Russia's orbit in favor of the European Union . Putin takes an exceedingly dim view of popular revolts .
 Putin engineered the annexation of the Crimean peninsula, where Russia already had a naval base . He then stoked the uprising in the mostly Russian-speaking Donbas region against the “fascists’ who had supposedly taken control in Kyiv .
Local fighters include some from the ranks of organized crime and some militiamen from the Russian side . They include local fighters — including some from organized crime — and some from Russia .
 A Dutch-led international team of investigators concluded that a missile that downed a Malaysia Airlines jetliner over eastern Ukraine in 2014 came from the Russian military .
Low-level fighting continues on a low-grade basis . Russia denies any link to the disaster .
 The separatists have not been defeated, but Putin’s backing has driven a wedge between most Ukrainians and Russia . It will take generations to heal.
 The United States and other countries imposed sanctions on Russia for grabbing Crimea . The U.S. and other nations imposed sanctions against Russia . The sanctions remain in place .
 The United States provided Ukraine with a limited amount of military materiel and training . Under President Barack Obama, the United States gave Ukraine the limited amount.
 President Trump’s delay of about $400 million in military assistance in the summer is at the heart of the impeachment inquiry .
 Trump administration also approved for the first time the sale of Javelin antitank missiles to the Ukrainians . About 13,000 people have died in the war, on both sides, and many Ukrainians are weary of it .
 American diplomats tried to focus attention on the threat of Russia and Ukraine to U.S. security this summer . American diplomats include Taylor and George Kent, deputy assistant secretary of state .
Divided opinions over the breakaway region are split in Kyiv over whether residents of the separatist regions can ever be successfully reintegrated into Ukrainian society .
 The actor Volodymyr Zelensky won the presidency in the spring . His supporters later swept control of the parliament .
 Without getting into specifics, he has talked about finding a way to end the war . He hasn't said anything about ending the war.
 Some worry that he is an easy mark for the Kremlin . Others say he has been too cozy with right-wing Ukrainian nationalists .
 Ukraine and Russia swapped 70 prisoners in September, and another exchange may be on the way .
 In October, Zelensky said he was willing to explore a path to peace talks called Steinmeier Formula . In October he said he would explore the path topeace talks called the Steinmeier formula .
 It has now brought about a very careful and tentative disengagement in a few towns along the front line . It has also brought about some careful and Tentative disengagement.
 The view among analysts in Ukraine is that Zelensky's bargaining position with Russia has been weakened by Trump's attempt to force Ukraine to do his bidding by investigating the Bidens and the country's supposed role in the 2016 United States election .
 Putin engineered the annexation of the Crimean peninsula, where Russia already had a naval base . He then stoked the uprising in the mostly Russian-speaking Donbas region against the ‘fascists’ who had supposedly taken control .
Both were deeply alarmed by Trump’s attitude toward Ukraine . Both were deeply concerned by Trump's attitude to Ukraine .
 The impeachment inquiry has further driven Zelensky into a tight spot, says a former Moscow correspondent .
 He was co-author of a project on shipbreaking that won the Pulitzer Prize for investigative reporting . He was also co- author of an Overseas Press Club award and a George Polk award .
Former Moscow correspondent Will Englund is a former Moscow correspondent . He joined The Washington Post in October 2010 .