 Russia has been using its natural gas exports, prices, and contracts as a tool of hybrid warfare against Ukraine and other former Soviet republics for decades . Russia's natural gas export, prices and contracts have been used as a weapon of hybrid war against Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s state natural gas company Naftogaz won in an epic four-year legal battle against the Russian gas giant Gazprom in the Stockholm arbitration tribunal .
 The Cabinet enacted its energy crisis response plan, instructed power generating companies to switch from natural gas to boiler oil . It recommended all academic institutions, from kindergartens to universities, to completely suspend work until 6 March .
 Naftogaz signed an urgent contract with Poland’s company PGNiG arrange alternative supplies .
 Gazprom announced that the company launched procedures in the Stockholm international arbitration court to terminate its supply contracts with Naftogaz .
 The United States urged Russia not to use gas as a political weapon against Ukraine . The U.S. urged Russia to not use gas to attack Ukraine .
 Naftogaz announced on 5 March that it would close its representative office in Russia by 12 March 2018 .
 Naftogaz demanded compensation from Gazprom for gas imports from EU amid energy crisis . Gazprom has been forced to cut gas imports to the EU from EU .
 Gazprom officially informed Naftogaz of the beginning of proceedings through the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce on the termination of gas contracts . Gazprom has not yet confirmed the start of proceedings .
 Russia’s revenge for victory of Naftogaz over Gazprom in Stockholm arbitration court . It was Russia's revenge for the victory of the victory in the Stockholm arbitration Court .
 Cutting the gas off, Gazprom acted as a political leverage of the Russian authorities . The gas off was cut off by Gazprom as part of a deal with Russia .
 In 2014, Gazprom cut off the gas supply to Ukraine, amid the unfolding Russian invasion in the Donbas, an eastern Ukrainian region .
 Ukraine had to pay for more than 50 billion m³ of natural gas annually whether it was consumed or not – over 1/3 more than it needed . Ukrainian economy took a dive following the Russian-inspired war in eastern Ukraine .
As Russia occupied Crimea in 2014, Russia denounced the 30%-gas-discount Kharkiv Pact granted for extending Russia’s lease of a naval base in Crimea, increasing gas prices .
 Naftogaz considered the 2011-2015 prices and “take-or-pay’s” volumes not appropriate . Plus, Naftogsaz considered 2011- 2015 prices and "take- or-pay" volumes notappropriate .
 Both sides filed lawsuits to the Stockholm Court of Arbitration in the fall of 2014 .
 This is the first time Ukraine beat the Russian monopolist in a European court . This is first time the country has beaten the Russian monopoly in a court .
 Gazprom got used to dictating its terms to Ukraine under pressure of Russian gas blackmail for decades . It's a great blow to Russia’s ego, it's a big blow to its ego .
 Stockholm arbitration court revised terms of “take-or-pay’ clause in December 2017 . Naftogaz to only purchase 5 bcm of gas from Russia annually – a far cry from initial 52 bcm/year .
 The court obliged Naftogaz to pay Gazprom $2 bn in arrears . It was much less than the $56 bn the Russian gas monopolist had sought .
 The court ruled in favor of Naftogaz once again in February 2018 . In February 2018, the same court ruled that Gazprom under-delivered transit gas to Ukraine cost Naftogsaz $4.63 bn.
 Gazprom now owes Naftogaz a total of $2.56 bn - which is a fragment of the $37 bn which the company had sought .
 Gazprom vocally disagreed, returned Naftogaz’s prepayment, and cut off supplies . This time, Gazprom Vocally disagreed. This time the company vocally disagrees, returned the prepayments .
 Ukraine stopped buying Russian gas from Gazprom back in 2015, buying it from European companies instead . Ukraine did stop buying the Russian gas in 2015 .
 Stockholm arbitration court obliged Ukraine to renew buying gas from Gazprom according to current contract . But the current contract is in much smaller volumes than Moscow demanded, according to the court ruling .
 Gazprom suddenly refused to perform the contract and returned the prepayment . This supply had to start on 1 March 2018, when Gazprom returned the preayment.
 Naftogaz and President Poroshenko’s initiative #Prykruty was the result of the popular support for the initiative .
 Kyiv has ordered power companies to replace gas with alternative fuels . Kyiv had ordered power firms to replace energy with alternative fuel .
 It was before Russia occupied Crimea and orchestrated a war in Donbas in 2014, but that changed . Russia occupied the Crimea in 2014 .
 Ukrainian domestic natural gas production stands at around 32 bcm/year . Now, Ukrainian domestic gas production covers some 60% of its total consumption, which stands at 32 b cm/year.
 Ukraine still remains dependent on natural gas of Russian origin, but not on Russian supplies . Ukraine still needs natural gas from Russia but not from Russia .
 Starting from 2015, Ukraine purchased gas exclusively from EU companies . Ukraine purchased exclusively from European companies .
 Ukraine's huge subterranean storage facilities provide the country with a balanced consumption of gas . Today, domestic production, imports from the EU, and Ukraine’s huge underground storage facilities provides the country.
 In 2017, Ukrainian domestic production was 20. bcm, with the consumption of 31 bcm . 14 bcm were imported from Europe, while 14 b cm were imported .
 The government plans to increase gas production up to 35 bcm and lower the consumption to 30 bcm by 2035 . The government will export annually 5 bcm of natural gas to the world .
 The Stockholm arbitration court obliged Ukraine to renew gas imports from Russia . Ukraine prepaid for the volumes it expected Russia to supply, relying on them . Russia refused to supply gas according to the ruling of the Court .
 Ukraine had enough gas in underground storages to make up for lost volumes . It's difficult to quickly extract it and transfer it within the national pipeline system .
 At the end of the heating season, when the supply is nearly exhausted, the underground pressure drops and the gas extraction rate decreases with it .
 If air is pumped up to maximum pressure, air will be released faster than if it’s half deflated . Imagine a beach ball.
 The problem was made even worse by Gazprom's maintenance of the lowest available pressure at the entrance to Ukraine’s gas transport system throughout the winter of 2017-2018 . The problem is made worse by the maintenance of low available pressure.
 Gas blackmail was an element of Russian foreign policy and a ‘political weapon’ to keep its neighboring countries in Russia’s orbit or at least to influence them .
 Russia temporarily suspended its gas pressure on Ukraine only during the presidency of Viktor Yanukovych . Viktor Yanukovych was ousted by the Euromaidan in early 2014 .
 Russia suspended gas exports several times between 1992 and 1994 as a result of disputes over non-payments by Ukraine . Russia suspended its gas exports from 1992 to 1994 .
 In 1993, then Russian President Boris Yeltsin offered to annul Ukraine’s gas debt to Ukrainian president Leonid Kravchuk . In return for control over the Black Sea fleet and Ukraine's nuclear warheads, he said .
 Kravchuk could have agreed, but a strong rebuke from politicians in Kyiv made him abandon the idea .
 In 1994, a Ukrainian deputy prime minister agreed with Russia that Gazprom could acquire a 51% stake in the pipeline system . The pipeline system was built in Ukraine in the 1990s .
 In 1995, the Verkhovna Rada adopted a law prohibiting the privatization of oil and gas assets . The law was passed in 1995 .
 In 1998, Gazprom alleged that Ukraine had illegally diverted gas meant for export to other European countries . In 1999, the company suspended exports of oil and electricity to the country .
 The debt issue was settled only in 2001, by the signing of an intergovernmental gas transit agreement . It was settled in 2001.
 Russia trebled the gas price for Ukraine in 2005 as the Orange Revolution disrupted Russia’s plans for the Ukrainian presidency of pro-Russian Yanukovych .
 The Ukrainian government accepted the Russian demand with the stipulation that price increases were to be gradual . Ukrainian government accepts Russian demand.
 Gazprom stated in 2005 that 7. bcm of its gas deposited in Ukrainian storage reservoirs was not available . Later in 2005, Gazprom said 7.bcm of the gas was deposited in Ukraine's storage reservoirs .
 It remained unclear if it had disappeared due to technical problems or had been stolen . It remains unclear whether it was missing, or was stolen .
 Gazprom started reducing pressure in the pipelines from Russia to Ukraine on 1 January 2006 . As negotiations between Gazprom and Naftogaz over prices and a new gas supply agreement failed, Gazprom began reducing pressure on the pipelines .
 The supply was restored on 4 January 2006, after the preliminary agreement between Ukraine and Gazprom was settled .
 Gazprom threatened it would reduce supplies to Ukraine if $1. bn in gas debts were not paid . In January 2008, Gazprom said it would cut supplies if the debt wasn't paid .
 Gazprom claimed that Ukraine didn’t pay a $600 mn bill, stating that Russia supplied its own gas instead of cheaper Central Asian gas for several months .
 Ukraine disagreed with Russia’s claims and on 3 March 2008, Gazprom claimed that the $1. billion debt still was not paid and cut the shipments to Ukraine by 25%, and an additional 25% the next day .
 On 7 January, Russia cut off all gas exports via Ukraine via Ukraine . Several countries reported a major fall in supplies .
 Bulgaria, Moldova, and Slovakia were among the most affected by the drops . The drops were also in Bulgaria and Moldova .
 Gazprom and RosUkrEnergo filed lawsuits against Naftogaz in Stockholm arbitration court . They later won $200 mn as a penalty and return of 12. bcm of natural gas for breaches of contracts .
 Russia also accused Ukraine of illegal diversion of natural gas, but these accusations were not confirmed .
 In March 2014, Russia seized Ukrainian assets in Crimea, including the oil and gas company Chornomornaftogaz, a subsidiary of Ukraine’s state-owned Naftogaz .
 Chornomorsknaftogaz continues to illegally extract gas on the fields of Ukraine’s occupied Crimea . Gazprom has no dealings with the seized company to avoid facing sanctions itself .
 In March 2014, Russia denounced the 2010 Kharkiv Pact and its 30% gas discount . Russia annexed Crimea in March 2014 .
 Gazprom says Ukraine's debt to the company is $4. bn. Bn. The company says Ukraine’s debt to Gazprom is $3.2 billion . Gazprom has said that Ukraine is in debt to its company .
 Gazprom decided that Ukraine had to pay upfront, and completely halted gas supplies to Ukraine . Unilaterally Gazprom decides that Ukraine must pay upfront .
 Russian regular troops in the East-Ukrainian region of the Donbas have been blackmailed . This instance of blackmail accompanied the direct invasion of Russian troops .
 Russian regulars came support the irregular formations which were losing battles to Ukrainian forces . The Russian regulars were in support of the Russian regulars .
 Russia agreed to resume gas supply only in October 2014, after the peace deal known as the Minsk Protocol was signed by Ukraine and Russia .
 Gazprom halted its exports of gas to Ukraine because Ukraine had stopped buying it . In November 2015, Gazprom stopped its exports to Ukraine.
Naftogaz and Gazprom filed lawsuits to the Stockholm arbitration court . Naftogz and GazProm filed lawsuits in Stockholm .
 Naftogas won the epic four-year legal battle in Stockholm in February 2018 . In February 2018, Naftogsas won an epic four year legal battle .
 Gazprom tried to provoke another gas crisis in the EU and to blame Ukraine in what Putin calls “snatching gas,” as Russia did in 2006 and 2009 . In retaliation, on 1 March Gazprom attempted to provoke a gas crisis, in retaliation, in
 Ukraine is not that gas dependent anymore, and Ukrainians have lowered the daily gas consumption by 14%, saved the uninterrupted gas supply to the European Union .
 Gazprom itself shot in the foot, having given Ukraine grounds for further lawsuits against itself . As a result, Gazprom has been given grounds for another lawsuit against itself.
 Gazprom's actions were politically motivated. It does, but in this case, Gazprom’s actions are politically motivated, he says . It does.
 Gazprom could have halted gas supplies to Ukraine in order to cause drops of pressure in the EU . Gazprom succeeded in 2006 and 2009, and later to sue Ukraine as in 2009 .
 German energy expert Claudia Kemfert commented on the current Russian attempt to instigate another gas crisis . “There are certainly also political motives here,’ she said .
 Naftogaz won the lawsuit against Gazprom in the Stockholm arbitration court on 28 February 2018 . Gazprom was obliged to pay Naftogsaz $2.56 bn. Just a day before the cut-off, on February 28, 2018, on the
 Gazprom announced it disagrees with Stockholm court's ruling . Gazprom’s deputy head, Alexander Medvedev, said Gazprom was not going to resume gas deliveries to Ukraine .
 Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller claims Stockholm court was guided by double standards . Gazprom says Stockholm court is guided by 'double standards'
 Miller announced Gazprom was preparing to terminate the 2009 contract with Naftogaz . On 5 March 2018, Miller announced that Gazprom had been preparing to end its contract .
 Russia appealed to the arbitration court in The Hague . It is likely that there will be attempts to not implement the decision, he says .
 Economic expert Yevhen Oleinykov also mentioned the case of the Noga company . Russia effectively ignored the decision of the Stockholm arbitration court .
 Gazprom announced it appealed the decision of the court in the gas supply case in March 2018 . Gazprom expects to submit an appeal by the end of March .
 The theoretical possibility of the decision being canceled exists, but it is small. Therefore, the theoretical possibility is small .
 Ukraine will aim to arrest Gazprom's assets in Ukraine and seize its foreign assets . President Poroshenko said the decision can be implemented .
 Each country has its own procedures for such seizures . Marchenko notes that such actions take a long time and require efforts, as each country has own procedures .
 Gazprom will be additionally fined $500,000 daily until it repays the debt . Naftogaz’s commercial director Yuriy Vitrenko said that even if Gazprom is to appeal, it is still effective starting from 1 March .
 Moscow's reaction to Stockholm verdict shows that Russia can attempt to repeat gas blackmail anytime in the future . Moscow’s reaction to the Stockholm verdict showed that Russia could try to repeat the same tactic anytime in future .
 This latest attempt, unlike those in the previous decades, was unsuccessful partially because post-Maidan Ukraine had been pursuing an energy independence policy . The latest attempt was unsuccessful because Ukraine was extremely dependent on Gazprom's gas .
 Ukraine wouldn't be able to cover the EU demand for gas using its own supply and production . If Russia would fully halt supplies to the EU via Ukraine, Ukraine wouldn’t be able.
 Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline is poised to connect Russia with Germany . The pipeline is set to bypass the Ukrainian gas transport system .
 Nord Stream 2 may only increase Europe’s energy dependence on Russia . Ukraine, Moldova, Poland, Lithuania and Latvia warn parliamentarians of the EU countries .
 The speakers insist that Nord Stream 2 is a political instrument of Russia . They insist that it is a commercial project .