Donald Trump canceled a meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin on Thursday . He cited the current Ukraine crisis as the reason for the cancellation .
 Trump had also said he would get a final report during the flight to Argentina on the tension in the region . Russia seized Ukrainian vessels near Crimea on Sunday .
 Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov was reported to have no official information of Trump's decision to cancel the meeting .
 Putin will have a couple of extra hours for "useful meetings" on the sidelines of the G-20 summit .
 Poroshenko accused Putin of wanting to annex his entire country . Poroshenko also called for NATO to deploy warships to a sea shared by the two nations .
 Poroshenko's comments to German media were part of a concerted push by Kiev to gain Western support for more sanctions against Moscow . Kiev is rallying opposition to a Russian gas pipeline that threatens to deprive Ukraine of important transit revenues .
 Moscow seized three Ukrainian naval ships and their crews on Sunday near Crimea . His Western allies have so far not offered to provide any of these things, despite his warnings .
 Moscow and Kiev blame each other for the incident, which took place in the narrow Kerch Strait off Crimea, the Ukrainian region annexed by Russia in 2014 .
 As Russian tsar, as he sees himself, his empire cannot function without Ukraine, he sees it as his empire can't operate without Ukraine .
 Russia has charged that Ukrainian vessels failed to obtain permission to pass from the Black Sea into the Sea of Azov through the Kerch Strait between Russia's mainland and the Crimean Peninsula it annexed from Ukraine in 2014 .
 Ukraine insisted its vessels were operating in line with international maritime rules . Ukraine insisted that its vessels are operating in accordance with international rules .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel said she plans to press Putin at this weekend's G-20 summit in Argentina . She said she will urge the release of the ships and crews .
 NATO allies conduct air policing and reconnaissance flights in the region . Bulgaria, Romania, and Turkey border the Black Sea and have their own military equipment deployed .
 NATO condemned the Russian action, but not expected to send ships into the Sea of Azov . The deployment could trigger a confrontation with Russia .
 A 2003 treaty between Russia and Ukraine stipulates that permission from both countries is required for warships from others to enter the internal sea . The 2003 treaty was signed by both countries .