 A pact between Kiev and the leaders of Kharkiv in eastern Ukraine has limited violence and ensured stability, but at the cost of keeping in place corrupt governing practices and forestalling reform .
 Eastern Ukraine does not differ much from the rest of the country; it mirrors the overall challenges of rule of law and captured governance . Eastern Ukraine is not much different from the other country, but it mirrors overall challenges.
 A study of the city and region of Kharkiv demonstrates how adaptation to the country's post-Maidan political and economic reality has been painful but rapid .
 Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-biggest city and the surrounding region, has a collective population of almost 2. million people . The city is the name of Ukraine's second-largest city and has almost 2 million people.
 Four years ago, it nearly turned into a Russia-backed separatist enclave like neighboring Donetsk and Luhansk . The region is now a Russian-backed enclave .
 The anti-government Russian Spring protests of 2014 were supported only by a minority of Kharkiv’s citizens . The protests were in neighboring regions .
Pro-Russian views were more prevalent in Kharkiv than almost anywhere else in Ukraine besides the conflict-torn Donbas region . Nevertheless, pro- Russian views are more prevalent than most in Ukraine .
After Russia annexed Crimea in March 2014, a group of aspiring separatists unsuccessfully attempted to establish a Kharkiv People's Republic . But loyal special security troops from western Ukraine, with the support of the regional elites, prevented them from doing so .
 Kharkiv lived through a turbulent 2014 and 2015, with shooting incidents and explosions causing casualties on both sides of the political dividing line .
 Most people in Kharkiv now have accepted the country’s turn toward the West, even if they do not universally support it .
 Kharkivites have not necessarily changed their values, but they have adapted to new realities, rather like the Turbin family in Mikhail Bulgakov’s novel The White Guard .
 In a spirit of compromise, the majority of residents remain neutral when it comes to geopolitics . The majority of people remain neutral.
Pro-Russian sentiments are largely buried, but still smoldering beneath the surface . Pro-Russian sentiment is largely buried. Pro- Russian sentiments are mostly buried.
 Kharkiv’s links with Russia are long-standing and substantial . This is no small feat as Kharkv's links to Russia are very substantial .
 A pact between Kharkiv's regional elites and Kyiv’s post-Maidan rulers ensures stability and loyalty . But has also cemented the rule of a local overlord with a checkered past .
 The Security Service of Ukraine has become the most powerful law enforcement agency . At times has resorted to extrajudicial violence against opponents to maintain stability in the region .
 The pact between President Petro Poroshenko and the regional elite may be a necessary evil, but it holds back the prospect of a political transition and reform .
 Decentralization reforms, as originally envisaged, have been distorted in Kharkiv . The reforms have reinforced existing misuses of power and related rent-seeking arrangements .
 Kharkiv’s close proximity to Russia was a beneficial source of cross-border trade and people-to-people ties . Before 2014, the border was just 40 kilometers away from the city, but this has since become a security concern .
 Kharkiv has turned into a fortress, with a defensive wall being built on the border with Russia . The region has been an international transportation and trade hub that benefited from its frontier position .
 Kharkiv has experienced an economic decline largely due to the loss of the Russian market . Like elsewhere in industrial regions of eastern and southern Ukraine, it has experienced a decline .
 A recovery is now under way in Kharkiv, fueled by a somewhat successful reorientation to new markets, increased military industrial demand, and export growth in the economy's services sector .
 People’s incomes have not returned to pre-2014 levels, so the government has only lukewarm public support .
 Kharkiv's future depends on governance reform and serious investment, much like the rest of Ukraine . The region is now less ‘fragile’ than it was reported to be in 2015 .
 The region must find a way to invest in its core competences, including to build on its educational, scientific, and economic potential .
 Kharkiv’s current governing arrangement continues to prioritize stability and enable rent seeking at the expense of meaningful reform . This mission requires more than adaptation and survival, but significant change is unlikely to occur as long as Kharkv's current governing arrangements continue to continue to
 Pro-Yanukovych demonstrations, held near the statue of Vladimir Lenin, were similar to those held in Ukraine .
 Yanukovych escaped from Kyiv and tried to convene an assembly of deputies from the southern and eastern regions of Ukraine in February 2014 . Thousands of demonstrators took to the streets to express support for Ukraine's unit and opposition to separatism .
Pro-government supporters and outsiders from neighboring Russian regions installed a Russian flag on the building that houses the Kharkiv regional state administration . The two camps started on March 2, 2014, when pro- government supporters installed the Russian flag.
 Oplot Fight Club nurtured street fighters from sport clubs recruited by the government to foil the Euromaidan . The number of pro-Russia activists was estimated to be 4,000 at most, according to one former regional official .
 Two pro-Russian supporters died on March 14, 2014, in a fight between radicals on both sides . The fight took place on the night of March 14.
 This skirmish included far-right activists from the Patriot of Ukraine . Andriy Biletsky is now a member of Ukraine’s parliament .
 Many Kharkiv residents wished to remain on the sidelines and stay loyal to their local community . The looming tensions sowed divisions among the people of Kharkov .
 An April 2014 poll indicated that 47 percent believed that the Euromaidan was a civic protest against corruption and dictatorship . 42 percent stated that it was a coup against Yanukovych .
 The masses largely steered clear of active involvement in the protests organized by either side .
 Odessa is a Russian city with a distinctive identity and highly prevalent Russian language usage . It turned out to be more important for Kharkiv's residents to be pro-Kharkiv than to be Pro-Russia .
 A group of pro-Russian activists proclaimed a short-lived Kharkiv People's Republic on April 6, 2014, just a few hours after their counterparts in Donetsk established a people's republic that remains intact .
 The one in Kharkiv was put down in less than two days due to the decisive actions of Ukraine’s security forces . The one is a Kharkovite and a former Kharkvite and former governor .
 A loyal special forces unit from the city of Vinnytsia quickly forced the pro-Russian activists out of the regional administration building .
 His change of heart came after a brief visit to Russia following Yanukovych’s escape .
 Kernes has been in local politics since the early 2000s . He is known for his craftiness, criminal past, and adaptability .
Saving the city also meant preserving his personal fiefdom, as his assets would have been destroyed had the separatists taken over .
 In April 2014, Kernes was seriously wounded in an assassination attempt . The motive for which he switched sides remains unknown .
 As of August 2018, the ensuing criminal investigation has not yet concluded . The ensuing criminal probe is still ongoing .
 Separatist resistance to new Ukrainian state authorities came in the form of sabotage, explosions, and shootings .
 The SBU reportedly foiled thirty-five of thirty-nine cases of terrorism . It identified twenty-three criminal groups with more than eighty participants . TheSBU reportedlyfoiled 30-five cases of terror .
 In February 2015, an improvised explosive device killed four people and injured at least nine people during a march commemorating the Euromaidan victims .
 Another explosion injured 11 people in November 2014 at a pub belonging to a volunteer who was helping the Ukrainian Army . The explosion took place in a pub owned by a volunteer in Ukraine .
 violence continued, mainly a side effect of an influx of firearms and explosives stemming from the war to the southeast . Even so, violence continued.
 Kharkiv faced a series of explosions and shootings in 2017 that resulted in casualties . Up to dozens of combatants from voluntary battalions, including members of the Azov Battalion .
 ammunition explosions occurred regularly all over Ukraine even before the conflict . Admittedly, ammunition explosions occur regularly in Ukraine .
 The authorities have investigated four out of five such incidents as acts of terrorism or sabotage . The authorities are investigating four of five incidents that have occurred since 2014 .
 The results of the final investigation into the Balaklia explosion remain secret . The results remain secret.
 In early May 2018, the same warehouse exploded again but caused no casualties . That conflagration was officially attributed to negligence, but no casualties were reported .
Violent incidents have contributed to a sense of insecurity and imposed significant human and social costs . Kharkiv has settled down, but things have not settled down .
 It is difficult to gauge the total number of IDPs in Kharkiv, although some estimates provide a rough approximation .
 At the peak of hostilities in 2014-2015, various local officials estimated that their numbers might have ranged from 300,000 to 380,000 .
 Schools, the job market, and medical facilities were put under severe strain, according to an NGO that assists such individuals in Kharkiv . The overwhelming majority of IDPs reside, the NGO says .
 Kharkiv coped with the IDP challenge thanks to the support of volunteer groups and international humanitarian organizations . State and local authorities were responsible for the challenge .
 In 2017, only 36 percent of IDPs said they did not feel fully integrated into the Kharkiv region . In 2016, 36 percent said they didn't feel fully integrate into the region .
 As of April 2018, about 123,000 IDPs are registered to reside in the region . Many have unofficially returned to or else visit their previous homes frequently for family-related reasons .
In 2017, more than 12,000 registered combatants in the region received some form of state assistance . In 2017, the region saw more than 11,000 combatants in 2017 .
 This includes both nationally and regionally administered social services and other programs for military personnel and their families . This includes the military's social services for the military and its families . It also includes both national and regional programs for families and military personnel .
 Psychological rehabilitation, professional job training, and other services to help returning combatants adapt to civilian life are particularly insufficient . Psychological rehabilitation is needed for returning combatants to cope with civilian life .
 Overall, a chairman of a parliamentary committee on veteran affairs estimated that more than 1,000 Ukrainian combatants have committed suicide . Overall, the chairman of the parliamentary committee estimated that 1,500 Ukrainian combatants committed suicide.
 The Kharkiv branch of the SBU has played a key role in suppressing pro-Russian dissent . The SBU is a key part of the anti-Russian movement in Russia .
 The state’s approach to conflict management has too often involved violence and a tendency to renounce dialogue with moderate, nonviolent, pro-Russian activists . This approach may have been effective for establishing short-term stability, but it appears shortsighted in terms of producing lasting peace .
 More than 1,000 people have been detained for conflict-related reasons in the region since early 2014, human rights defenders say .
 The majority of detentions occurred in 2014 and 2015, but some arrests have continued to be made in 2018 .
 Human rights groups have documented grave human rights violations . The state has denied these allegations, and no effective investigations have been conducted .
 The threat of armed conflict and terrorism has made it easier for law enforcement personnel and the judiciary to justify heavy-handed tactics and cover for their own failures to deliver justice .
 Several cases in Kharkiv amply illustrate a continuous sense of impunity for human rights violations . The state is failing to deliver justice, says the author .
 Kharkiv police are reluctant to prevent and investigate radical right-wing groups for crimes against the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender community .
 There has been no progress toward convicting the perpetrators of the deadly violence in Kharkiv in 2014 .
No effective investigation has been conducted into allegations about Kharkiv’s secret prison . detainees reportedly have been held incommunicado for up to two years . No effective investigation was conducted into the allegations .
 Nelia Shtepa has been accused of separatism and terrorism . She is the former mayor of Sloviansk and political opposition figure .
Nearly 20 judges have sought to avoid presiding over the case . Nearly 20 judges, facing political pressure to convict her, have used a variety of pretexts .
 A criminal case in Kharkiv against Mayor Kernes, a regime ally, was shut down by the court on the grounds that prosecutors had continuously failed to attend hearings . By contrast, a criminal case against Kernes against his regime ally was closed down by court .
 Even the new patrol police, which initially gave a boost to public confidence in law enforcement, has not brought about change .
 The level of police violence has returned to pre-2014 levels. Deficient legislation, limited training, and inadequate equipment have degraded the capacity and professionalism of the new police force in Kharkiv .
 The local SBU in Kharkiv has become the strongest law enforcement agency in the world . It operates without any mechanisms for meaningful supervision of its work .
 One in four Ukrainians accept the police’s use of unlawful violence or even torture . Against this backdrop of limited accountability, the public has exhibited some level of tolerance for state violence .
 There are still pockets of support for Russia in Kharkiv, but with dissent silenced and most radical activists jailed or driven out, pro-Russian sentiment has gone underground .
 The percentage of those blaming Kyiv decreased from 39 percent in 2016 to 46 percent . The proportion of those answering “hard to say’s’t say” increased from 34 to 34 percent in 2017 .
More broadly, the outlooks of a plurality of people in the Kharkiv region remain closely aligned with those of people living in Ukraine's government-controlled parts of Donetsk and Luhansk in eastern Ukraine .
 One quarter of the population would prefer that Ukraine move toward Europe . Support for integration with Russia decreased from 20 percent in 2016 to a meager 7 percent in 2017 .
 For Kharkiv's ordinary citizens, neutrality is a compromise, allowing them to take their time while adapting to the region’s new reality .
 Neutrality is a more natural option for a place like Kharkiv with a pronounced local identity .
 Kharkivites sometimes boast to foreign visitors about having one of Europe’s largest squares and Gorky Park .
 Kharkiv used to be a Soviet center of high-tech industry and science . It holds what was Europe’s first “complex of skyscrapers,” the “constructivist” building known as Derzhprom .
 Kharkiv's universities continue to produce thousands of information technology experts . Many of them are leaving the city for a better life elsewhere .
 The city was established in 1654, the same year that Russia’s colonization of Ukraine began following the Treaty of Pereyaslav .
 Starting in the seventeenth century, the city became a Ukrainian intellectual, cultural, and industrial center in the Russian Empire .
 It served as the capital of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic between 1919 and 1934 . It was the heart of the Soviet policy of Ukrainization in the 1920s and early 1930s .
 Kharkiv’s Soviet legacy has a dark side, too, which the local ruling elites have preferred to keep obscured . But Kharkov's Soviet legacy still has a darker side, which has been obscured .
 The region's population suffered most intensely from the Holodomor, the Soviet government’s orchestrated famine in 1932-1933 . Ukrainian intellectual elites concentrated in the then capital were brutally extinguished by the repression of the Great Terror .
 Kharkiv will remain stable as long as the pact between local and national elites holds . The region has avoided a local repeat of the pro-Moscow demonstrations of Ukraine’s 2014 Russian Spring .
 The region historically has not been rebellious and has shown loyalty to the central authorities . Compared to Donbas, the region historically hasn't been rebellious .
 Local tycoons such as Oleksandr Yaroslavskyi, a banker and former owner of the Kharkiv football club, show no national ambitions .
 The modus operandi typically employed by Kharkiv elites to influence Kyiv has not been to conquer it, but rather to incorporate themselves into it . The modu operandi is typically used by Kharksiv elites.
 The late Yevhen Kushnariov served as the first mayor of Kharkiv and later as the governor of the region . For example, the late Karkiv was the mayor of the city of Kharksiv .
 Arsen Avakov, a businessman from Kharkiv, has been a pivotal national figure . More recently, he's been a key figure in Ukraine's economy .
After the Orange Revolution in 2005, Avakov became the region’s governor .
Avakov was dismissed by then president Viktor Yushchenko for his ties to Yulia Tymoshenko . Tyloshenko became a key Yushchen opponent in 2010 .
Avakov escaped to Italy after the Yanukovych regime charged him with abuse of power . The following year, Avakov escaped from the regime after it was charged with abuse.
 After the Euromaidan, he became the interior minister and one of the most powerful men in Ukraine . He was one of Ukraine's most powerful people .
 Avakov is the head of the Presidential Administration for Poroshenko . He has served successively as the president since the Euromaidan . In addition to Avakov, two Kharkivites, Boris Lozhkin and Ihor Rainin have served as the
 Kernes won the 2015 mayoral elections with 65. percent of the vote, effectively mobilizing his voters . Kernes is believed to control many assets in the city and is seen as a capable manager .
 Poroshenko aims to keep strategically important eastern city under control . Close cooperation with Kernes looks to be a necessity for Poroshenko .
 Locals in Kharkiv like to compare their city to Odessa rather than to Kyiv .
Both cities generate significant income from their advantageous positions on key trade routes . Both cities generate major income from advantageous positions. Both cities are located in key areas of the world .
Too often, these resources have been captured by corrupt local elites . They trade their loyalty to Kyiv in exchange for impunity to continue ripping off their hometowns for private gain .
 Ukrainian cities behave like self-contained city states where local opportunists meet basic expectations, like supporting Ukraine’s territorial integrity and providing stability .
 In this local context, national reform has a limited impact and in some respects has had negative consequences . In some respects, the reform has had a negative impact, says the author .
 decentralization reforms have produced only 16 new united communities . So far, decentralization reform has produced only sixteen new communities, covering 8 percent of the region’s population .
Carte blanche is being given to local authorities who support the Poroshenko bloc . It is perhaps no surprise that carte blanches are being given by local authorities .
 Decentralization in the Kharkiv region has been diverted from its original aim of granting ordinary people more accountability . The Kharkov region was originally intended to grant ordinary people the right to be accountable .
 The local budgets of the newly formed communities that resulted from fiscal decentralization has not been matched with increased transparency, accountability, or civic participation . Instead, it has allowed elites to capture of even greater share of public resources, as previous conflicts between the old pro-Russian elites have ended,
 In absence of independent local media and strong, grassroots civil society organizations, patronage networks are being reinforced rather than challenged .
Donors who support decentralization reform in Ukraine could try making assistance to newly formed communities conditional on local governments adopting democratic tools and practices . To try to mitigate this negative trend, international donors could try to make assistance to new communities conditional.
 Kharkiv’s economy has done fairly well reinventing itself. These governance challenges notwithstanding, Kharkv's economy is doing well, says the author .
 Historically, Kharkiv was known as an industrial region hosting machine building, hydrocarbon extraction and energy production . The region was known for the manufacturing of chemicals, pharmaceuticals, food, drinks, and tobacco .
 The region’s finance and services sectors developed rapidly. Meanwhile, the region's financial and services sector developed rapidly .
 The regional economy is now composed of a mix of service industries located in the city of Kharkiv . As a result, the regional economy has become more diverse than ever .
 The region also has a vast rural agricultural sector and natural gas fields . The region is also home to a vast agricultural sector .
 Government procurement contracts after 2014 helped trigger a modest revival after 2014 . Government procurement contract contracts after 2013 helped trigger modest revival .
 The Kharkiv region also contains the second-largest number of military-related enterprises . The Malyshev tank factory and the Kharkov Morozov Machine Building Design Bureau known for manufacturing the T-34 tanks used in World War II .
 Kharkiv has successfully managed to reorient its production to new markets . The trend started before the conflict with Russia, but it has been successful .
 Turboatom, a state-owned producer of steam and hydro-powered turbines, started selling its products to buyers in Africa, Asia, and Latin America .
 The Kharkiv Tractor Plant and Malyshev tank factory have managed to replace Russian suppliers and distributors with ones from Ukraine and from some EU countries .
 The economic rebound of Kharkiv has had some positive effects on living standards . Compared to the rest of the country, the economic rebound has had a positive effect .
Kharkiv officially has the lowest unemployment rate in Ukraine at 6 percent . Kharkiv has a 6 percent jobless rate .
 The average salary in Kharkiv has increased albeit at a slower pace compared to the rest of the country . It is still a far cry from salaries in even the poorest EU countries .
41 percent of households still receive subsidies for utility payments . The region’s economic revival has had its limits, however, as 41 percent of families still get subsidies .
 Wages going up due to labor shortage caused by migration and insufficient adaptation by education facilities to market needs . Wages are going up.
 Poland has overtaken Russia as the key destination for Ukrainian labor migration . Since 2014, Poland has taken the lead in Ukraine's labor migration market .
 Advertisements to lure workers to Poland and the Czech Republic are plastered all over metro stations in Kharkiv .
 direct flights from Kharkiv to Warsaw, Katowice, Milan, and Dortmund are being planned . New routes from Kharksiv to London are also being planned.
 Kharkiv’s universities produce thousands of IT graduates per year, but brain drain has become an acute problem .
 Many IT specialists are inclined to leave to secure a better and more peaceful future for their families .
 The case of Kharkiv demonstrates that economic recovery and relative security are not sufficient to keep highly qualified workers in Ukraine . Ukraine has one of the fastest-shrinking populations in the world, with one of its fastest-growing populations .
 Kharkiv is doing relatively well compared to the national average . But it is still a long way from fulfilling its full potential, it says .
 The region's proximity to a war zone and an aggressive neighbor undoubtedly have had damaging effects . The region’s proximity to the war zone may have had a damaging effect .
 Kharkiv elites’ obsession with clinging to power, their lack of strategic planning for the future, and their insistence on preserving rent-seeking arrangements are the chief reasons why the region’s politics remain so shortsighted .
 Kharkiv's transformation from a cross-border trading post to a frontline city on Ukraine’s new eastern flank has left a heavy mark on the region's small vendors and traders as well as its traditional people-to-people contacts .
 The Barabashovo Market has become a symbol of this city for which trade has always been a core part of its historical identity . The market has been a key part of the city's historical identity.
 Barabashovo is the poster child of the post-Soviet transformation . It is giving a new lease on life to many Soviet-era engineers and construction workers .
 The market employs 55,000 people and has become one of the biggest wholesale trade markets in Eastern Europe . With a square area of 75 hectares, the market employs about 55,00 people .
 When the war in Donbas broke out, the market lost most of its clients, including traders from Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The market had few customers on a Saturday in June 2018 when the authors visited . Although it is iconic and is still huge, the market is still big .
 The management of the market has a new plan to adapt by reorienting the market toward retail trade . It faces competition from more comfortable malls, online retail platforms, and secondhand shops .
 Russia remains the top foreign trade partner of the Kharkiv region, but it has lost ground since 2014 . Russia is the top trade partner in the region .
 In 2017, the Commonwealth of Independent States countries accounted for 40 percent of exported goods from the region of Kharkiv . EU countries received 20 percent of the goods, while the Commonwealth countries received 40 percent .
 Asian markets received a larger share of Kharkiv’s exports than the EU did in 2017 . The EU's share of trade with the region has grown due to Ukraine's free trade agreement with Brussels .
 Kharkiv’s IT boom has had a positive impact on exports in the services sector . Kharkv's IT boom is seen as a positive boost to the services industry .
 In 2017, information technology and telecommunications services comprised nearly 60 percent of all service exports from the Kharkiv region . The United States is the top destination for information technology, telecommunications services .
 The EU accounts for about 70 percent of foreign investment in the Kharkiv region . Much of this money is only re-exported domestic capital that likely has been laundered outside Ukraine .
 Cyprus and the British Virgin Islands are among the offshore locales that invest in the region . Panama and Belize are also among the countries that invest.
As a result of the armed conflict in Donbas and the breakdown of relations with Russia, Kharkiv has turned from a trading post into a fortress .
 Ukrainian government's plans to build a wall at the border with Russia stalled due to a lack of funds and embezzlement charges . It was actually followed through on in Kharkiv .
 The state's readiness to act in case of a new conflict is called into question by locals . But there are citizens that are ready and possess the necessary skills .
 It has a very high concentration of students compared to many other parts of the country . But most young people tend to avoid civic or political activism .
 It has a long history as an urban center of avant-garde intellectualism, where a wide range of political views have gone underground .
 The city has multiple identities, being a trading center located at an international crossroads . It is a home to the country’s IT industry, an educational and scientific center of national significance .
 The region has managed to adapt to new realities, avoid radical solutions, and stay afloat amid the crisis . Diversity has been one reason that the region has been able to cope with new realities .
 Due to the political pact struck with Kyiv, local governing structures have remained intact . The political pact was struck with the Kyiv government .
 Poroshenko is managing an uneasy ruling coalition in Kyiv . The decision to work with corrupted local elites in Kharkiv, as well as in Odessa was evidently the lesser evil .
 The collapse of central authority in Kyiv and the threat of Russian aggression made it necessary to concentrate power and muster whatever capacity was available . The collapse was a result of the collapse of Kyiv.
 The incumbent mayors in Kharkiv and Odessa managed to consolidate their power following the Euromaidan . They won local elections by large margins .
 Decentralization reforms are not a cure for bad governance in this national and local political context, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Decentralsization reforms not a cures for badgovernments in this country .
 The mafia-like rule in Kharkiv differs from the oligarchic clans of Dnipro and Donbas in the sense that it does not aim to subdue national politics .
 The region's future development will depend on whether it can ensure the necessary investment into the core competencies of its educational, scientific, and industrial potential for innovation .
 Kyiv’s emphasis on patriotism and decommunization are unlikely to win hearts and minds in eastern Ukraine . But substantial investment is held back by a corrupted governance structure and a business environment ruled by criminal interests .
 The modern Ukrainian writer Oleksandr Irvanets’s most recent book, Kharkiv-1938, features Kharksiv as the capital of a version of Ukraine that managed to preserve its independence amid the civil war in 1918–1919 .
 Kyiv-born aviation engineer Igor Sikorsky never left Ukraine for the U.S.
 Kharkiv is featured as a carnival-like city that attracts foreign journalists, filmmakers, and writers from all over the world . The city is also known for its carnival culture .
 The book's black humor contrasts with the everyday fight for survival amid insecurity . The book’s black humour contrasts with that of the everyday struggle for survival .
 There are rumors that Kernes may be preparing an exit plan . Any transition will likely be a conservative one, according to reports .
 Any ruler in Kyiv will have to make sure that the region stays under control . No matter what results the 2019 elections bring, no matter what result the elections bring .
In the meantime, meaningful discussions about the future of the region are being held by civic activists, young artists and intellectuals, not by the authorities .
 Kharkiv is just one piece of the puzzle of Ukraine, as the weak rule of law and rampant corruption there mirrors the overall state of the country .
 The state authorities should take responsibility for creating the necessary conditions that will allow Ukraine’s regions to prosper and renounce rudimentary tendencies inherited from the Soviet times .
 The possibility of transforming Kharkiv into a Silicon Valley for eastern Ukraine will remain just a utopian aspiration until the emergence of a state that prioritizes its citizens’ interests, economic well-being and social mobility at home .
 Kharkiv is a city in the eastern part of the Russian city of Karkiv . The city has been plagued by a growing exodus of people in recent years . It is one of the largest cities in the country's history .
 Arsen Avakov was dismissed as the Kharkiv region’s governor by then president Viktor Yushenko in February 2006 . Avakov lost his mayoral elections a few years later and lost his job .
 Avakov was dismissed in February 2010, and he lost the mayoral elections a few months later . In fact, he was dismissed.
 Carnegie Europe is grateful to the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research for its financial support of this publication . Carnegie Europe says it is grateful for the Dutch organisation's financial support .
 The first wave of the survey was conducted in late 2015 and early 2016 . The second wave took place in early 2017 .
 The conflict between President Putin and the West is global, says Carnegie Europe . The conflict is global.
 If the topic concerns Eastern Europe, usually there are three questions that serve as the litmus test to understand which side he protects from these two .