 In this issue, he pits America’s two greatest generals against each other . "Find out where your enemy is," he writes .
 Ulysses __ was as daring as it was genius. Strike him as hard as you can, and keep moving on, he says .
 Grant's quest to map the entirety of Japanese compared generals in all history, gold, glory and maybe even the military history . Grant is the U.S. most French throne and the most French .
 Page 82. To learn more about the planes and the pilots of this tragic tactic, turn to page 82 .
 To commemorate the 600th anniversary of the Battle of celebrated civil war leaders. JACK GRIFFITHS to mark the anniversary .
 West Point graduates bore the heavy responsibility of command and often took great risks with men’s lives to achieve what they saw as the greater quest to heal their nation .
 Nazi Germany won the Spanish Civil War War in FOCUS in Focus .
 The regiment was formed in 1947 from the 4th Field Artillery Brigade . It reunited batteries that had previously served together under other formations for several years .
 Nikolai Dmitriev-Orenburgsky depicts the dramatic scene of some 185,000 Russian troops making a river crossing to attack the Ottoman Empire .
 The Vulcan ended its flying career in 2015, as it reached the end of its operational life span . The Vulcan was the last airworthy Vulcan to leave the air force .
 It was . restored to working order more than 1, a decade ago with popular dj iy support .
 Edward reasserted his claim to the French throne . Philip VI began to interfere in Edward's war . against Scotland .
 The effects of fighting a long and bitter war were beginning to show, says historian .
 The country’s peasants were forced to pay high taxes to subsidise it . The 1380 poll tax pushed them to breaking point .
 When a tax collector attempted to gather unpaid taxes in Essex, it led to a full-scale revolt .
 Violence continued and many rebel leaders were tracked down and killed . However, many rebels were killed and many were killed .
 There were periods of peace between the conflicts, and many historians disagree about when it truly began and ended .
 France had struggled to achieve much success against the English, but this changed at Orléans . France lost 2-1 at Agincourt to the English in their opening game .
 England had held the siege on the strategic city for almost half a year, and victory seemed assured . England had been holding the siege for almost a year .
 Joan of Arc arrived in France with a small army, accompanied by small army . But fierce resistance spread among the French ranks and forced the English to retreat in nine days .
 J was Joan of Arc’s first major military victory . Edward the Black Prince preferred to lead raids known as chevauchées .
 These horse charges would plunder cities, burn crops and cause as much destruction as possible . The charges would be used to plunder cities and destroy crops .
 The region was reclaimed and Henry slowly captured more and more of Gascony . The region is reclaimed by Henry and Henry .
 The two forces eventually met, but the English miscalculated the strength and size of the French army . They were destroyed by their artillery .
 The defeat led England to lose almost all its land in France . The defeat marked the end of the long and bloody conflict .
 Joan of Arc is commonly portrayed as a fiery tomboy . She only wore male clothes when necessary, much preferring to don a dress .
 Edward Ill was just 14 when he inherited the English crown in 1327 . He reigned until his death in 1377 . She was also known to loathe the female camp followers .
 Considering he was a Medieval king in a time of conflict, this is an impressive accolade . He was a medieval king of the time .
 Henry V was a rather ruthless warrior and leader . Henry V is seen today as a paragon of English chivalry .
 Joan of Arc came from humble origins . She would go on to become a heroine and martyr of France .
 She was born in the tiny village of Domremy, where she lived the quiet life of a farmer’s daughter .
 At the age of 12, she began to experience religious visions of saints and angels that spoke to her . This all changed when she was 12, when she began experiencing religious visions .
 Most significantly, she claimed to speak to the archangel Michael, one of the patron saints of the French Royal Army . She also claimed to have spoken to Michael, a patron saint of the army .
 The situation in France at the time was at breaking point . The uncrowned dauphin Charles was losing territory and the English were preparing for a fresh campaign .
 Robert de Baudricourt was the garrison commander of the garrison . After struggling to persuade the commander of her mission, she finally convinced Robert De Baudicourt to take her to Charles .
 Joan impressed the dauphin, who was desperate for any help he could get, heavenly or otherwise . Joan impressed Joan. Joan impressed. Joan was desperate to get, and Joan impressed her .
 Charles granted Joan everything she asked for — armour, a horse and an army . Despite some reservations from his court, Charles granted her everything she wanted .
 Joan was in the besieged city of Orléans when she arrived in the city .
 Joan accompanied troops, holding her banner, and was even wounded by an arrow to the neck . She never personally took part in the battle .
 When the siege was over, and the English expelled, she was declared a heroine . When the English were expelled, the English had been declared heroine .
 She accompanied Charles on his assaults, helping him to take any towns that resisted . Her reputation spread far and wide, and she accompanied him on assaults .
 The English began to fear Joan’s influence, but Charles himself himself .
 When she was captured by the Burgundians after defending Compiégne, the French king made no efforts to rescue her . She was captured after defending her .
 Joan was given to the English, put on trial and found guilty of heresy and crossdressing . Joan was convicted of heresy. Joan was sentenced to life in prison .
Charles eventually had her name cleared, but only once a cult had begun to arise around the girl who fought and died for France and God . Charles eventually had the name cleared and her name was cleared .
 Another of du Guesclin's nicknames was ‘The Black Dog of Brocéliande’ and du Guellin entered the service of the French king to be . The French king was also known as the 'Black Dog of the Black Dog
 Charles II of Navarre had his sights set on the Duchy of Burgundy . He led Charles’s forces to victory at the battle of Cocherel .
 The French were bitterly known as ‘The Eagle of Brittany’ at the Battle of Auray . Bertrand du defeated and du Guesclin captured .
 Guesclin served as a French military commander during the early part of the Hundred Years’ War . Charles was willing to pay for his military service .
 du Guesclin was regarded as ugly, highly the Eagle was regarded . From safe return — 100,000 francs — indicates just how a tough upbringing, du Guellin was considered .
 lowborn as du Guesclin. He was later made and small, so he was forced to develop tenacity and Constable of France . His fighting spirit helped him well in later life .
 Du Guesclin first made his name while fighting in the Breton War of Succession when the French won the French after victory . He immediately set about his name when fighting for the English back across the sea .
 He helped to conquer most of France from the invaders . He also helped to defend the city of Rennes against a siege by English .
 Charles V is one of the most popular figures in the history of bravery and military prowess . Charles V, the country's most popular military figure, is known for his bravery and bravery .
 Owain Lawgoch was a Welsh soldier who claimed descent through an ancient line of Welsh princes .
 Lawgoch grew up in England and received military training in France . He is now regarded as a Welsh hero, but is now considered a hero .
 In 1369, he was stripped of his lands in England and proclaimed himself Prince of Gwynedd . He was also stripped of the land in England in 1369 .
Ambitious and flamboyant, he assembled a team of mercenaries and the French began to take notice of him . He assembled a group of mercenaries, and they began to notice him .
 Lawgoch won battles in France and Spain and also offered the losing country a chance to strike the English on their own soil .
 Charles V supported Lawgoch’s claims and financed a fleet of ships the Welsh rebel planned to use to invade Wales .
 Owain Lawgoch translates to ‘Owain of the Red Hand’ Charles V called them back and ordered them to attack La Rochelle instead . The ships didn’t get very far before the ships were ordered to attack .
 The Crown took them seriously enough to dispatch an assassin to end the Welsh nuisance once and for all . Some historians believe that these were simply intended to distract the English .
 Jon Lamb successfully infiltrated Lawgoch’s band of men and stabbed the would-be king to death . Lamb ended the direct line of Welsh princes .
 BURGUNDY Philip inherited the dukedom of Burgundy at a time when the Burgundian dukes lived in splendour . The duke's son inherited the title of the Burgundy dukes .
 Philip himself had a good reputation, known as 'the bold' thanks to his brave actions at the battle of Poitiers when he was 14 .
 He was wounded, captured, and spent most of his late youth in captivity in England . He played chess with the Black Prince in captivity, where he was captured .
 Philip was confirmed as duke of Burgundy when Charles V, Philip’s brother, ascended the throne . Philip became a favourite of the French people after becoming a favourite .
 He was an excellent negotiator and could easily win the favour of many difficult men . He was a good negotiator. He was also a good friend to many people .
 Charles V died in 1380, Philip assisted the young Charles VI in running the country . Charles VI died in 2013, Philip helped run the country.
 As his nephew grew older, it became obvious that something wasn't right .
 He suffered fits of murderous rage and insanity so intense that he even killed his own knights . He was so violent that he killed himself .
 Philip used his charm and negotiation skills to make an agreement with Richard II of England . He established a truce that lasted for 28 years .
 Brittany would last until 1, but in this tight skir French emerge victorious . Brittany would have to wait until 1.
 His Netherlands series of victories helped make Aquitaine an English powerhouse . His Dutch series of wins helped make the Netherlands anEnglish powerhouse .
 The invasion culminates in the Battle of Agincourt . The invasion is a series of French strongholds .
 The English longoowman, for instance, would have been a commoner, but his importance to the army and effectiveness in battle far outweighed his lowly status back home .
 He would not have the wealth to buy the best armour, or anything other than crude melee weapons, so his skill with the bow was often his sole asset .
 Cannons saw their first real use on European battlefields in the Hundred Years’ War . Cannons were the first European army to use a personal squire in the battle .
 Both men would be looking to win gold and glory by defeating a rich enemy, who they could then seize and later ransom for profit . Regardless, in the chaos of a fight, both these men would want to win the gold .
 The Medieval battlefield, therefore, was a great social leveller in the period . The medieval battlefield, however, was an important social battleground .
 She takes us through each of the troop types that would have made up both English and French forces during the Hundred Years’ War and beyond .
 By the late 14th century, gunpowder artillery was playing an increasing role in warfare . The use of gunpowder was increasing in warfare by the 14th Century .
 Gunners were often craftsmen as well as soldiers, ee seeing to the construction and repair of their weapons too .
 In 1441, only 2 per cent of the men-atarms were knights . Richard, Duke of York, led the army led to France by Richard in 1441 .
 The Crown has become more selective in its creation of knights . Men of potential knightly standing were less keen to follow military careers .
In France, the proportion of knights in royal armies fell from 15 per cent in 1340 to 9 per cent . In France, too, the number of knights had military careers in 1392 . Virtually all peers hadMilitary careers.
 The i needs of war also played a role in noble creations and promotions . The i need of war played a part in the creation of noble creations.
 In the early 15th century, the number and proportion of archers increased, possibly because they were cheap . But also because they are valuable in both offensive and defensive contexts .
 The mounted knight was a near-unstoppable force on the Medieval battlefield . His horses became HEAVY CAVALRY targets on the field instead .
 APPROX 48KM /H developed for their mounts . The armour was developed for the French knight .
 The barding was extensive, TTT Eee with many different parts including champron, criniere, croupiere, flanchard and peytral . The barded was extensive.
 They were usually about three metres long and made of wood with a steel tip . The wood was usually about 3m long and about threem long .
 The lance wouldn't be thrown, but rather the knights would use it to exploit gaps in an enemy's armour .
 It could also be used to pry open a visor, then jabbed against lines of infantry . It could be also a gallop forward, then gallop-forward .
 The triangular blade was specially designed to allow for maximum penetration and through lines of infantry with ease . The 38 centimetres in length was designed to be able to stab an opponent .
For most French noblemen, fighting on foot was simply unthinkable, so acquiring the fastest, strongest mount was essential . For most French nobility, fighting for the best was just unthinkable .
 The English exploited this belief by stealing horses and burning their stables, severely impacting French cavalry training . The English exploit this belief.
 A gorget was a circular piece of steel designed to be worn were very cumbersome and impacted badly on the knight’s mobility . Later versions were known as ‘great bascinets’
 The gorget also supported the weight of the heavy armour . It provided important protection for the knight’s neck .
 knights would have worn a gorget with three or four overlapping plates for flexibility . There were cheaper single-plate gorgets.
 The knight's arms would often have the knight’s arms emblazoned upon them . They were occasionally plain, but would sometimes have the knights' arms on them .
 The armour covered the wearer from head to toe, but they would still remain surprisingly agile . Despite the fact that the armour covers the wearer, they still remain agile .
 The armour provided near invulnerability to sword slashes, and also gave protection against spears and pikes . The armour was designed to protect against spears, pikes and spears .
 Knights would have worn their coat of arms on their surcoat or tabard, and their shield if they had one . Knights would also have had their shield on their coat or tabards, and would have had one on .
 The symbols would provide a means of recognition for knights. This wasn't just for show, as with a helmet covering their face, knights were unrecognisable on the battlefield .
 It is believed that use of these symbols in battle is what encouraged the spread of heraldry across Medieval Europe .
 sword for knights on horseback would still carry a sword for close-quarters combat . But advances in armour made swords for knights somewhat obsolete .
 Swords could vary hugely in length and breadth, from broad single-handed swords to long and thin two-handed weapons up to 1.06 metres .
 The English aura of invincibility was finally lost as a reckless advance saw their forces obliterated by a French and Scottish coalition . Agincourt and Henry V was still the master of northern France .
 The future Charles VII desperately appealed to the Scots for help . Soldiers arrived shortly after, ready for battle against the English . The dauphin, the future CharlesVII, desperately appealed for help.
 Henry was back in England by March 1421, so the heir to the throne, Thomas of Clarence, led the army in his stead .
 Clarence swept inland, plundering his way through the countryside. Utilising chevauchée raiding tactics, Clarence swept ashore .
 The French have been fighting back since the end of the month . French President Nicolas Sarkozy's government has been in power for a month .
 The English army marches inland from the coast, conquering Maine and settling in the castle of Beaufort .
French scouts track the English advance but are captured and interrogated . French scouts track English advance and are captured by French troops .
 The Franco-Scot forces march west from Tours and cut off the English escape route north that leads to the safety of Normandy .
 English forward foraging parties have confirmed sightings of French, Clarence and Clarence . Eager to engage the French and Clarence.
 Earl of Salisbury Thomas Montgau is told to assemble archers and then follow his superior into battle .
 The French and Scottish forces congregate on the other side of the river Couesnon .
 The only bridge is heavily garrisoned, so the English knights dismount and wade across the river in full armour . It is the only bridge in the world.
 The English men-at-arms assault the church, the church .
 The river crossing leaves the English troops scattered and disorganised . Very few troops are now under effective command .
 A lull in the fighting gives Clarence the opportunity to wait for reinforcements .
 Hidden over the ridge lies the main force of Franco-Scots, who vastly outnumber the English . The French are the most powerful force in the world, with the majority of the French .
 The Scottish and French forces are now back in line, but once again ignoring the advice of his commanders, Clarence presses on . The final charge is the Scottish andFrench forces .
 A charge up the hill to the waiting Franco-Scots is ordered despite Salisbury and the archers still not arriving . The archers are not arriving at Salisbury .
 The English are routed by the larger French and Scottish army as Clarence and all of his commanders are killed .
 Without the support of the longbowmen, the English lose more than a thousand men . The French and Scottish casualties only number in the hundreds .
 The French and Scottish leave the battlefield, along with the mountain of English bodies behind to rot .
 Salisbury arrives next day with reinforcements but he is too late to even glimpse the opposing army . To his horror, he finds only the dead .
 MOMENTUM with the FRENCH Clarence’s body is recovered and shipped back to England . Henry V prepares to return to France with a new army .
After the battle, the French begin planning a conquest of Normandy . After the victory, they plan to conquer Normandy .
 The Battle of Baugé was the zenith of Scottish support in France in the Hundred Years’ War . The battle was the battle of the Hundred years' War .
 The Scots had been at war on and off with the English for decades and had actively assisted the French since 1382 . They were asked to join with Charles VI in return for equipment.
 The French had supported Scotland during Edward I’s invasion of the country . Both had a history of common interest .
 The agreement was known as the 'Auld Alliance' and was a constant thorn in the side of the English . French and Scots tried to force a war on two fronts .
 The Truce of Leulinghem was signed with the English in 1389, but it wasn't long until the Scots were back in the fold .
 The Scots were involved in the losses at the battles of Cravant and Herrings . Their role in the war was effectively at an end after a major defeat at the battle of Verneuil .
 The Franco-Scots’ charge was decimated by the English longbowmen, who killed half of the opposing forces .
 The French kingdom was the most pre-eminent realm in Europe at the time . France was the world's most important country .
 It controlled the largest territory, it was the wealthiest and the home of chivalry . It was also the home to chivalry.
 Italy was in a much better position than the weak Holy Roman Empire, a divided Italy or the backwater that was Spain . If you compare it to the other political entities in Europe, it was in better position.
 In England, the king was powerful, but in terms of size and resources, the country was far weaker . The king was strong, but his country was weaker, according to reports .
 There was a very different political culture to the ones we are familiar with today. What you have to remember is that there was a different politicalculture to the current political culture .
Political culture was dominated by a patchwork of personal relationships between king and nobility . Nationalism was not a powerful idea at this time .
 The kings of France had been doing over the centuries before the Hundred Years’ War . What the kings did was to reinforce and tighten these relationships with the nobles that lived in the areas around Paris .
 The kings of England tried to do the same to maintain their claims to territories in France . So they began to compete in France, so they began competing .
 Dr Honig’s research interests include the wri strategic relationship between politics and war . The king of France had a further geographical advantage over the king of England .
Claims to the duchy were more disputed than any other part of France . It was far more independent than the other areas of France and was more independent .
 The kings of England tried to exploit this conflict between the duke of Brittany and of France . But they didn't have any claims of their own to the duchy .
 The Hundred Years’ War was a major conflict between two major kingdoms of Europe . The Hundred years’ war was between Europe and Europe .
 Genoa created an unremitting demand for manpower and other military resources such as ships from Genoa .
 To feed this demand, mercenary forces grew in popularity . Specialist forces were drawn from further afield .
 Many principalities were also drawn into alliances with the antagonists, like Aragon with England and Castile with France . Many principalsities were drawn in alliances with each other .
When the war in France went through a quiet spell, soldiers moved from the French theatre to other wars, like in Spain . When the war was over, soldiers from France moved to Spain and France.
 The coat of arms for the French House of Valois was interwoven with English monarchs when kings are at war . The dynasty's history was Interwoven when kings were at war.
 It is a territory that has a long history of almost mythical proportions . It has a history of nearly mythical proportions. It is also a territory with a long-standing history of its history .
 The French royal dynasty in the 14th century came into its own as a powerful entity because of the divisions in the royal dynasty . But it really came to its own because of its divisions.
 The French king’s weakness gave one of his uncles an opportunity to turn his Duchy of Burgundy into a powerhouse .
 The dukes of Burgundy shifted alliances, so they were aligned with France at some points and England at others .
 During the reign of Henry V, Burgundy sided with the English, and this was critical to England maintaining and expanding its presence in France .
 If you look at Henry VIII, for example, he fought to reclaim the lost possessions in France . Henry VIII had little success in France, but had littlesuccess in France.
 Invading France slowly lost its lure, and expeditions became more difficult once Calais was lost in 1558 . The claims persisted until the Treaty of Amiens with Napoleon in 1802 .
 The French kings relied traditionally on undependable military service given out by the nobles . They now created an army that was much more under their control .
 The structure of a standing army survives and strengthens the monarchy . Despite the storm of the religious and civil wars of the 16th century, this structure survives .
 troops from the seceding state of South cal — Carolina opened fire on government-held Fort Sumter, sparking z the American Civil War .
 Several other Southern states joined South Carolina in secession, seeking to preserve the institution of slavery .
 Abraham Lincoln, 16th president of the United States, was resolved to bring the wayward states back . Abraham Lincoln was resolved by force .
 Ulysses S Grant and Robert E Lee would have been the largest and deadliest ever to be waged on U.S. soil . Grant and Lee were the two extraordinary soldiers, who in their origins and personalities could not have been more different from each other .
 Robert E Lee was the son of Henry ‘Light Horse Harry’, a cavalry commander from the colony of Virginia . He had achieved renown in the American War of Independence .
 Military service was part of the heritage of the Lee family . The young man was admitted to the United States Military Academy at West Point as part of a class of 1829 .
 Lee played a role in one of the more notable episodes of the immediate pre-civil war era . Lee seemed destined for great things, and played an important role in the early civil war .
 In October 1859, John Brown, a fanatical abolitionist, and 21 of his followers had seized the Federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry .
 The plot failed when a group of United States Marines appeared on the scene and quashed the raiders, killing ten and capturing most of the rest, including Brown .
 West Point graduate Ulysses S Grant possessed an unexceptional everyman quality . By contrast, Lee’s fellow West Point grad U.S. graduate U.lysses Grant had an unexceptionional every man quality .
 Born in April 1822 to a tanner in Ohio, his lowly origins and reportedly shabby dress belied a careful, analytical mind .
 Grant, who had gone so far as to resign from the army in 1854, would one day become the paramount commander of the United States Army . The unassuming Grant would then fail in his civilian business ventures .
 America Grant was eager to rejoin the regular army after the war erupted . Grant was also eager to return to the regular Army .
 He turned down command of the volunteers when it was offered to him . The low quality of the politicians who tended to grab posts in the volunteer regiments put him off .
 On 24 May 1861, he penned a letter to the army requesting reinstatement . He wrote a letter asking for reinstatement of the army .
 Grant would be given a commission in the regular army as a brigadier general . He would be made commander of the district of south-east Missouri .
 LEE captured rebel-held Fort Donelson on the Mississippi in Tennessee . I thought so at the time... only I had not moral courage enough to resign LEE vs GRANT 30 war for the Union .
 Lee was displeased with the Southern move toward secession, which he thought disastrous . For his part, Lee was not happy with the move .
 He was forced to choose between his cherished Virginia home state and his country . He chose between Virginia and Virginia .
 Lee had even been marked out for the command of a Federal army being formed to return the secessionist states back under US control . But he still chose Virginia .
 By then he had served in the army, including his time at West Point, for some 35 years . He had served at the U.S. Army for 35 years.
 The South would have to fight an uphill battle, but it was not without advantages . General Lee and the Army of Northern Virginia The South had to fight a uphill battle .
 The First Battle of Bull Run in July 1861 was an entirely one-sided Southern victory .
 The USA’s war with Mexico, from 1846-48, had its origins in the question of the annexation of Texas .
 Texas wanted to be admitted into the U.S. President James K Polk was a firm believer in the USA's ‘manifest destiny’ to increase its territory .
 He strongly favoured the annexation of Texas, and this was accomplished in 1845 by a resolution of Congress . He strongly supported the annexation.
 Mexico had never reconciled itself to the loss of what it considered rightfully to be one of its own provinces . But Mexico had other ideas, and had never truly reconciled themselves to what it was considered a province .
 In April 1846, Mexico declared war on the USA after an American army commanded by General Zachary Taylor crossed the Texas border .
 The United States Congress declared war on Mexico in May . Many anti-slavery elements in the North saw it as a naked attempt to win more slave territory .
 In February 1847, a strong Mexican army under Santa Anna was defeated by Taylor at the Battle of Buena Vista .
 Also in 1847, United States forces under General Winfield Scott captured the port of Veracruz, and marched inland to Mexico City . They reached Mexico City in August 1847 .
 Ulysses S Grant, in the meantime, had been a supply officer with Taylor at the war’s start . Grant had accompanied Scott in his assault on Mexico City .
 By September 1847, Mexico City had fallen to Scott, and the war was ended by the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo in February 1848 . The United States took half of Mexico’s territory .
 "This enabled him to obtain a commission in not on the battlefield. My, “iy, Wy bbe i 1b MA EEE ‘e ip we and this enabled him. to get a commission.’eip we. “i 1bMA E
After exemplary service in Mexico, which garnered —_ dust-covered Brevet Captain N & WeSN Sy hy ty WY yyy j Wifi YW Y I ERIS . Grant went to General Winfield .
 Wy UY was brought back by the academy in so poor that he was scolded by yh Ve Jai . His appearance was “e Why nA . Wy Uy, YY ies Hy high.
 Lee would one of Scott’s staff officers, none of his wife, Mary Anna Randolph Custis Lee, would bring his wife. Lee would be a Scott's staff officer, none My, \ fe iy Vy wee bring his wives, other than Lee .
 Graduates of West ih Mj"" xy. f MY, | UNUM he gps. eyes expect,’ he said .
 Grant was side by side during the Mexicanit Mi Gee MAME . His best subject, horsemanship, was not academic another in the civil war .
 Lee had been serving as Confederate President Jefferson Davis’s military adviser since early 1862 . Lee himself was serving as President Davis's military adviser .
 Major General George B McClellan was an able trainer of soldiers but was also extremely cautious and lacked vigour in the field . His future opponent commanding the Army of the Potomac, Major GeneralGeorge B McC Lellan, was an extremely cautious trainer .
 Davis placed Lee in command of the Army of Northern Virginia on 1 June 1862 . His previous commander, General Joseph Johnston, had been wounded in battle .
 The Seven Days Battles in June-July 1862 drove the larger Army of the Potomac away from the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia . Lee attacked McClellan again and again, and in what became known as the Seven days Battles, he attacked him again and
 At the Second Battle of Bull Run on 30 August, he hurled the Union Army of Virginia under General John Pope back towards Washington .
 On 17 September, he fought McClellan to a standstill at Antietam, Maryland . Both sides took horrendous casualties in the civil war’s bloodiest day .
 President Lincoln became so disgusted with McClellan’s failure to pursue Lee after the battle that he removed him from command in November 1862 . He replaced him with Major General Ambrose Burnside .
 Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which declared that all slaves in rebel territory were now free . Antietam had been a victory, at least of a sort .
 The generalship of Lee and Grant featured detailed planning as well as an ability to react to unforeseen opportunities on the battlefield .
 Both were forceful commanders who were unafraid to take heavy casualties to win battles . Both were strong commanders who took heavy casualties in battles .
 Grant was often called a ‘butcher’ because of the costly battles that he fought . Unlike many other Union generals, he was never afraid to give battle .
 The Chancellorsville campaign had begun with much confidence, at least on the part of Union General Joseph Hooker . Most Federal commanders would fight and then retire some distance to let their soldiers recover .
 In late 1863 Hooker’s Army of the Potomac moved south across the Rappahannock River .
 General Jeb Stuart's cavalry brings word to Lee that Hooker’s right-wing entrenchments are utterly exposed .
 Jackson wants to swing around left and crush them by a flank attack that will shatter the vulnerable Yankee line . Jackson wants the attack on left and right to crush them .
 Jackson’s 30,000 men meet with little Opposition as they make their way around the Union flank . The Federal ranks burst upon the Federal ranks like a thunderbolt .
 Jackson finds Hooker’s right flank open to attack . At 5pm, he strikes them at an angle perpendicular to the end of the Union trenches .
 Grant was always able to remain calm, and this reassured his officers . In battle, Grant was able to keep his officers calm .
 Lee was even more aggressive than Grant, perhaps because he could not afford to rely upon superior numbers or attrition to win a battle . If anything, Lee was also more aggressive.
 The president had reframed the conflict into one in which the Union now had moral superiority over the slaveholding states .
 He humiliated Burnside at Fredericksburg on 13 December, and then devastated Hooker’s gigantic army at Chancellorsville in May 1863 . Hooker's army was devastated by his humiliation at Burnside in December .
 Army of Northern Virginia soldiers were also suffering heavy casualties . However, his valiant soldiers of the Army were also suffered heavy casualties.
 This was a consequence of Lee’s offensive spirit, always seeking to attack, but it cost his army dearly . This was the result of Lee's offensive spirit. This was also the consequence of his offensive spirit .
 The Army of Northern Virginia took more than 10,000 casualties at Antietam, 5,300 casualties at Fredericksburg, and more than 13,000 at Chancellorsville . The Army could ill afford the losses it would ill afford .
 Lee had the advantage of generally more capable subordinates, especially Stonewall Jackson . Lee’s tactical acumen and battlefield sangfroid have been rightly praised, but his strategic vision has occasioned a more nuanced view .
 Lee was unwilling to listen to them and accept their advice . This would have meant nothing, however, had Lee been unwilling to accept them and listen .
 Jackson came up with a dangerous yet daring plan to strike a hammer blow against Federal troops at Chancellorsville . It was Jackson's first attempt to attack Federal troops .
 Lee’s offensive instinct could hurt his own army too, since even in victory his battles were always bloody affairs for his troops . But Lee's offensive instincts could hurt himself too, as well .
 In quick succession, Union regiments / break and flee as the rebels charge from west to east . Inquick succession, the rebels flee as they charge.
 First, one Federal division and then the one next to it vanish as the men run for their lives . First, the oneNext to it vanished as the onenext to it disappears .
 Jackson has vaporised the Union right and inflicted some 2,400 casualties . By 7pm, darkness is falling, and in just two hours, the Union is vaporised .
 Within a few days, Hooker will retreat back north across the Rappahannock . Hooker is in the middle of a week .
 LEE vs GRANT Lee tended to fight battles in a very aggressive manner, meaning he often incurred severe casualties even when winning . Lee often suffered severe casualties when winning, such as severe casualties .
 The more populous North could with its own. These were losses that could not be made good with the same speed as the more populousNorth .
 Lee’s decision to invade Pennsylvania, a Northern state, led to the Battle of Gettysburg . The Army of Northern Virginia took on a much larger and improved Army of the Potomac .
 His boldness saw him fight a three-day battle from 1-3 July 1863 . His troops were ground down by Federal soldiers .
 The action culminated on 3 July with Pickett's Charge, which failed and resulted in the destruction of Lee’s last fresh division, which took some 7,000 casualties . The action culminates in the death of Lee.
 Lee had lost one third of his army of 75,000, some 28,000 men, in just three days . Lee's army had lost a third of its army of 25,000 in three days. Lee had also lost a second of his 75,00 men .
 The Union 1st Battalion, 13th Infantry, can be seen planting its colours on Confederate positions . In early 1863, Grant was commander of the Army high bluff overlooking the river .
 Grant had been stymied for months in his to terrain more suited to offensive operations . Vicksburg, Mississippi, had been trying to take the city of Tennessee .
 It was city, but these could only be found to the south and east, strongly fortified and commanded the river from atop a on the other side of the Mississippi .
 Vicksburg surrenders itself to and strike from the rear from the back of the car .
 With the fall of Vicksburg, the Union now controls the length of the Mississippi . The rebellion in western Confederate states has been dealt a death blow .
 Grant’s widely separated corps 5 under Generals William T. Sherman, John McClernand and James McPherson each cross over the river and converge upon Vicksburg . Grant's widely separated Corps 5 under generals Sherman, McClernand, and McPhersson.
 Grant’s 40,000 men try to carry the city by a speedy assault on 22 May . This is repulsed with heavy Union losses, so Grant settles in for a siege .
 His subordinate officers had urged him not to attack, but Lee would hear none of their caution . He would not hear any of his officers' caution .
 Bluecoat losses in the battle were uncharacteristically, lighter than Lee’s, just 25,000 .
 The needless invasion of Pennsylvania had accomplished nothing except the death of thousands of Lee's and Meade’s soldiers . victory for the South was further away than ever .
 Lee may have missed the assistance of Stonewall Jackson, but had Jackson survived long enough to have taken part at Gettysburg . Jackson and Lee could not overcome the insuperable advantages held by the North in men and resources .
 William Tecumseh Sherman was a fellow classmate at West Point military academy . For Grant, he was a classmate at the academy .
 Sherman had resigned from army service to pursue a Civilian career in banking . Like Grant, Sherman had had mixed results, with mixed results .
 The ill-tempered Sherman's early civil war career was less than splendid . Sherman's career was more than splendid, but he was not a success .
 He was aghast at problems he encountered with inept, ill-trained volunteers and overly inquisitive reporters . He was also aghasts at the problems he faced with inept and ill- trained volunteers .
 The press made him appear to be mentally deranged, and he was relieved of command . The press also made him seem to be mental deranged .
 He later found himself back in the war leading a division under the overall command of Grant at Shiloh in April 1862 .
 Grant and Sherman would thereafter form a partnership of war and take Vicksburg on the Mississippi the next year . Grant, Sherman would then form a partnerships of war. Grant andSherman would thereafter take on Vicksberg .
 Forged in the trying times in the beginning of the war that both men experienced, they were the closest of comrades .
 Lee was blessed with the aid of Thomas ‘Stonewall’ Jackson, a general whose military Grant in command in command In Grant, Lincoln had finally found a general he could rely upon to take the fight to the enemy . Lee was lucky to have
 In March 1864, Grant was promoted to the resuscitated rank of lieutenant general . He was made commander of all Union armies, comprising some 550,000 men .
 It was now his mission to take all of the manpower and material advantages that the North had and use them to destroy the Confederacy . The North's mission was now to take the manpower, material advantages and to destroy them .
 A President Grant election campaign hat from 1872 Ea TY le acumen was unsurpassed on either side of the war . He was unafraid to give battle, knowing that the key to victory was defeating Confederate armies .
 His parents died while he was still young, and he was raised by an uncle . He was also raised by his uncle .
 The military life appealed to him, and he was admitted to West Point's class of 1846 . He was admitted in 1846 to the military life .
 He saw service during the Mexican-American War as an artillery officer . His performance was so exemplary that he was rapidly promoted from brevet lieutenant to brevet major .
 In 1851, he resigned from the army and took a teaching position at the Virginia Military Institute . He taught philosophy, optics and artillery tactics .
 Jackson was personally opposed to secession, but was not pro-slavery in any meaningful sense . Jackson owned six slaves, though he owned 6 slaves .
 He followed his home state of Virginia out of the Union and into war, when it came to war . Nevertheless, he followed his state into war when it was invaded .
 Jackson and the First Virginia Brigade he commanded at First Bull Run in July 1861 both earned the moniker ‘Stonewall’ for their stalwart defence against a furious Federal assault . Jackson was a member of the First Virginian Brigade, which he commanded in
 Union General William Sherman succeeded Grant as the Union commander in the western theatre of the war in 1864 .
 The Federal armies under Grant’s command took stunningly heavy casualties in the Wilderness, at Spotsylvania Court House, North Anna and Cold Harbor .
 The defeat of the Confederacy required the death of its armies, which were still skilled and potent . The defeat required death of the armies.
 Grant’s willingness to fight helped him past what might have sunk his hopes of retaining his command early in the war . Grant's willingness to fighting helped him pass what may have been his hopes.
 He had a drinking problem of uncertain severity, with much depending upon the observer . He was also a drinker who had a problem of unknown severity .
 Sherman was well aware of Grant’s penchant for alcohol, as were many others, but believed that it did not hinder him . Grant was known for his tendency to drink .
 President Lincoln said to have wished to send a barrel of the same whiskey to his other generals to get them to fight as hard .
 In June 1864, Petersburg, Virginia, a vital rail junction, was besieged by Grant . The beginning of the end of the rebellion was the beginning of a rebellion .
 Lee would have to either fight Grant in open country or allow Richmond to fall to Union forces . If the city was to be captured, Lee would be forced to fight Grant .
 The Army of the Potomac The North had tremendous latent advantages over the South . The Army had a tremendous latent advantage over the south .
 It had far more people, and thus could both put more soldiers into the field and replace losses more easily . It could also put more people in the field, and so could both.
 The Union also possessed three times as much railway track as the South . The Union had three times more railway track than the South.
 The South's industrial development far surpassed that of the South, which had a largely agrarian economy .
 The North could make most of its own muskets and cannons, for example, and could buy arms from Europe to make up any shortfall . The North has its own cannon and musket, but could also buy arms.
 The U.S. Navy’s naval blockade of Southern ports would choke off almost all Confederate imports .
 Diplomatically, the support and recognition that the Southern states expected from Europe, especially Britain, never materialised .
 This was mainly because of the Southern over-estimation of the importance of cotton . This was due to the Southern Over-estimated of the value of cotton. This was mostly because of a SouthernOver-estimating of cotton's importance .
 Many Southerners thought that when the supply of cotton from the South was disrupted by war, the shortage would cause the British to bring about a negotiated settlement that resulted in the recognition of the Confederacy’s independence .
British importers found other sources for cotton, and the South was left without allies or significant diplomatic support . Instead, British importers find other sources.
 The tactically inconclusive Battle of Spotsylvania Court House saw 32,000 Union and Confederate casualties . LEE vs GRANT tried and failed to take Petersburg.
 The small Confederate Army of Northern Virginia was whittled away by Grant . The bloody siege would last for months, but Grant had effectively pinned Lee down .
 Sherman was hard at work driving the rebel army of General Joseph Johnston out of Tennessee and into Georgia, where he took Atlanta .
 The 62,000-strong Army of the Tennessee then began its great march through Georgia and the Carolinas in the middle of November 1864 .
 Sherman had to destroy the South’s ability, and even willingness, to make war . Rebel armies could always retreat away from him, and destroying them was next to impossible .
 Atlanta man started out into untouched Georgia countryside . He forgot about his supply lines and started out in untouched countryside .
 Along a broad swathe of territory GO miles wide, bluecoats burned farms and crops, ripped up railway tracks and caused all sorts of havoc among an outraged but impotent Southern public .
 From Savannah, Sherman's men continued on through the Carolinas, burning as they marched .
 Lee’s position in the city was untenable, and on 1 April 1865, he withdrew his troops . He warned the Confederate government in Richmond that he could no longer protect the capital .
 Grant mounted an attack on the weakened rebel defence works, and his 60,000 men rolled over the mere 20,000 left behind by Lee .
 Petersburg fell that same day, and Richmond was in Grant’s hands by the next day . Petersburg fell on the same day .
 The matter of most importance to Grant now was defeating Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia, which was in the open and vulnerable .
 Lee understood better than anyone else just how badly his ill-fed and poorly clad men had suffered, and that his army was surrounded by Union troops . Lee understood his army had suffered and that he was surrounded.
 Grant and Lee met at McLean house in Appomattox Court House to formalise the surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia .
 Major Wilmer McLean's farm in Manassas had been fought over at the war's beginning in April 1861 during the First Battle of Bull Run .
 The major had taken his family to Appomattox, where he thought they could avoid rest of the war . The major's family had taken them to Appumattox to avoid the rest of war .
 Lee, perfectly attired, rode up on his horse, Traveller, to the McLean house where he would meet Grant . Lee's custom is to ride up on Traveller to meet Grant.
 Grant, by contrast, was dressed very simply, and was not even wearing a sword .
 The pair had been in Mexico for decades before, and then got down to business . They talked a bit about their experiences in Mexico, decades before and decades before .
 Grant's terms were that Lee's surrendered officers and men should be released on parole, never to fight again until exchanged . The rebels’ weapons would be turned over to Federal forces .
 AS Lee departed after the proceedings were concluded . Grant and the other Union officers present raised their hats in salute .
 'Visit, Understand, Never Forget' are our watchwords for why we should all go on a battlefield tour at least once . Z (the uistory NEVER FORGET the SACRIFICE THE BATTLEFIELDS)
 Specialist Guides accompany points, and can upgrade to luxury SILVER SERVICE every tour .
 Whatever your area of interest, our guides will make sure you get the most out of your visit .
 Aquitaine and Calais were still held by the English, but the cross-channel invaders had been almost completely driven out of Normandy and Flanders .
 In that time he had become intent on reclaiming vast swathes of France for himself . He had been trying to reclaim swathes for himself.
 Henry initially offered the French 1. million Crowns to recognise English rule . He ordered payment for the body of French King John Il, who was captured at the Battle of Poitiers .
 Negotiations of harsh terms fell through, so Henry turned to military action . The military action was the result of the harsh terms.
 The warrior king had the ideal conditions for a successful invasion . As well as his burning desire for conquest, he had the perfect conditions for an invasion .
 Despite a recent plot to overthrow his rule, he had noble support, broadly there was unrest on the continent . Despite the recent plot, there was also unrest in the region .
 Charles VI was prone to bouts of insanity, hand in 1407 . His troubled reign led to the formation of rival factions in the Valois royal family .
 Louis, the duke of Orléans and brother of the king, had been murdered in Paris by the Burgundians . Louis had been killed in the city of Paris .
 France, after vanquishing the English in 1389, had descended into chaos . France had become a nation of chaos after the French revolution .
 He landed in Normandy on 14 August with 8,000 archers and 2,000 menat-arms . They were contracted for 12 months’ service .
 Henry stepped onto shore first and fell to his knees, praying to God to give him strength against his enemies . On arrival, Henry stood on the shore and prayed to God for his strength .
 The English army’s plan began with a siege of the nearby town of Harfleur . The town was an important centre of operations for raids on the English coast .
 The French commune put up fierce resistance for more than a month . The siege took much longer than expected, and the siege took a month.
 When Harfleur finally surrendered on 22 September, campaigning season was almost over . The campaign season ended in September .
 The plans to take Paris and Bordeaux were put on hold as the English sought refuge in Calais for the winter .
 Henry contacted the governor of Calais, Sir William Bardolph, asking him to safeguard his chosen crossing point of the River Somme . Edward Ill had traversed the same point in 1346 .
 The French had been tracking the English since the fall of Harfleur . Charles had summoned knights from every part of his kingdom to engage Henry’s military .
 The king amassed a huge army to fight off the invaders . Letters were sent to every noble in the realm as the king amassed an army .
 All weapons and cannons were removed from town defence duties . HENRY’S ROUTE, ee ~ewh 4 @ CHERBOURG @ Be rtiron AGINCOURT and put into the field of battle .
 Marshal Boucicault and Constable d’Albret would lead the French forces . King would not take to the battlefield .
 Edward IIl’s emphatic victory at Crécy was near here . French were keen to get revenge on the same piece of land 69 years after their defeat .
 The French cut off the English at the Somme. However, this idea didn’t go to plan .
 Henry made it to the river estuary, there was no sign of Bardolph . The French had barricaded the main crossing .
Henry had to divert to another bridge, stretching both his resources and the resolve of his men . Henry had to choose a different bridge to reach his goal .
After finally crossing the river, they were met by the French 48 kilometres from Calais . They were finally met by a group of people who had crossed the river .
 The French army spilled over the horizon in a pitched battle between villages of Tramecourt and Agincourt . The chosen location was a forest between the villages.
 The exhausted and disease-ridden English army had marched for 17 days and was in no condition to fight . Amassing on the ridge.
 The morale in the English camp on the eve of the battle was low. After living off nuts, raw vegetables and contaminated drinking water, the morale was low .
 New soldiers were arriving by the hour and they stayed up gambling and drinking, certain of victory .
 Some soldiers even fashioned a cart especially for Henry’s dead body to ride through the streets of Paris .
 Winter was on its way and the freshly ploughed ground below the soldiers’ feet resembled a mudpit after heavy overnight rain .
 The longbowmen took up their positions just before dawn on slight ridges overlooking both sides of the battlefield as well as interspersing themselves in the core of the infantry .
 The longbow was first used in great numbers in Wales and some of the finest archers in the entire army came from there . Some of the best archers came from Wales .
 Many of them were ordinary men, not seasoned veterans of battle, and they watched on as the French amassed opposite them with about six times as many men in their ranks . Many of the men in France are ordinary men.
 King Henry, in crown and bascinet, would fight shoulder to shoulder with his men . Sir Thomas Erpingham manning the right and Lord Camoys leading the left .
 One was mounted and two were on foot, with d’Aloret and Boucicault leading the vanguard with the dukes of Bourbon and Orléans . One was mounted and one was on foot.
 The French knew the threat the longbowmen posed and had upgraded their armour since the days of Crécy . The French known the threat they posed and have upgraded the armour .
 The lines now wear thick steel plates “The LINES WERE SUCH A MESS that FALLEN TROOPS WERE CRUSHed down into the MUD, UNABLE to RISE UP AGAIN DUE to EXHAUSTION’
 The two forces face each other across a narrow forest clearing . The French attack is not ‘, ‘ at forthcoming, so Henry is forced to — aa Great Battles BATTLE of AGINCOURT 29 OCTOBER 1419 Ol .
 The huge French army is organised into three divisions with both knights and menat-arms .
 The English army has much fewer men and its hopes hinge on the effectiveness of the longbowmen . The French finally i -'£ ak unleash their feared cavalry charge .
Longbowmen take up a position in range of the French lines . They take up the position in a range of positions .
 Guarded by wooden stakes, they begin 7 pummelling the French with arrows .
 The attack focuses on the English baggage train and initially catches Henry off guard . The attack initially catches him off guard.
 An angered Henry slaughters the French prisoners and the attack comes to nothing as the French begin to flee .
 The French army is a spent force, says Ed Crooks Gi. A . AGINCOURT Ed Crook Gi.
 The heat of battle Henry claims a victory that reinvigorates the crazed horses in France . Henry claims that the horses unsaddle their English cause .
 The archers drop their bows and slash at the French with swords and axes . The French are known for their sharp weapons .
 Longbowmen fire rapidly at the French as the charge turns into a disorganised frenzy . They are now sitting ducks for the longbowmen.
 The longbow originated in Wales and is made out of yew, ash, oak or birch . It is made from the longbow.
 By the time of Agincourt, it was one of the most feared weapons on the Medieval battlefield .
 The tactics of an archer were based around being nimble and light-footed . The tactics were based on being a nimble, light-footed archer .
Longbowmen would drop their bows and fight with swords, axes and clubs . When engaged in closequarters combat, the longbowman would drop his bows and battle with swords and axes .
 The longbow would be nothing if it wasn’t in the hands of a trained archer . Due to their limited armour, longbowmen were often positioned behind barricades .
 All sports except archery were banned on Sundays and the most talented were drawn into the English Army .
 Longbowmen were vulnerable to cavalry so would attack from range and flank the enemy . Longbow men were vulnerable. Longbowman were vulnerable in the battle to cavalry .
 The French battle standard, the Oriflamme, flew on flags above them . Each knight had a coat of arms proudly emblazoned on his shield .
 The English soldiers carried a bow that was much more powerful than the one employed during the conquests of Edward Ill .
 Two-handed swords were wielded by the higher classes of infantry on both sides . The majority carried one- handed swords or lances and even blunt weapons like maces, hammers and clubs .
 Both sides spat insults at each other, as commanders became reluctant to make the first move . Henry makes his move .
 The French were unwilling to advance, as Boucicault in particular knew the English would starve if they went much longer without food .
 Henry was all too aware of this and finally rolled the dice as he ordered his longobowmen forward . Henry was also not aware of the situation and ordered them forward .
 The French had already made their first error by not attacking the archers when they broke ranks and moved forward . The French made the first error of the French in the first half of the game .
 D’Albert and Boucicault were experienced soldiers but lacked authority and respect that a king like Henry would receive from his men .
 In the French ranks, nobles jostled for space so they could have their coat of arms displayed at ttle .
 Charles VI was unable to lead his army due to his failing mental health . The result was a chaotic mess .
Several units of archers had secretly tracked through the forest surrounding the battlefield and into the nearby village of Tramecourt, creating another angle of attack .
 Longbowmen in the centre hammered stakes into the ground, fortifying their position . The tactic was learned from previous conflicts in the war .
 The French longbowmen first shot galling arrows to purposely wound and disorientate the French ranks . They then switched to standard bodkin-point arrowheads .
 French knights slaughtered by the hail of English arrows as their frightened horses became uncontrollable . The combination of the narrow, muddy battlefield and the severely undermanned charge saw the knights slaughtered .
 With the horses' hooves, the foot troops moved forward painfully slowly . With the battleground now even more churned up by the horses’ hooves.
 The area was so narrow that the French crossbowmen and artillery could not support their now-isolated foot soldiers . A wall of arrows struck the exhausted infantry, striking the exhausted soldiers .
 The French attack had just enough momentum to reach the enemy ranks . At first, the English line began to buckle under the strain .
 The English rallied as the longbowmen dropped their bows and took up swords and axes . Knowing that leaving the narrow battlefield would result in annihilation, the English rallied .
 The lines were such a mess that fallen troops were crushed down into the mud . They were unable to rise up again due to exhaustion and the 50-kilogram weight of the armour .
 Any Frenchman who fell drowned in the mud as his fellow soldiers trampled over him. Any French soldier who fell drowns in mud is likely to die .
 Within 30 minutes of fighting, two of the three French lines had been completely destroyed . The French lines were completely destroyed.
 The duke of Alencon lay dead in the mud as did the French commander d’Albret .
 The Duke of Gloucester had defended valiantly in the heat of battle . Henry was still alive and so was his brother, the Duke Of Gloucester . Henry had defended his brother in the battle .
 Isambart d’Agincourt and Robert de Bournonville, men with local knowledge, to target rear of Henry’s army .
 French prisoners the English had captured during their invasion were located . It was here that French prisoners were found .
 A small force of peasant fighters and knights quickly overwhelmed the limited English defenders and plundered the English camp, taking horses and even a royal crown .
 Henry ordered the killing of all his prisoners except only the highest-ranking nobles . Henry was also concerned at the possibility of a mass French counterattack .
 The English men-at-arms refused, as this would clash with their chivalric code, so the archers took on the job, killing them in cold blood . The archers killed the men- at-arms as they refused, so they killed them.
 There were more prisoners than men in the whole English army, so this knee-jerk reaction was effective in nullifying any possibility of an uprising . But it severely lessened the opportunities for ransom after the battle .
 Henry ordered a service of thanksgiving on the battlefield after the English victory “The ENGLISH MEN-at-ARMS REFUSED AS TT CLASHED WITH their CHIVALRIC CODE SO THE ARCHERS TOOK ON THE JOB, KILLING them
 The English dead only numbered in the low hundreds . This setback was the final straw, and the remaining French line withdrew .
 Aftermath Ecstatic after their victory, the English broke into song, chanting early versions of Agincourt Carol and other traditional tunes .
 The series of French mistakes had proved fatal and the location of the battle had essentially forfeited their numerical advantage . The battle was fought in the French capital of Paris .
 If the full strength of the French cavalry had charged at the English, even the skilled longoowmen would not have been able to hold them off .
 Henry’s army sacked the French camp and stripped the dead of everything of worth as soldiers fled in all directions .
 The king held a banquet in nearby Maisoncelles that night . The banquet was served by captured and now-humiliated French knights .
 The men were unable to march on Paris, voicing concerns over a lack of siege weapons . They withdrew back to the safety of Calais on 29 October .
 Charles VI was still in power, but the French military had been broken on the field . Despite the unlikely victory at Agincourt, minimal territory had been gained .
 Harfleur was now an English-controlled town and would be an effective launching pad for Henry’s second invasion of Normandy in 1417 .
 Burgundy still refused to strike a deal with the House of Valois . Burgundy's enemies began to stack up as the French kingdom's enemies stack up .
 Henry sailed back to England after his nobles voiced fears over the possibility of a costly winter campaign . Despite the gains, Henry sailed home after the gains .
 The Treaty of Troyes in 1420 would recognise him as regent and heir to the French throne .
 The failures of Agincourt had made the French hesitant to fight pitched battles, which contributed to English victories at the 1416 Battle of the Seine and the 1418 siege at Rouen .
 Henry's French conquests were successful, but the strain on his kingdom’s finances was beginning to tell . It would eventually signal the end for the Lancastrian monarchy in his later years .
 The king died in 1422, meaning he never officially became the king of France . The king was the first king to die in France .
 Triumph Against The Odds and several specialist studies of English archery tactics used in the Hundred Years’ War .
 There is no doubt that Henry was inspired by his great-grandfather's achievements . Henry's great- grandfather was also inspired by the achievements of his father .
 Edward had invaded Normandy via the Cherbourg peninsula, sacked Caen and advanced to just north of Paris . Edward was challenging the French king to battle in Normandy .
 He then withdrew northwards to Poitou where he was victorious at Crécy . He then withdraws northwards, where he won the title . He was victorious in the second round of the competition .
 Henry landed at Harfleur, in the mouth of the River Seine, capturing it after a bitter siege and then marched to Calais . In contrast, Henry landed in Har Fleur, capturing the river and then marching to Calais.
 The war against France, fought in France, was desirable to the military aristocracy because it offered opportunities for glory, plunder and lands . Generally, the war against the French was desirable for the aristocracy .
 Richard II's unpopular peace policy had been an important factor in Henry Bolingbroke's 1399 usurpation . Richard II’s unpopular peace policies had been a key factor in the 1399 coup .
 Young Henry had proved his valour in his first battle at Shrewsbury in 1403, aged only 16, where he was wounded in the face by an arrow . Young Henry's first battle was his first, aged just 16, when he was injured in
 As king, Henry V won support from the nobility, but also the financiers of the City of London . Richard Whittington recognised a good investment .
The 12,000-strong English army landed in mid August and a month-long siege ensued . The 12,00-strong army landed on the British army in August .
 Harfleur was well fortified by walls and 24 towers, together with ditches and a moat on the seaward side . The garrison was a bare.
 Siege artillery, both gunpowder and traction, pounded the main gate . The main gate was protected by a wooden bulwark .
 The unsanitary conditions of the siege lines caused an epidemic of dysentery, which killed or incapacitated some 2,000 of the English, including its leaders .
 When Harfleur finally surrendered on 18 September, it seemed that Henry’s plans had suffered a serious check .
 The English Crown also held lands in Aquitaine, so marching south would have emphasised the link with these ancient possessions .
 It was late in the year for campaigning and it would have required significant logistical support . However, it was late for campaigning.
In the latter years of Edward Ill’s reign, there had been several disastrous attempts of this nature . Known as a chevauchée, such expeditions could have a symbolic effect .
 The French had learned not to confront English armies, but to harry them and deny them provisions . The risk for Henry was too great, so the risk for him is too great .
 French forces combined against it. They feared that the English army would be caught ‘like sheep in fold’
 Henry was making a statement about his right to march wherever he wanted in a country he wanted . He claimed that he had the right to rule. The answer must be that Henry was made a statement.
 Edward may also have contemplated winning a decisive action against the French, as Edward had done 69 years earlier . He may have also contemplated winning the French against him in 1969 .
 The French army shadowed the English line of march when the army set out . The French had not attempted to relive Harfleur .
 Henry was forced to lead his men south east, away from the direct route to Calais . English supplies soon ran out, and Henry led his men away from Calais .
 He did manage to cross near Péronne, which was a week’s march from his destination .
 In the light of the stunning victory at Agincourt, any dissension may have been written out of the record . The victory was a stunning victory for the Englishman .
 The Deeds Of Henry V was written by a churchman who wrote an eyewitness account of the campaign . He says the soldiers were often uncertain and frightened .
 The king kept strict discipline, enforcing regulations and hanging pillagers . However, he kept strict Discipline, enforcing rules and hanging pills .
 The risk of leaving the army and being at the mercy of the enraged French peasantry was probably greater than keeping together . Also, the risk of leave the army was likely to be greater than leaving the peasants .
 Second, they hoped to wear the English down before the challenging battle . Second, They hoped to be able to fight back against the English .
 Her study of documentary records indicates that the army may have been 9,000 strong . Her study suggests that the Army could have been 8,500 strong .
 France was in the midst of a civil war, with a mad king and rival Burgundian and Armagnac factions . In contrast, France was also in the middle of the civil war .
 commanders were bitterly divided and it may be that all their forces did not come up to fight . Their commanders were bitter divided and may not have fought .
 They had a greater number of fully armoured men-at-arms, but their botched battle plan meant that they failed to utilise them effectively . They failed to use them effectively, according to the military .
 The English set out with a week’s rations, but had been on the road for 16 days .
 Anne Curry points out that although no source states that they were suffering from diarrhoea, it seems likely that it is likely .
 They may well have been weakened, but they were both desperate and inspired by a charismatic leader, which was enough to win the day .
 The ‘pronunciamiento’ quickly spread across continental Spain, with the rebels seizing Seville and several small towns in the SYolul .
 The harsh polarisation of Spain between a leftist, progressive, socialist republic and a right-wing, conservative, absolutist reaction became representative of European attitudes at the time .
 The Europe of the 1930s was also ferociously ideological, with numerous regime changes and experimental politics shaking the continent . The Europe was exhausted by World War, and the Great Depression, despite being exhausted.
 Europe was under the ‘spectre of communism’, and a series of revolutions and leftist violence . Germany, Austria, Italy and Portugal were among the countries under communism .
 Spain's geological position made it a vital decider of the European conflict in the years to come . Spain's position of Spain has been a key part of this clash of ideologies .
 Soviet Union sought to establish a 'Red Bastion' in the far west . The Soviet Union signed a treaty of mutual assistance with France in 1935 .
 The Spanish Republic had assembled a naval blockade in the Strait of Gibraltar . It didn't seem possible to transport such an overwhelming number of military personnel .
Nine German Junkers Ju 52 transport aircraft landed in Tetouan, Morocco . Six days after General Franco’s initial request for aid in the transport of his army to the Iberian Peninsular .
 This initial package would be the beginnings of what would evolve into the infamous Condor Legion . It would be an initial package for the first time .
 Operation Magic Fire/Guido is an attempt by Hitler to secure his interests in Spain while avoiding the unnecessary antagonism of Western states . Its initial days would be shrouded in the mystery of Operation Magic fire/Guid .
 The operation was undertaken in the utmost secrecy, with the state-run company Sociedad Hispano-Marroqut de Transportes (HISMA) being established for the sole purpose.
 Starting on 28 July, the nine Ju 52s conducted up to five transport flights a day between continental Spain and Moroccan possession .
 There was a sense of urgency in the operation, with German pilots transporting up to 40 fully equipped Nationalist troops per journey, a quantity well above the recommended quota of 17 persons .
 The Ju 52s are well beyond their functional capacity . Only one incident resulted in the loss of an aircraft .
 A cargo-vacant Ju 52 crashed in the municipality of Jerez de la Frontera . The cause of the crash was presumed to be severe engine deterioration and failure .
 Nazi aircraft were used in the North African Campaign in World War Il . They were used to provide useful information that would later be used during the campaign .
 The first reformation of the Nazi operation in Spain began in 1936 . With the arrival of the Usaramo and its cargo in Cadiz on 6 August 1936, the first reformed of the Nazis began .
 The automatic pull-up dive brakes enabled pilots to dive at targets with the confidence that the plane would recover, even if the pilot blacked out .
 Wolfram von Richthofen had a propeller-powered siren added to the exterior of the craft . The siren was added by an air technician .
 The wailing siren, known as a 'Jericho Trumpet' was a foray into experimental psychological warfare by the Nazis . It would become the defining characteristic of the aircraft .
 The Ju 87 was the first aircraft to be utilised in the Knickebein system . The Stuka would make its name in Spain . The Ju was introduced towards the end of the war.
 It was an important tool of the Condor Legion in iconic clashes, such as the Battle of Bilbao and the Catalonia Offensive .
 The Ju 52 began its life as a craft typically utilised by commercial airlines . Recognisable by its low, cantilever wing, bulky fuselage and three-engine design, the Ju 52 was designed for commercial airlines.
 The 1932 Columbia-Peru War and the 1934 Chaco War saw the aircraft implemented in a supply and evacuation context . The aircraft was used in supply and evacuate context .
First prototype bomber class Ju 52s were produced in 1934 . Luftwaffe was quick to recognise the Ju 52's potential .
 In Spain, the Ju 52 was primarily assigned to the role of skirting the Republican blockade and transporting the Nationalist army to continental Spain .
 Many of the remaining Ju 52s would be converted to tactical bombing aircraft, and used in a ‘terror bombing’ campaign against the Republican civilian population . Most notoriously in the bombing of Guernica.
 The trainees were severely inexperienced with aircraft and evidently prone to crashing .
 The Eiserne Legion claimed its first victim, a Republican reconnaissance aircraft, at the hands of future ace Johannes Trautloft on 25 August 1936 .
 The real change came at the beginning of September. Despite the escalation of the role of German units in actual combat, the real change comes at the start of September .
 The situation in Spain became ‘threateningly red’ with the election of Socialist Prime Minister Francisco Largo Caballero on 4 September . Soviet advisers and military equipment arrived six days later .
 Hitler was worried about the possibility of further Soviet intervention . He was also unwilling to commit a large portion of the recovering Wehrmacht to Spain without a dividend .
 Hitler sought to trade military assistance for resources from the Jrit amen des . Franco was 'generalissimo'
Befehlehaber der Wehrmacht 4m Tiamen bes Fuhrets und Oberften Befehlshab . Such resources are vital to the rearmament of the WehrMacht and Hitler’s long-term goals .
 The Rohstoffe-und-WarenEinkaufsgesellschaft GmbH (ROWAK) was established with a credit of 3 million Reichsmarks and the purpose of buying up a portion of the Spanish mining industry .
On 6 November 1936, 6,500 German volunteers and six bomber squadrons disembarked at Cadiz . The news spread of Germany’s involvement in Spain .
 Nazi and Italian regimes recognised Franco’s government in November . Such news was all but verified on 19 November, when it was announced .
 The Condor Legion began operations on 8 November . There were several sorties beforehand, most notably the experimental direct bombing of civilians in Plaza de Colon, Madrid .
 The month-long assault on Madrid that would begin two weeks later would see the arrival of the International Brigades on the Republican side and a three-day bombing campaign against the republican civilian population by the Condor Legion .
 The battle also saw the loss of air Superiority by the Condor Legion in the face of a Republican side . The battle saw the arrival of squadrons of the technologically superior Soviet Plikarpov I-16 fighter class and Soviet Tupolev ANT-40 bomber class .
 The siege ended less than a month after it began with the exhaustion of both sides and the establishment of a static front line . The siege was the first to end with the end of the siege .
 Wolfram von Richthofen as chief of staff prompted a revising of technology . The arrival of new staff, such as Wolfram Von Richth ofen, prompted arevising of tech .
 Messerschmitt Bf109 offers a fitting replacement for the Heinkel He 51 . It was decided by late April a replacement was under way, with the Messershmitt BF109 offering a replacement .
 The Jagdgruppe 88 experienced a partial rotation of staff . This was not an easy task, and it required a significant restructuring of the Legion itself .
 The Heinkel He 111, Junkers Ju 87 and the Dornier Do 17 appear in military context for the first time .
 The Condor Legion joined the War in the North . The old aircraft were passed on to the Nationalist Air Force, and with a mutating air force.
 The German forces set a precedent for the Biscay Campaign on 31 March . The town of Durango, a defenceless settlement of little military value, was levelled .
 Guernica, a town housing 10,000 refugees of the War in the North, famously met the same fate in April . Less than a month later on 26 April, Guernicas, a city in the north of the country, was a town of 10,
 The War in the North saw the introduction of many such innovations in the use of aircraft .
 The ‘Knickebein’ system and ‘Devil’s Egg’ improvements were also trialled .
 The former was a system of bombing wherein the bombers, providing close air support, would be guided to the target by radio . The bombers would be able to create ‘airborne artillery’ and set the stage for the infamous Blitzkrieg tactics employed a few
 A 25-gallon mixture of gasoline, grease and engine oil was combined with the force of two 22-pound explosives . The mixture hinged on the mixture’s ability to produce a burning, sticky substance upon detonation .
 Napalm wouldn’t be properly invented and implemented in war until the bombing of Berlin on 6 March 1944 .
 The system of bombing developed during the War in the North, as well as the experimental bombs themselves, would later be evaluated and applied to Nazi military strategy . Regardless, the system of bomb bombing developed in the war in the north .
 By the end of the Biscay Campaign, the Condor Legion had undergone a metamorphosis .
 Nationalist line faltering in the opening stages of the Battle of Brunete . Republican forces ambush the town by the Republican forces on 6 July .
 The Condor Legion responded immediately with a newly equipped air force . The CondOr Legion responded with a new air force.
 The Republican Air Force was now under-equipped, and the Condor Legion was quick to assert its dominance in the skies above Brunete .
 Richthofen began his military career in the German Calvary in 1913, earning an Iron Cross . Born into nobility, he rejected an academic life and began a military career .
 Richthofen joined the Condor Legion in Spain in 1936 . He later became a professor at the University of Madrid .
 He worked to expand Close Support Doctrine advocating for co-operation between an equally weighted ground force and air force .
 He pioneered the ‘Air Shuttle’ technique, in which the sorties of aircraft would be staggered in order to allow a constant air presence . Also pioneered the 'Air Shuttle' technique.
 Last, upon joining the underequipped Condor Legion, he famously improvised, utilising 88mm anti-aircraft batteries in the place of artillery .
 The Luftwaffe's Special Purpose Division was constructed with Richthofen’s findings in mind . The Special Purpose division was constructed in mind.
 Galland’s first major engagement was in the Battle of Brunete . Arriving in Spain on 7 May 1937, Galland's first major engagements were in the battle of Brunet .
 Galland became one of the men awarded the Spanish Cross in Gold . Galland returned to Germany, where he would go on to participate in the invasion of Poland .
 He became an established ace of World War Il and led the Fighter Pilots’ Revolt against Goering . He was an established World War I ace and was a member of the RAF .
 In his later life he was invited by Juan Peron to train the young Argentinean air force . He left a tactical legacy that would become ingrained in military aviation for years to come .
 The Luftwaffe was accepted and transferred to the Condor Legion in 1938 . Adolf Galland took over from Hitler in 1938, taking over from the German dictator .
 He became the highest scoring ace of the Condor Legion, with 15 kills in the Spanish Civil War alone . Despite his late arrival, he became the top scorer of the Legion .
 He was awarded a Spanish Cross in Gold in recognition of his combat pioneering . He was, like Galland, awarded the Spanish Cross for his skill and combat pioneering. He was also awarded Spanish Cross.
 Molders introduced ‘Schwarm’/Finger-Four’ formation and the ‘Cross Over Turn’ to the Luftwaffe . Both tactics would prove to be vital in securing Germany’s future victories .
 Molders died in a civilian aircraft crash in 1941 while attending the funeral of a superior in Crimea . Molders were killed in the crash while attending a funeral in Crimea.
 He was among the initial six pilots, paired with Heinkel He 51s, to arrive in Spain on 7 August 1936 . He was one of the first six pilots.
 Trautloft developed the theory behind the deployment of the new Bf109 . The Condor Legion claimed the first recorded kill by the Condors .
 Trautloft was awarded the Spanish Cross in Gold with Diamonds . Like Galland and Molders, Traut Loft was also awarded the award for the best Spanish Cross .
 He served in the Bundesluftwaffe the air force of West Germany until his death in 1995 . He later joined the Fighter Pilots’ Revolt and served in West Germany .
 The 19-day battle saw an almost oversaturation of Nationalist aircraft, and it was widely believed that the Battle of Brunete decided the war . It was believed that Hermann Goering would utilise the battle to gain favourable concessions from the Nazi government in the future .
 The protection of Nationalist Brunete was a great success, and would be repeated upon the return of the Condor Legion to the War in the North . The victory at the end of the month-long Battle of Santander was a decisive victory .
 The Condor Legion was quickly becoming an economic burden for Nazi Germany . That said, the overconfident Legion would face difficulty in the battles of Teruel and Belchite .
 The issues in Spain were quickly becoming overshadowed by developments in Central Europe, the Anschluss of Austria and the annexation of the Sudetenland .
 The bombing of Barcelona on 16 March would again see the use of military force against civilian targets . The bombing would also see the added innovations of experimental timed explosives and the ‘Silent Approach’ method .
 This technique was orchestrated by deactivating the engine in order to glide from a high altitude silently and bomb the desired target . The technique was used to climb to a safe altitude before restarting the engine .
 The timed explosive would penetrate much deeper into the buildings or streets before detonating . It would be timed to detonate .
 These were among the last experimental innovations to be implemented during the war . They wouldn't be seen again until the London Blitz of 1940 .
 The Battle of Ebro began on 25 July 1938 and ran for the greater part of that year . It would further transform the Condor Legion and the wider crisis in Spain into a nuisance .
 The exhausting battle saw staff recalled, reshuffled and redeployed for the last time . Richthofen once again took up the position as chief of staff .
 The Legion conducted a series of sorties against the Republicans in the Nationalist’s final offensive . The last three months of deployment consisted of a first phase .
 The e A Stuka dive bombs a Spanish city in 1938 Wehrmacht high command was satisfied by the establishment of a Spain that was friendly, or at the very least neutral, to the future actions of Nazi Germany .
 The Condor Legion began its withdrawal in February 1939, with the last troops leaving the Iberian Peninsula by May .
 The intervention by Nazi Germany in the Spanish Civil War did pay its dividends . Nazi Germany's intervention in Spain paid its dividends.
 The Nazi regime was able to innovate and invent a new kind of warfare, seize industry vital to the German military . The next generation of pilots would excel in the crucial opening months of the next great war .
 The Basque town of Guernica opened in 1937 as any other Monday would in the Basque city . ‘TOTAL WAR’ STRATEGY’ was opened on 26 April 1937 .
 It was market day, so the streets were packed with people from the surrounding region . It was the first market day of the year .
 Despite the civil war that was engulfing the rest of Spain to the south, Guernica saw very little conflict itself .
 Refugees had sought asylum in the ancient capital, but otherwise, the civil war seemed exterior to the town’s inhabitants .
 Guernica was positioned in such a way that was strategically important to the Nationalist forces, who were invading northern provinces .
 At 4.30pm, the first German aircraft began their descent into the town . The first German plane began its descent in the town.
Church bells rang and people ran for the fortifications built following the bombing of Durango . The carpet bombing tactics employed by the Condor Legion absolutely devastated Guernica .
 The first bomber appeared, dropped its payload and departed. Five minutes later, the first appeared, dropping its payload .
Both attacks aimed at the centre of the town. Then came a second both initial attacks aiming for the centre .
 Three Junkers Ju 52s arrived and began carpet bombing the city indiscriminately . Only 15 minutes later, three JunkersJu 52s began carpeting the city .
 This was repeated every 20 minutes until 7.45pm with a rotational force utilised . This is repeated every 30 minutes until the end of the 20-minute period .
 squadrons of Junkers Ju 52s for bombing and demolition purposes . Squadrons of recently introduced Bf109 fighter planes took up a more anti-personnel role .
 Durango bombing has not stood the test of time, with the modern government of Germany apologising for the actions of its predecessor in 1997 . Nationalist forces initially blamed communist militants for the destruction of the city .
 The Condor Legion was experimenting with psychological warfare at the time . The attack shattered any notion to resist the invading Nationalists, who took control of the city .
 Mehmet II marched on Constantinople in 1453, he brought with him some of the largest SUPERCANNONS of the world . The siege of Constantinople marked a significant transition from the Medieval world of swords, catapults and trebuchets to the triumph of the gunpowder
 As the impenetrable walls of Byzantium were crushed by super-sized cannons, down with them came the might of millennia of the Roman Empire .
 When Sultan Mehmet entered the city in 1453, its capture was mourned in the Latin West as a destruction .
 The Ottomans saw themselves as heirs to the caliphates, but as inheritors of Rome . They saw themselves not only as heirs but as the inheritors.
 The Ottomans carried on the cultural legacy of a great empire in the Mediterranean . They continued the tradition of military pomp .
 Orban’s gargantuan supercannon helped conquer Constantinople in 1453 . More importantly, they carried on the legacy of military might, conquest, and engineering .
 The Ottoman Empire’s origins lie in the slow crumble of the Turkic Seljug Empire in Anatolia and the northern part of the Near East .
 The Seljuqs had been under continuous onslaught against forces like the Persian Safavids and the Byzantine Empire from the west . TheSeljuqs were under continuous attack against forces such as the Persian and Byzantine Empire .
 In 1299, a relief force from modern-day Turkmenistan changed the course of the conflict . The conflict began in 1299 with the help of the relief force .
 The force was led by Osman, whose rise to power had been foreshadowed by a dream in which he saw a moon rise from a holy man's breast and sink into his own .
 A tree supposedly rose from the light in his belly and spread its branches across the world . Then, a tree supposedly raised its branches from a tree in its belly .
 Osman arrived to a fragmented political patchwork of small, competing warlord states in Anatolia . Osman was only nominally under the control of the central Seljug state .
 The empire gradually expanded from humble beginnings under Osman’s heirs . Constantinople had essentially become an ailing city-state, but with much more powerful foreign allies .
 The Byzantines, however, were on the opposite end of their historical trajectory . The Byzantine Empire was on the same trajectory as the Byzantine Empire .
 In the 19th century the Ottoman Empire would be referred to as the ‘sick man of Europe’ In the 15th century, it was the Byzantines who filled this role .
 The empire had barely recovered from a long period of civil war and assaults from external aggressors . By this time, the empire was barely recovering from civil war .
 Emperor John VI Kantakouzenos hired Ottoman mercenaries to subdue his rivals . They became engulfed in an extremely complex civil war in the Balkans .
 The Ottomans established themselves in the Balkans. Unfortunately, what he ended up with was the Ottoman establishing themselves in Europe .
 As they gradually pushed south east, Byzantium found itself sandwiched between Ottoman strongholds .
 majority of siege technology focused on rams, catapult devices and so on . The majority of the siege technology used in China for centuries .
 The Islamic empires of the exe. aole mV al aa Mm dal-m pales-imr-lelcelalercre were eager adaptors of foreign innovations .
 As they pressed eastwards, they began adopting and expanding upon the devices they encountered through the NY Ko . They also incorporated European technologies they encountered .
 This thalej al-sin or ‘Chinese snow’ would be revolutionary in the history of siege warfare .
 One of the most prominent early uses was during the Battle of Mohi in 1241 . The Mamluks also used it against the Mongols at Ain Jalut in 1260 .
 The evolution of massive supercannons was mostly centred around the “MANY WOULD EXPLODE as their gunNERS PACKED them with huge LOADS of GunPOWDER’ Later Renaissance European micro-kingdoms, which regularly besieged one another .
 At first, the goal was to create huge-calibre guns of more than 50 centimetres in diameter that fired large stone projectiles . The goal of smashing the walls of fortresses.
 Many gunners would explode as their gunners packed them with huge loads of gunpowder, or otherwise shatter their projectiles on walls rather than penetrate .
 By the Ottoman period, despite their ineffective, slow-loading handguns, the elite Janissaries were a force to be reckoned with . In the Middle East, gun technology tended Ko aalon'c-m cele lcercm aretha .
 Hungarian engineer Orban saw opportunities in south-east Europe and the Middle East .
 To compensate, gunners would have to wad the gaps with sheepskin, wood or other materials .
 The Basilica cannon measured more than 27 feet in length, with eight-inch thick walls to accommodate its enormous blast . The cannon was designed to withstand the blast .
 The stone shot was designed to be loaded with a stone shot weighing more than half a ton . It had a diameter of more than 30 inches and was designed for loaded with the stone .
 The Ottoman cannons were both deafening and dangerous, so their psychological effect was almost as powerful as their physical impact . The psychological effect of the cannons is almost as strong as the physical impact of their cannons .
Crews were often injured and killed during the operation of guns in the siege . Crews were also injured during the siege.
 Orban himself is rumoured to have later been killed by one of his own malfunctioning cannons .
 The uniqueness of Orban’s gun was not in its composition, but its scale . It was not the uniqueness of the gun.
 He intended to build the biggest, most powerful gun that had ever been created .
 Mehmet ll asked if his gun would be powerful enough to penetrate the walls of the city . The sultan asked the sultan if he had a gun that could penetrate the wall of the building .
 At this point, the Ottomans had made the most formidable empire in the Islamic world .
 They had learned about the use of artillery during previous engagements with the Mamluks to the south and during conflicts in Hungary .
 Ottoman gun crews were extremely skilled in its use, both in portable handheld forms and larger artillery pieces . They had developed very little of their own technology .
 Sultan Mehmet II pioneered a new use of a long-range mortar during the siege . He was well educated in the art of ballistics .
 Orban set to work near the capital of Edirne and Mehmet stockpiled supplies for gunpowder, copper and tin as he worked . Orban was working in Orban's Orban.
 His crews dug enormous casting pits in the ground and melted scrap bronze in nearby furnaces . The bronze was superheated by bellows to pour into the mould .
 The cannon designed to destroy the walls of Babylon itself was designed by Hungarian engineer, Orban . It was used by the Ottomans to destroy Babylon itself .
 The military band inspired fear with their military band. They besieged the city with the deafening roar of their cannons and inspired fear .
 A small group of Janissaries raised the Ottoman banner on the ramparts . Constantine XI’s men knew they were done .
 The history of siege warfare came crashing down at the end of Ottoman cannoneers . They were masters of ballistics and adept adaptors of foreign technologies .
 Ottoman gunners had a difficult time aiming this huge cannon . It was positioned on a combination of removable wooden blocks, as well as earthen ramparts .
 Teams had to clear out fields of fruit trees to provide a clear line of sight . Teams also had to remove fields of trees to give a clear view of the area .
 Once fired, it took an extraordinarily long time to cool down and had to be drenched with copious amounts of oil and cleaned frequently .
 The cannon was only capable of about seven shots per day . It was reinforced in a triangular pattern by the smaller cannons .
 The gun was cast of solid bronze and laboriously transported by a team of 60 oxen with an accompanying crew of up to 400 .
 They travelled at rate of 2. miles a day to within a mile of Constantinople’s wall .
 wooden flap covered the gap in the wood and earthen ramparts in which it protected its operators from defensive projectiles .
 Basilica’s ammunition was mined from areas along the Black Sea . It was never of an exact size, so it would be padded with sheepskin or wood .
 Ottoman gunners would often attempt to drag undamaged munitions back from the walls with large nets, to be recycled . The production was so intensive that Ottoman gunner would often try to drag the munitions back with nets .
 Despite the enormous amounts of bronze, its construction was still too weak for the enormity of its shot . The bronze is still too strong for the enormous amount of bronze .
 During the siege, it had to be repaired by Orban numerous times, and was reinforced by iron rings after it had cracked .
 The defenders of Constantinople also responded to Ottoman attacks with their own cannons . They packed some with multiple small projectiles in a shotgunlike fashion .
 Their recoil often damaged their own walls. However, their guns were smaller and their recoil often caused their own wall damage .
 In the end, cunning strategy toppled the Byzantines, not the use of a sole super weapon . The OTTOMAN EMPIRE is the world's most famous person .
 The city of Oxo was the first city to be built in the city . The city was built in 18th century .
 Constantinople was only urbanised in its easternmost extremity in 1453 . The rest of the area inside the massive walls comprises village-sized settlements separated by large fields and rural segments .
Within the walls its citizens grew their own food and farmed livestock . Within the walls of the walls their citizens grew food and livestock .
 In theory, it could withstand extremely long sieges, as it had before including an Ummayad assault in the 7th century . In theory it could be able to withstand very long siesges .
 Had this happened, it is unclear what the ultimate goal could have been as a completely encircled city-state .
 When the siege began, the city had only about 10,000 professional soldiers at its disposal . Almost 3,000 were foreigners mainly from the major powers of Venice and Genoa .
 Constantinople was still arguably the best-defended city in Europe at the time . Although the defenders were outnumbered, the city was still the best in Europe .
 The Ottomans created a greased wooden slipway and transported their ships on land around the defences .
 The Ottomans created a pontoon bridge across a weaker point in UayomCre . The walls were slow to fall, so the bridge was built .
 As the Ottoman artillery began cracking the walls, the defenders worked endlessly and kept plugging the holes and reinforcing them with earth and wood to absorb their impact .
 50 Janissaries poured into the cracks near Kerkoporta, with the prospect of an elevation of rank for the first who scaled Natoma Cell meal .
 Once Saint Romanus’s gate was breached, Constantine XI himself sat within sight .
With these first volleys of the sultan’s cannons for Ja atom taro elsy-dialaliar-zomeymanlelerclaam-ladli, the Byzantine defenders saw the entire history of siege warfare disintegrate .
 Mehmet the Conqueror enters the defeated city of Constantinople 62 . Unfortunately the Basilica gun was lost to history following the siege .
 Munir Ali, Orban’s Successor, carried on tradition of casting Supercannons as well as other artillery .
 Eventually, these guns were superseded by other artillery pieces with smaller bores but longer barrels, and moreefficient gunpowder . Eventually, they were superseding by other weapons with shorter barrels and longer barrels .
 For the next few centuries the development of weaponry trended in this direction . These super guns made only occasional appearances again . The development of these super guns has been in the past few centuries .
 Their use had become increasingly irrelevant as heavily fortified cities became less and less prevalent . The use of fortified cities had become less and more prevalent .
 In 1463, Munir Ali cast a gun that would stand watch over Istanbul for the next three and a half centuries . The gun would stand in the middle of Istanbul for more than a century .
 It would later be used by desperate Ottoman troops in 1807, to devastating effect against a British fleet . British fleet tried to force the Dardanelles.
 Whenever heavy fortifications emerged again, the concept of the supercannon also returned as a possible solution . Supercannon is a possible solutions to the problems of the OTTOMAN EMPIRE .
 During the Crimean War, the British developed ‘Mallet’s Mortar’ but never used it in combat . The British developed it during the Crimea War, but not in combat.
 In World War I, a series of extremely long railway-mounted howitzers emerged to dislodge troops from trenches .
 The Nazis resurrected the idea in the 1930s with the Schwerer Gustav and Dora rail cannons, with the intent of destroying the concrete defences of the Maginot Line, and was used in the Siege of Sevastopol .
 At the end of World War Il, the USA experimented with a modern bombard nicknamed ‘Little David’ in a planned siege against what they imagined was a heavily fortified Japan .
 After World War II, the USSR and USA both developed field cannons capable of firing nuclear weapons . The same legacy is an extreme continuation of this same legacy .
For the most part, ves mechanised warfare seemed to prefer more mobile equipment . For the most of the time, the most mobile equipment was used in the battle .
 These guns, even having proved their effectiveness at specific engagements, remained largely a curiosity .
 Modern militaries have shifted towards asymmetrical warfare and away from heavy fortifications of any kind .
 If they ever return, the guns to breach them and the inheritors of the legacy of Orban's gun will emerge again .
Tennessee-born son of a blacksmith originally tried to avoid enlisting for military service . ‘| was worried clean through,’ he remarked at a lecture later in his life .
 His request for conscientious objection was formally rejected and he was soon shipped off to fight . But he was later sent to fight.
 Alvin C York was born on 13 December 1887 into an impoverished family living in Pall Mall, Tennessee . The third of 11 children was born in 1887 to a family of 11 .
 The United States was only two decades removed from the civil war when York entered the world . The former secessionist state was still recovering from the devastating domestic conflict .
 York, like his seven brothers, spent only nine months in formal education before his father brought him home to work full time .
 From an early age, the young York was no stranger to the hard graft of farm work .
 When his father died in November 1911, the running of the household fell to the 23-year-old . He soon took up a number of jobs, including logging and working on the local railway .
 He was devoted to WORDS DOM RESEIGH-LINCOLN, but was also a burgeoning alcoholic . He was prone to brawls and dust-ups in local bars .
 York left the alcohol behind and embraced his faith in 1915 . He still attended church on a regular basis with his devout mother and siblings .
 He was raised a Methodist, a more recent branch of the Christian faith that drew his attention . He says he was raised in a Methodist church .
 The Church of Christ in Christian Union had no official pacifist doctrines per se . It did shun violence as much as it opposed division between the many Christian sects .
 On 5 June 1917, the Selective Service Act came into effect . Men aged between 21 and 30 were legally bound to enlist for military service .
 York attempted to seek conscientious objection on the grounds of his new spiritual beliefs . But as the Union wasn’t recognised as an official branch, he was denied .
 York became a figurehead for promoting the U.S. military’s successes in World War I . He never grew comfortable with this new fame Regiment, 82nd Infantry Division at Camp Gordon, Georgia .
 York was granted ten days of leave when he returned to his new church . He came with the belief that God intended him to fight .
 York and his division were then posted to France to take part in the United States Army’s first offensive of World War I, the Saint Mihiel Offensive .
 President Woodrow Wilson requested Congress officially declare war in April that year . Up until this point, the United States had attempted to stay out of the conflict .
 U.S. Army forces arrived in north-east France in September 1917 . They caught the Germans in a state of retreat .
 York and his fellow compatriots helped secure an Allied victory in a matter of a few days . The unprepared enemy scrambled to react to the new American military presence .
 Allied forces, including the 82nd, successfully took Hill 223, located along the Decauville railway line north of ChatelChéhéry . The 82nd Division was then shifted further north to take part in the Meuse-Argonne Offensive, one of the final
 Forces swarmed down the hill on the other side, but they found the triangular valley at the bottom was a death trap .
 German machine-gun emplacements were encamped on ridges around the valley . Allied soldiers gunned down Allied soldiers in their droves .
 German First Lieutenant Paul Jurgen Vollmer orders the surrender of emplacements . With his unit also proving unwaveringly defiant, he is also proving unrepententant .
 York leaves the remaining eight able soldiers to guard the prisoners while he moves forward alone to silence the guns .
 Four noncommissioned 02 Assault under fire officers, including a recently York and the unit overrun the promoted Corporal York . 13 headquarters of a German unit that privates are ordered to infiltrate were ordered to infiltrated .
 Six American soldiers were killed and three wounded in the attack on the German headquarters .
 More than 30 German machine guns are now blazing at York and his men .
 York is forced to kill enemy after enemy with his rifle . York calls out continuously in an effort to convince them to surrender .
 Six soldiers attempt to run him through with their bayonets, but he reluctantly dispatches them all with his pistol . Six soldiers try to run them through with the bayonet, but they try to stop them .
Sergeant York’s Medal of Honor A unit under the command of Sergeant Bernard Early was tasked with moving behind enemy lines .
 Four noncommissioned officers, including York, and 13 privates, used the large amount of brush and tall bushes to flank the gun nests .
Early, York and the rest of the unit were able to immediately overrun the main headquarters . Working from such an advantageous position, Early, York was able to easily overrun the headquarters .
 The HQ was taken almost entirely without bloodshed . Early and his men took a large contingent of prisoners within minutes of beginning their offensive .
 A German soldier manning a gun emplacement noticed the fracas and opened fire on the exposed unit . Unfortunately, the covert nature of the assault was soon torn apart .
 Six Americans were killed outright, and another three were critically injured in the opening salvo, including Early .
Command of the unit was passed to York. With his senior officer incapacitated, the unit's command of the units was passed.
Gun emplacement was peppering the cover sheltering York, the wounded and those soldiers still able to fight .
 It had become clear that the unit wouldn't be able to silence the guns from their current position, so York ordered his men to stay where they were and continue exchanging fire .
 The corporal manoeuvred swiftly and silently through the trenches . With the gunners distracted by the remainder of his team, the corporal moved forward alone .
 The Meuse-Argonne Offensive was one of the costliest to American lives . More than 26,000 dead Lying prone and peeking over embankments, York began sniping at gunners .
 Georgia soldier says his life as a soldier was a calling from God . He says he didn't leave his ideals behind .
 He began calling out to the soldiers, imploring them to surrender and avoid further bloodshed, only returning fire when it was clear such a course of action was not a consideration .
 A contingent of six German soldiers were dispatched to hunt him down . With his men also pressing the gun emplacement, a contingent of 6 German soldiers are dispatched .
 The kill team might have been successful had York not spied them in time, switching to his pistol and dispatching each one at close range .
 York continued his assault on the machinegun emplacement . York picked off any soldier that was foolish enough to peer over the embankment . York continued the assault .
 First Lieutenant Paul Jurgen Vollmer realised his men were too exposed and offered his and his men’s surrender .
 Some reports suggest York killed up to 20 German soldiers that morning . He has always distanced himself from those claims, but has always denied them .
 Corporal York put his life on the line in one of the most daring acts of valour .
 He was swiftly promoted to sergeant and awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . He was quickly promoted to Sgt.
 York’s medal was upgraded to the Medal of Honor in recognition of his actions in the final months of the conflict .
 offer code PS15 must be quoted to receive this special subscription price . Offer code PS 15 must be quotes to receive the special price .
 Imagine Publishing reserves the right to limit this type of offer to one per household . Imagine publishing reserves the rights to limit the offer to a single household .
 The design put cruise efficiency ahead of handling at low speeds . So many crews initially stayed well away from the aircraft .
 It was most effective in the European Theatre, operating in mediumaltitude attacks in Normandy and the invasion of Italy . It was the most effective of the European Theater .
 These turrets were the first of their kind and rotated on large ball bearings . The turrets were rotated on ball bearings.
 Some B-26s included several smaller .30-inch machine guns, dotted around the fuselage .
 These guns acted in a defensive capacity and would protect the aircraft from enemy fighters and anti-aircraft positions when on bombing runs .
 The rear gun was invaluable as it helped take down Messerschmitts, Zeros and any other Axis planes on the bomber’s tail .
 Up to 1,814 Al Koyed go. Pakom C-@ 10m exelul ale l--) mere l0] devastating strike sorties .
 It was the first Allied aircraft built in World War Il to use four blades “ay ~~ f | AR in its propulsion system and could generate up — — 72 eS SS OEE to 1,930 horsepower .
 The 18-cylinder engine was incredibly versatile and was used in planes in the Korean War as well as World War Il . The engine was also used in World War I and World War II .
 Using a tricycle shape, it incorporated a nose wheel rather than the traditional tail wheel . The shape was designed to make it look more like a bicycle .
 An astonishing 18,400 were but not to be confused with the giant of the sky . It the war, an astonishing 18.400 were.
 The Liberator was the first Allied attack to strike the world using its range of more and long-serving aircraft . The A-26 was a versatile in the UK and deployed to Germany .
More than 2,000 miles. in the Korean and Vietnam wars. It served to take part in relentless daylight Japanese home islands .
 The B-26 was a sophisticated war machine . It may have been rushed off the production line, but it was a well-planned machine .
 The U.S. medium bomber was a competition for a new United States medium bomber in 1939 . One of the major differences between the bomber and its predecessors was the use of plastic .
 Before the Marauder, military aircraft were made mostly out of metal, but the B-26 changed this by using cheap and readily available plastic .
 The Marauder carried so much equipment that it couldn’t sustain much flak before getting in trouble . It was so heavy that it had to be rescued by a rescue crew .
 This made it ineffective at low-level attack missions, meaning it was soon changed to a medium-level bomber to make it more durable in combat . This made the bomber more durable, making it easier to attack .
 The original models also suffered from problems with the landing gear, but these were corrected by a heat-treatment process . The hydraulic system was improved by a process that improved the hydraulic system .
 Only three ME 264s were built before the German project was abandoned War in Donbass . A separatist rebellion has torn apart Ukraine’s east and brought relations between Russia and the West to their lowest level since the Cold War .
 There are plenty of bullet and mortar-gouged buildings, but on many streets, there is a semblance of normalcy .
 At least two thirds of businesses are believed to have closed and there is no banking in the city . Even so, at least twothirds of businesses have closed .
 A curfew descends at 10pm, and in the distance, the thud of exploding mortars can be heard .
 Donetsk, a mining town, was home to more than 1 million people . Many of them have now fled .
 Its pre-war population was 4. million, and most of the 2 million civilians internally displaced by the fighting in Ukraine originated from here .
 The pro-Russian insurgents have not erected checkpoints around Donetsk . They can sometimes be seen bouncing through the streets in cars or minivans .
 separatist Oplot militia gathered to declare independence from Ukraine in May 2014 . On 11 May 2014, they may pass the 11-storey government buildings where they gathered .
 By the time he was appointed prime minister of the Donetsk Peoples’ Republic in August, the region was mired in bitter fighting .
 The EU and NATO-friendly posture of Ukraine’s new government had inflamed its chief patron, President Vladimir Putin .
 When separatist rebellion spread through Donbass, Russia began to intervene on behalf of the insurgents . Russia started to intervene.
 It is uncertain how many military and civilian deaths have occurred since May 2014 . Estimates go up to 7,000, but it is unclear how many have occurred .
 Donetsk ‘People’s Governor’ Pavel Gubarev on 22 May 2014, it promises the nationalisation of key industries, Russian orthodoxy as the state religion and a confederation of Ukraine's southern and eastern regions . AS announced by the Donetsk �
 A key turning point in the conflict came in mid-2014, when Putin began extending ‘humanitarian’ assistance .
Donbass has since come to resemble one of the proxy battlefields of the Cold War . Donbass has been likened to a battlefield in the Middle East .
 Moscow and Washington ‘outsourced’ conflict to various client regimes and insurgencies throughout Africa, Asia and Latin America . During this period, unwilling to risk a direct confrontation and possible escalation to a nuclear war, Moscow.
Today’s conflict in the industrial east of Ukraine is ethno-nationalist and territorial rather than ideological .
 Officially, the Kremlin denies it has troops fighting in Ukraine even if bases are mushrooming on the Russian side of the border .
 Viktor Yanukovych is declared coup in Moscow, Ukraine’s led by Viktor Yushchenko winner in the presidential election . Yulia Tymoshenko, who was elected president, begins to reverse reports of rigging by democratic reforms .
 Yanukovych will be Yanukovych. His rival the pro-Russian premier Viktor Yulia Tymoshenko will be the Ukrainian prime minister .
 parliament declares independence from the Soviet Union in a referendum endorsed by 90 percent of | the electorate .
 After the 17th century, the Ukrainian Cossacks signed a treaty with the tsar of Moscovy . The western regions of Ukraine passed between the rule of Warsaw and Moscow .
 The glue of Soviet power held in place a fault line between the western and Slavic worlds for a long time .
 The nuclear fault line is once again active, with nucleararmed players on either side .
 For many outside observers, it had been a question of when, not if, this fault line would become active . Euromaidan is a member of the European Union .
Resourcerich and nestling on Russia’s southern flank, a consultative referendum in the region in 1994 had been called concurrently with Ukraine's first parliamentary election . The referendum was held concurrently with the Ukraine'sfirst parliamentary election.
Ukraine did not federalise and Russian was not adopted as a state language . Ukraine did notFederalise and Russia was not used as a language .
 At the behest of the World Bank, a bracing programme of privatisation was pushed through Donbass . Many mines were closed.
 regional elite of oligarchs became rich. Awash with new, and often corrupt, money, the regional elite became rich .
 Viktor Yushchenko was elevated to the presidency by the 2004 ‘Orange’ Revolution . Upon taking power in February 2010, he rapidly reversed the pro-Western stance .
 The former KGB lieutenant colonel has sought to re-establish a Russian ‘sphere of influence’ of the type that existed in Cold War era .
 Ukraine was ahead of the others in having already initialised a trade agreement with the European Union . But Ukraine is ahead of other countries in the process of agreeing a trade deal .
 During November and December of 2013, there had been anti-government protests in Kiev . The protests took place during November andDecember of 2013 .
 The ‘Euromaidan’ movement sought a closer relationship with the EU and later, later, changes to the Constitution that would lessen presidential power .
 Putin and his Slav-nationalist power base could bring NATO right up to Russia’s borders . This was a dangerous precedent, one that could bring Russia's borders to NATO .
 Russia agreed to buy $15 billion in Ukrainian bonds and slash the price of natural gas by one third . A critical turning point came on 17 December.
 protestors were back on the streets by 24 December . This was a rebuke to the protestors, who nonetheless were back in the streets .
Thousands of students had gathered in Maidan Nezalezhnosti 24 years earlier, when it had been called Lenin Square .
 A decade before, the Square had been a focal point of the Orange Revolution . The Square was one of the focal points of the revolution .
 Molotov cocktails, projectiles and barricades were met with tear gas and riot shields .
 More than 50 civilians were killed by police in February . Police used live rounds, killing more than 50 people .
 On 16 March, a referendum in the Crimean region decisively endorsed Russian rule . The referendum was held in the Crimea region .
 Russian troops had already seized key locations in the peninsula . By that point, Russian troops were already seizing key locations .
 While these events unfolded, semipopulist revolts erupted in the resource-rich east . Also, while these events unfold, these events occurred in the region .
 The first phase of the ‘War in Donbass’ would last roughly from mid April to late June 2014 . The first stage would be the first phase.
 Self-proclaimed militias representing the Russian-speaking minority materialised and, usually after standoffs with the authorities, seized key buildings .
 Once the independence of Donetsk and Luhansk had been formally declared on 11 May, the battles grew more violent .
 Video footage shows uniformed snipers become more violent . The security forces are seen firing on protesters .
 Yulia 3 Tymoshenko is freed from prison and parliament votes to remove the president from office .
 The loss of Crimea to a westernaligned regime would spell the end of Russia as a world power’s world power .
 Most rebel-held AY towns had been retaken by the government forces . But by mid-July, most rebel- held AY cities had been taken back by government forces.
 Following a week-long ceasefire, the breakaway region seemed poised to be retaken by the government . The region has been on the verge of being retaken.
 This first phase of the war got under way while the dust of the Euromaidan revolution was still settling in Kiev . This is the first time the war has been over for more than a year .
 A Western-friendly oligarch who built his fortune on confectionary, his administration proved a controversial bulwark against the supposed expansionism of Putin .
 Ukraine’s 150,000-man army would stand little chance if Russian forces directly intervene in the fighting . Russia's military would have little chance to intervene.
 National Guard had been tasked with counter-insurgency . The government permitted the incorporation of several militantly nationalist groups into the National Guard .
 Euromaidan protests included some decidedly unsavoury factions that had nonetheless played an important role during the protests . These included some of the most controversial factions .
 Notable among these was Right Sector, whose ideology encompasses Christian fundamentalism, gun rights and homophobia .
 Both the battalion and the Poroshenko government denied their involvement . Both the Battalion and the government deny their involvement.
 The invocation of fascist or communist extremism has been an easy matter in a nation that was brutalised by both ideologies within living memory . But the invocation of fascism and communist extremism is an easy issue in a country that was brutally brutalised .
 A referendum, not recognised by Kiev, resulted in 89% of Donetsk and 96% of Luhansk electorate voting to break from Ukraine . The referendum was held in the Donetsk region, not recognized by Kiev .
Fighting between government forces and separatists had convulsed Artemivsk, Sloviansk, Karamtorsk, Horlivka, Mariupol and several smaller towns .
 Protesters in the Russian-speaking east occupy government buildings in Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv . They call for an independence referendum .
 Acting President Olexander Turchynov announces ‘anti-terrorist’ operation aimed at recapturing rebel-held areas .
 The EU-friendly oligarch Petro Poroshenko is elected president of 5 July 2014 DPR fighters abandon their stronghold of Sloviansk as fighting comes close to the Russian border .
 When separatists raided the armoury in Artemvisk, it housed about 30 tanks . The armoury was raided by separatists when separatists raided it .
 Donetsk International Airport was the focal point of heavy fighting between the government and separatists . From early on, the airport was the focus of the fighting .
Several dozen insurgents were killed before government forces were able to recapture the airport . Several dozen insurgents died before the airport was recaptured .
 By late June, Ukrainian forces claimed to have cleared separatists from the southern and western sectors of Donetsk Oblast and northern sector of Luhansk .
 Ukrainian troops, assisted by the National Guard, had retaken Mariupol . With the rebels still holding Donetsk City, it was designated as the capital of Donetsk Oblast .
 The scale of the fighting in Donetsk and Luhansk is escalating . But even as government forces bore down on Donetsk, the fighting is escalating.
 Yampil is a town held by several thousand rebels close to government-controlled Krasni Lyman .
 Government forces intended to take Yampil and push forward to rebel-held Siversk . Government forces wanted to take the town and move forward to Siverk .
 On 19 June, they attacked Yampil with air and artillery strikes . But they did not withdraw for at least 24 hours and also claimed to have downed a Su-25 bomber .
 In mid July, the conflict took a shocking new turn. As fighting raged close to the Russian border, Donbass seemed precarious .
 The aircraft vanished over the seas of South East Asia four months earlier . The aircraft was the same model that had vanished over South EastAsia four months ago .
 contact was lost with the pilot at 13.20 GMT about 50 kilometres from the Russia-Ukraine border . En route to Kuala Lumpur, the pilot was lost on the route .
 Footage soon emerged from rebel-controlled Donetsk showing wreckage . Witnesses reported seeing bodies falling from the sky .
 Weeks passed before all the wreckage and bodies were removed . Work being hampered by fighting in the region .
 Eventually, a deal was done with the militias and investigating teams went in . Eventually, the militias were found to be working together .
 Donetsk International Airport is almost completely destroyed after weeks of fighting . DPR fighters capture Donetsk International airport .
 Just who shot down Flight MH17 has since become a matter of heated argument . The MH17 incident has become a heated argument.
 U.S. officials have concluded that the plane was ‘likely’ downed by a Russiansupplied SA-11 missile . Moscow has placed blame at the feet of Ukrainian forces .
 The Dutch Safety Board is currently leading an international probe . It has already recovered the aircraft’s flight recorder .
 In July of this year, Malaysia pushed for the draft resolution of an international tribunal into the fate of the aircraft to be put before the UN Security Council . In July, Malaysia also pushed for a draft resolution.
 The ill-fated MH17 was not the first aircraft to be blown out of the skies . The Russian intervention was a Russian intervention .
 Ilyushin IIl-76 was shot down while attempting to land troops and supplies at Luhansk Airport . All 49 aboard were killed .
 More and more sophisticated weapons were appearing on the battlefield . Big guns and advanced missile systems were also appearing .
 Putin denied involvement in Donbass, but Russian ‘volunteers’ were increasingly appearing on battlefield .
 Don Cossack, Chechen, Ossetian and Abkhazi paramilitaries have been seen at such battle sites as Donetsk Airport . Donetsk Airport is located in Donetsk, Ukraine .
 Ukraine's Foreign Minister called the conflict an invasion by Russian forces . On 27 August, two columns of Russian tanks crossed the border .
 The presence of Russians in Donbass marked the beginning of a reversal of the separatists’ fortunes .
 Russian 'volunteers' were able to recapture many of the strongholds established during April and May .
 Ukrainian forces were reportedly attacked by Russian forces while travelling through a ‘green corridor’ arranged for their retreat . In September, Ukrainian forces abandoned the town of llovaisk following their abandonment .
 The region sought to implement ceasefires and demilitarisation in the region during 201415. February.
 They were signed after extensive talks in Belarus and brokered by the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe .
 By late September, a second battle broke out at Donetsk International Airport and this time the DPR were victorious . By late October, the DPR had been victorious .
Ukrainian forces abandoned Debaltseve, an important road and rail junction on the eastern edge of Donetsk .
 There have been no changes of territory since June . At present, there are skirmishes along both sides’ lines of control .
 The military deadlock in Donbass may reflect a wider political impasse, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russian troops are believed to be ready for a large-scale conflict . There are about 40,000 troops in Rostov Oblast .
 A possible future target could be the port of Mariupol, which has large metallurgical plants and access to the Sea of Azov .
 The Crimean region is now sunk in recession, afflicted by inflation and collapsed investment . From Putin's perspective, it makes sense to establish a land corridor to the Crimean region .
 Two U.S. studies say Russia would need to set aside nearly 150,000 troops to do this . But according to two studies, Russia would have to set away nearly 150k troops .
 The Russian armed forces consist of 750,000 soldiers, this is unlikely . Given that the Russian armed force consists of 750k soldiers, it is unlikely.
 IMF and EU have offered billions in aid but these are dependent on political reforms . Poroshenko is relying on links with the West; the IMF has offered billions of aid .
 He will gain little at home from a conciliatory approach that tacitly concedes power to Russia in Crimea . He also recognises some form of limited self-rule in Donbass .
 He will be badly imperilled by another military defeat on the scale of Debaltseve . He will certainly be badly imperilled by another military defeat .
 The Imperial Japanese Navy was on its last legs after the Pearl Harbor success . The Imperial Japan Navy was in its final stages .
 From Midway to Palau, Japan suffered losses from midway to the end of the decade .
 In the last quarter of 1944, any remaining hope for victory over the Allies was brutally quashed . In 1944, Allied hopes for victory in the war were quashed.
 The previous day’s missions had been difficult and inconclusive, but now the sun was out .
 These were escort carriers — basically large hulls supporting broad wooden decks loaded with fighters . These were escorts carriers .
 They were first used in the Atlantic to hunt U-boats . In the Pacific, they became indispensable for air cover during Aas landings . They were used to hunt the U- boats .
 Lieutenant Yukio Seki was killed together with laliswaarelarcromelle . The squadron leader was killed by his payload detonated below deck .
 USS Santee, Kitkun Bay and Suwannee suffered hits too . Their sister carriers USS Santee, Kitkun Bay and Suwannee also suffered hits .
 U.S. forces captured Iwo Jima in March 1945 .
Officers TL ACemYACeremANoLanliccl Mm Olalcyalm-yacey sxe m aleni'a el ts lates. The Ohka was an experimental weapon, the Ohka .
 Young men, with or without flying experience, were given the choice to volunteer for the Tokko Tai if they were already enlisted .
 If a mission was aborted, the Tokko WE Timaatelalerclimiatsiaaeleatsvem dar-imre i e. e. will be jovial and without remorse upon his return, says the author .
 Before flying, they scribbled a haiku, sipped from a cup of alc . ACca’are lave ma (ste mrs WZ Alicomars) (ealiaatelCmaelelare)
 Sentimentality also mattered for Tokko Tai eo. The mother's fate also mattered.
 In practice, hundreds of kamikazes were lost crashing into the water rather than their intended targets . By the time he arrived in the Philippine Islands, Onishi had new orders .
 Takijiro Onishi was responsible for some of the technical details of the attack on Pearl Harbor . He was born in Hyogo Prefecture on 6 June 1891 . His life coincided with the rise of Imperial Japan .
 This supposedly originated from an unconventional tactic he explained to subordinates for crippling a U.S. Navy aircraft carrier . He crashed a bomb-laden plane into it.
 A staunch patriot, Onishi also believed that it was unsound for Japan to wage war on the U.S. Onishi was a staunch patriot .
 Some kamikaze writers suggest Onishi was introduced to the concept of self-sacrifice among Japanese pilots in 1943 or 1944 .
 Onishi harboured serious doubts about the effectiveness of Special Attack tactics .
Officer with his background has an expert grasp of modern air combat . It was particularly disturbing for him, given his background, with his experience .
 He was gripped by a determination to do anything for the Japanese cause, more so with the Allies drawing near in ever greater numbers . Like the rest of the IJN in 1944, he was gripped with a determination.
 Onishi's personal conduct during the campaign to reconquer the Philippine Islands is unknown . Onishi’s personal conduct is unknown.
 Tokko Tai tactics he devised were still being carried out well into 1945 by IJN holdouts in the Philippines . But the TokkoTai tactics were still still being used well into1945 by I JN .
 Back in Tokyo, Onishi knew, at least privately, that Special Attack tactics were squandering lives . Back in Japan, he knew that Special attack tactics were Squandering lives.
 Hearing of the emperor’s surrender message over the radio, the disheartened Onishi committed seppuku, or ritual suicide .
 A day later, he was found writhing in agony in agony. He was found a day later on 16 August .
 Having disembowelled himself with a knife, he was unable to slit his throat . He refused a swift decapitation from a second .
 During the months after Pearl Harbor, it continued winning dogfights against many Allied planes it faced in the air .
 Japanese planes also had weaker engines, less armour protection, and couldn't match the altitude of U.S. heavy bombers .
 The Tokko Tai is a Japanese aircraft manufacturer . It is based in Tokyo, Japan, and has been owned by several Japanese companies .
 The plan was drawn up at Tachiarai Joint Service Flight School outside Chiran . It was to deploy as many Special Attack formations as possible .
In 1945, there was still enough AGM Zeros left for use in kamikaze missions . In 1945, the remaining AGMZeros were still available for use on missions .
 Hundreds of older ADM fighters were co-opted for the missions as well . Hundreds of the older ADm fighters were Co-opted as well as the older fighters .
 The Zero was a lightweight marvel with superb manoeuvrability and an excellent 14-cylinder 1,130 horsepower engine . Designed by the inventor and engineer Jiro Horikoshi in the late 1930s, the Zero was the lightweight marvel .
 At the beginning of Japan's Pacific War, the Zero proved its superiority over American rivals like the F4F Wildcat .
 More than 10,000 Zeros would be built, but the gradual loss of IJN carriers in Midway, the Philippine Sea and other battles limited its effectiveness .
 With insufficient armour plating, countless numbers of them were blown to bits as they approached United States warships .
 The UN Air Corps officers used aircraft like ordnance and cared little for keeping their planes airworthy .
 This, along with diluted aviation fuel supplies, explains the high rate of failure among Special Attack missions . This is due to the high number of missions that have failed to perform well .
Once a Tokko Tai pilot was selected and trained, his plane was given enough fuel to reach the area of operations . Once a Tok Ko Tai pilot is trained, he was given the fuel he needed to reach operations .
 The Tokko Tai pilot embraced his end as he flew to his target . The pilot was not involved in an accident .
 ARMAME The Zero carried two light machine guns and a pair of nastier surprises . The Zero was armed with two light machines and two machine guns .
 Allied ships also used the same gun on incoming Zeros . Based on the Swiss Oerlikon, the Allied ships use the same weapon .
 Zeros prepare for takeoff to take part in the first wave of the attack on Pearl Harbor . The Zero's greatest asset was its manoeuvrability.
 This was made possible by its lightweight airframe, which had little armour protection . The airframe had little Armour protection .
 Surviving the experience naturally inspired a curious regard for the Japanese who seemed so eager to vanquish them . The Japanese seemed to be so eager.
 The U.S. Army's Grim proof of Onishi's handiwork is in Yank, the United States Army’s Grim proof .
 Once Tokko Tai missions began in October 1944, any large Allied ship was fair game weekly news magazine . The magazine was about a genuine kamikaze pilot .
 Before their deployment, they were allowed to write a short letter home . They had been deployed to Afghanistan .
 He was soon disappointed by his treatment at the hands of Tokko Tai officers . But he is soon disappointed with his treatment by the police .
 Okamoto was forced to endure lectures about the virtues of ancient samurai . He was stranded at sea with his navigator, who perished in shark-infested waters .
After hours afloat, he reached an island inhabited by suspicious natives deathly afraid of US air strikes . He reached the island after hours afloat .
 Not all recollections were as light-hearted as Norio Okamoto’s . But not all memories of Special Attack activities were good .
 rumour spread that he crashed a plane into the sea after Japan’s surrender .
 Most striking is the belief that it was embraced by the IJN as a credible strategy . The IJJN has been embraced by some of the world's most successful countries .
Personal appeals by the emperor together with rosy propaganda inspired so many volunteers . This is why personal appeals and propaganda inspired many volunteers. The emperor's personal appeals are why he was inspired by his propaganda .
 Japanese soldiers, being patriotic to the core, weren’t obsessed with dying either .
 Many kamikazes who survived the war admitted a reluctance to squander their lives . Death in battle was a last resort.
 Yasukuni shrine was erected in Tokyo in 1869 . It was the final year of the Meiji Restoration that replaced the Tokugawa Shogunate . Japan slowly shed its feudal system.
 Oro amcomarcavaielelalemaalele. Instead, NCKSIUL cctoio1.1 al ecxO Mme is Oro amarcavaialele (O Oro amcarcavailelalele) The emperor's place
 Japanese servicemen began sacrificing themselves as soon as the tide began to turn against their country .
 The critical moment was the arrival of American long-range bombers in 1944 . The arrival of U.S. bombers was the critical moment of the war .
 remote incidents of fighter pilots ramming their planes began to warrant notice . U.S. B-29s with machine guns were unable to defeat American B- 29s withMachine guns .
 A growing awareness of Japan’s vulnerability influenced the suicide ideal among the officer class . Japan's suicide ideal was the ideal for officer class.
 IJN Air Corps soon organised a genuine suicide force despite its low chances of success . Japanese high command has tacit endorsement by the Japanese highcommand .
In or before August 1944, Warrant Officer Shoichi Ota told a befuddled Lieutenant Commander Tadanao Miki that in lieu of a guidance system, his team should just install a cockpit on the MXY7 Ohka .
 The suggestion launched the Divine Thunder God Corps, the IJN’s newest elite unit and the original Tokko Tais .
 The first batch of Ohkas were supposed to be deployed in the Philippine MXY-#Ohka plane Islands in 1944 but their transport, the warplanes and transport, were destroyed . The Ohkas are believed to have been in the Philippines.
 The concept behind the Ohka might have been April Fool’s Day, or perhaps the idea of a Okinawa Okinawa . Maybe because it was flight of 18 G4M medium bombers heading for the Okinawa .
 The formation was intercepted by the United States, but the cherry blossoms were too silly to comprehend .
 The Special Attack proved more ineffective the more it was used . Rebekka Hearl's Special Attack was more ineffective .
 A specific doctrine was never developed by the U.S. Navy and Air Corps to counter them . Since the kamikazes were only used en masse in two campaigns — Leyte Gulf and Okinawa — a specific doctrine wasn't developed . The doctrine was only used in
 By 1945, U.S. warships were equipped with incredible anti-air and anti-submarine weapons . The U.N. Navy was equipped with an arsenal of more than 100,000 weapons .
 The former included radar-assisted guns, AA gun batteries and rapid-fire cannons . The former includes radar- assisted guns,AA gun batteries, rapid fire cannons .
 Most effective were the twin 40mm Bofors mounted in nests on U.S. Navy destroyers, carriers and transports .
 The 40mm Bofors of Sweden was a European success before licensed production began in the U.S. in June 1941 . In June 1941, the 40mm bofors would blow it to pieces .
 The U.S. Navy air cover for blowing up any incoming suicide planes .
 By the time Okinawa was firmly under American control, it proved to be the costliest battle in the Pacific Theatre .
 A total of 2,363 kamikaze attacks between October 1944 and 21 June 1945 left more than 5,000 U.S. and Allied dead . The attacks were carried out in the United States.
 atomic bombs levelled Hiroshima and Nagasaki . A little more than a month after Okinawa, atomic bombs were levelled .
 The last kamikaze squadrons were disbanded and the once-doomed pilots lived on to demobilise for peacetime .
 These place names may have exotic origins but, because of the battles fought in Waterloo, all are now quintessentially English words weighted with meaning .
 Henry V’s victory over the French near Azincourt castle in 1415 is the name Agincourt . The name is a loudest through history .
 Anne Curry’s wonderfully accessible book about the battle is about the clash itself .
 The classic two-fingered salute wasn’t a defiant gesture created by the English archers . While shoring up others that sounded like later embellishments from a poet’s pen.
 The sky really was black with arrows that day apparently . The king himself could deliver a rousing team talk to his troops .
 He was swift to take political advantage of his victory, sending out a loud message across Europe and at home that he wasn't a man to be messed with .
 Agincourt is an inspiring tale of overturned odds in the English imagination . But it was undoubtedly the contribution of a certain Mr W Shakespeare that has done the most to confirm the story .
 Shakespeare's Henry V was written at a time when England was involved in a protracted conflict with Spain . England was steeling itself for what would be a messy conflict in Ireland .
 The rousing speeches were intended by Shakespeare to fire up his audience’s spirits in darkness .
 England is a country that's been at almost perpetual war ever since . It is not surprising that the play’s speeches and sentiments have frequently resurfaced .
 Agincourt has been used to convince the country on repeated occasions of its own invincibility . Curry’s insightful book shows us how the myth of Agin court has been harnessed by jingoism .
 The BUIZED CITY THE DESTRUCTION of COVENTRY, 1940 A THOROUGH ACCOUNT of HOW a PROVINCIAL BRITISH CITY BECAME THE TESTING GROUND for a NEW KIND of WARFARE .
With its gas chambers and atomic bombs, it was the first truly total war . The bombing of Coventry in November 1940 was one of the first indications of what that meant .
 Zeppelin raids had hit London during World War I; Guernica and Barcelona had both been struck by bombers during the Spanish Civil War . Warsaw had been terrorised from above when Hitler ordered the invasion Poland .
 The bombing of Coventry marked the moment when aerial bombing became a weapon of mass destruction .
 Her book begins with a brief history of Coventry, explaining how its position in the industrialised East Midlands put it at the heart of the British war effort .
 The narrative then sweeps through the build up to war and its early days, switching between the fighting on the continent and the changing life of Coventry’s citizens .
 We’re fed a decent potted history of events that provide a good backdrop for what is to come — the bombing — while an impending sense of disaster brews ominously . The bombing is expected to take place in London on Sunday .
 Farrington has used first-hand accounts to help paint her canvas . She has also used first hand accounts to paint her canvases .
 She provides a real sense of the terror the raid caused, as Coventry's citizens huddled in claustrophobic shelters .
 Most of their “Medieval gem’s of a city had vanished. There is also a real sense of the bewilderment the raid’'s survivors felt when the smoke cleared .
 Coventry wasn’t destroyed completely, though, and the latter part of the book uses the same weave of historical master narrative and first-hand accounts .
 The raid was used by Churchill first for propaganda purposes, helping to propagate support in the then-neutral USA, and then as an excuse to unleash Britain’s own bombing offensive .
 Berlin, Hamburg, Cologne and Dresden. So they did — again and again — with appalling consequences . So they do — again, again — With appalling consequences in Germany, Hamburg and Cologne .
 Albert Speer's lawyer wanted him to be seen as a cultured technocrat with no interest in Hitler’s racist policies and no knowledge of its consequences . Speer is largely remembered by history as his lawyer at the Nuremberg trials .
Charles de Gaulle spent the next 20 years in jail for war crimes . Described as courageous in the court's judgement of him, he escaped the hangman’s noose . Calls for this apparently civilised man to be released early came from such notables
 The Holocaust survivor has spent much of his time composing two memoirs . He insisted he knew nothing of the Holocaust . He gave a series of high-profile interviews .
 Speer used these to broadcast his ignorance of the regime’s more heinous crimes, and to portray himself as a man who merely dreamed of creating beautiful buildings .
 His books — along with another about the SS — went on to become international best sellers . He died of natural causes, aged /6, a wealthy man .
 Martin Kitchen’s new book points out that Albert Speer was much more complex and culpable than his legacy suggests . Speer's new book, Martin Kitchen, was published on Sunday .
 Others have argued that Speer knew about Hitler’s genocide all along, and that he was more than just a man who designed pretty cities .
 Hitler's Architect is the first biography of Speer to take evidence that he did know of the regime’s atrocities .
 What emerges is a portrait of a man who was a vain, opportunistic playboy, and an intelligent, brooding loner .
 The conman was a cold-hearted conman whose decisions and actions resulted in the anguished deaths of countless souls . What he ultimately was, though, was acold-hearted Conman whose actions and decisions resulted in many deaths .
 Speer’s life as we’ve known it until now was a fiction, a piece of theatre as showy and diverting as the enormous stage sets he built for his Fuhrer .
 Kitchen’s book systematically destroys the myth that Speer was somehow a ‘good Nazi’ The book rips the mask of respectability from this legacy .
 Andrew Walsh’s historical account of the Battle of Bogside is interspersed with eyewitness accounts from people at the heart of the battle .
 This collection of facts, stories and titbits of information offers a glimpse into the ancient world . It is not a step-by-step guide about how to succeed at chariot racing .
 Voices From The Past delves into the chaotic scenes on the Channel Islands as Hitler's Blitzkrieg arrived and occupation ensued .
 A few entries seem slightly tenuous, weighty tomes that are invariably densely or retread ground already covered earlier . But these are small quibbles in what is colourful publication, divided into digestible overall a strongly recommended title .
 Snippets that will work for readers of all Se cael aiid seal . 50 colourful titles such as Leaders That Changed History and How To Think Like Sherlock .
 Smith includes strategies that come under commerce, politics and society . Smith also includes strategies for business, politics, society .
 He covers many of military history's finest successes, including George Washington’s guerrilla-like strategy in the American War of Independence . He also covers Nelson's innovative naval formation at the Battle of Trafalgar and Allies’ intricate planning ahead of D-Day .
 Smith isn't afraid to recognise success in all strategic areas, such as the Nazis’ Final Solution . Smith isn’t afraid to recognise the success of the Nazis.
 Rosemary Hawley Jarman turns her attention to fact in the brilliant Agincourt: The Story Of A Battle .
 This is a thorough account of an integral part of English and French history . Detailing the whole of Henry V’s invasion, this is a detailed account of the entire invasion .
 The Hundred Years’ War was a full European war and incorporates detail that is absent in similar releases . Split into easily digestible chapters.
 Jarman is a writer of fiction and the whole invasion is detailed superbly . It is clear from the outset that Jarman has been a writer.
 The residents of Harfleur are described as “running around like inhabitants of a kicked antheap,” vividly illustrating the panic that was present .
 This excellent description prevents the book from ever getting bogged down in facts and Statistics . It's a trap that some do fall into, says author .
 Jarman delves into the mind of King Henry, explaining his desire to emulate his great-grandfather Edward Ill and his devotion to his faith .
 The only chapter dedicated to the battle itself is the only chapter of the book .
 Compact yet thorough, it doesn't hold back on description of the longbowmen . "Shoeless, gloveless, pale and desperate"
 After the catastrophic French defeat, the book slows down and enters a reflective aftermath . The book focuses on the wider aspects of Henry's reign .
 Focused, as it is on photographs, the story is told in relatively broad strokes . In-depth introduction lays out finer details of the war in 1943, making this a solid read .
 The book chronicles the Allies' efforts to overcome the Axis and turn the tide of the war for good . It's fair to say that this book offers more interesting details than previous entries into the series .
 The Battle of the Huon Gulf, in which the Allies destroyed three Japanese transports and 80 aircraft, was the most humiliating defeat in the war so far . Stalingrad, where the loss of the 6th Army resulted in Germany’s most humiliating loss in the War so far
 This is a great starting point for researching one of World War II’s most Crucial periods . Overall, this is the best entry into this series so far .
Head of Sales Hang Deretz 01202 586442 hang.deretz@imagine-publishing.co.uk.uk Account Manager Lee Mussell 01 202 586424 lee.mussell.com International History of War is available for licensing .
Contact the International department to discuss partnership opportunities . Contact the International Department to discuss partnerships .
 Nothing in this magazine may be reproduced in whole or part without the written permission of the publisher of the magazine . The publisher of this magazine is responsible for all the content .
 All copyrights are recognised and used specifically for the purpose of criticism and review . Allcopyrights are recognisable and used for the purposes of criticism .
 The magazine has endeavoured to ensure all information is correct at time of print . Prices and availability may change .
 This magazine is fully independent and not affiliated in any way with the companies mentioned herein . It is not affiliated with any companies mentioned in the magazine .
 Imagine Publishing gives Imagine Publishing an irrevocable, perpetual, royalty-free licence to use the material across its entire portfolio, in print, online and digital .
 Neither Imagine Publishing nor its employees, agents or subcontractors will be liable for the loss or damage . Any material you submit is sent at your risk .
 ‘Douglas’ was the star of one of these popular shows .
 Douglas was the prop of soldier-turnedventriloquist Arthur Langley Harden . He arrived in France for service in March 1917 .
 Colonel K C Brazier-Creagh noticed the positive affect the dummy was having on morale .
Harden and Douglas were moved away from the front line to perform the act to injured soldiers . Subsequently, Harden and Douglas had to be moved away to perform to injured troops .
 The show was such a success that it even dissuaded Harden from pursuing an officer's commission . The show could well have saved his life, he said .
 Ventriloquism was just one of the ways that troops were entertained on the front of the troops .
 Shows were put on that included men cross-dressing, acting out folk tales such as Cinderella . Soldiers even wrote new material on the front .
 The Balmorals were a theatrical troupe that performed satirical sketches . POWs performed when they were imprisoned to raise the morale of others in German prison camps .
 Props were created out of anything the men could find on the front line . Soldiers did their best to take themselves away from the harsh reality of war .
 A party of Royal Irish Rifles resting in a communication trench early in the Battle of the Somme Left . Football was another form of entertainment.
 The Napoleonic range is a collection of statement pieces from the Napoleonics range .
 These very special Journeys of Remembrance will take you to the heart of Normandy’s rich and eventful WW2 history .
 An official Royal British Legion guide and a medic accompany the group . The group is based in London, England .
 Many were from the British 14th Army and were awarded more Victoria Crosses than any other Second World War campaign . Many of the Crosses were awarded by the British Army .
We pay tribute to troops who secured a vital foothold in the Allied invasion of Burma and the ultimate defeat of the Japanese . We pay tribute. We also paid tribute to the British troops who fought in Burma .
 Rangoon only reached by special train up the historic line . The former capital Mandalay and the Chindit area of operations in the North are only reached on special train .
 Join us to discover an unspoilt land of rugged jungle, rice fields, beautiful temples, colourful markets and colourful markets .
 The Battle of the Somme began on a bright July morning in 1916 . Mike Bradley Prices: £2499 per person .
After five months of gruelling struggle this piece of French countryside was reduced to razed villages and burnt out farmland .
 It is those men who we will never forget and who we honour on this tour. It's those men we'll never forget. It is the men we will not forget. We honour them.
 We will arrange personal visits to memorials and cemeteries in the Somme area . We will learn how they are maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission .
 This tour will take place over the International Centenary event on the weekend of 1st July . The tour will also take place in London and London .
 Arena Travel offers more information on Arena Travel . If you would like more information please contact Arena Travel on the details below .
 RBL guide Remembrance Travel is the travel arm of The Royal British Legion . RBL has been running tours since 1927 .
 Arena Travel on First World War & Second World War Journeys of Remembrance and anniversary events . We now work in partnership with Arena Travel. Arena Travel is a partner with the World War II memorials and Remembrance events .
 Whether you are an association, a group of friends or a club, we can also create a bespoke, personalised tour . The tour is unique to your needs .