 On March 31, Ukrainians go to the polls to elect their sixth president . Ukrainians will vote on March 31.
 We analyzed the most widespread Kremlin manipulations about Ukraine's presidential election on Russian state-controlled media .
 Channel One Russia claims President Petro Poroshenko bribed the Patriarchate of Constantinople to get autocephaly for the Ukrainian Orthodox Church in order to gain some points in the pre-election ratings .
 The channel claims that Poroshenko signed a secret agreement to transfer buildings, premises, and other objects to Istanbul .
 The agreement between Kyiv and the Orthodox church in Constantinople says that Ukraine has no obligation to transfer any buildings . However, the agreement between the church and Kyiv says that Kyiv does not have to transfer buildings .
 Ukraine's independent church has been a target of Russian propaganda since it gained autocephaly . The independent church is an independent church in Ukraine .
 Many Russian and pro-Russian outlets are spreading a boogeyman narrative that the Ukrainian church will fall under the control of what Russians call the "Istanbul patriarchate" In this way, it will bring Orthodox Christians under control of a Muslim state .
 The UN report on Ukraine deals mainly with the catastrophic human rights situation in the territories occupied by Russia .
 Russia is responsible for the atmosphere of intimidation that prevails in the areas of Ukraine that it occupies. In other words, Russia is behind the atmosphere that prevail in Ukraine .
 State-controlled media claim that international organizations are completely dissatisfied with the pre-election environment in Ukraine . State- controlled media say that international groups are dissatisfied with Ukraine's pre- election environment .
 PACE praised this campaign, pointing to some problems that still might be resolved by the election . In fact, PACE noted that some problems still might still be resolved .
 PACE never concluded that these allegations were true . It was also concerned that some candidates were trying to establish vote-buying systems .
 Kremlin media exaggerate pro-Russian Ukrainian presidential candidate Yuriy Boyko's chances of winning . Kremlin media exaggerated the chances of Boyko winning .
 In reality, Boyko has no shot at making the second round of the presidential election . In reality.
State-controlled channels love to repeat the idea that Ukraine's election will be falsified . The state-controlled channel loves to repeat its idea.
 Marat Bashirov served as chairman of Council of Ministers of the "Luhansk People's Republic" from July 4 to August 20, 2014 . He was also the chairman of the Council of ministers of the ""Luhans People's republic"
 The message of a third Maidan is constantly repeated by Kremlin media . Ukraine is waiting for the "third Maidan" The message is being repeated by the Kremlin media.
 Medvedchuk is an odious Ukrainian businessman with a pro-Russian stance . He is an intimate friend of Vladimir Putin .
 Kremlin media point to Kirill Vyshinsky's case as proof that freedom of speech is being squeezed during the campaign .
 Vyshinsky was the former chief editor of RIA Novosti Ukraine . His case is now being tried now .
 The Special Service of Ukraine alleges that he helped Russia occupy Crimea and the Donbas in 2014 . Russia gave Vyshinsky 53,000 Euros monthly .
 Russia is deeply interested in Ukraine's election and attempting to shape public opinion . Russia is also trying to shape the public opinion in Ukraine .
 Russia wants to persuade its citizens that the situation in their country is much better than in the neighborhood . U.S. and Europe should not support Ukraine, Russia says .