 The Russian government asked for a formal halt to NATO’s eastern enlargement . A ban on intermediate-range missiles in Europe and a ban on Western assistance to Ukraine .
 Moscow does not have a veto over NATO’s decisions, says U.S. officials . It has no grounds to demand that the West stop sending weapons to Ukraine, they say .
 It appears determined to follow through with countermeasures if it doesn’t get its way . Now, however, it appears to be determined to take countermeasures .
 The West was given just a month to respond, which circumvented the possibility of prolonged and inconclusive talks . The West has been given just one months to respond .
 Both drafts were published almost immediately after their delivery . The move was intended to prevent Washington from leaking and spinning the proposal .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is acting as if he has the upper hand in this standoff, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin has been in a standoff with the Russian President since the beginning of the year .
 According to U.S. intelligence services, Russia has nearly 100,000 troops and a great deal of heavy weaponry stationed on the Ukrainian border .
 The U.S. and other NATO countries have condemned Russia’s moves but have limited their threats of retaliation to sanctions . The United States will not defend Ukraine, which is not a NATO member .
 The Russian government no doubt understands that thanks to polarization and gridlock, ratification of any treaty in the U.S. Senate will be all but impossible .
 An executive agreement between two governments does not have to be ratified and thus not have the status of a law . A more realistic alternative to an executive agreement may be a more realistic option .
 If Putin is acting as if he has the upper hand, that’s because he does, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin's actions are similar to that of Vladimir Putin, he says .
 The Kremlin could be satisfied if the U.S. government agreed to a formal long-term moratorium on expanding NATO and a commitment not to station intermediate-range missiles in Europe .
 A separate accord between Russia and NATO would restrict military forces and activity where their territories meet . It is an open question whether the Biden administration is willing to engage seriously with Russia .
 Opposition to any deal will be high in the U.S. because of domestic political polarization . Biden administration to criticism that it is caving to an autocrat .
 leaders will feel that a negotiated settlement between Washington and Moscow leaves them on the sidelines . Opposition will also be high in Europe, where leaders will also feel that they will be high .
 Putin has presided over four waves of NATO enlargement and has had to accept Washington’s withdrawal from treaties governing anti-ballistic missiles, intermediate-range nuclear forces, and unarmed observation aircraft .
 The Russian commander-in-chief is supported by his security and military establishments . Despite the Russian public's fear of a war, he faces no domestic opposition to his foreign policy .
 Biden was right not to reject Russia’s demands out of hand and to favor engagement instead .
 There is significant asymmetry in the importance the West and Russia ascribe to Ukraine . The West and the Russia ascribes to Ukraine.
 The West did extend the prospect of NATO membership to the country in 2008, but without a formal timetable for admittance .
 There would be little public support in the U.S. for deploying troops to fight for Ukraine .
 Washington is saddled with a promise to Kyiv that both sides know it cannot keep . Both sides know they can't keep the promise .
 Russia, by contrast, treats Ukraine as a vital national security interest . Russia has professed its readiness to use military force if that interest is threatened . Ukraine has said it is ready to use force if it is threatened.
 Moscow's openness to committing troops and geographic proximity to Ukraine gives Moscow an advantage over the U.S. and its allies . This openness to commit troops and geographical proximity gives Moscow a advantage.
 Despite Western media's predilection for depicting Putin as reckless, he is in fact cautious and calculating, particularly when it comes to use of force .
 Putin is not risk-averse, but in his mind, the benefit must outweigh the cost . Putin's actions in Chechnya, Crimea, and Syria are proof of that, writes David Frum .
 He won't invade Ukraine simply because of its leaders’ Western orientations. He won’t invade Ukraine just because of his leaders' Western orientation .
There are some scenarios that could prod the Kremlin to dispatch troops to Ukraine . The Kremlin has said it is considering sending troops into Ukraine .
 Putin publicly declared a Ukrainian attempt to regain territory in the Donbas region by force would unleash a military response . In 2018, Putin declared that a Ukrainian attempts to retake territory would unleash military response.
 Another Russian redline is Ukraine’s accession to NATO or the placement of Western military bases and long-range weapons systems on its territory .
There is almost no support from the United States and other NATO members for letting Ukraine join the alliance . For now, there is almostno support from U.S. and other members of the NATO alliance .
 In early December 2021, U.S. officials told Ukraine that NATO membership for that country is unlikely to be approved in the next decade .
 Putin is cautious and calculating, particularly when it comes to the use of force . Putin is careful and calculating.
 If NATO builds up its forces in the eastern member states, that could further militarize the new dividing line in Europe .
 Russia could be provoked into placing more short-range missiles in Kaliningrad . The noncontiguous, westernmost part of Russia is sandwiched between Poland and Lithuania .
 A closer military alliance with Belarus could put even more pressure on Ukraine . A closer alliance with Ukraine could put pressure on the Ukrainian government .
 Moscow could integrate Donetsk and Luhansk into a new geopolitical entity with Russia and Belarus . Moscow could also recognize the self-proclaimed ‘people’s republics’ of Donetsk andLuhansk .
 The geopolitical implications of these developments could reverberate beyond Europe . The implications of the developments could resonate beyond Europe.
 Moscow may need to lean on Beijing, which also finds itself under increasing U.S. pressure . To counter more drastic Western economic and financial sanctions, Moscow could lean on China .
 Presidents Putin and Xi Jinping are already discussing financial mechanisms to protect their countries from U.S. sanctions .
 Putin's scheduled visit to China for the Winter Olympics in February 2022 might turn out to be more than a courtesy call .
 The U.S. could then see the current Chinese-Russian entente turning into a tighter alliance . The United States could then be seen as a stronger alliance .
Military cooperation between the two powers would reach new levels . Economic, technological, financial, and military cooperation would be new levels of cooperation .
 Putin’s threat to force comes from his frustration with a stalled diplomatic process . Putin is frustrated with the diplomatic process.
 The Kremlin’s effort to entice Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky to strike a deal on Donbas was naught .
 Zelensky is an exceptionally erratic leader . He won the presidency in a landslide running as a peace candidate . He is an extremely erratic leader.
 The decision to use armed drones in Donbas in 2021 ratcheted up tensions with Moscow at a time when Ukraine could not afford to provoke its neighbor .
 France and Germany have flubbed efforts to strike a diplomatic resolution to the Russia-Ukraine stalemate . France, Germany and Germany are trying to reach a resolution .
 The Europeans were the guarantors of the Minsk agreements of 2014 and 2015 that were supposed to bring peace to the region . They had little success pushing the Ukrainians to strike a deal .
 German President Frank-Walter Steinmeier could not even get Kyiv to accept a compromise that would have allowed for elections in the Donbas region .
 The Russians went so far as to publish private diplomatic correspondence between their foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, and his French and German counterparts . The Russian foreign minister and French foreign minister have been in contact since November .
 NATO countries expanded their military activities in the Black Sea region and in Ukraine . The focus has been on the Russian troop buildup near the Ukrainian border .
 In June, a British destroyer sailed through territorial waters off Crimea, which London does not recognize as belonging to Russia . The Russians are angry at the British destroyer .
 In November, a U.S. strategic bomber flew within 13 miles of the Russian border in the Black Sea region, infuriating Putin . In November a United States strategic bomber flying within 12 miles of Russian border .
 As tensions rose, Western military advisers, instructors, arms, and ammunition poured into Ukraine .
 Russians suspect that a training center the United Kingdom is constructing in Ukraine is in fact a foreign military base . Russians also suspect that the UK is building a military base in Ukraine .
 Putin is adamant that U.S. missiles in Ukraine that can reach Moscow in five to seven minutes cannot and will not be tolerated . Putin is particularly adamant that deploying United States missiles can't be tolerated.
 Putin's threat to force comes from his frustration with a stalled diplomatic process . Putin’s threat to resort to force come from his frustrated with a delayed diplomatic process.
 Putin may emphasize the unity of the Russian and Ukrainian peoples, but what he cares most about is preventing NATO expansion in Ukraine .
 Ukraine's president Viktor Yanukovych was overthrown in March 2014 . He sent forces into Crimea in response to the overthrow of Ukraine’s president .
 Putin's actions suggest that his true goal is not to conquer Ukraine and absorb it into Russia but to change the post-Cold War setup in Europe’s east . Putin's real goal is to absorb Ukraine into Russia and change Europe's east .
 If he manages to keep NATO out of Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova out of Europe, he thinks he could repair part of the damage Russia's security sustained after the Cold War ended .
 Putin would be up for re-election in 2024, when he would be in office . Not coincidentally, that could serve as a useful record to run on in 2024 .
 The Carnegie Moscow Center is Director of the Carnegie Moscow Centre . The center is based in Moscow, Russia .
 The U.S. Embassy in Washington, D.C. has been in charge of foreign affairs for more than two decades . The embassy has been at the center of the world's largest embassy in Washington for over a decade .