 Crimea was transferred from the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic to that of the Ukrainian Socialist Republic . In 1954, by decree of Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, Crimea was officially transferred to Ukraine .
 When the Soviet Union broke up in 1991, Crimea remained a part of Ukraine . Crimea was part of the USSR when it was split in 1991 .
 The Belavezha Accords, which effected the breakup of the Soviet Union, also detailed that the port city of Sevastopol, along with the rest of Crimea, were to remain a part of Ukraine .
 Viktor Yanukovych was elected president of Ukraine in February of 2010 . He was elected on a platform promising closer ties to the European Union and the West .
 In November of 2013, Ukraine asked for $27 billion in aid and loans from the European Union . In November 2013, the EU requested $27billion in aid from Ukraine .
 Thousands of demonstrators took to the streets demanding a return to the 2004 Ukrainian constitution . The constitution had been abolished shortly after Yanukovych was elected .
 Russian authorities put pressure on Ukrainian government to bring an end to the demonstrations .
 The protests centered around the Maidan in downtown Kyiv, and thus took the name Euromaidan . The protests took place in the city of Kyiv .
 Euromaidan protesters fortified their area in the city with burning barricades, tires, and wooden obstacles . At one point, a trebuchet was even built .
 Regular police were replaced by the elite Berkut riot police, a militarized police force trained in urban combat and crowd dispersal .
 The Berkut were notoriously heavy-handed, and on February 18th, 2014, tensions came to a boiling point . On February 18, 2014.
 Police and protesters met on the streets, and over 20,000 citizens surrounded the parliament building .
 Batons were met with bricks, bricks with tear gas, tear gas with Molotov cocktails, eventually culminating in automatic weapons and sniper fire . Batons, bricks and tear gas were used in sniper fire.
 Police overran the Maidan and by the time the smoke began to clear on the 21st, over 80 people had been killed .
 Yanukovych was put up for impeachment by the parliament on the same day . Despite the signing of a deal with opposition leaders on the 21st, Yanukovych was placed on the list .
 Yanukovych fled for Kharkiv, and eventually Russia, leaving the presidency vacant as declared by the parliament on 22nd .
 The president was removed from power via a democratic process of at least a majority . This high number has led some to cast doubt on the reality of the vote .
 Presidential elections were scheduled for the 25th of May to decide on a permanent president . Presidential elections are scheduled to be held on May 25 .
 Rumors of fascists taking power in Kyiv were spread by Russian media, and on eve of the revolution tensions in Crimea reached a high point .
 When Yanukovych was ousted, many ethnic Russians in Crimea felt threatened . Many ethnic Russians felt threatened by the ousted leader .
 Crimean parliament called for extraordinary session and voted to recognize the interim Ukrainian government in Kyiv and abide by all laws and regulations declared by said government .
Rumors of Russian military forces mobilizing became rampant as protesters took to the streets in Sevastopol .
 A call to arms was issued by pro-Russian forces, and ‘self-defence militias’ with support from special forces troops, began surrounding Ukrainian military bases in Crimea .
 Highly trained military personnel with high-tech equipment, known as “little green men, began locking down key highways and transport hubs .
 Russia denied these were their forces, but months later it was revealed by President Putin himself that the forces were in fact Russian special forces .
 masked ‘little green men’ stormed the parliament building in Crimea on February 27th . They raised the Russian flag .
 Crimean parliament voted to dissolve the Crimean government and replace the prime minister . An emergency session of the Crimean parliament was held behind closed doors . The government had only won 4% of the vote in the most recent elections .
 Crimea would vote on greater autonomy from Ukraine in a referendum on May 25th . A referendum was also declared for the people of Crimea in Crimea on May 26th .
 Communications to the parliament building were cut and phones, laptops and other personal communications devices were confiscated by little green men prior to entering the building .
 Some members of parliament claim ballots were cast by masked men for parliamentary members who were not present .
Soldiers later identified as Russian soldiers stormed the international airports at Simferopol and Sevastopol .
 Naval vessels of the Russian navy arrived in Balaklava harbor and blockaded the harbor, trapping Ukrainian naval forces in port . Ukrainian forces were trapped in port by Russian vessels .
 The council voted unanimously in favor of such a resolution a mere hours later . The council votes unanimously in favour of such an resolution a few hours later.
 Russian forces, still without insignia, began arriving in Crimea to bolster the forces already in-country .
 The Russian consulate in Simferopol began issuing Russian passports to citizens of Crimea . Among the first to receive their newfound identities were former members of the Berkut riot police .
 The disgraced officers had taken up arms alongside the ‘little green men’ to control the roadways and transport hubs of Crimea . Starting March 1st prohibited any Ukrainian journalists from entering Crimea .
 Ukrainian forces stationed across Crimea awoke on the 2nd to find themselves surrounded by “little green men’s and pro-Russian separatists .
 Attempts to storm Ukrainian naval ships were made and several bases were assaulted . Several bases were also assaulted .
 Every member of the Ukrainian armed services was called up and put on alert . reservists were awakened by the telephone as they were called up .
 On March 4th, Putin issued a statement that no Russian forces were yet in Crimea, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary . The statement was made by Putin, who said there was no evidence of Russian forces in Crimea .
 The vote to initiate the referendum was done illegally and without a quorum, and as such was condemned as illegitimate by the United States and the European Union .
 The Mejlis of the Crimean Tatars voted not to participate in the referendum as­ they also saw it as illegitimate . It is important to note that the Melis voted not.
 The homes of Tatars were marked with the letter X by as-yet unidentified gangs . The letter X was written by an unidentified gang .
 The first of several blockade-ships was scuttled in Donuzlav Bay to prevent the Ukrainian navy from sortieing to sea . Finally, the first of many blockade-ship was scutled in the bay .
 Between the 7th and 10th of March, the estimated number of Russian troops in Crimea grew to 30,000 . The estimated number in Crimea is 30,00 .
 More and more Ukrainian bases fell or were besieged by Russian forces . The transfers of power and assaults were largely peaceful . The lack of violence can really be attributed to two factors .
 The forces in Crimea were likely members of Russia’s elite airborne unit, the VDV, along with specialized internal police forces and other special forces .
 No information was leaked from any of the Russian forces to the media as to the origins of the force . But said origins were obvious to even a casual observer .
 Ukrainian military officers of Crimea allowed any soldiers who wished to join the new Crimean Autonomous forces to do so . In many cases locked up or hid their weapons of their respective bases to prevent any provocations and gunfire from their own side .
 On the 11th and 12th of March, observers from the OSCE were prevented from entering Crimea at gunpoint . The OSCE declared the referendum illegitimate .
Crimeans lined up at the polls to vote in the referendum . Between the 12th and the 16th OSCE observers were continually barred from entering Crimea .
 Crimea declared its independence from Ukraine and requested annexation by Russia . By March 17th, Crimea had declared itsindependence from Ukraine .
 The man, who had been tortured before his death, is arguably the first death in the Russian invasion of Ukraine . The man's death is the first in Russia's invasion of the Ukraine .
 He had last been seen taking part in a protest against the annexation of Crimea by Russia . He was missing for over two weeks before his mutilated body turned up .
 The annexation and removal of Ukrainian forces from Crimea was largely peaceful . Over the next several days, a ceasefire between Russia and Ukraine was held .
 On March 24th, Russia was kicked out of the G8, which became, once more, the G7 . The G8 became the second G7 after Russia was booted from the G9 .
 This is one of the more prominent examples of the West using diplomacy to try to force the Russians to change their pathway toward war . It proved nearly useless, but it was a good example of diplomacy .
 Russia awarded a medal to former-Ukrainians who assisted in the annexation of Crimea . The following day, Russia awarded the medal to the former- Ukrainians .
 Crimea had changed to Moscow time and become a de facto part of Russia . By April 1st, Crimea had become a part of Moscow .
 Throughout the Crimean crisis, protests had begun sparking up in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of East Ukraine .
On April 7th, heavily-armed pro-Russian forces stormed the SBU offices in Luhansk and Donetsk . Donetsk declared the Donetsk People's Republic and requested annexation by Russia similar to that of Crimea .
 Security forces and armored vehicles from the central government arrived in Donetsk and Luhansk over the following two days . They arrived as a ‘last resort’ to be used if the situation did not deescalate .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk arrived in Donetsk to try to salvage the situation . He promised greater autonomy for the Luhansk and Donetsk regions .
 The following day, pro-Russian militants from Russia, Crimea, and Ukraine assaulted several government buildings in Sloviansk and looted their guns, distributing them to other protesters .
 The Ukrainian government declared an “Anti-Terror Operation’s” April 13th . Two Ukrainian serviceman died in the first day of the operation .
 The mission was a failure, with rebels remaining in command of the buildings they had taken . The mission had been a failure.
 flyers distributed in rebel-held Donetsk instructing all Jews to register with the DPR and pay a $50 tax . flyers were distributed on April 17th .
Nearly 1. million Ukrainian citizens are currently displaced by the conflict . To many of the Jewish residents, this brought back memories of events leading up to the Holocaust .
 rebels captured government buildings in several major cities, including Mariupol, Horlivka, and Sloviansk . By April 14th, rebels in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts had captured buildings .
 The acting government of Ukraine signed a decree on the 13th granting amnesty to all those involved in the takeovers if they laid down their arms within 24 hours . It also proposed greater concessions for regional autonomy .
 The Ukrainian government launched an assault on Sloviansk that lasted until June 5th . Ukrainian forces reclaimed the city after separatists refused to accept the offer .
 Luhansk People’s Republic was declared on April 27th . With their ranks swelled by an influx of former Berkut troops, it began capturing more government buildings .
 Ukrainian forces began battling DPR forces in Mariupol on April 13th . By the 24th, Ukrainian forces had largely routed the rebel forces .
On May 12th, rebel leader Igor Girkin declared himself the leader of the DPR and demanded the immediate surrender and allegiance of all armed forces in the region . On the 16th of May, Ukrainian forces retook the local administration building, with the help of local iron workers .
 Pavel Gubarev, the president of the DPR, declared martial law and pledged to destroy all Ukrainian forces which remained in the Donbas region .
On May 22nd, the DPR and LPR confederated under the flag of Novorossiya . On May 22th, the two confederates under the Flag of Novorsiya .
Further mention of pro-Russian forces in either Luhansk or Donetsk will be referred to as NAF or Novorossiya Armed Forces .
 Ukrainian forces will henceforth be known as UA . and Russian forces will be designated on an individual basis . Ukrainian forces to henceforth have been known asUA .
 LPR and DPR forces began attempting to consolidate their gains after referendums . Both ended in a vote to join Russia, which both ended in the vote to joined Russia .
 UA forces backed up by air support throughout the end of May and early June . The situation continued to escalate .
 Ukrainian forces made advances in the western parts of Donetsk and Luhansk . NAF forces secured border crossing sites on the Russian border and continued to hold out in several major cities .
 Ukrainian forces reported that Russian military personnel and equipment had crossed into Ukraine . On June 11th, Ukrainian forces said that Russian personnel had crossed in Ukraine .
 T-64 tanks and BM-21 Grad MLRS, with supporting infantry, spotted in NAF areas . On the next day a counteroffensive commenced which saw heavy losses on the UA side .
 In late June, the newly-elected Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko, declared a ceasefire to be in effect . The government attempted negotiations with LPR/DPR leadership .
Ukrainian forces launched a major counteroffensive on July 1st . When this failed, Ukrainian forces launched an anti-Russian counteroffensive .
 Heavy shelling on the part of UA forces assisted them in routing NAF forces from several key towns, notably Kramatorsk and Sloviansk .
 Ukrainian forces formally retook Sloviansk on the 5th, and NAF forces went into a full retreat . DPR forces pulled back almost entirely to the city of Donetsk .
 Rebels began attacking government forces who were still holding out at Donetsk International Airport on July 10th . The battle would last until January 2015, when the government forces were still in control .
 Fighting died down for several days, then reignited around the 16th in parts of eastern Donetsk Oblast . Fighting died in the early hours of the day .
 The following day, an event would take place that would change the shape of the conflict . The event would bring the war front and center in world attention .
 Russia had been providing rebels with higher-tech weaponry as well as drones, artillery radars, and anti-aircraft systems . Russia had also been providing tanks and APCs .
 At around 3.20 PM on July 17th, Russian troops operating an advanced 9K37 “Buk’s anti-aircraft missile launcher noticed a large blip on their radar .
 They tracked the aircraft and, suspecting it was a government transport, they fired . They fired .
 The feeling of elation soon subsided as hundreds of bodies began raining from the sky . It was the first time the bodies began to rain.
Shrapnel from a missile warhead impacted the starboard-front of the fuselage . Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 was destroyed by shrapnel .
 The aircraft, traveling at 30,000 feet, was quickly ripped apart and destroyed . The aircraft was traveling at30,000ft .
 Russian media reported that the airliner had been shot down by a Ukrainian Air Force Su-25 ground attack aircraft . An immediate cover-up was instigated by Russian media .
 The Su-25 lacks a pressurized cockpit, thus making it unable to fly at 30,000 feet . It is the first time the Su- 25 has a pressurized cockpit .
 The aircraft is designed for low-speed loitering over a battlefield, not engaging aerial targets at speed . In addition to this, it is designed to be low- speed loitered over the battlefield .
 The Su-25 fleet owned by Ukraine lacks the technical ability to shoot down another aircraft . As such, the Su- 25 fleet is not capable of shooting down other aircraft .
 The Su-25 has no air attack radar, and further does not carry air-to-air missiles . It also does not have air- to-air missile radar .
 Russia has a version that is capable of attacking other aircraft . But this version is only employed by Russia .
 The vehicle, with ID number 3X2, was attached to the Russian Army’s 53rd Air Defense Brigade . It was being operated by ‘volunteer’ forces of the Russian army .
 The crash brought Ukraine back to the forefront of world attention and is likely responsible for many nations that voted to place trade and economic sanctions on Russia in the wake of the disaster .
 The war in Ukraine seemed to quiet down for a few days before re-erupting on the 21st of July with extremely heavy fighting in Donetsk .
 Government forces rapidly recaptured several cities in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts before the frontline stalled out in Lohansk around mid-August .
 NAF troops, heavily supported by Russian regular military forces, launched a large counteroffensive . The Russian military forces launched the counteroffensive.
Government forces became enveloped in a pocket in the city of Iloviask, Ukraine . The pocket would come to haunt Ukrainian military forces again in the near future .
 The volunteer battalions supported by the UA forces were essentially abandoned by the military proper and left to fend for themselves . Heavy casualties resulted in heavy casualties .
 As the offensive continued, “little green men’s appeared in eastern Ukraine, the same soldiers responsible for the takeover of Crimea .
 At several training bases across Russia, tanks were readied for combat . reactive armor was attached, shells were stocked up, and identifying markers were painted over .
 The conscripted Russian soldiers were sent to the frontline after a few months of training .
 Often their first indication that they were in Ukraine would be a road sign for a major city, such as Donetsk or Luhansk .
 Ukrainian people were told they were ready to join the NAF if they were simply given support to do so . They were told that the Ukrainian people are ready to rise up .
 Rumors were told that the fight was against NATO mercenaries, in particular Polish soldiers . But these rumors have proven to be simply untrue .
 Regardless, soldiers fought independently of the pro-Russian rebels .
 The NAF was able to make large advances into Ukrainian territory, finally culminating in a ceasefire in September of 2014 .
 The ceasefire essentially froze the frontline, but fighting continued at such flashpoints as Debeltseve and Donetsk . In particular Donetsk International Airport remained partially in the hands of UA forces .
 rockets and shells continue to fall across much of Eastern Ukraine . A group of Ukrainian soldiers remain firmly in place at Donetsk Airport .
 These soldiers used the former military infrastructure of the airport as a series of bunkers . They survived wave after wave of enemy assaults and thousands of rockets, shells, and mortars .
 Eventually they became known as the Cyborgs of Donetsk Airport for their seemingly inhuman ability to stay alive under fire . The Cyborgs became known for their apparently inhuman ability.
 As the days grew colder, both sides began digging in with trenches and fixed emplacements like something from World War 1 .
 In January of 2015, NAF troops assaulted the airport in large numbers . In January 2015, the “winter offensive’s’ began, with Naf troops assaulting the airport .
 Mariupol was shelled once again, killing dozens of civilians . Two buses full of civilians were also attacked with rockets, killing another dozen and a half .
 The attacks occurred whilst the Charlie Hebdo attacks were taking place in France . Fortunately for Russia, these rocket attacks occurred while Charlie Hebdo was taking place .
 Their goal was to reaffirm their commitment to peace which had initially been agreed upon in September . They had initially agreed upon their goal in September. Their goal is to reaffirmed their commitment.
 The new treaty, known as Minsk II, came into effect on February 14th, 2015 . The treaty was created in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The agreement called for the immediate withdrawal of all heavy weapons to prescribed lines and a cessation of all hostilities on the front line .
 The rebel forces have launched an assault on the city of Debaltseve . The ceasefire agreement was supposed to be signed in February .
During the day, when OSCE observers were present, the fighting would cease for the most part . The fighting would stop during the day .
At night, when they retreated to their headquarters, the shelling would continue . At night, they would retreat to their HQ, and the shelling continued .
 At least 28 towns and villages fell to the rebels during the three months between the agreement and the 9th of May . The Ukrainian army tried desperately to uphold a ceasefire one side, the side of the rebels seemed not to recognize .
 Russia officially denies it has troops in Ukraine . But there is overwhelming evidence to the contrary .
 The NAF have claimed their heavy equipment is simply captured from Ukrainian stores . The untrained observer appears plausible, according to the NAF .
 Russia has sent its own army to fight alongside the rebels . It has been documented repeatedly that, among the captured vehicles, Russia has been sent to fight with rebels .
 Ukrainian army does operate the T-72 tank, for example, but does not operate T- 72BM variant . While the Ukrainian army operates the T72BM variant, it does not.
 “Nakidka’s’ camouflage is designed to absorb radar, and new Relikt explosive reactive armor on the turret and front of the vehicle .
 A photograph from Donetsk shows a small group of BM-21 Grad MRLS vehicles .
In the photograph one can see a BM-21 Grad-K variant, once again a variant not in use by Ukraine . However, in the photograph, one can also see a variant of the same type of variant .
 Another MRLS vehicle was spotted in the city of Makeeva, this time a BM-30 Smerch .
 Ukraine does operate the Smerch, but it has not lost any of them in the war . It is impossible for the rebels to have obtained one in such a way .
 According to a wounded Russian soldier, Russian troops are recruited from their units for “volunteer” missions in Ukraine .
Ukrainians promised higher pay and chance to “make a difference’s against the “fascists’ in Ukraine. They are promised high pay and the chance to make a difference against “Fascists in Ukraine”
 Once they accept, they are sent to training camps near the border where they paint over their unit markings, remove their patches, and collect/leave behind their identifying papers . Once they are accepted, they will be sent to camps.
 The rebel troops, according to Russian army sources, are of extremely poor quality . They do not stand up against the Ukrainian army very well, sources say .
 conscripts from the Russian army are sent in with tanks to bolster rebel troops . To assist them, they are sent to bolster the rebel forces .
 Other times, special forces units are deployed, as was seen in Luhansk, as seen in the city .
 The troops in question were armed with the AS “Val assault rifle, a weapon only in use by the Russian army . The AS ‘Val’ assault rifle is a weapon used by the army .
 Russian government documents discussing the deployment of troops to Ukraine have formed a paper trail . It was picked up by the late Boris Nemtsov, a member of the Russian Duma .
 Nemtsov was gunned down by an as-yet unidentified assailant within a block of the Kremlin . The gunman is believed to have been an unknown assailant .
 The Russian government has been accused of being involved in a cover-up of Russian involvement . The government has not been able to confirm that they are involved .
 Advanced radar systems, intercepted phone calls, and photographs uploaded by Russian soldiers to social media all point directly at the Kremlin .
 The United States has been firm in its support of Ukraine’s sovereignty . The U.S. has begun supplying the Ukrainian army with non-lethal aid .
 France cancelled the delivery of two Mistral-class assault ships it had built to sell to Russia . France has agreed to refund the money Russia has already paid toward them .
 Donetsk, Luhansk, Shyrokyne, and Mariupol have seen repeated fighting, shelling, and explosions . More than 80 Ukrainian soldiers have died since the ceasefire began, more than 80 have died .
 On almost a daily basis there is a terrorist attack in western Ukraine, usually in Odessa . Between the 10th and 12th of May alone saw 5 bombings .
 NAF has been putting OSCE decals on their cars to avoid fire from Ukrainian positions . More recently, the NAF have been putting them on their vehicles to avoid fires .
 One of the candidates reaffirmed his support for Ukraine during the Polish presidential elections . If elected, he would send Polish military forces into Ukraine to bolster Ukraine’s army .
 NATO or the Visegard Group will become entangled in the conflict as well . If Poland gets militarily involved, it is very likely that either NATO or Visegart Group will get involved .
 The conflict in Ukraine is of the utmost importance to the West, as its potential to spiral out of control greatly exceeds the risk of similar events being spawned by other world conflicts that are currently in progress .
 What Ukraine desperately needs from the West is financial support and advanced military technology . Ukraine needs financial support, advanced military tech.
 Ukraine’s domestic military production is among the best in the world . There is no shortage of factories and facilities to build and maintain military equipment .
 Ukraine lacks advanced gun sights, radar systems, and encrypted radios . NAF and Russian soldiers can easily intercept Ukrainian military transmissions and set up ambushes .
 If the U.S. wants to offer token support to Ukraine, doing the above is likely the best course of action . If the United States wants to help Ukraine, it will likely be the best way to help .
 If the U.S. and her Western allies do not support Ukraine, it is likely that the entire eastern half of the country will be carved off .
 The ceasefire is continuing to break down, and in all reality only stands in theory . As of this writing, the ceasefire is still being broken down .
 Violence has not returned to pre-September 2015 levels and seems to be dropping off . In recent days there has been a significant increase in violence .