 Following the Ukrainian Revolution of Dignity in 2014, Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula was occupied by unmarked Russian forces, and later annexed by Russia . These events marked the beginning of the Russo-Ukrainian War .
 Russia launched a full-scale invasion of the Ukrainian mainland across a broad front . Ukraine to sever all formal diplomatic ties with Russia after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Numerous bilateral agreements have been terminated and economic ties have been severed . Many bilateral agreements are terminated.
 Russian military buildup on the border of Ukraine escalated tensions between the two countries . The two countries have strained their bilateral relations .
 Ukraine broke diplomatic relations with Moscow in response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine . Ukraine broke relations with Russia after Russia invaded Ukraine .
 Streets bearing the names of Russian figures and monuments symbolising Russia and Ukraine friendship were removed from various locations across Ukraine .
 Volodymyr Zelenskyy presidency. 2020s. 4 Border 5 Armaments and aerospace industries . 6 Popular opinion 6. Popular Opinion 6 .
 Both Russia and Ukraine claim their heritage from Kievan Rus, a polity that united most of the East Slavic and some Finnish tribes . The polity was formed in the ninth to eleventh centuries and adopted Byzantine Orthodoxy .
 Kyiv, the capital of modern Ukraine, was proclaimed the Mother of Rus Cities in the late medieval state of Rus . According to old Rus chronicles, Kyiv was the city of the late Rus .
 Little Russia Office and Collegium of Little Russia After the Mongol invasion of Kievan Rus' histories of the people inhabiting territories of Russia and Ukraine diverged .
 The Grand Duchy of Moscow united all remnants of Rus's northern provinces and evolved into the Russian state . The state was formed from the Russian city of Moscow in the early 1930s .
 The Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia came under the domination of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, followed by the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth . The kingdom was also under the control of the Polish-Lithan Commonwealth .
 The militant Zaporozhian Cossacks refused polonization in the Commonwealth . They often clashed with the Commonwealth government controlled by the Polish nobility . They sought union with Russia.
 Much of Ukraine's territory was gradually annexed by the Russian Empire in the mid-17th century . It was gradually taken away by the time of the late 18th-century partition of Poland .
 The Cossack host was forcibly disbanded by the Russian Empire . Most Cossacks were relocated to the Kuban region on the southern edge of the Russia Empire .
Until the end of World War I this view was only opposed by a small group of Ukrainian nationalists . Until the end Of World War II this view had been only opposed to a small groups of Ukrainians .
 In 1804, the Ukrainian language was banned from schools as a subject and language of instruction . The language was also banned in 1804 .
 In 1876 Alexander II's secretary Ems Ukaz prohibited the publication and importation of most Ukrainian language books, public performances and lectures in the Ukrainian language .
 The borders of the Ukrainian SSR within the Soviet Union between 1924 and 1939 were the borders of Ukraine's SSR .
 The February Revolution saw establishment of official relations between the Russian Provisional Government and the Ukrainian Central Rada . The Rada was represented at the Russian government by its commissar Petro Stebnytsky .
 At the same time Dmitry Odinets was appointed the representative of Russian Affairs in the Ukrainian government . Odinets is also the representative for Russian Affairs.
 Ukraine declared its full independence from the Russian Republic on 22 January 1918 . The Ukrainian People's Republic existed from 1917 to 1922 .
 The two treaties of Brest-Litovsk that Ukraine and Russia signed separately with the Central Powers calmed the military conflict between them . Peace negotiations were initiated the same year .
 Ukraine became a battleground in the Ukrainian War of Independence, linked to the Russian Civil War . After the end of World War I, Ukraine became an important part of the Ukrainian war .
In 1922, Ukraine and Russia were two of the founding members of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . They were signatories of the treaty that terminated the union in December 1991 . Both Russians and Ukrainians fought in nearly all armies based on personal political beliefs .
 The Russian Empire also ended the ban on the Ukrainian language . The end of the Russian Empire was also the end of a language ban .
 This was followed by a period of korenizatsiya that promoted the cultures of the different Soviet Republics . This is followed by the period of the Soviet republics.
 In 1932–33 Ukraine experienced the Holodomor which was a man-made famine in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic . Up to 7.5 million Ukrainians died in the famine .
 Millions of citizens of the Ukrainian SSR, mostly ethnic Ukrainians, died of starvation in an unprecedented peacetime catastrophe . During the famine, also known as the "Terror-Famine in Ukraine"
 The Holodomor famine extended to many Soviet republics, including Russia and Kazakhstan . Scholars disagree on the relative importance of natural factors and bad economic policies as causes .
In the absence of documentary proof of intent, scholars have argued that the Holodomor was caused by the economic problems associated with the radical changes implemented during the period of liquidation of private property and Soviet industrialization .
 The Kyiv Appellate Court found Stalin, Kaganovich, Molotov, and Soviet leaders Kosior and Chubar guilty of genocide against Ukrainians during the Holodomor famine .
 Ukraine inherited the third largest nuclear stockpile in the world, along with significant means of its design and production .
 Ukraine had physical control of the weapons, but it did not have operational control . It was dependent on Russian-controlled electronic Permissive Action Links and the Russian command and control system .
 Ukraine transferred all Soviet-era strategic warheads to Russia in 1996 . By 1996, Ukraine had transferred all Russian strategic warheads from Ukraine .
 The second major dispute of early years was over the fate of the Black Sea Fleet as well as its operating bases, mainly Sevastopol on the Crimean Peninsula .
After several years of intense negotiations the whole issue was resolved in 1997 . The whole issue is resolved after several years.
Several Soviet-Western Europe oil and gas pipelines ran through Ukraine . Economics is another major dispute related to energy supplies .
 Overall, between one third and one half of Ukraine's trade was with the Russian Federation . Overall, the country's trade with Russia was at least one third of the world's trade .
 Russia remained Ukraine's primary market for ferrous metals, steel plate and pipes, electric machinery, machine tools and equipment, food, and products of the chemical industry .
 Russia–Ukraine gas disputes Vladimir Putin and Leonid Kuchma in December 2003 . Russia-Ukrainian gas disputes began in 2003 .
 disputes existed prior to the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election . Relations with Russia under the latter years of Leonid Kuchma's term improved .
 In 2002, the Russian Government participated in financing the construction of the Khmelnytskyi and the Rivne Nuclear Power Plants .
 In 2003, Russia attempted to integrate Ukraine into a new Russian-led Single Economic Space with Russia .
 The overall perception of relations with Russia in Ukraine differs largely on regional factors . The overall perceptions of relations between Russia and Ukraine differ largely on region factors .
 Many Russophone eastern and southern regions welcome closer relations with Russia . The majority of the Russian diaspora in Ukraine is home to the most Russophone regions .
 Russian language should be given official status and made the second state language. This was further fuelled by the public discussion in Ukraine of whether it should be made official status . Russian language is the second language in Ukraine .
 Russian media portrayed Ukraine as aggressive and greedy state that wanted to ally with Russia's enemies . The status of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol remained a matter of disagreement and tensions .
 Second Tymoshenko government Vladimir Putin and Viktor Yushchenko in February 2008 . Russia unilaterally withdrew from the Ukrainian–Russian intergovernmental agreement on the Main Centre for Missile Attack Warning signed in 1997 .
 relations between Ukraine and Russia soured due to Ukraine's support for Georgia and Russian claims of Ukraine supplying arms to Georgia . Russia refused to comply with Ukraine's new regulations for the Russian Black Sea Fleet .
 This rekindled controversy over the Russian military presence in Crimea . The Crimea region has been the subject of controversy for years .
 Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin accused Ukraine of supplying arms to Georgia during the Russo-Georgian War .
 Putin also claimed that Moscow had evidence proving that Ukrainian military experts were present in the conflict zone during the war .
Ukrspetsexport said no arms were sold during the war . Defense Minister Yuriy Yekhanurov denied that Ukraine's military personnel fought on the side of Georgia . No weapons or military equipment of the Ukrainian Armed Forces were present at the conflict .
 The U.S. supported Ukraine's bid to join NATO launched in January 2008 as an effort to obtain aNATO Membership Action Plan . He also confirmed that the international transfers of military equipment between Ukraine and Georgia from 2006 to 2008 were conducted in accordance with earlier contracts,
 Russia strongly opposed any prospect of Ukraine and Georgia becoming NATO members . Russia also opposed the prospect of Georgia becoming a member of NATO .
 Putin spoke of Russia's responsibility for ethnic Russians resident in Ukraine and urged his NATO partners to act advisedly . He also hinted to his U.S. counterpart at the possibility of Ukraine losing its integrity in the event of its NATO accession .
 exports of Russian natural gas through Ukraine were shut down in January 2009 . The dispute over natural gas prices led to the shutdown .
 The Russian media almost uniformly portrayed Ukraine as an aggressive and greedy state that wanted to ally with Russia's enemies and exploit cheap Russian gas . During the conflict the Russian media nearly uniformly portrayed the Ukrainian state as aggressive .
 Russian Energy Minister Sergei Shmatko told an investment conference that it appeared to draw Ukraine legally closer to the European Union and might harm Moscow's interests . The plan was unveiled at a conference at which it was unveiled .
 Medvedev announced he would not send a new ambassador to Ukraine until there was an improvement in the relationship . Medvedeva further announced that he will not send an ambassador until there is an improvement .
Analysts said Medvedev's message was timed to influence the 2010 Ukrainian presidential election . Yushchenko wrote a letter which noted he could not agree that the Ukrainian–Russian relations had run into problems .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said the Russian government wanted to see economy prevail in Russian–Ukrainian relations . The two countries set up joint ventures, especially in small and medium-sized businesses .
 On 2 December 2009, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Petro Poroshenko and Lavrov agreed on gradually abandoning the compilation of lists of individuals banned from entering their countries . The list was released in December 2009 .
 Vladimir Putin arrived at the 14th International Biker Rally in Sevastopol, Crimea, July 24, 2010 . Viktor Yanukovych was the most pro-Russian and neo-Soviet president to have been elected in Ukraine .
 Russian President Dmitry Medvedev wrote to former President Viktor Yushchenko in August 2009 . Medvedeva fulfilled all of the demands laid out by Medvede in his letter .
 Presidents Viktor Yanukovych and Dmitry Medvedev signed an agreement leasing the Russian Naval Forces base in Sevastopol to Russia for 25 years . In return for discounted natural gas deliveries which accounted for $100 per 1,000 cubic meters .
 President Dmitry Medvedev arrived in Kyiv on a two-day visit on 17 May 2010 . The lease extension agreement was highly controversial inside and outside of Ukraine .
Medvedev hoped to sign cooperation agreements in "inter-regional and international problems" During the visit Medvedev hopes to sign cooperation agreements .
 This was also mentioned on the official inquiry at the Verkhovna Rada by the First Vice Prime Minister Andriy Klyuyev .
 The main purpose of the visit was to resolve disagreements in the Russian–Ukrainian energy relations . Viktor Yanukovych agreed on the partial merger of Gazprom and Naftogaz .
Both Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin have stated they noticed a big improvement in relations since Viktor Yanukovych presidency . Apart from the merger of the state gas companies there are also talks of the merger.
 Sergei Razumovsky is leader of the All-Ukrainian Association of Homeless Officers . He resides in Ukraine under the Ukrainian flag . He called for the creation of Ukrainian–Russian international volunteer brigades in support of Syria to fight rebels .
 Rozumovsky wanted to create such brigades because he felt the government did not support its officer corps . One of the reasons for the brigades was that the government didn't support its officers .
 A Russian coast guard patrol boat collided with a Ukrainian fishing vessel . Some sources claim he was a Kremlin provocateur .
 Four fishermen died while one was detained by Russian authorities on charges of poaching . One of the fishermen was arrested on suspicion of poaching .
 Russian law enforcement agency claimed that it was the poachers who tried to ram into the patrol vessel . The surviving fisherman was fired at as well .
 The Ukrainian Consul in Russia was very passive in providing any support on the matter . The Minister of Justice of Ukraine Olena Lukash acknowledged that Russia has no jurisdiction to prosecute .
 The surviving fisherman was expected to be released to Ukraine before 12 August 2013 . The Prosecutor Office of Russia chose to keep the Ukrainian detained in Russia .
 Another incident took place on the border between Belgorod and Luhansk oblasts . An apparently inebriated Russian tractor driver decided to cross the border to Ukraine along with his two friends .
 The State Border Service of Ukraine handed over the citizens of Russia right back to the Russian authorities . Unlike the Azov incident a month earlier on 17 July 2013, the state border service handed over citizens of Russian citizens to Russian authorities in Ukraine .
 Tractor Belarus was taken away and handed over to the Ministry of Revenues and Duties .
 In 2013, Ukraine both pursued an observer status in the Russian-led Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia . In 2013 the Russian Custom Service stopped all imports coming from Ukraine .
 Some politicians saw that as start of a trade war against Ukraine to prevent Ukraine from signing a trade agreement with the European Union .
 Ukrainian negotiator Pavlo Klimkin: "The Russians simply did not believe could come true" He says Russian negotiators initially "simply didn't believe"
 In September 2013, Russia warned Ukraine that if it went ahead with a free trade deal with the EU, it would face financial catastrophe and possibly the collapse of the state .
 Russia had already imposed import restrictions on certain Ukrainian products . Glazyev did not rule out further sanctions if the agreement was signed .
 Glazyev allowed for the possibility of separatist movements springing up in the Russian-speaking east and south of Ukraine .
 March 15 protests, named the March of Peace, took place in Moscow a day before the Crimean referendum . On 21 November 2013, Yanukovych suspended preparations for signing EU Association Agreement, to seek closer economic relations with Russia .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin agreed to lend Ukraine 15 billion dollars in financial aid and a 33% discount on natural gas prices . Putin agreed on 17 December 2013.
 The treaty was signed amid massive, ongoing protests in Ukraine for closer ties between Ukraine and the European Union .
 Critics pointed out that a change in Russian customs regulations on imports from Ukraine was a Russian attempt to prevent Ukraine from signing an Association Agreement with the European Union .
 The 2014 Crimean crisis unfolded in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in the aftermath of the February 2014 Ukrainian revolution . The government of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych was ousted .
 Protests were staged by groups of mainly ethnic Russians who opposed the events in Kyiv . They wanted close ties or integration with Russia .
 Other groups, including Crimean Tatars, protested in support of the revolution . Other groups also protested in supporting the revolution.
Military men with no insignia wearing masks seized a number of important buildings in Crimea . The parliament building and two airports were seized in February .
 The Supreme Council of Crimea dismissed the autonomous republic's government . Ukraine accused Russia of intervening in Ukraine's internal affairs, while the Russian side officially denied such claims .
 Russian parliament granted President Vladimir Putin the authority to use military force in Ukraine . On 1 March without declaration of war, Putin was granted the authority.
 Oleksandr Turchynov decreed the appointment of the Prime Minister of Crimea as unconstitutional . On the same day, the acting president of Ukraine decreed that the appointment was unconstitutional .
 Russia recognized Crimea as a sovereign state after a disputed local referendum . In mid March, Russia proceeded to formally annex the peninsula .
 The Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs summoned the Provisional Principal of Russia in Ukraine to present a note verbale of protest against Russia's recognition of the Republic of Crimea and its subsequent annexation . The Russian government has been accused of annexing the Crimea .
 Ukraine responded with sanctions against Russia as well as blacklisting and freezing assets of numerous individuals and entities involved with the annexation of Russia . Ukraine responded to Russia's annexation.
 Ukraine started a campaign not to buy Russian products and other countries supporting Ukraine's position . Similar measures followed similar measures.
On 19 March 2014 all Ukrainian Armed Forces were withdrawn from Crimea . Russia responded with similar measures against Ukraine and its supporters but did not publicly reveal list of people or entities sanctioned .
 Russia returned 35 ships that had been impounded during its annexation of Crimea . Ukraine did not renew its unilaterally declared ceasefire on 1 July 2014 in the War in Donbass .
 On 19 March 2014 all Ukrainian Armed Forces were withdrawn from Crimea . All Ukrainian armed forces were pulled from Crimea.
 Pro-Russian groups proclaiming "People's Republics" in Donetsk and Luhansk as of 2017 . Malaysia Airlines flight 17 was shot down by a Buk surface-to-air missile launched from pro-Russian separatist-controlled territory .
 Military clashes between pro-Russian rebels and the Armed Forces of Ukraine began in April 2014 . Military clashes began in the Donbass region in April.
 Ukrainian government and self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic signed a tentative ceasefire – the agreement – on 5 September 2014 .
 A new ceasefire agreement took effect in mid-February 2015, but also failed to stop the fighting . Russia has been accused by NATO and Ukraine of engaging in direct military operations to support the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk people's Republic .
 Russia denied this, but in December 2015, Vladimir Putin admitted that Russian military intelligence officers were operating in Ukraine . Putin insisted that they were not the same as regular troops .
 Russia said that Russian ""volunteers"" were helping the separatists People's Republics . Ukraine's President Petro Poroshenko stated that bilateral relations with Russia could not be normalized unless Russia undid its unilateral annexation of Crimea and returned control of Crimea to Ukraine .
 Ukraine ended a 1997 agreement that Russians could enter Ukraine with internal ID instead of a travel passport . In February 2015, Ukraine ended an agreement that allowed Russians to enter the country with internal IDs .
 In February 2015 the law banned the showing of ""audiovisual works" that contain ""the popularization, agitation for, propaganda of any action of law enforcement agencies, the armed forces, other armed, military or security forces of the occupier state" was enacted .
 One year later Russian productions had decreased by three to four times . Russian productions decreased by 3 to 4 times in a year .
 All broadcast of Ukraine-based TV channels was suspended in March 2014, and prior to its independence referendum, before the referendum .
 The Ukrainian National Council for TV and Radio Broadcasting ordered measures against some Russian TV channels . They were accused of broadcasting misleading information about Ukraine .
 Kerch Strait incident in May 2015, Ukraine suspended a military cooperation agreement with Russia . The agreement had been in place since 1993, and was suspended since May 2015 .
Following a breakdown in mutual business ties, Ukraine also stopped supplying components used to produce military equipment in Russia .
 In August, Russia announced that it would ban imports of Ukrainian agricultural goods starting January 2016 .
 In October 2015, Ukraine banned all direct flights between Ukraine and Russia . In November 2015, the country closed its air space to all Russian military and civil airplanes .
 Ukrainian lawmakers voted in December 2015 to place a trade embargo on Russia in retaliation for the latter's cancellation of the two countries free-trade zone and ban on food imports . The European Union and Ukraine came into force in January 2016 .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov responded by saying that Moscow should not be like Kyiv . He said that Russia should not impose "blacklists" and restrictions on cultural figures .
 Lavrov says Russian producers and film industry should take into account "unfriendly attacks of foreign performers in Russia"
 Russian-annexed Crimea in 2016 According to the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine the number of Russian citizens who crossed the Russia-Ukraine border dropped by almost 50% in 2015 .
Ukraine's 2017 education law makes Ukrainian the only language of primary education in state schools . In February 2017, the Ukrainian government banned the commercial importation of books from Russia .
 Russia fired upon and seized three Ukrainian Navy vessels off the coast of Crimea in November 2018 . The captain of the Nord, Vladimir Gorbenko, is facing up to five years in prison .
 The event prompted angry protests outside the Russian embassy in Ukraine . An embassy car was set on fire and a car was also set fire .
 Martial law was introduced because Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko claimed there was a threat of 'full-scale war' with Russia . During the martial law Ukraine banned all Russian men between 16 and 60 from entering the country .
 Ukraine claimed this was a security measure to prevent Russia from forming units of ""private"" armies on Ukrainian soil . Ukraine claimed it was a measure to stop Russia forming "private" armies on Ukraine soil .
 1,650 Russian citizens were refused entry into Ukraine between 26 November and 26 December 2018 . The National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine announced that it had extended restrictive measures of the State Border Guard Service regarding the entry of Russian men into Ukraine .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy held a telephone conversation with Russian President Vladimir Putin . The former's appeals to the Russian leader to take part in talks with Ukraine, the United States, Germany, France, and the United Kingdom in Minsk .
 The leaders also discussed the exchange of prisoners held by both sides .
 Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskyy shut down pro-Russian TV channels owned by parliamentary deputy Taras Kozak . Viktor Medvedchuk is godfather of daughter of Russia president Vladimir Putin .
 25 Ukrainian soldiers died in the conflict in the first quarter of 2021, compared to 50 that died in 2020 . Medvedchuk is also said to be the real owner of the pro-Russian TV channels .
 Large movements of military equipment were reported in late March 2021 . The equipment was headed to Crimea, and Rostov and Voronezh oblasts .
 Russian news agency TASS put the number of troops in the Southern Military District at 85,000 to 90,000 . The region borders the Donbas conflict zone .
Tensions also came in line with the election of Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who pushed back against Russian encroachment on Ukrainian sovereignty .
 European leaders feared that this step might provoke an even harsher response from Russia . However, they feared that it might provoke a harsher response .
 A map shows two alleged Russian plans published separately by Bild and Center for Strategic and International Studies .
 The vessel did not react to a request to change course, according to the FSB . The vessel later headed back to shore .
 US Senator Bob Menendez, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, again proposed the idea of severe sanctions . Menendez reiterated the possibility of cutting out Russia from SWIFT .
 German chancellor Olaf Scholz also warned of "consequences" for the Nord Stream 2 pipeline project . The pipeline project is operated by Gazprom under the wholly-owned subsidiary Nord Stream AG 2 .
 On 21 February 2022, Russia officially recognized the Luhansk People's Republic and Donetsk people's Republic, 2 Ukrainian breakaway states . On 21 Feb 2022, Russian President Vladimir Putin will make his first appearance in Ukraine in a presidential election .
 British Prime Minister Boris Johnson warned that Russia was planning the ""biggest war in Europe since 1945" as Putin intended to invade and encircle the capital of Kyiv . Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said he would consider the possibility of severing Ukraine's diplomatic
 Putin during the address "On the conduct of a special military operation" on 24 February 2022 . Putin during his address.
 Russia had repeatedly denied any plans to invade Ukraine . The Russian army started an invasion on 24 February, with ground and air assaults across Ukraine .
 Russia's foreign ministry urged on European Union and NATO members to "stop supplying arms" to Ukraine . On 5 March 2022, the Russian foreign ministry said .
 Moscow is particularly concerned that portable anti-aerial Stinger missiles could fall into terrorist hands, according to the report . Moscow is also concerned that the missiles could pose a threat to planes .
 Russia had previously supplied anti-aircraft missiles to pro-Russian separatists . Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was downed by pro-Russia separatists .
 Britain will deploy investigators to Ukraine to assist in the collection of evidence of war crimes, including sexual abuse . Russia was reported to be responsible for a large-scale cyberattack against Viasat's KA-SAT network .
 Intelligence from the UK's National Cyber Security Centre said the attacks also caused disruption to wind farms and internet users in Central Europe .
 Russia and Ukraine share 2,295 kilometres of border . Russia-Russia-Belarus border crossing at Chernihiv Oblast, 18 August 2018 .
 It was expected to cost almost $520 million, take four years to complete . The project has been under construction as of 2015 and is expected to be completed by 2015 .
 In June 2020 the State Border Guard of Ukraine expected that the project would be finished by 2025 . The project will be finished in June 2020 .
 On 1 January 2018 Ukraine introduced biometric controls for Russians entering the country . The country introduced biometrics for Russians in January 2018 .
Since 30 November 2018 Ukraine has banned all Russian men between 16 and 60 from entering the country with exceptions for humanitarian purposes . On 22 March 2018 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko signed a decree .
 The Ukrainian and Russian arms and aviation manufacturing sectors remained deeply integrated following the break-up of the Soviet Union . The Ukraine and Russia arms and aircraft manufacturing sectors remain deeply integrated .
 Russians generally say they have a more negative attitude towards Ukraine than vice versa . In opinion polls, Russians say they are more negative towards Ukraine.
 Ukrainian attempts to have the Holodomor recognized as genocide against the Ukrainian nation . A large majority of Ukrainians voted for independence in December 1991 . In the following years the Russian press portrayed Ukraine's independence as the work of ""nationalists"
 The study argues that this influenced the Russian public to believe that the Ukrainian political elite is the only thing blocking the "Ukrainians' heartfelt wish" to reunite with Russia .
 Some members of the Russian political elite continued to claim that Ukrainian is a Russian dialect and that Ukraine should become part of Russian Federation .
 Ukrainian history is not treated as a separate subject in leading Russian universities . Experts say Russian government cultivates an image of Ukraine as the enemy to cover up its own internal mistakes .
 Analysts like Philip P Pan argued late 2009 that Russian media portrayed the then-Government of Ukraine as anti-Russian .
 Russian attitudes towards Ukraine in 2009. In 2009, 80% had a ""good or very good"" attitude towards Belarus in 2009 .
 During the 1990s, polls showed that a majority of people in Russia could not accept the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the independence of Ukraine .
 According to a 2006 poll by VTsIOM 66% of all Russians regretted the collapse of the Soviet Union . A similar poll held in Ukraine in February 2005 stated they regret the disintegration of the USSR .
 A late 2011 poll by the Levada Center showed 53% of Russians preferred friendship with an independent Ukraine . 33% preferred Ukraine to be under Russia's economic and political control, and 15% were undecided .
 60% of Russians preferred Russia and Ukraine as independent but friendly states with open borders without visas or customs . The number of unification supporters increased by 4% to 20% in Russia .
Less than 10% of Russians supported Russia and Ukraine becoming one state . Twenty surveys conducted from January 2009 to January 2015 by the Levada Center found that less than 10 per cent supported Russia .
 In February 2019, 82% of Russians had a positive attitude towards Ukrainians, but only 34% had apositive attitude towards Ukraine . Only 7% had positive attitude to Ukraine, according to observers . Younger Russians are more likely to be against Putin and his policies and older Russians
 A Levada poll released in February 2021 found that 80% of Russians supported Ukraine’s independence from Russia . Only 17% wanted Ukraine to become part of Russia .
 In December 2019, Ukraine and Russia agreed to implement a complete ceasefire in eastern Ukraine by the year-end . The ceasefire is expected to end in December 2019 .
 The negotiations were brokered by France and Germany . The countries in conflict committed an extensive prisoner swap . Ukraine's military from three major regions fell on the front line .
 Territorial disputes. Crimea, which Russia annexed in 2014, is shown in pink .
 Ukraine considers this as an annexation and as a violation of international law and agreements by Russia . The Russian Federation and Ukraine consider this an annexation .
 G8 suspended Russia from the group then introduced first round of sanctions against the country . It led to the other members of the then G8 suspending Russia .
 International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War Tuzla Island . Russia's annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation .
 Some Russian nationalists have disputed Ukraine's independent existence . Some have considered Ukrainians to belong to the Russian nation .
 The People's Friendship Arch in Kyiv was dismantled on 26 April 2022 . The sculpture depicted a Ukrainian worker and a Russian worker standing together .
 The arch and the Peoples' Friendship Arch monument are also planned to be renamed and to become a new monument . The People's Friendship Arch and the arch will also be renamed .
 Dozens of streets associated with the Soviet Union, Russia and Russian figures across Ukraine would be renamed . This would be one of the first steps in a plan to demolish about 60 monuments .
 The People's Friendship Arch statue was removed days before it was removed . aspects of this street renaming and monument removal plan were already being carried out across other areas .
 Medvedev also accused Yushchenko of attempting to eliminate the Russian language from everyday life in Ukraine . Among other issues in the relationship, such as the Black Sea Fleet, gas disputes, also accused him of trying to eliminate Russian language .
 President Biden warned President Vladimir V Putin of Russia of "strong economic and other measures" if tensions with Ukraine escalated .
 Russian Foreign Policy in the Twenty-First Century and the Shadow of the Past . Russian Foreign policy in the 20th Century.
 More than 90% of voters approve historic break with Kremlin .
 Political Culture and National Identity in Russian–Ukrainian Relations . Political Culture, National Identity and National identity in Russian-Ukrainians Relations .
 "Russians want Sevastopol to belong to Russia, poll shows" "Sevastopol" is the name of a Russian city in the Crimea .
Ukrainian envoy to NATO proposes Russian counterpart to focus on his problems .
 Permanent Mission of the Republic of Poland to the U.N. Office and International Organizations in Vienna .