 Toddlers, puppies, and tanks are draped in the ubiquitous orange and black striped St. St. Louis-style tanks .
 George Ribbon is a symbol previously associated with patriotic veterans and war heroes of World War II . In Russia, it is referred to as the Great Patriotic War .
 The ribbon has recently morphed into a symbol of Russian patriotism and nationalism . It culminates in the May 9th military parade and related festivities .
 Russia is raging with “Victory Day’ fever, and sponsoring celebrations of Russia’s defeat over fascism in some 70 countries this week . Many inside Russia also see not a small amount of hypocrisy and exploitation .
 The Kremlin uses the symbol of the horrific suffering and sacrifices of tens of millions of Soviet citizens to justify and even spread new aggression into Europe . The Kremlin distorts its own history while reverting to a repressive climate against its own citizens .
 Last week was the anniversary of the Bolotnaya Square protests in Moscow . The protests were held in the capital's capital.
 On May 6, 2012, hundreds of thousands of Russians took to the streets of central Moscow to demand a fair election . They were protesting widespread election fraud .
 The Kremlin responded ruthlessly, with riot police, batons and mass detentions . The Kremlin response was ruthlessly.
 These words were apparently a call to action to authorities, because the first arrests began shortly thereafter . The first arrests started shortly thereafter.
 In the days and years following the Bolotnaya protests, dozens of innocent people have been subjected to interrogations and investigations .
 Peaceful protesters who had participated in the largest demonstrations since the fall of the Soviet Union in a Russia whose Constitution specifically guarantees freedom of speech and assembly . The Bolotnaya case is the latest in a series of protests against the government .
 They displayed remarkable dignity and courage, charged with assault and rioting when they themselves were beaten by riot police . The riot police were the ones being brutally beaten.
 Bolotnaya was a striking example of the personal courage of so many of Russia’s opposition activists .
 Bolotnaya was also a striking example of the growing totalitarian climate in Russia under Vladimir Putin .
 The Bolotnaya trials were a part of a wider crackdown on Russia’s opposition .
 A series of repressive laws together with media campaigns against leading opposition figures calling them “traitors to Russia had sown fear among many .
 Putin is here to stay, and anyone who doesn't agree with him can and will be silenced . Anyone who doesn’t agree with Putin can be silenced – one way or another .
 The following November protests grabbed the headlines and took on an ominous meaning for the Kremlin . But it was in neighboring Ukraine the following November .
 The Kremlin reacted swiftly and aggressively, unleashing a propaganda campaign to discredit the new Ukraine as a fascist Western coup . The new Ukraine was the Euromaidan Revolution of Dignity .
 Putin had to show who’s boss, this time to the new Ukrainian leadership in Kyiv .
 Russia’s assault on Ukraine, annexing Crimea and staging an insurgency in the border region of Donbas . Thus began Russia's assault on the Ukraine, annexed Crimea and staged an insurgency .
 Crimea’s seizure was touted as bloodless, Ukrainians and the indigenous Crimean Tatar populations have suffered under Russian rule . Many missing, jailed and killed, many missing and killed .
 The war in Donbas has killed over 10,000 people, injured and displaced millions more . The war is continuing to this day.
 The Kremlin seemed to have concluded that perhaps it hadn't been tough enough on the opposition . Russian troops were carrying out their war in and on Ukraine .
 Despite the Bolotnaya trials and convictions, Russians were still organizing protests . Perhaps they would gain momentum from Ukraine’s successes.
We saw the ratcheting up of vicious propaganda against Ukraine and the Maidan protests, and any Russians who supported them. Hence, we saw a ratchets up of brutal propaganda.
 "Maidan" has become a kind of generic term for violent and bloody upheaval, not protest . Russian media so bombarded audiences with images of fires and violence and chaos on Maidan.
 Putin's lashing out at Ukraine gave Russia's opposition even more inspiration for protest. Ironically, it was Putin’s lashingout at Ukraine that gave Russia’'s opposition more inspiration .
 Boris Nemtsov helped to rally tens of thousands of Russians after Bolotnaya in anti-war and anti-crisis protests in March . In September of 2014, hundreds of Russian ‘volunteer’ soldiers returned in body bags .
Opposition leader and protest organizer Boris Nemtsov was assassinated at the foot of the Kremlin walls . He was assassinated on the eve of a third mass demonstration, dubbed Russia's ‘Spring’
 The lifeless corpse of a man who seemed larger than life itself against the backdrop of the moonlit picture-postcard cupolas of Red Square was a stark symbol of Russia in Putin's 15th year as president .
 After Nemtsov's assassination, many opposition activists just left Russia, understandably .
 For those who made the decision to remain, they have nobly and courageously continued their struggle for a more open society and to free Russia from repression and aggression .
 They protest even if they have to stand alone and silent, as now required by law . They protest, even if the law requires them to do so .
 Vladimir Kara-Murza says the process is rigged against them in region after region . He points out that elections are rigged in a variety of ways .
 If you think such preposterous means to suppress dissent would be too obvious and so unsuccessful, then you don't know Putin or Russia. If you don’t know Putin and Russia, then it's too obvious .
 Russia is a security state like no other, and its leader is a former career KGB agent . There were no rules and the KGB could do whatever it took to get the job done .
 It is a post-traumatic Soviet state, as are all the former Soviet states are . It is not a state, but it is a state of the former USSR .
 Russia still has one foot firmly in the grave of the Soviet Union, a black earth unjustly enriched by the blood of its dissenters . But Russia still still has a foot firmly on the ground .
 Putin has breathed new life into Russia’s dark past. Instead of trying to climb out Russia's dark past, he has breathed life into it .
 Stalin and Dzerzhinsky are leading figures of the Soviet Union back in vogue . We see that a militaristic fascism has taken hold as well .
 Russians are now bombarded with propaganda about rampant Russophobia in the West, conspiracies by the CIA about the internet against Russia, and about Ukrainian fascists who must be defeated .
 Post-Soviet Russia has had access to non-Kremlin controlled information . It's only relatively recently that post-SovietRussia has had control of non-kremlin information .
 There is a natural thirst for information, and all things Western, really, from a society that has been starved of it for generations . There is also a naturalthirst for information.
 Russians are particularly susceptible to propaganda, both out of deprivation and out of inexperience . So Russians are more vulnerable to propaganda than others .
Under constant information assault from Kremlin-controlled media, it's not difficult to understand why so many Russians want to believe in a simple good and evil, black and white world .
 The laws have become even more restrictive and the space for public expression has narrowed considerably . The space for the public to express has also narrowed considerably.
 Four years later, people are still being arrested in the Bolotnaya matter . In this light, perhaps it’s not so remarkable that four years after the incident, it's not really so remarkable .
 Anyone who was on Bolotnaya Square that day on May 6, 2012, goes into high anxiety mode at the sound of early morning noises .
 In Russia Bolotnaya is the case that keeps on giving, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Anyone can get that knock on their door and find themselves a criminal defendant and a political victim . Anyone can change their lives overnight, altering their lives.
 Sergei is 55 years old and serving a 3-year-and-9-month sentence in a penal colony . Sergei is serving a three-year and a nine-month term in the penal colony.
 Krivov was one of those arrested after the first wave of ‘May 6 Political Prisoners’ as they have come to be called .
 He knew perfectly well that he too could become a defendant, but he didn’t run or hide . He didn't hide or hide.
 He continued to protest the only way protesters can in Russia today, by standing alone in the bizarrely restricted single-person picket .
 Krivov held such a single-person picket in front of the Investigative Committee building in Moscow . He is demanding freedom for those Bolotnaya activists already under arrest .
 Protesters such as Krivov are like sitting ducks, or rather standing ducks, ripe for picking off by police . Police say they are trying to protect themselves from the public .
 Krivov found himself in the same despicable predicament as the victims about which he was protesting . That’s how he found himself.
 Russia celebrates its ‘Victory Day’ on May 9, a day to remember and commemorate the heroes of the past .
 Russian society and its militaristic patriotism leaning toward fascism looms over its neighbors . Russian citizens are ever squeezed back behind a virtual Iron Curtain of propaganda and repression .
 Today’s heroes are those who gathered on Bolotnaya Square four years ago, and those who dare to come back and again, risking their freedom and their lives .
 In commemoration of the 4th anniversary of the Bolotnaya protests, the Open Russia Foundation published the list of the names and faces of all 35 political victims . ‘Freedom Prisoners’ as they are called.
 These are the Russian heroes whose lives have become nightmares after the events of May 6, 2012 .
 Readers can help by sending letters so that those still locked away will know that they are not forgotten and that people still support them .
 Letters can be sent directly to Open Russia who will pass them on individual prisoners . Letters can also be sent to the Open Russia website .
 Some have served their time in prison, while others are just beginning their nightmare journey . Some have been sentenced to life in prison . Others have been released from prison .
 One man on Bolotnaya Square was exasperated by a man on the square . He said: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 Sasha Sotnik was there to capture the informal gathering and interview those who showed up to pay their respects and not let Russia's unsung present-day heroes be forgotten .
 Ivan Nepomnyashchikh was arrested on February 25, 2015 and under house arrest until trial . He was arrested in February 2015 .
 On December 22, 2015, he was sentenced to 2 years and 6 months of imprisonment . He was sentenced in December 2015. He will serve 2 years, 6 months and 2 years in prison .
 He is charged under Criminal Code 2.212 for mass riots and 1.318 for assaulting government authority . He is accused of mass riots, assault on government authority and other charges .
 On August 18, 2014, he was sentenced to 3 years and 8 months in a penal colony . He was sentenced in August 2014 to three years and eight months .
 On July 24, 2014, he was sentenced to 4 years and 6 months in a penal colony . He was sentenced in July 2014 to four years and six months .
 Leonid Razvozzhayev was kidnapped by security forces in Kyiv on October 19, 2015 . He was delivered to Moscow, where he was arrested on October 21, 2015, and was arrested .
 At the present time he sits in Penal Colony-31 in the Krasnoyarsk Kray . At the past time he was in Penal colony-31.
 An appeals court reduced his sentence by 3 months, to 3 years and 9 months, on June 20, 2014 . He was sentenced to three years and nine months in June 2014 .
 On October 9, 2014, he was sentenced to 3 years and 2 months in a penal colony . He was jailed for 3 years, 2 months and 3 years in October 2014 .
 On February 24, 2014, he was sentenced to 3 years and 7 months in prison . He was sentenced in February 2014 . He is currently serving a sentence of 3 years.
 He served his sentence in Penal Colony-6 in the Ryazan region . He was released on December 25, 2015 .
 On February 24, 2014, he was sentenced to 2 years and 4 months in a penal colony . He was sentenced in February 2014, and was sentenced on February 24.
 On March 25, 2013, he was declared insane and sent for compulsory treatment in psychiatric hospital №5 in Troitsko . He is currently in a psychiatric hospital in the village of Troitskos .
 On May 25, 2013, he was sentenced to 2 years and 6 months in a penal colony . He was sentenced in May 2013. He is currently serving a 2-year sentence .
 Aleksandr Margolin was arrested on February 20, 2013 . He was charged under 2.212 and 1.318 of the Criminal Code .
 He served his sentence in the Ryazan region and was released on parole on February 9, 2016 . He was released after serving his sentence.
 He was sentenced on February 24 to 3 years and 6 months in a penal colony . He is sentenced to three years and six months in the penal colony.
 Artyom Savelyev was arrested on June 9, 2012 . He was charged under 2.212 and 1.318 of the Criminal Code .
 On February 24, was sentenced to 2 years and 7 months in a penal colony . The sentence is expected to last two years and two months .
 Elena Kokhtareva was charged under Art..212 and Art..318 of the Criminal Code on March 25, 2013 . The charges were filed under Art...212 andArt..318 .
 On August 18, 2014, she received a suspended sentence of 3 years and 3 months . She was sentenced to three years and three months in August .
 Alexander Dukhanina was arrested on May 27, 2012 and was under house arrest . He was arrested in May 2012 .
 She was charged under 2.212 and Art.318 .318 “the use of violence against a government representative’s representative” of the Criminal Code .
 On February 24, 2014 received a suspended sentence of 3 years and 3 months . The sentence was suspended for three years and three months .
 Vladimir Akimenkov was arrested on July 10, 2012 and charged under Art..212 of the Criminal Code . He was arrested in July 2012 .
 Nikolai Kavkazky was arrested on June 25, 2012, charged under 2.212 of the Criminal Code . He was arrested in June 2012 .
On December 23, 2013, the General Prosecutor’s Office sent to the court the criminal case against Dmitry . Less than a month later on January 16, 2014, criminal proceedings were terminated and he received amnesty .
 Maria Baronova was charged on June 21, 2012 under Art..212 of the Criminal Code . She was charged under Art ..212 of Criminal Code.
 Her criminal prosecution was terminated when she received amnesty on December 19, 2013 . She received amnesty in December 2013 .
 Alexander Kamensky was arrested on June 10, 2012 and 10 days later he was released on bail . He was arrested in June 2012 .
 Alexander was charged under Art..212 of the Criminal Code, after which he received a pardon . On January 3, 2014, he was charged with Art.. 212 of the criminal Code .
 Fedor Bach was arrested on June 10, 2012, and charged under 2.212 of the Criminal Code . Bach is a former member of the National Security Council .
 Leonid Kovyazin was arrested in Kyiv on September 5, 2012, and then transferred to Moscow . He was arrested and then moved to Moscow in 2012 .
 He was charged under Art..212 of the Criminal Code . He was in “The Bear’s prison charged under art..212.
 Oleg Melnikov was arrested on June 3, 2012, and released on bail the same day . He was arrested in June 2012 .
 Anastasia Rybachenko was put on a federal wanted list on September 11, 2012 . RyBachenko is a Russian-born woman who has been in the Ukraine since 2007 .