 Russia’s invasion of Ukraine constitutes the biggest threat to peace and security in Europe since the end of the Cold War . Russia's invasion of the Ukraine is the biggest threats to peace in Europe in the past .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin gave a bizarre and at times unhinged speech laying out a long list of grievances as justification for the “special military operation’s” The speech was announced the following day .
 Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus should share a political destiny both today and in the future, says Vladimir Putin . It reflects a worldview Putin had long expressed, emphasizing the deep-seated unity among Eastern Slavs .
 Moscow has pursued a policy toward Ukraine and Belarus predicated on the assumption that their respective national identities are artificial . Putin’s time in office, Putin has been in office since 2008 .
 Putin's arguments about foreign enemies promoting Ukrainian identity as part of a geopolitical struggle against Russia echo the way many of his predecessors refused to accept the agency of ordinary people seeking autonomy from tsarist or Soviet domination .
 Putin often invokes ideas of thinkers emphasizing the organic unity of the Russian Empire and its people . The historian Timothy Snyder calls the “politics of eternity,’ the belief in an unchanging historical essence .
 The salience that Putin and other Russian elites assign to the idea of Russian-Ukrainian-Belarusian unity helps explain the origins of the current conflict . Moscow was willing to risk a large-scale war on its borders when neither Ukraine nor NATO posed any military threat .
 Moscow's ambitions extend beyond preventing Ukrainian NATO membership and encompass a more thorough aspiration to dominate Ukraine politically, militarily, and economically . It also suggests that Moscow’s ambitions extended beyond preventing NATO membership .
 Moscow appeared to calculate that enough Ukrainians, at least in the eastern part of the country, would accept some form of reintegration into Russian sphere of influence .
Despite pre-war polls showing large numbers of Ukrainians willing to take up arms to defend their country against a Russian invasion, Moscow's wager was not entirely implausible given the recentness of the shift .
 Russia’s war has become bogged down in no small part because this calculation about Ukrainian identity has proven dramatically wrong. Nonetheless, Russia's war has been bogged up in noSmall part .
 The past three decades have witnessed a significant consolidation of Ukrainian civic identity . The 2014 “Revolution of Dignity’s” and ensuing Russian annexation of Crimea and intervention in Donbas have seen a significant consolidating of Ukrainian identity .
 Ukrainian civic nation encompasses not just Ukrainian speakers in the western part of the country . Much of the Russian-speaking but increasingly bilingual east as well .
 A generation has grown up in an independent Ukraine that, for all its flaws, has maintained a robust democracy . Russia remains fixated on quasi-imperial great-power aspirations .
 If anything, the current war has further united Ukrainian citizens from all regions and linguistic and religious backgrounds . It has also reinforced the split between Ukrainian and Russian identities .
 Russia is almost certain to fail in its bid to establish lasting control over its neighbor . Thus, whatever happens on the battlefield, Russia is likely to fail .
 Russia’s war has become bogged down in no small part because this calculation about Ukrainian identity has proven dramatically wrong . Russia's war has also become bogging down because of this calculation .
 Putin has long claimed that Russians and Ukrainians comprise ‘one people’ whose common history implies that they should also share a common political fate today .
 He also described Russians and Ukrainians as “one people” in his March 2014 speech to the Russian parliament announcing the annexation of Crimea . He has come back to the theme in subsequent years, notably in a 6,000-word article titled “On the historical unity of Russians
 Putin also claimed that the current Ukrainian state was a creation of the Soviet Union . He also said the current state should be renamed for its supposed “author and architect,’ the Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin .
 Putin’s historical excursions tend to provoke bewilderment in the West . When they are not dismissed as outright disinformation, they are often dismissed as disinformation .
 Ukrainians and Russians are ‘one people’ has a long pedigree in elite Russian circles. Yet his claim that Ukrainians and Russian are “one people is not true.’ He says he has been in the Russian elite for years .
 It continues to shape not only elite discourse but political practice as well as political practice . It is still shaping elite discourse and political practice.
 Ukraine has become increasingly “Ukrainified’ in recent years, Russian officials and analysts were oblivious to the changes . Russian officials are oblivious to changes in Ukraine .
 The Grand Princedom of Moscow began bringing the disparate East Slavic lands and peoples under its control . With some Soviet-era variation, what the historian Zenon Kohut calls the “unity paradigm’s been the default view of Russian statesmen and intellectuals since the early
 During this period of imperial conquest, Russian publicists such as the cleric Innokenty Gizel redefined the Ukrainian lands and their people as part of Russia's own history .
 The tripartite “all-Russian people’s’ view was promoted in the educational system of the nineteenth-century Russian Empire . They emphasized the existence of a tri partite ‘all- Russians’
 imperial elites believed that rival powers were deliberately promoting Ukrainian and Belarusian nationalism as a geopolitical tool for weakening Russia . Putin has long emphasized the idea of the “all-Russian people’s people, imperial elites .
 Ukraine was partitioned between Russia and Austria-Hungary in the 19th century . Ukraine is now part of the Ukraine-Austria region of Galicia, Bukovina, and Transcarpathia .
 The comparatively liberal Habsburgs tolerated the Ukrainian national movement . They provided support for Ukrainian forces who fought against Russia during World War I .
 The Russian Empire, on the other hand, persecuted Ukrainian activists and organizations . The Russian empire, onThe other hand,. persecuted Ukrainian activist groups and activists .
 The minister of internal affairs issued a decree in 1863 banning publication and instruction in the Ukrainian language . The decree remained in force until 1905 .
 Ukrainian writers and activists were arrested and exiled . Taras Shevchenko was regarded as the father of Ukrainian literature .
 Russian suspicions about Ukrainian identity transferred to other targets . Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires collapsed at the end of World War I .
 Former foreign minister Sergei Sazonov: “As for Ukraine, it does not exist.’
 The Austro-Hungarian and Russian territories continued to divide long after the two empires fell . This divide between the two countries continued to matter long after they fell .
 Ukraine secured a brief period of independence during the Russian Civil War . It was fought between Polish and Russian armies .
 Despite a vicious campaign of communization, western Ukraine remained a crucible for nationalist sentiment . Despite a brutal campaign ofcommunization, the country remained a bastion of nationalist sentiment.
 It was the site of some of the war’s worst atrocities, including the German-led annihilation of the Jewish population, Ukrainian-led ethnic cleansing of Poles .
 Bandera became a figure of particular hate in the Russian narrative . His willingness to collaborate with the Nazi invaders held up as evidence of the link between Ukrainian nationalism and foreign manipulation .
 Putin and other officials claim Ukraine's post-2014 governments have pursued a ‘Banderite’ policy of purging Russian influence under the direction of foreign sponsors .
 Ukraine ultimately experienced a high degree of Russification, owing to the persecution of nationalist intellectuals under Stalin . Despite a period of “indigenization ” of education, culture, and politics in the 1920s, Ukraine ultimately suffered from Russification .
 During the late 1980s, Mikhail Gorbachev’s policy of glasnost provided an opportunity for the mobilization of nationalist movements pushing for the breakup of the Soviet Union .
 Gorbachev sought to keep Ukraine within a Moscow-centric confederation . He hoped to replace the Soviet Union .
 Then-Russian president Boris Yeltsin supported Ukrainian independence in the context of his effort to overcome Gorbachev . He and his advisers clung to the belief that an independent Ukraine would remain closely bound to Russia .
 Yeltsin resisted calls from senior military officials and politicians to “recover’s Crimea or otherwise pursue territorial revisionism toward an independent Ukraine . The formermayor of Moscow Yury Luzhkov also resisted calls to ‘recover Crimea’
 Much of the Russian political and intellectual elite continued to doubt the legitimacy or viability of the Ukrainian state . Much of Russia's political, intellectual elite still doubted the legitimacy of the state .
 Solzhenitsyn called for the formation of a ‘Russian Union’s East Slavic core’ While the Baltic, South Caucasus, and Central Asian states would become independent, the Baltic and South Caucasus would be independent .
 Solzhenitsyn condemned the “cruel partition’ of Ukraine from Russia . Warns of further waves of separatism within Ukraine itself .
 Putin adopts similar language to his imperial predecessors’ to describe Ukraine and Russian-Ukrainian-Belarusian relationship .
 Putin accuses NATO and the European Union of manipulating Ukrainian national sentiment as part of their own geopolitical competition with Russia . Putin accuses the EU of employing “the old groundwork of the Polish-Austrian ideologists to create an ‘anti-Moscow Russia’ in Ukraine .
 Putin believes Ukraine's desire to separate itself from Russian influence was the product of “external forces’s” claim .
President Volodymyr Zelensky won 73 percent of the vote in Ukraine’s April 2019 presidential runoff . It contributed to the Kremlin's confidence that the war could be won easily and quickly .
 Russian hubris rested on a basic failure to grasp the deep roots of Ukrainian identity . Ukraine itself has changed in the years since the Soviet collapse .
 Ukraine has made enormous strides in consolidating a shared civic identity . The relationship between Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarusians remains an object of contention .
 The relative success of this project of “making Ukrainians” has accelerated Ukraine’s decoupling from Russia, feeding concern in Moscow . Moscow is running out to restore influence over its neighbor and justify a series of increasingly risky gambles.
 The story of the more than three decades since the Soviet collapse centers on the gradual diffusion of ‘Ukrainianness’ across an ever-wider swathe of the country .
 The independent Ukrainian state became instrumental in forging a shared national identity through education, official memory, the media, legislation, and other tools . In a pattern familiar from both interwar Europe and the postcolonial Global South.
 A much higher percentage of Ukrainian citizens today see themselves as Ukrainian . Russian remains the predominant language in parts of the country .
 A key element of the process of “making Ukrainians’s underway since the late Soviet era is a blurring of the historical divide between western and eastern Ukraine . The process of making Ukrainians is a key element.
 A 1991 referendum on independence from the Soviet Union was approved by 92. percent of voters . Even in Russian-speaking regions of eastern Ukraine, large majorities supported independence .
 In the last years of the Soviet Union, Russian speakers outnumbered Ukrainian speakers in most of Ukraine’s eastern oblasts . By 2001, the number of Ukrainian speakers was higher everywhere except in Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Today, more than two-thirds of Ukrainian citizens claim Ukrainian as a native language . In eastern regions, a plurality is bilingual in Ukrainian and Russian .
 The shift reflects both state policy, as well as individual decisions . The shift is based on state policy and individual decisions.
 A language law signed by former Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko in 2019. It promises to further “Ukrainify’s education, media, and administration .
 Some of the shift is politically driven, as individuals increasingly use Ukrainian in protest against Russian intervention . In the wake of the 2022 invasion of Ukraine, Ukraine is expected to be invaded by Russia in 2022 .
 Ukrainian independence is also the natural result of over 30 years of Ukrainian independence .
 Voting patterns provide another indicator of Ukrainians’ emerging sense of national unity .
 The first several presidential and parliamentary elections held after independence saw stark divides between western and eastern Ukraine . The first election was held in Ukraine's capital Kiev .
Pro-Western candidates Petro Poroshenko and Volodymyr Zelensky have won comfortable majorities in all oblasts . Since the Russian annexation of Crimea and invasion of Donbas, however, pro- Western candidates have won majorities .
 Voting behavior in recent elections was shaped by bread and butter considerations, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Ukraine's conflict in Donbas is an issue that cut across Ukraine's geographic divides .
 Religious affiliation suggests Ukrainians’ increasing distinctiveness from Russians. Religious affiliation similarly suggests Ukrainians' increasing distinctness from Russians .
 The ROC and most of the global Orthodox community regarded as illegitimate . But soon after independence, clerics aligned with president Kravchuk set up rival Orthodox Church in Kyiv .
 The UOC-MP has steadily lost adherents over its ties to the ROC . The ROC actively promotes the idea of a ‘Russian world’ and claims as its “canonical territory’ the whole of the former Soviet Union .
 The 2018 decision by the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople granting recognition and autocephaly to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine remains a sore spot in Moscow . It represents another step in Ukraine’s progressive disentanglement from Russia .
 Calls for Ukraine's integration with the European Union and NATO have grown substantially . Russia’s annexation of Crimea and occupation of Donetsk and Luhansk have been part of the response to the Crimea annexation .
 Support for NATO membership, which hovered below 50 percent prior to the 2014 Russian invasion, has greatly risen, reaching 62 percent in early 2022 . Support for the NATO membership has increased by more than 50 percent in the past .
 Two-thirds of Ukrainians support membership in the European Union . More than two-thirds support the EU .
 Russia's willingness to admit Ukraine is a seismic shift that makes the idea of reintegration with Russia harder to imagine .
 Ukrainian leaders such as Poroshenko and Zelensky have come to power in the shadow of war and occupation . They prioritize deepening ties with the Euro-Atlantic West as a hedge against further Russian intervention . They also have implications for Ukrainian foreign policy, insofar as leaders such
 A certain “all-Russian’ or post-imperial consciousness still lingers in corners of Ukrainian society . The development and consolidation of Ukrainian national identity over the past three decades .
 Some politicians, militants, and ordinary people aligned themselves with Russia . The deposed former president Viktor Yanukovych and Belarusian leader Aleksandr Lukashenko are both Russian speakers .
 Both promoted Russian as a lingua franca, supported religious institutions linked to the ROC . But they struggled to maintain their legitimacy in the face of rising national consciousness .
 Some Ukrainian citizens sided with the separatists, including members of the Ukrainian army and security services . During the annexation of Crimea and the war in the Donbas, some Ukrainians sided with separatists .
 Preparations for Russia’s current invasion likewise centered on mobilizing collaborators from among the population . Some still serving the Ukrainian state, including some still serving, are still serving.
 Some pro-Russian fighters no doubt have financial or other reasons for fighting . Others appeared motivated by genuine support for the idea of an imperial Russian nation or belief in the Russian claim .
 Others, perhaps, are willing to support whichever side can bring peace and stability . Donbas, whose inhabitants remain deeply ambivalent about their political future.
 Russian-backed Opposition Platform – For Life in eastern Ukraine may have helped convince Moscow of lingering pro-Russian sentiment .
 The extent and intensity of resistance to a Russian invasion in eastern Ukraine remained an open question at the start of the current war .
 The evidence of the past few months suggests that Russian calculations turned out to be wrong .
 Russia’s continued intervention in Ukraine appears to be one of the main factors accelerating the consolidation of a Ukrainian national identity at odds with the idea of an “all-Russian” nation .
 A similar pattern has held throughout the Putin era, as Moscow’s repeated interventions in Ukraine have themselves helped drive the emergence of a Ukrainian national consciousness .
 Russia’s resurgence as a major power is its most glaring failure, its most significant ‘unfinished business’ for the aging Putin . The most significant failure is the repeated failures to keep Ukraine within the fold .
 Putin’s risky invasion seems to be a last-ditch effort to reverse the legacy of previous failures . If the historical record is any guide, it is likely to accelerate rather than reverse the process of nationalization and decoupling .
 Russian Meddling Accelerated Ukraine’s Decoupling Russian efforts to slow Ukraine's Westward drift date to the first years after the Soviet collapse .
 Ukraine's Yeltsin accepted Ukraine’s post-Soviet borders, but concern about Russian irredentism was instrumental in the 1996 decision to align with Georgia, Azerbaijan, and Moldova . Three states that did face Russian-backed separatist conflicts on their territory.
 In 2004, Putin's Kremlin inserted itself into Ukraine's electoral politics by openly supporting Yanukovych, outgoing president Kuchma’s handpicked successor .
 Putin traveled to Ukraine ahead of the vote and campaigned on Yanukovych’s behalf . Putin traveled on Yanukovych's behalf .
 Pro-Western opposition candidate Viktor Yushchenko was poisoned in an assassination attempt . The assassination attempt was widely blamed on Russian security services .
 Moscow doubled down on its support, even as masses of orange-clad protestors took to the streets in Kyiv and other cities .
 Yushchenko won a comfortable majority in the new election . Moscow responded with various forms of pressure, including politically motivated gas cutoffs .
 The bilingual Yushchenko pushed for international recognition of the Stalinist famine as an anti-Ukrainian genocide .
 Yushchenko's presidency was a failure in political terms, but his allies won substantial sympathy in the West . The West portrayed Ukrainians as a European nation who had long suffered from Russian oppression .
 Yanukovych and his supporters favored signing an association agreement with the European Union . Despite their interest in maintaining close ties with Russia, Yanukovych's supporters wanted to sign an association deal .
 The agreement called for establishing a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area that would boost Ukraine’s overall trade . It would give Ukrainians greater access to Europe, including courts and banking systems .
 The ambition to sign an association agreement was incompatible with Putin’s call for creating a Eurasian Union . The aim was to allow Moscow to deepen its political and economic influence across much of the former USSR .
 Yanukovych rejected membership in this planned union . Moscow employed a mixture of carrots and sticks to convince him to change his mind .
 Yanukovych agreed at the last minute to abandon the EU association agreement . Neither he nor the Kremlin reckoned on the fury of millions of Ukrainians who believed Yanukovych had betrayed their aspiration for a European future .
 The initial demonstrators on Kyiv’s Independence Square in late 2013 were mostly young people calling on Yanukovych to sign the agreement .
 Waving Ukrainian and EU flags, they embodied the idea of a Western-oriented Ukraine and rejection of Russian influence . They embodied the ideas of a West-oriented Ukrainian and European Union .
 Moscow claims the Maidan protests were part of a U.S.-backed coup attempt . Moscow also claims the presence of United States officials and statements of support for the protestors .
 Violence by Yanukovych’s security forces only radicalized the protests, which expanded beyond Kyiv .
 Even in Russian-speaking parts of eastern Ukraine, demonstrators targeted symbols of Russia's domination .
 The Kremlin recognized that Yanukovych could not remain in power and participated in negotiations for a managed transition . By February 2014, even the Kremlin recognized the situation .
 Yanukovych’s hasty flight derailed the transition agreement and resulted in snap elections, limiting Moscow's ability to influence the outcome . Yet Yanukovych's hasty flights led to snap elections and Moscow's influence in the election .
 The May 2014 presidential election resulted in a comprehensive victory for the pro-Maidan, pro-European Petro Poroshenko . The election was held in May 2014 .
 Ukraine's potential inclusion in the renamed Eurasian Economic Union was left a shell of what Putin had hoped it would be .
 Moscow pivoted to partition after Ukraine failed to coerce Ukraine back into the fold . Moscow pivoting to partition .
 Russian special forces seize government buildings and military assets across Crimea . Even before Yanukovych fled, pro-Russian demonstrations had broken out in the Crimean port of Sevastopol .
 Putin announced the annexation of Crimea in a speech to the Duma . Just over three weeks later, the annexation was announced by Putin . The annexation was followed by a hastily organized referendum .
 The rapidity with which Russia swallowed Crimea reinforced Russian assumptions about the weakness and artificiality of the Ukrainian state . Russia also encouraged Moscow to undertake a similar effort across many of the Russian-speaking regions of eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Crimea playbook had limited success in other parts of the country . Moscow's surprise and frustration with Crimea's success .
Pro-Russian demonstrators in the Dnipro, Kharkiv, Kherson, Mykolaiv, Odesa and Zaporizhzhia oblasts failed to secure control of government buildings and communications infrastructure .
 Police in Kharkiv arrested dozens of protestors who had seized the regional administration building . In Odesa, counter-protestors set the occupied Trade Unions building on fire, killing nearly 40 pro-Russian activists .
Only in Donetsk and Luhansk did pro-Russian demonstrators manage to gain control of the local administration and launch an insurgency . Only in Donetsk.
 Attempts to use Crimea-style referenda as a pretext for annexation were scrapped . Too few voters supported annexation by Russia, but too few supported annexation .
 Ukrainian military was on the verge of surrounding separatist forces in the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk ‘people’s republics’ By the summer of 2014, the Ukrainian military had cut supply lines linking them to Russia .
 Moscow responded by invading Ukrainian territory in August 2014 . Facing the prospect that its proxies would be wiped out, Moscow responded.
 The Donbas War has been costly for Ukraine, Russia was unable to translate its victory into a favorable political settlement . Russia's victory in the field was not enough for Russia to win the war .
 Military occupation and control of the border merely allowed Russia to supply the separatist regions and secure them from reconquest . Military occupation only allowed Russian to supply separatist regions .
 Moscow failed in its larger ambition to use the breakaway regions as a cudgel to force Ukraine to abandon its aspiration for integration with the West . Moscow also failed in the larger ambition.
 Neither Poroshenko nor Zelensky made a serious effort to implement the provisions of the February 2015 Minsk II ceasefire agreement . The Ukrainian legislature must adopt a “law on special status’ for the occupied regions.
 Russian-backed separatists within the federal structure of the state. Both understood that these steps would entrench the Russian- backed separatists . No democratically elected Rada would vote in favor of these provisions .
By the end of 2021, he was even suggesting Kyiv should seek to modify or abandon it should negotiations fail to progress . He was even suggested Kyiv would seek to abandon or abandon the negotiations .
 Zelensky also started chipping away at the pillars of Russian influence . Zelenski also started Chipped away at Russian influence in Russia .
 Viktor Medvedchuk is regarded as the Kremlin’s main proxy in Ukraine . He ordered the closing of pro-Russian television networks, and his government arrested oligarch ViktorMedvedchuk .
 Zelensky also pushed to reform the security services, aiming to root out the Russian sympathizers who proved integral to the takeover of Crimea . Zelenky has also interfered with investigations into Russian influence .
 The bilingual Zelensky also left in place the language law signed at the end of Poroshenko’s term .
 The conflict in Donbas left Russia facing escalating economic penalties from the U.S. and the European Union that stifled its economy . The Road to War and Beyond the conflict left Russia with escalating penalties for its economy.
 NATO responded to fears of member states along Russian borders by reinforcing its military capabilities in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and Romania . In 2016, NATO stood by its 2008 pledge that Ukraine and Georgia “will become’s members.
 In 2019, the U.S. also abandoned the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty after accusing Russia of noncompliance . It would allow for nuclear deployments in Central and Eastern Europe as well as around the Russian periphery in Asia .
 Putin gambled on an all-out invasion in February 2022. Faced with this deteriorating security environment and calculating that the West was too divided and distracted to respond forcefully, Putin gambles on an invasion .
 Moscow lacks the manpower to carry out a sustained military occupation, especially in the face of an insurgency sustained by foreign support .
 The failure of assaults on Kyiv, Kharkiv, and other cities in spring 2022 extracted heavy casualties and forced Moscow to pivot back to Donbas . The failure to attack Kyiv and Kharksiv in spring 2012 forced Moscow back to donbas .
 U.S. and EU sanctions have hit Russia hard, with most of its banking sector cut off from access to dollar-denominated financial system . The prospect of default looms for Russia's banking sector .
 War has boosted Putin’s standing in opinion polls, it has also prompted a mass exodus of educated Russians .
 Putin’s decision to use force, particularly to carry out a large-scale invasion rather than the more limited incursions Russian forces conducted in Georgia and Donbas, smacks of desperation .
 Putin denied the idea of a separate Ukrainian identity and the legitimacy of the Ukrainian state . Putin’s February 21 speech, as well as a subsequent address announcing the start of Russia's “special military operation, on February 24, effectively denied the very idea of
This time, Western powers are preparing to support an insurgency as well . This time, the West is preparing to back an insurgency, according to reports .
 Putin has assumed that many, if not most, remain committed to the idea of the “all-Russian’s nation, and that it is only their “Banderite” leaders and the manipulation of foreign powers that have pushed Ukraine away from Russia .
 Russia's campaign to halt Ukraine's drift toward Europe has been in place for years . Russia's belief has underpinned Russia’s campaign to stop Ukraine’'s drift towards Europe .
 Putin is wagering that military force can succeed where various other forms of intervention have failed . Today, Putin is trying to show that military forces can succeed in the world .
 The current invasion rests on the same assumptions about Ukrainian identity that have led Moscow astray in the past .
 Ukrainian resistance has already surpassed what Moscow was expecting . Ukrainian resistance is already far surpassing Moscow's expectations .
Russian forces have suffered tens of thousands of casualties and failed in their initial objective of marching on Kyiv . Russian forces have been forced to withdraw from Kyiv in recent days .
Even politicians from eastern-based Opposition Platform – For Life – have come out against the Russian invasion .
 Even if Russian forces take Kyiv, an occupation regime will be unable to count on even a modicum of legitimacy among Ukrainian citizens . It follows revelations of widespread atrocities in occupied regions .
 Putin’s gamble already appeared to have backfired spectacularly, a month or so into the conflict .
 More than five million Ukrainians have fled the country, and thousands more have been killed or wounded . Today, more than 5 million Ukrainians are now living in Ukraine .
 Russia has failed to achieve any of its stated military objectives and has itself suffered significant losses of both troops and materiel . Russia has lost both troops, materiel and its own troops .
 Even apolitical Ukrainians have fought back or denounced the invasion of Russia . Moscow suspected Boiko would line up on its side .
 The flood of collaborators Moscow was counting on to run occupation administrations in places like Kherson has not materialized .
 The consolidation of Ukrainians of all linguistic and regional backgrounds behind the government is not only a testament to Zelensky’s unexpected courage and political acumen . But also consistent with the historical experience of foreign invasion as a catalyst for nationand state-building .
 Ukrainian membership was never a near-term possibility. For all the Kremlin’s angst, Ukrainian membership wasn't an immediate possibility .
 Yanukovych's aspiration to sign a trade agreement with the European Union precipitated the Maidan protest movement and Russia's first invasion . Yanukovych’s aspiration to signing a trade deal with the EU precipitated Maidan protests .
Finlandization of Ukraine is unlikely to resolve the crisis, says CNN's John Sutter . Finland has a much more comprehensive Russian protectorate than any Soviet Union ever exerted over Finland .
 Russia could still emerge victorious on the battlefield, but only at a very high cost . Despite the unimpressive performance of its military thus far, it could still be victorious in the battlefield .
 Ukraine's odds of maintaining a long-term protectorate appear to be plummeting with each day Ukraine holds out .
 The ultimate outcome of the conflict will depend on the West’s response and on Ukrainians’ willingness to fight for a nation Putin believes does not and should not exist . Putin believes that Ukraine should not be a nation.
 The Center for Strategic and International Studies is a private, tax-exempt institution focusing on international public policy issues . This report is produced by the Center for strategic and international Studies .