 Crimean incident highlights extent to which Ukraine is unable to control its own military . Crimea’s historical connection to Russia which the West chooses to ignore .
 The 7 August skirmish on the Crimean peninsula has ratcheted tensions between Ukraine and Russia . It calls into question Kyiv’s legitimacy and claims to the territory .
 Acting Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko’s immediate, scripted reaction was to deny involvement . Acting President Poroshenko was forced to deny any involvement .
 Kyiv's authorities are simply losing control of their defence forces. These contradictions show that Kyiv’s authorities are just losing control.
 The UAF is a loose confederation of over 50 volunteer batallions . They lack the skills and coordination to best the Russian FSB and infiltrate the Crimean peninsula .
Amnesty International released a scathing report documenting the lawlessness of the Aidar Battalion and other Ukrainian paramilitary groups’ as they committed increasingly brutal human rights violations in the Russian speaking Donbas region . This became evident on 8 Sept.14, at the onset of hostilities
Marcin Mamon of The Intercept wrote a ground breaking series of articles on how the Kyiv government began overlooking Ukrainian collaborations with Islamic State .
 Russian-Ukrainian relations remain in utter disarray . UAF advances southward to the Isthmus of Perekop, violating the Minsk agreements along with Crimean citizens .
 Ukrainian relations with Crimeans, on the other hand, have been irrevocably changed forever . Ukraine's relations with the Crimeans have been forever changed forever.
 Crimea was a gift to Ukraine and historically sanctioned within strict guidelines . Crimea was given to Ukraine as a gift and was historically sanctioned by strict guidelines.
 The 1954 “Meeting of the Presidium of the Supreme Union of Soviet Socialist Republics’ speech explicitly states the terms of the agreement to transfer Crimea to the Ukraine . The 1954 speech was made by the President of the Soviet Union .
 In history there could not be and cannot be such relations between republics under capitalism . desires for territorial seizure and the desire of strong countries to feast on the territories of weak countries formed the very basis of relations between countries .
Only in the conditions of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was such a just solution of all territorial issues between union republics possible based on administrative and economic advisability .
 Both in the distant and not-so-distant past enemies repeatedly tried to take the Crimean Peninsula from Russia and use it to pillage and ravage Russian lands, and to create a military base there .
 First, the transfer is based on trust between two communist governments . First, it's based on the trust between the communist governments. Second, it will be under a socialist political economy .
 The terms and conditions no longer apply to independent capitalist republics . Now that both are independentcapitalist republics, they no longer have the same conditions .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, it took years of painful negotiations between then-Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin and U.S. Presidents George Bush, Sr. and Bill Clinton to reshape the pacts under the “Treaty of friendship, cooperation and partnership
 Yeltsin believes that these new conditions would hold under the current global order . However, it was a fool’s errand for Yeltsins to believe that this would hold.
 Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych inflamed tensions after weighing his options between the Eurasian Union and the European Union . Yanukovych violated Article 13 of the 1997 Treaty of Friendship .
By the time he had rescinded Europe's offer, he had already besmirched Ukraine’s national sovereignty . The Euromaidan coup was already underway as a contingency .
 Putin keenly observed this and followed the coup, simply rescinded the 1954 transfer . He noted specific violations in the Friendship Treaty to validate the Crimean referendum .
 With Yanukovich gone and a hostile, puppet government on its doorstep, Russia reclaims its historical territory .
 Following the US-backed Euromaidan coup, then-interim President Oleksandr Turchynov provoked Russian authorities further by repealing a 2012 law protecting minority languages .
 Reports of persecuted ethnic minorities finally compelled Putin to act by first speaking to U.S. President Barack Obama and contacting UN Secretary General Ban-Ki Moon .
 Vladimir Putin worked with Crimean authorities to establish referendum . He then signed Executive Order no. shortly afterwards .
 The Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol has been under fire in recent weeks . Russian President Vladimir Putin's main motivation was that he would never allow Crimeans to fall under fascism again .
 Both the illicit Kyiv government and its Western supporters brush this aside and choose to ignore Russia’s valid concerns .
 Vladimir Putin has been accused of being a power-hungry dictator . Vladimir Putin's actions have only reinforced and increased support for his actions around the world .