 The Hurford Fellows Program is sponsored by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . It supports the EuroAtlantic Security Initiative Next Generation Network in identifying young academics conducting innovative research on international security .
 Ukraine is an especially significant country for Russia and will remain so in the foreseeable future . The country is a significant nation for Russia .
 Owing to the choices of the Ukrainian elites and the constant political instability that started in 2004, Russian-Ukrainian interdependence is weakening . The Ukrainian political instability is weakening.
 Russia has chosen to remove its vitally important interests the Black Sea Fleet naval base, energy transport infrastructure, defense contracts and Russian population from Ukrainian influence . Russia has also removed its important interests from Ukraine .
Under normal conditions, this process might have unfolded over decades, but it was accelerated in 2014 by supporters of the Maidan . The Maidan movement was accelerated by the forcible seizure of power in Ukraine .
 This made Moscow ‘unbracket’ in its relations with Kyiv, the issues of the Black Sea Fleet base and Crimea . This makes Moscow 'unbrack’, in its Relations with Kyv, in their relations with Ukraine .
 Russia also stated that resolving the situation in the Donbass was possible only by political means . Russia also clearly stated that resolution in the region was possible by political Means .
 Moscow assumes that an unfriendly regime will remain in power for an extended period . It will proceed with the policy of limiting its dependence on Ukraine .
 It is in the interests of both countries to act in such a way that the lowering of interdependence is gradual and well prepared . It's in the interest of both nations to act.
 The collapse of the USSR in 1991 took place peacefully . The collapse was badly prepared and proceeded in a hurried way .
 Soviet citizens, often against their will, suddenly became citizens of other countries . Soviet citizens were often against the will .
 The collapse of the Union did not entail resolution of the problem of jurisdiction over previously common property . The collapse did not mean resolution of a dispute over the issue of jurisdiction .
 Strategic assets of Russia remained on the territory of postSoviet countries . The economies of the newly formed countries continued to operate as a single organism .
 With the collapse of the post-Soviet countries, the integration of their economies was disrupted . The collapse of political unity was also disrupted .
 A sharp drop in the populations’ standard of living inevitably followed . Most of the countries tried to cushion the drop .
 Each of them in their own way, long ago set out upon the path of extracting profits from the “Soviet inheritance’s’. Since that time, they have not changed course .
 In the 1990s Moscow realized that sharp reform and simple solutions to complex problems constitute a highly risky strategy . In the 90s, Moscow realized it was a risky strategy.
 At the beginning of the 2000s Russia chose a course of slow but steady growth and avoiding involvement in expensive conflicts . Based on this experience, Russia chose to stay away from expensive conflicts.
 Moscow never initiated a reconsideration of the status quo along its borders . For precisely this reason Moscow never started a reconsiderations of thestatus quo along the borders .
 It was last to join in the destruction of this status quo, and then only when its vital interests were suffering, says the author . "It's not the first time it's been in the middle of a crisis," he says .
 It lets violations of its secondary interests (Yugoslavia, Iraq, Libya, Syria) go by without consequences . It is not the first time the government has allowed such violations .
 The objective of progressive economic growth leads Russia to remain interested in the stability and integrity of Ukraine . Even if a regime remains in Kyiv that is unfriendly to Russia, it remains unfriendy to Russia .
 These two states are connected to one another more than any other states in the post-Soviet space . The two states were in the same post- Soviet space .
 Moscow’s vital interest lay in the basing of the Black Sea Fleet on the peninsula, and likewise in the military neutrality of Ukraine . The transit of energy resources through Ukraine is likewise a vital interest .
 The security of over 10 million Russians living on Ukrainian territory is a significant part of Russia's defense of their rights . A significant portion of Russia considers Russia the defender of their right to rights in Ukraine .
 Ukraine ensures transit of goods not only between Russia and the EU, but also with Asian countries . Ukraine ensures transport of goods between the EU and Russia .
 Russian capital invested in Ukrainian facilities represents a double-digit share of the overall economy . Russian capital investment in Ukraine represents adouble-digitshare of the economy .
 Yearly labor migration from Ukraine to Russia amounts to up to 6 million people . The number of people moving to Russia from Ukraine is 6 million .
 The human connections between the two countries are far stronger, reinforced by mixed families and a shared culture and religion .
 Moscow donates $10-12 billion to the Ukrainian economy every year in support of these interests . Russian producers are at the disadvantage of Russian producers in Ukraine .
 Russia has been and remains the chief external guarantor of Ukraine’s stability, and this is a vital interest . Without exaggeration, Russia is a key part of Ukraine's stability .
 Critics of Russia's Ukraine policy believe Moscow is trying to undermine Ukraine's economy by plunging the latter into war .
 Kyiv would be forced to increase expenditures on defense . This would curtail revenues into the budget, and would force Kyiv to increase spending .
 Russia may have an interest in stability of Ukraine, says Putin . Such might be the case, if not for the fundamental economic interdependence that leads Russia to have a interest in Ukraine .
 Even the war in the Donbass has had only a limited effect on them. These connections are so essential that even the war has had a limited impact on them .
In April 2015 the gross external debt of Ukraine amounted to $126 billion, of which about $50 billion was government debt . In April 2015, Ukraine's foreign debt of $126billion was $126bn .
 $25 billion represented investment of Russian state and private banks in Ukrainian sovereign bonds . Of that portfolio, $ 25 billion represented the investment of Russia's state, private banks .
 $4 billion represents Ukrainian state debt to Russia, of which $3 billion is in Russian bonds payable by the end of 2015 . In addition, $4billion represents UkrainianState debt.
 The VS Energy International company, which represents Russian capital investment in the electricity distribution networks of Ukraine, runs 27 regional distributors of electricity .
 In December 2014 Russia began to deliver coal to Ukraine, without prepayment, in quantities of 50,000 tons per day . The domestic price of coal is at the domestic Russian price, at the national price .
 Ukraine's energy crisis allowed Ukraine to escape an energy crisis during the winter of 2014-15 . This allowed the country to escape the energy crisis in the winter.
 European Parliamentary Research Service, Members’ Research Service,. June 2015 .
 After the beginning of Russian coal deliveries, Ukraine stopped cutting off electricity to Crimea .
 In the field of atomic energy Russia and Ukraine had over decades developed a strategic partnership . The two countries had developed a partnership over decades .
 Ukraine inherited four nuclear plants for the generation of electricity with 15 reactors . Fuel for which was delivered from Russia was delivered to Ukraine .
 Russia was planning to construct a fuel factory in the Kirovograd region . But after the beginning of the crisis work was never renewed .
 Ukraine began to experiment with the use of American fuel in the Soviet-constructed nuclear reactors .
 Ukraine and Czech Republic had been attempts to replace Russian fuel with American fuel . The experiments turned out to be technologically unsafe .
 Ukraine seeks an agreement with Russia on deliveries of nuclear fuel for 2015 and 2016 . This led Ukraine to seek an agreement. This led to a deal with Russia for 2015-2016 nuclear fuel deliveries .
 In 2013 the share of gas from Russia used in Ukraine reached 85%; in 2014 Kyiv cut its share of purchases from Russia 6 . In 2014, Kyiv began to transition to reverse deliveries of the same Russian gas from Slovakia, Poland and Hungary .
 The unresolved dispute led in mid-2015 to the cessation of deliveries of gas from Russia .
 Negotiations with Russia over the price of gas for Ukraine always bore a non-market character . Negotiation with Russia has always been non- market character .
 Ukraine was the last republic of the former USSR with which Gazprom transitioned to market relations in the gas sphere . Ukraine was last republic in the former Soviet Union .
 Kyiv lifted from the pipeline more gas than Russia owed it for transit . In addition, until 2009 there were no separate contracts for gas transit, and no separate contract for transit.
 By Russian estimates, between 1991 and 2013 Ukraine saved over $82. billion owing to reduced prices of gas .
 The agreement with Ukraine on gas deliveries for the 2014 heating season was reached only thanks to direct cooperation between 5 “Potrebleniye gaza v Ukraine snizitsya do 34 kubov v etom gody – Ukrtransgaz’
 The European Union reacted constructively to the threat on the part of Ukraine to the transit of Russian gas . The EU reaction was constructively.
 In the same way, transit risk is growing in Ukraine and this affects not only pipelines, but also in Ukraine . The risk is not only in Ukraine, but in Ukraine.
 The security of automobile and train passage and of cargo transport through Ukrainian ports has been called into question .
 Russia has been forced to change the routes of its cargoes to Central and Southern Europe .
 In 2015 construction will begin on a railroad that will deliver cargoes passing between Belgorod, Voronezh and Rostovon-Don . The railroad will obviate the need to transit Ukraine.
 Industrial production remained an important sphere of RussianUkrainian interdependence, especially in the military-industrial field . Russian manufacture utilize components made in Ukraine .
 Russia was forced into an unscheduled review of its rearmament program through 2020 . All military-industrial cooperation between the countries was halted .
 In 2013 Russia was Ukraine’s leading trade partner . Russia was trailing by only a few percentage points the combined trade with EU countries .
 The volume of two-way external trade amounted to $26. billion, $18 billion less than in 2013 . In contrast, Ukraine’s trade with the EU grew by 12%, which did not compensate for losses in the Russian market .
 Conditions exist for a further drop in trade between Russia and Ukraine. Conditions are expected to continue to deteriorate.
 The Ukrainian Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with the EU will lead Moscow to introduce trade duties on Ukrainian goods . Since a preferential trade regime is in force between Russia and Ukraine, the preferential trade regimes are in force .
 This would lead to their loss in competition with the Eurasian Economic Union . This would inevitably lead to the loss of the EAEU .
 Ukrainian economy may lose a minimum of $33 billion annually, according to Russian specialists . Russian specialists say the EEU market may be limited by limitations on access to the market .
 Russia proposed that the EU and Ukraine come to an agreement with Russia on the rules of economic cooperation in the current triangle . To avoid these consequences, Russia proposed a deal to avoid the consequences .
 Consultations on this began only in May 2015 and their outcome offers little hope of success . The outcome of the Consultations is still uncertain .
 Ukrainian authorities proposed canceling the current visa-free regime with Russia . As part of the conception of constructing a ‘wall’ on the border with Russia, the new Ukrainian authorities propose a “wall” on the borders .
 The move would lead to a reduction in money transfers home from Ukrainian workers in Russia . It would be 9 “RZhD i Minoborony podpisali dogovor o stroitel’stve dorogi v obkhod Ukrainy�
 The numbers indicated above show how deep the economic interdependence between Russia and Ukraine is . The numbers indicate how deep it is .
 The economy of independent Ukraine has developed from the beginning with significant Russian participation . In addition to the shared Soviet industrial inheritance and economic ties, the economy has developed with significantRussian participation .
 The close interdependence which had developed had previously forced Russia and Ukraine to “compartmentalize’s politics and economics. Consequences of the Unexpected Rupture in Relations in 2014.
Under crisis conditions the two sides fused them to the point of a rupture in mutual connections . Under crisis conditions, under crisis conditions.
 Ukraine is identified as a forward outpost of the West in a war with Russia . In the new national security strategy of Ukraine Russia is called a “long-term strategic threat,’s new strategy is called ‘long- term strategic threat’
 Russia has also taken affairs to the point of a rupture in interdependence . In turn, Russia has been taking affairs to a rupture.
 Russian Prime Minister D Medvedev: "Russia intends to follow strictly its own national interests"
 Three strategies came into existence for Moscow in relation to Kyiv . Three strategies were applied in accordance with Ukraine’s readiness to cooperate .
 In the first version of the strategy, Russia was dealing with a friendly Ukraine . The strategy aimed at integrating into the common economic space of the CIS and jointly develop on the basis of the Soviet economic inheritance .
 Russia was dealing with a vacillating Ukraine, which was inclined towards neutrality . In the second version of the strategy, Russia was applying most frequently of all .
 Russia aimed at the formation of a tripartite economic regime with Ukraine and the EU for the creation of a future “bridge’ over the territory of Ukraine. In this scenario Russia aims to create a future 'bridge' over Ukraine .
 The goal of Russia’s policy in this case is the gradual weakening of interdependence . The goal is the removal of its interests out from under vulnerability to Kyiv, and the creation of conditions for the stability of Ukraine .
The chief interest remains likewise the preservation of the military neutrality of its western neighbor . The chief interest is likewise the protection of the country's military neutrality .
 Russia began to construct an alternate base for the Black Sea Fleet in Novorossiysk in 2004 . 25 years of Russian attempts to establish friendly relations with Ukraine produced no results .
Today in Moscow it is assumed that any achievements on the basis of the Ukrainian political class that emerged in the years following independence will be transitory .
 The contemporary Ukraine strategy of Russia consists of non-intervention to the extent possible and limiting the losses that Ukrainian processes might impose on Russia .
 The political trajectory of Ukraine led to other results, according to the author . Ukraine's political trajectory led to a political trajectory, he says .
 In the years of its independence a consolidated political class never emerged in Ukraine . Politics was characterized by the priority of private over state interests .
 The political structure of Ukraine presupposes that whoever wins elections will receive the entirety of power . A new elite always changed not only the staff of the upper ranks in Kyiv, but also the leaderships in all 24 regions of Ukraine .
 In the majority of cases the new elite came to power represented the interests of a specific regional group, which extended its influence to other parts of the country .
 Since the stakes were so high, any national election turned into a crisis . The stakes have been so high that any national elections turned into an election crisis .
 Yushchenko was elected with the support of the ‘Maidan’ One prime minister was imprisoned in her country (Yu.Yushchenko)
 "Esli eto imelo opredilennuyu rezhissuru," says Vedomosti . "Rezhisseru nuzhno postavit’s pyat’ s plyusom," he says .
 The political class of Ukraine actually stimulated the interference of external forces in Ukrainian affairs . In addition, Ukraine's political class actually stimulated external forces.
 Local political actors aimed to receive dividends from the constant involvement of global power centers in Ukrainian politics .
 Ukraine's political class did not achieve a consensus on identifying national interests of the country, says the author .
 In the absence of this fundamental conclusion, it proved impossible to elaborate a long-term development strategy on the basis of defense of sovereignty from external interference .
 The Ukrainian elites began to feel that Ukraine would forever be a victim of the confrontations of external forces on its territory . The Ukrainian elite felt that the country would never be a victims of the external forces .
 Kyiv stopped perceiving itself as an equal participant in the situation bearing responsibility for its decisions . Kyiv began to use external interference to further its own interests .
 The situation exacerbated the instability in the political system of Ukraine and led to the failure of attempts by Russia to establish a stable and close partnership with Kyiv .
 The question remains open as to how durable the pro-Western course of Ukraine will be . Kyiv will be able to construct a long-term partnership with western countries .
 Ukraine Caught in a Vise Convinced of the impossibility of a constructive partnership with Ukraine, the Russian leadership refused to try to integrate it into the Eurasian Economic Union . Ukraine is fragile as Ukraine a definitive choice between Russia and the EU would have been fatal .
 The EU never ceased its attempts to include Ukraine in its zone of influence . However, the EU never realized the potential negative effects of such a policy .
 The economic and normative eastward expansion of the EU required the countries of Eastern Europe to make a definitive choice between the West and Russia . In recent years the Western demands that Ukraine make such a choice became more insistent .
 Yanukovicha zhdala sud’ba Kaddafi’skaya Pravda 5 February 2015 . Komsomol’'skaya Pavda.
 Yanukovych, was overthrown, and a “government of the victors’ was formed in Ukraine .
 This unleashed a chain reaction in the South and East of Ukraine that took the country to the brink of civil war . The country is now in a civil war with Ukraine .
 Many in Moscow think that the goal of these actions was to strike a blow against Russian interests . The expansion of NATO to Ukraine and the removal of Russia’s fleet from Crimea was the goal .
 Few in Moscow believed the actions of Russia in Crimea and the Donbass took it by surprise . The U.S. leadership’s declaration that Russia's actions in the Crimea and Donbass was a surprise .
 In reality, the interests of Russia in Crimea and Ukraine were explicitly reiterated to the American and European elites .
 Russia has accepted Ukraine's westward orientation, including its possible accession to the EU and closer ties with NATO . NATO membership and the establishment of a United States or NATO base in Ukraine remain clear redlines .
 The opinion in Russia is that the U.S. consciously aimed at forcing Russia to defend its interests in Ukraine and thereby dragging it into an exhausting conflict .
 Russia’s NATO Enlargement Redlines, 1 February 2008, is the first time the Redlines have been published .
 The question of NATO accession remains a subject of deep discord in Ukraine, even after Crimea's secession and the beginning of war in the Donbass .
 In June 2015, 37% of Ukrainians expressed themselves in favor of NATO accession, according to the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology .
 If a referendum were held with full turnout, these figures would result in 51% for and 49% against . If a vote were held, the figures would have been more than 50% against.
 The current Ukrainian government threw out the strategy of balancing between Russia and West .
 Ukraine is perched at the juncture of two centers of power . In so doing it also rejected the conception of Ukraine as a fragile state .
 The logic of the ‘Government of Victors’ lies in utilizing a historic chance to “turn the country to the West,’ despite all the likely costs, including the fracturing and collapse of the country .
 One may assume that the situation as it has developed is not definitive . It is not clear if the situation has developed.
 The current authorities in Ukraine are trying to avoid an internal crisis as exemplified by the collapse of the “orange coalition of 2004-2006, inasmuch .
 Several systemic conflicts are occurring, involving central authorities, regional groupings, powerful oligarchs and non-systemic militarized detachments .
 Social dissatisfaction is growing with the effectiveness of the policy of the authorities . Among the population, massive social dissatisfaction isgrowing with the government's policies .
For now, this is reflected in extremely low poll numbers for the authorities, and in sporadic protest demonstrations . For now, it's reflected in very low poll number for the government, and sporadic protest protests .
Public discussion in the country flows in three basic vectors, two of which are radical . The situation is that public discussion flows in a way that is radical .
 The representatives of the mainstream advocate a civil nationalist program of ‘Ukraine for the Ukrainians’ and see Ukraine as the advance guard in a Western struggle with Russia . The group most numerous, best organized and best represented in the media.
 Representatives of this group give highest priority to a Ukrainian identity based on a Ukrainophone civic nationalism . Representatives of the Ukrainian group give most priority to Ukrainian identity .
 At the same time, the Uniates and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate played a big role in mobilizing people in Western Ukraine and in blessing the use of force on the Maidan .
 The goal of this group is the creation in Ukraine of a national state composed of people of Ukrainian identity . The goal is to create a group of Ukrainian people who have a national identity .
 They are prepared to sacrifice the territorial integrity of the country in order to consolidate a homogeneous society on the remaining lands . Thus they are prepared.
 The nationalists are prepared to keep the Donbass within Ukraine only on condition of the complete loyalty of the local population . In other words, the nationalists are preparing to keep it within Ukraine .
 Ukrainians, Russians and other ethnic groups that do not share the goals and values of the Maidan and consider Russia to be an important force in Ukrainian politics . Ukraine's Maidan is one of Ukraine's most popular cities .
 Many of them are desperate to find a defender of their interests among the participants in Ukrainian politics . Many are trying to understand why Moscow does not defend their interests as it did in Crimea .
 This group is not as numerous as the first; at least, it is much less represented in the media . This group of people are not as many as first .
 Some representatives are subjected to political pressure, in some instances to persecution . This is not surprising, as their representatives are subject to political Pressure .
 Among many of them an underground mentality is forming, and the trend might radicalize with time . Many of them have a "underground mentality" that is forming .
People of Russian identity have stopped associating themselves with Ukraine . Previously, they were loyal to the Ukrainian project, but now they are more frequently opposed .
 Many people of Russian identity are adherents of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate . Many people are adherents to the Russian Orthodox Church.
 The Kyiv Metropolitanate is pursuing a conciliatory course and has not taken sides in the civil opposition . The Kyv Metropolitanate has not been taken by the opposition .
 The immolation of over 40 “anti-maidan’s activists in Odessa on 2 May 2014. It is possible to assert that the turning point in the attitude of Russians to the situation in Ukraine was not the events of the Maidan and the overthrow of V Yanukovych
 Pubic pressure on the authorities of Russia in connection with the tragedy was huge . citizens demanded action in defense of those close to them in Ukraine .
 The third group of the Ukrainian elite consists of supporters of an inclusive statehood as a condition for the territorial integrity of Ukraine . The Ukrainian elite is the third group.
 The étatists consider the top priority to be the 23 “Politicheskaya situatsiya b Ukraine.’s’ top priority is the 23. ‘Politiheskaya’ b Ukraine .
 Ukraine must choose the course of neutrality and sovereignty in order to preserve the unity of the state . They recognize that Ukraine must choice the course. Ukraine must also choose the way to preserve its unity .
After the victory of the Euromaidan, this was the camp advocating the necessity of avoiding radicalism in order to prevent the loss of Crimea . The camp advocated the need to avoid radicalism.
 There are also representatives of this point of view in the Bloc of Petro Poroshenko . They are mostly found in the Opposition Bloc .
 The staff of the newspaper Vesti, which advocates an étatist platform, are subjected to persecution by supporters of the authorities . The newspaper's staff are subject to persecution.
 Russia was last to join the disruption of the status quo, and then only when it recognized that others were not playing by the rules . Russia was first to recognize that other countries were not doing the same .
 The first to intervene in Ukraine’s internal affairs were the EU and the U.S., which supported one of two political parties . One of two parties had set as its goal regime change by force .
 The coup in Kyiv fundamentally altered the status quo, and the West did not attempt to integrate the new Ukrainian opposition into the developing system or take account of the interests of Russia .
 In 2014, Ukraine's opposition used force, primarily anonymously, to force the government . The opposition has used force in Ukraine, to a degree unprecedented for Ukraine .
 New authorities continue to use violence against their opponents . The new authorities are coming to power .
 Plan dii iz vregulyubannya krymskoi krizi,” Radio Free Europe, 11 March 2014, is the latest in a series of news stories .
30 a series of murders and suspicious suicides of opposition politicians and journalists,31 and finally the beginning of the Anti-Terrorist Operation in the Donbass in April 2014 . Local inhabitants perceived the local inhabitants perceived as a punitive operation .
 None of the aforementioned events called forth energetic protests from the United States or EU countries, which in practice sanctioned to the actions of the government in Kyiv .
 The situation that developed in Crimea after the overthrow of Yanukovych left Moscow little room for maneuver .
 The population of the peninsula had historically aimed at extracting itself from the sovereignty of Ukraine and uniting with Russia . Throughout the 1990s and 2000s Moscow resisted this, aiming instead to establish friendly relations.
 Sevastopol was also the base of the Ukrainian Navy, which numbered up to 11,000 personnel . The Ukrainian Navy was also a naval base .
 The comparability of the potentials of these two groupings made the situation in Crimea especially tense . The situation was especially tense in Crimea .
 Both the Russian and Ukrainian fleets were staffed by service personnel from Crimea, whose sympathies lay with Russia .
 At the same time, this circumstance would not have prevented bloodshed, had not Moscow taken the initiative in its own hands .
 In Moscow elites saw this situation as a choice of the lesser of two evils . In Moscow, elites saw the situation as an option of a lesser two evils.
 The Crimeans thought that if Russia had not intervened, there would have been no outlet for the pro-Russian sentiment of the Crimeans . They thought that there would be no outlet.
 Kyiv would not have reconciled itself to the intention of the peninsula to leave and would have utilized force, as it did in Donbass .
 Since Russian service personnel were located in Crimea, they would have been subject to accusations of supporting separatism .
 Ukrainian forces would have blockaded Russian bases and hindered the movement of personnel. Ukrainian troops would have blocked Russian bases .
Local military personnel wanted to defend the independence of the peninsula . However, this would not have stopped those of the local military personnel who wanted to protect their independence .
 The start of resistance actions would have been unavoidable, with the participation of local militias and individual Crimeans .
 30 P Poroshenko asserts that this act averted the destabilization of Odessa . It is highly likely that Russian bases would have come under intentional or unintentional circumstances .
 "Vlast’ ne pozvolit povtorit’s 2 maya v Odesse, zayavlyayet Prezident,” Site of the President of Ukraine, 10 April 2015 .
 Meshkov scored a victory in parliamentary elections with a platform advocating reunion of the peninsula with Russia . Meshkov's platform advocating reuniting the peninsula was a success .
 It is hard to conceive that Russia would have permitted its service personnel to become hostages . It is not clear if the Russian government would have allowed them to be hostages .
 Moscow would have faced accusations of intervention in Ukraine’s affairs, followed by demands for the removal of the base and the Fleet .
 Moscow began to support the insurgent movement only towards the end of the summer of 2014 . In contrast to Crimea, the direct military involvement was obvious from the beginning .
 In Crimea Kyiv did not resort to force, as that would have led to a direct military confrontation with Russia . The Crimea region is in Crimea, Ukraine's Crimea region .
 The situation in the Donbass was different, and President Poroshenko preferred to launch a military operation . The situation, however, was different and Poroshenko wanted to launch an operation .
 Three months of military clashes passed by, costing hundreds of lives and sending a flood of refugees into Russia . Moscow took the decision to support the militias after months of fighting .
 Based on the words of the latest and independent observers, that decision was forced . The decision was made by the U.S. government .
 The domination of nationalists in the Ukrainian mainstream is an obstacle to the preservation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity . Ukraine's territorial integrity is at risk.
 Kyiv has no intention of implementing the political part of the Minsk Agreements of 12 February 2015 . The Ukrainian authorities are prepared to sacrifice the “pro-Russian” Donbass for the sake of consolidating their rule over the remaining territories .
 The main content of the Minsk Agreement consists of the re-establishment of Ukraine’s sovereignty over the Donbass through peaceful reintegration and the inclusion of its representatives in the Ukrainian elite .
 Despite all suspicions, Russia actually aims at a resolution in the Donbass . Russia aims to resolve the issue in a resolution .
 The goal of Russia is not the defeat of Ukraine and the victory of Donbass, but an equitable political settlement between them . Russia's goal is not to defeat Ukraine and Donbass's victory, but to make a political settlement .
 Russia insists on a comprehensive resolution and for that reason aims at guaranteeing in the renewed Ukrainian constitution the rights of the Donbass and potentially unstable regions of Ukraine . Russia says it wants to guarantee in the new Ukrainian constitution.
 The West is guarded in its perception of these initiatives, seeing in them a Russian intention to interfere in Ukraine’s affairs . The West says in them, they are a Russian attempt to interfere with Ukraine .
 The West will not be interested in the 34 “Remarks with EU High Representative Lady Catherine Ashton after their Meeting,’s meeting, 6 May 2014 .
 Russia is a bigger supporter of the integrity of Ukraine within its current borders than the current authorities in Kyiv . It is a paradox that Russia, coming to the defense of the rights of the Russian community of Ukraine, is a larger supporter of Ukraine .
 Moscow wants in this way to balance anti-Russian forces in the Kyiv government with more moderate ones . Moscow wants to ensure military neutrality of Ukraine .
 The onset of reconciliation and the signing of agreements in Minsk do not signify the prospect of a quick political settlement . Minsk has been accused of a political crisis in the past .
 President Poroshenko wants to reduce dependence on Donetsk and Luhansk . He plans to achieve his goals through military means, now he counts on reducing dependence .
Ukrainian politicians and experts raise the question of rejecting Donetsk and Luhansk and excluding them from Ukraine . Ukrainian politicians, experts raise question of rejection of Donetsk andLuhansk .
 Kyiv is outraged by the demands of the Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic that they be allotted a special status including autonomy and choice of economic vector of development .
 Kyiv sees this condition as so unacceptable that it is prepared to put off until a more advantageous moment . Donetsk's fate is the question of the fate of the Donetsk region .
 Kyiv's conception is beginning to dominate Kyiv that Ukraine must first implement successful reforms and become attractive to Donbass . But without additional conditions, Kyiv must take the latter back – but without further conditions .
 A similar thesis guided the elites of Georgia with regard to Abkhazia in the 1990s, but so far such an approach has not had positive results .
 Donetsk and Luhansk will be expressed in their physical isolation from the rest of Ukraine . The course of reducing dependence on Donetsk andLuhansk is to be shown in the future .
 At this stage President Poroshenko is proposing an economic blockade and surrounding the territory controlled by the militias with a line of fortified strongholds .
The execution of this plan will render impossible a political solution in the Donbass . The execution of the plan will rendering impossible a Political solution in Donbass.
 Donetsk and Luhansk will reinforce themselves as autonomous entities and de facto states . With the passage of time Donetsk will reinforce their status as autonomous states . The two cities will become autonomous entities.
 Kyiv is prepared to pay such a price to retain undisputed control over the rest of the country . Kyiv has been in power for more than a decade .
 Ukraine is prepared to grant Crimea every possible preference in the event of its return to Ukraine . However, the prospect of reintegrating Crimea into Ukraine is not in view .
 In actuality, the chief interest of the authorities is the consolidation, at any price, of a nationalist state on the territory controlled by Kyiv .
 A frozen conflict in the Donbass harms Russia’s interests, which aim at normalizing relations with Ukraine in the new circumstances . Russia's interests are at risk.
 The main consequence of the unresolved divergence of opinion regarding the Donbass will be the further deterioration of Russian-Ukrainian economic interdependence . The main reason for the divergence is the continued deterioration of Russia's economy .
Work began on the creation of a new base for the Black Sea Fleet in Novorossiysk . The transfer of military contracts from Ukrainian to Russian enterprises took place .
 Moscow’s aim was to prevent this exit from inflicting irreparable harm on Russia itself . But it did not veto the foreign policy choice of Kyiv – nor could it have.
 The February coup in Kyiv in 2014 struck a blow against Russia’s vital interests . The acceleration of changes resulting from the February coup was a blow.
 The threat of the expulsion of the Russian Black Sea Fleet from Crimea led to the decision of Moscow to encourage the separation of Crimea and Sevastopol from Ukraine . Ukraine's accession to NATO led to Moscow's decision to encourage separation.
 Russia demonstrated that in defense of its vital interests it is prepared to act decisively and warned of the consequences of further attacks on them by the new authorities in Kyiv .
 Moscow had tired of the constant blackmail of every new government in Kyiv on the question of Crimea .
 Crimea has been removed from under the question marks hanging over relations with Kyiv . It is the latest infringement on this Russian interest in the region .
 Moscow remains a supporter of the preservation of the status quo in the very fullest sense of the word . However, in all remaining aspects Moscow is still a supporter.
 Russia does not wish to deepen the damage to its interests. It proposes measures for the preservation of the integrity of Ukraine in its current borders through decentralization .
 The condition for Russia’s continuing its course of supporting the stability of Ukraine is reaching an understanding with the new authorities in Kyiv on the price of gas and energy transit to the EU .
 The transition from logic of cooperation to the logic of war is undesirable for Moscow . The transition is undesirable, says the Russian government .
 Russia will be forced to transition to the containment of the threat emanating from Ukraine . If adventurist and aggressive forces prevail in Kyiv, Russia will have to step down .
 Russia will not embark on an open use of force to resolve its differences with Kyiv – that is too expensive and unreliable . In so doing, Russia will NOT embark on a openUse of force. In so do, Russia would not embark upon an open Use of
 The search for alternate routes to deliver energy to the EU would receive an impulse . Russian investment in the Ukrainian economy would be blocked . preferential trade and visa regimes would be reconsidered . and labor migration would be restricted .
 Russia would cease to subsidize the price of gas to Ukraine. And – more importantly – Russia would stop subsidizing the price to Ukraine .
 Ukraine measures would provoke an economic crisis in Ukraine and harm Russian interests as well, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: In their entirety, these measures would provoked an economic Crisis in Ukraine .
 Moscow will aim to avoid such an eventuality, but would not shy away from it if Kyiv leaves it no choice . Moscow will try to avoid it, but will not hide from it.
 Russia would invest in its national industry the resources it previously used to support its neighbor . Russia would spend more on its own industry than it did in the past .
 Russia will attract migrants from among the Russophone population of Ukraine . In proportion to the widening gap in the level of development, Russia will be attracting migrants .
 The course of reducing the influence of Ukraine on the vital interests of Russia will be accelerated . Russia's influence in Ukraine will be reduced by reducing its influence on Ukraine .
 The new Ukraine policy of Russia will be to “normalize’s ties with Kyiv through cessation of politically motivated economic aid and placing trade and industrial relations on a non-preferential basis .
 Bilateral relations will achieve a “new normal’ on the basis of a new economic equilibrium. After a substantial decline, bilateral relations will achieved a ‘newnormal’
 The single common framework for mutual action by Russia and Ukraine will be the WTO regime . The singleCommon framework for Mutual action by the two countries is the World Trade Council .
 The prospective pragmatization of ties will lead to their recovery and will open the way to a trilateral Russia-Ukraine-EU trade regime . The prospect of a Russia- Ukraine-Ukraine trade regime will help them recover .
 In the past it was Russia, not the EU, that granted the strategic conditions for the growth of the Ukrainian economy .
 Moscow will stop guaranteeing the stability of Ukraine on its own, since Kyiv itself aims at this . With the exit of Ukraine from the zone of free trade with Russia, Russia will stop guarantees of Ukraine's stability .
 Brussels recognizes that the next stage in Ukraine might become an energy crisis in the EU . It aims not to permit that to happen .
 It is impossible to guess how the Ukrainian elites will evaluate today’s events tomorrow .
 The 19 structural problems of Ukraine will begin to be resolved. We can try to imagine an eventuality in which the 19 problems will be resolved . We can also imagine a possible solution to the Ukraine's problems .
What is necessary for that is in the first instance the strengthening of the system of state governance and the elimination of oligarchic groups from the authorities. What is necessary is in first instance, says the author .
 Ukraine must aim to become a bridge between Russia and the EU, not an anti-Russian outpost in Eastern Europe . In terms of geo-economics and geopolitics, Ukraine should aim to be a bridge to Russia and EU .
 Ukraine would guarantee its neutrality and support normal trade ties in the Russia-EU-Ukraine triangle .
 Russian investment would lead to the return of Russian investment and the renewal of advantageous commercial conditions, which will lead to a new industrialization of Ukraine . This would create new jobs, according to the Russian government .
 A neutral and stable Ukraine will recognize the political rights of the minorities living on its territory in accordance with OSCE norms . Ukraine will also recognize the rights of minorities living in its territory .
 The good intentions of both the West and Russia will not materialize into a joint assistance program for Ukraine . Russia and the West will not be part of a joint aid program for the Ukraine .
 external forces will be to control the damage that processes in Ukraine might inflict on Europe’s security and economy .
 The goal will be to contain the instability within Ukraine’s borders and not to allow extremism and violence to spill over to neighboring states .
 The security of the nuclear plants in Ukraine will be a great priority, as will the inviolability of cargo and energy transport through Ukrainian territory .
 The migration flow from Ukraine will be an added concern for neighbors . The migration from Ukraine is expected to increase in coming years .
 The EU does not yet recognize the size of the yearly subsidies that Ukraine will require if it comes out from under Russian tutelage . The EU is not prepared to allocate them .
 There is reason to doubt the longterm effectiveness of the Ukrainian leadership. There is also reason to question the actions of the Ukraine leadership .
 The internal political problems and the debt burden for 2016 and 2017 may force Kyiv to resort to a military provocation in the Donbass .
 The United States for now does not play the role of stabilizing force, and Russia is hedging its risk and withdrawing vulnerable assets . The U.S. for now doesn't play a role.
 The impulse towards striking a deal will appear only when the EU perceives its own severe vulnerability in the field of energy security . The impulse to strike a deal is likely to come from the EU.
 All external players in the Ukraine crisis must consider the possibility that it will take a new turn in the course of the 2018 electoral cycle . Ukraine crisis will be the focus of the election cycle in 2018 .
 A scenario analogous to the Euromaidan might once again occur and threaten to turn the crisis international . A scenario like that might happen again and threaten the world's future .
 It is in the common interest not to turn Ukraine into a battlefield between Russia and the West, but rather to encourage it to become a “bridge’s between the two .