 4.75 out of 5 based on 16 user reviews. Additional Details Revealed .
 It reveals additional details about the MH17 shot down in Ukraine in 2014 . The MH17 was shot down by Ukrainian forces in the early hours of the morning .
 He’s a member of the Union of Journalists of Russia, chief department editor of the Military Herald of the South of Russia newspaper . He's also author of dozens of military history publications and a native of Donetsk .
 SF needs to publish “article condemning russian troops in Ukraine or the illegal annexation of Crimea’s Crimea. So in your opinion to be independent SF need to publish an article condemning russia troops.
 This article presents view from other side beside and I think it's pretty balanced . This article was written by John Sutter .
 Even if rebels had shot down MH17, they would have considered it enemy aircraft in their territory .
 Ukrainian air force was active in conflict region and was wrecking havoc on civilians areas . This was flight carrier and air space controller fault that they did not close the air space considering Ukrainian air Force was active .
 Presence of Russian troops in Ukraine and Annexation of Crimea is a political opinion that anyone is entitled to have but its not the universal accepted truth .
 So far nobody has been able to present even the tiniest evidence about Russian troops in Ukraine .
 Ukraine ceased to be an independent democratic country because of the external military takeover that swept the land into illegal Nazi-like hands . Great many people assert there were no Russian troops in Ukraine or Crimea was illegally annexed by Ukraine .
 He thought Germany should have its own agency to counter it with it’s like Germany . He thought they made such effective use of it in WWI, in contrast to Germany .
 Anglophone world has been the world's foremost propagandists since the 18th Century .
 The Netherlands, Ukraine and U.S. have something to hide. Clearly, the Netherlands and the United States have a thing to hide, says the author .
 The path to truth about other acts of criminality like 9/11 lies through the truth being revealed about MH17 . MH17 was at the very least shot down by the Ukrainians – most likely with help of one sort or another .
 Mark Rutte and Geert Wilders are a man prepared to speak the truth . Rutte is a globalist lovechild and a nationalist firebrand .
 Trump must do whatever he can to get Wilders elected – and lucky for him, there is a very easy way to do that .
 The 3rd Anniversary of the Maidan is about a month after Trump’s inauguration .
 A side impact of this will be to destroy Rutte’s political career and get Wilders elected . A side effect of this is to destroy the political career of Rutte .
 I wouldn't be surprised if Rutte ended up rotting in jail when the truth of his treachery to his fellow citizens is revealed .
German chancellor Angela Merkel is a pathetic German chancellor . Merkel's leadership is still uncertain at this stage .
 Sometimes, it's good to get an over-view of a seemingly complex event – one that backs up just enough so the whole picture becomes clear .
 Russia supplied it to mercenaries who then detected an aircraft on their radar . The mercenaries thought it was a Ukraine aircraft and turned out it was not . Russia supplied the aircraft to the mercenaries .
 YET the Russians always changed their story from saying a Ukraine jet shot it down, that MH17 was in fact MH370, MH17 already had dead bodies in it and a bomb .
 ONLY the Russians blame the CIA NATO Ukraine fascist nazi and will NEVER believe facts only propaganda . Only the Russians blames the CIA Ukraine nazi .
 The propaganda is no good at all from the Dutch U.S. Brits and French, according to the Dutch media .
There are those of us who will not forget this atrocity and will not cease to inform others of the facts . There are those who will never forget the atrocity .
 People across the world are rejecting regimes such as the one installed in Kiev .
 Once they are purged, honest people can get on with the task of a proper investigation without amateurs messing it up .