 The United States Army Special Operations Command Fort Bragg, North Carolina Reproduction in whole or in part is permitted for any purpose of the U.S. government .
 Nonmateriel research on special warfare is performed in support of the requirements stated by the U.S. Army Special Operations Command .
 The opinions, conclusions, and recommendations expressed or implied within are those of the contributors . They do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Defense, Department of Army, or any other government agency .
 The intent is to share knowledge, generate discussion, and solicit input on the topic . The intent was to share information and generate discussion .
 The document is a working draft that will be updated with additional information . It will eventually become part of a complete case study . The document will be part of the case study.
 The U.S. Army Special Operations Command G-3X, Sensitive Activities 2929 Desert Storm Drive Fort Bragg, NC 28310 All ARIS products are available from USASOC at www.soc.mil under the ARIS link .
 The black fur hat seemed to be just as much as much a part of the Serb as the thick, black beard that hung below his clavicle .
On the shoulder of his woodland camouflage uniform was a patch with a skull and crossbones depicted on it . The patch was also depicted on the shoulder.
 He stopped in front of the Orthodox Church in Sevastopol to pray for a few moments before sharing why he and his compatriots came to Crimea .
 As night fell, he directed operations at the Belbek checkpoint with other Serbian War veterans .
 Cossacks, motorcycle gangs, and thugs looking for work flooded into the region, providing muscle that could be controlled from Moscow .
 Dressed conspicuously in fashionable dress jeans and an expensive black silk blouse, she raged at the small, docile group that gathered around .
 She spouted rhetoric about the need to “obey the European Union and its “sponsor,’ the United States. She said the U.S. needs to ‘obey” the EU .
 In Sevastopol, an elderly mother wailed inconsolably over her dead son . The illegitimate Kyiv regime is accused of murdering her son .
 The fascist monsters who invaded the city sought him out because his accent revealed Russian ancestry . The monsters wanted him out.
 A stern, serious woman lectured the crowd on the history of Ukraine and its proud heritage of loyalty to Russia and resistance against invaders .
 She rattled off figures touting the strength of the Eurasian Economic Union and how it is vastly superior to the EU’s faltering, authoritarian economy .
 Dressed in a worker's simple dress, she appealed to the listeners’ patriotism and selfinterest, insisting that hope lay east and tyranny west .
 Journalists are not allowed here, he said from behind the balaclava .
Green and black digital patterned kit had no insignia or markings . The kit shouted “special forces’ rather than “conscript’s”
 The soldier's voice and posture were brazen, as if the rolling cameras behind him could trump the soldier's Kalashnikov .
 It is an unclassified expansion of an earlier classified version . It drew from numerous classified and unclassified sources, including key U.S. diplomatic cables . It's an un classified expansion of a classified version.
 The authors drew from open source articles, journals, and books . For this version, the authors draw from open sources .
 The primer does not reflect a comprehensive historiography, nor does it achieve in-depth analysis . The primer examines a very recent conflict .
 The book is intended to acquaint the reader with the essential background to and course of the Russian intervention in Ukraine from the onset of the crisis in late 2013 through the end of 2014 .
 Russian intervention in Ukraine has featured refined and modernized techniques evolved through observation and analysis of Western methods and Russian experiences since the collapse of Soviet Union .
 Igor Panarin and Alexandr Dugin are the primary theorists . e Russian Chief of Staff Valery Gerasimov’s model for interstate conflict reflects the growing importance of nonkinetic factors in Russian strategy .
 Ukraine’s historical, cultural, religious, and economic ties to Russia make it a vital interest to Moscow . Russian Unconventional Warfare in Ukraine, 2013-2014 e Historical Context.
Western security is a major threat to Western security, according to security experts . Security experts say the approach is a key threat to security .
Igor Panarin is a leading advocate for Russian information warfare . He boasted about the nearly flawless Russian operation to seize and annex Crimea .
 He celebrated the campaign’s success in avoiding armed violence and preempting American interference .
 He praised the use of blackmail, intimidation, and deception in the face of international dithering in the West . He pointed to neoconservative ideals of justice, spirituality, and “true liberty’s” liberty .
 He attributed the success to the personal leadership and direct control of Vladimir Putin to the success of Putin .
 Moscow’s goals vary from outright annexation to the creation and discipline of weakened states all along its periphery . Moscow's goals include outright annexation.
 Russia’s unconventional warfare techniques challenge the provisions of Article 5 of the NATO Charter . The treaty invokes collective defense in response to “armed attack’ by another power. Russia”s unconventional Warfare techniques challenge Article 5 .
 Throughout the campaigns in Ukraine, Moscow denied involvement and employed proxies and deception to obviate the stigma attached to a conventional armed invasion .
 The principles will be explored later in a full study to draw out more detailed observations and insights on Russian unconventional warfare operations .
 The title is intended to include the full spectrum of Russian activities in the subject time frame . It includes diplomatic coercion, intimidation, bribery, manipulation of media, terror, subterfuge, sabotage, and a host of other kinetic and nonkinetic activities .
 There are many terms and concepts that contribute to the study of modern conflict, including irregular warfare, hybrid warfare and new-generation warfare .
 Each term has competing definitions and nuances, and each adds value to the ongoing discussion and analysis . Each term addsvalue to the discussions and analysis of each term .
 Russian activities in Ukraine featured elements of many of these ideas . Russian activities included elements of some of the ideas .
 The authors use the term unconventional warfare to embrace the wide variety of military, informational, political, diplomatic, economic, cultural, and religious activities observed and analyzed .
 Samuel Huntington’s Clash of Civilizations examined the nature and course of conflicts among nations .
 Huntington named eight such civilizations including Western, Islamic, Confucian, and Japanese civilizations . Huntington named 8 such civilizations.
With the book’s publication in 1993, readers could view the Iran-Iraq war, Operation Desert Storm, and the ongoing conflict in Israel .
 The rump state now called the Russian Federation is now called Russian Federation . The rift between the successor state to the Soviet Union was less obvious than the West .
 Moscow was emerging as the leader, champion, and oftentimes tyrant of the Slavic Orthodox civilization .
 The Russian nation traces its history to the Kievan Rus' Empire . Ukraine was the seam between Western and Slavic Orthodox civilizations .
 The division between the Latin Church and Orthodoxy was exemplified by the 1472 marriage of the Grand Prince of Moscow Rus Ivan III to Sophia Paleologue .
 Russian autocrats believed themselves to be the true inheritors of civilization, with Moscow the “third Rome’s” following Constantinople . Still, through this union, the Russian autocrat believed himself to be a true inheritor.
 Ivan II began to refer to himself as Tsar, the Russian derivation of Caesar . Ivan II was born in Moscow, Russia, in the early 1900s .
 Vladimir Putin’s interest and intervention in Ukraine emanated from these deep roots and from the dramatic experiences of the Soviet Union as it teetered toward its demise .
 The world's two largest oceans provide a formidable barrier for any would-be invader . The world’s two biggest oceans are the world's largest oceans .
 Russian and Soviet leaders developed defensive precepts that began with a buffer zone of border states .
 The Soviets invaded Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 . After their rise to superpower in World War II, the Soviets invaded the country in 1956 .
 They invaded Afghanistan on Christmas Eve 1979 and became embroiled in a long war against insurgents that became known as the Soviets’ Vietnam . The Soviets' Vietnam was known as 'The Soviets'
Each of these interventions occurred in order to bring to heel governments that were attempting to distance themselves from Russian control . Each of the interventions occurred to bring back heel governments .
 The rise of the Polish labor union movement in August 1980 led to unconventional warfare in a Soviet client state . But the actions did not result in an invasion .
 As the Soviet Army became mired in Afghanistan, a noncommunist labor movement emerged in Poland . It subsumed one-third of Poland’s workforce .
 Solidarnosc, or Solidarity, used nonviolent, civil disobedience to achieve its aims . The group's aims were to achieve their aims .
 The movement's rise triggered a response in Moscow that led to serious consideration for yet another eastern European invasion . Still, the movement's Rise triggered a reaction in Moscow .
 U.S. intelligence indications and warnings led to an assessment that Soviet military intervention was likely .
 Soviet forces conducted a dress rehearsal in anticipation of a potential invasion as early as December 1980 . This rehearsal seemed to follow the pattern they employed before entering Czechoslovakia in 1968 .
 Soviet leaders Leonid Brezhnev and Yuri Andropov elected not to respond with outright invasion . The Soviet leaders were in charge from 1966 through 1982 .
 Polish state imposed martial law but was forced to reckon with Solidarity eventually . The Polish state instead imposed a martial law .
 The movement became a de facto political party and its leader, Lech Walesa, was elected president .
Some historians suggest this was a major factor in the eventual dissolution of the Soviet Union . Some historians suggest it was a key factor.
 Russia's current leadership likely considered and recognized the potential of using similar popular movements to foment nonviolent insurrection . Despite the movement’s contribution to the Soviet dissolution, Russia’'s current leaders likely considered the potential.
 Over four centuries Russian expansion eastward and southward proceeded at the remarkable average of fifty-five square miles per day . The average of 50 square miles a day is more than 50,000 square miles .
 The Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 replaced the anachronistic regime with a vigorous, ideological power .
 Russia was hungry to reassert its control over what it considered its natural sphere of influence . Russia's influence stretches from eastern Europe to the Pacific and from the Arctic Ocean .
 The trauma of World War II gave rise to the superpower conflict of the Cold War . The Soviet government assumed its new mantle of the leader of the Second World by installing authoritarian puppet regimes .
 With the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the rump state of Russia struggled to find and reclaim its place in the world order .
 Reactionary elements within the government, intelligence services, and armed forces found common cause with the new economic elites and elements of the Russian Orthodox Church .
 The government in Vilnius had declared independence in March 1990 . The ensuing months featured economic crises, rampant inflation, political upheaval . Pro-Russian populations within the country protested what they saw as discrimination .
 The “Russian diaspora’s’ problem became a common theme in this and future Russian interventions. The ‘Russian di aspora problem’ is a common topic in Russia, says the author .
 Protection of ethnic Russians teetered between being a genuine objective and a convenient—even artificial—contrivance by which Moscow could justify military invasion .
 Russian operatives employed propaganda and organized worker protests that on the surface were aimed at overpriced consumer goods . But fundamentally were vectored more at the government's independence from the Soviet Union .
Protesters attempted to storm government buildings. These events were followed by protesters attempting to storm buildings . The tactic would be repeated in future conflicts .
 The Soviets deployed military forces into the country, allegedly to ensure law and order .
 The forces included Spetsgruppa A —a counterterrorist unit created by the KGB in 1974 that operates under the direct supervision of the government in Moscow . The forces also included a unit of paratroopers and a group of anti-terrorists .
 The January Events commenced with Soviet military forces seizing key government buildings and media infrastructure on January 11 . The January events began with Soviet forces seizing government buildings, media infrastructure .
 Soviet forces continued to assault and occupy government facilities while unarmed civilians mounted protests and demonstrations against the aggression .
 Tanks drove through demonstrators, killing 14, and Soviet forces began to use live ammunition against civilians .
Independent television broadcasting station managed to transmit desperate pleas to the world decrying the Soviet invasion . International pressure on Moscow mounted when an independent broadcasting station transmitted desperate pleas .
 Gorbachev and his defense minister deny that Moscow had ordered any military action in Lithuania . They claim that the “bourgeois government’s” there had initiated the conflict by firing on ethnic Russians .
 The Soviets stopped large-scale military operations and instead used small-scale raids and intimidation . Nevertheless, international and domestic reaction to the aggression caused the Soviets to cease large- scale military operations .
 The Soviets signed a treaty with Lithuania on January 31, and subsequent elections saw massive popular support for independence . The Soviets sign a treaty.
 To maintain control over states on the periphery, they would have to employ power in a more clandestine, deniable fashion .
 The dissolution of the Soviet Union led to ethnic tensions in Moldova as well . Intervention in Transnistria, 1990-19921 led to the collapse of the USSR .
 The Popular Front agitated for closer ties to Romania, the reestablishment of Moldovan as the sole official language, and a return to the Latin alphabet .
 ethnic Slavs in Transnistria and Gagauzia formed an ad hoc government that sought autonomy from the rest of Moldova . Under Gorbachev's perestroika and glasnost, anti-Soviet sympathies grew .
 War broke out in 1992 as Moldovan forces tried to suppress separatist militias in Transnistria .
 For several months Transnistrian militias and Cossacks, supported by the Soviet 14th Guards Army, fought Moldovan forces . Romania had support from Romania, which had support for Romania .
 The strategic dynamics of the small war included Moldova’s military weakness and the political and military strength of Transnistria . Moldova's military weakness included its political and political strength of the country .
 The disputed territory came about because of the strong ethnic Russian majority in the disputed territory on the east bank of the Dniester River and the remnants of the Soviet 14th Army who remained in the area .
 Some of the unit’s officers who had strong local ties defected to join the separatists . Others offered their support, at times turning over weapons and ammunition .
 On July 3, 1992, the commander of the 14th Army launched a massive artillery strike against Moldovan forces . The strike effectively destroyed them and ended the military conflict .
 Transnistria became one of the four “frozen republics’’s” —quasi-legal states left over from the Soviet occupation . The country is one of four ‘f Frozen republics'’—quasi
 Russian operatives in Transnistria branded the opposition as fascists attempting to install an illegal government over ethnic minorities .
 President Yeltsin attempted to put down the rebellion with Internal Troops . Russian forces were surrounded and compelled to withdraw .
 In 1993 the government of Chechnya declared full independence from Russia . In 1993, the government declared fullindependence from Russia.
 The subsequent exit of Russian professionals caused a severe downturn in the economy . Russian professionals were forced to leave the country .
 Russian forces fighting in South Ossetia were positioned on the Chechen border . In response to the independence movement, Russian forces were positioned in the region .
 Russia began to provide funding, arms, training, and leadership to the opposition against the Chechen government . In 1994 Russian forces joined the insurgents in two assaults on Grozny that failed catastrophically .
 Russia repeated its unconventional warfare tactics of supplying mercenary and volunteer forces . During the campaign, Russia denied involvement, denying involvement, and using its own forces in support of rebels .
 In December 1994 Russia launched an all-out invasion aimed at destroying the government of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria . Many within the Russian military and government protested the war, insisting that it would lead to another stalemate as in Afghanistan .
 Russian forces inflicted horrendous casualties among the civilian population, including those who had originally supported the intervention as well as ethnic Russians . Russian conscripts’ poor training and leadership.
After months of bloody fighting, the invaders finally took Grozny . The cost in civilian life attracted universal condemnation, including from former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev .
 The war grinded on as Russian forces advanced to try to take control of the entire country . The war has been raging in Russia for years .
 The senior mufti in Chechnya declared a jihad against the Russian invaders, opening up the prospect of a wider Islamist war against Russia . The war took on a new and dangerous dimension.
 On the last day of August 1996, the Russian government signed a cease-fire agreement with Chechen leaders . The agreement ended the First Chechen War .
 Moscow learned again that the large-scale use of conventional force to impose its will on the periphery caused more problems than it solved . As in the Lithuanian conflict, Moscow learned.
 The challenge of ensuring Russian control of regions and states remained . But Russian leadership began to cast about for different, more effective techniques for dealing with conflict .
Russian planners used unconventional warfare tactics in the Caucasus . The Caucasus war required more conventional force operations, but unconventional tactics rose in prominence .
 Two-thousand jihadists crossed the border into Dagestan to aid Islamic separatists there . To that end they organized a two-th thousand brigade of jihadists .
 The response from the local government and its Russian support was slow, allowing the rebels to seize several villages . The response was slow.
 Russia staged an effective counterattack using ground troops and strong air attacks . But Russia eventually staged a successful counterattack with ground troops, strong airattacks .
 Key to Russian success was failure of the Islamists to gain substantial popular support for which they hoped .
Local villagers tended to view the Chechens as invaders and religious fanatics . Instead, local villagers tend to view them as invading and religious fans .
 The Russians expelled the invading forces, pushing them back into Chechnya, and commenced airstrikes against their strongholds there .
 Russian FSB accused oligarch billionaire Boris Berezovsky of conspiring with Chechen Islamists to instigate the Dagestan war . The oligarch is accused of goading Russians into attacking separatist Chechnya .
 The case was never proven, but Berezovsky's involvement and opposition to Vladimir Putin highlighted the growing role of Russia’s super-rich elites and the need to engender cooperation between them and the Russian government .
 If Putin and his reactionary allies hoped to succeed in recapturing Russia’s status as a great power, they would have to make common cause with the oligarchs .
 That they were effective in doing so was critical to operations in Ukraine in 2014 . They were critical to the success of the Ukrainian government in Ukraine .
 The Russians invaded Chechnya to continue the fight and to reestablish Moscow’s control of the region . The Russians have been fighting Islamic International Brigade in Dagestan .
 This was Vladimir Putin’s first war as the new prime minister of the Russian Federation . This was Putin's first war.
 A string of bombings tied to Dagestani separatists and their Chechen allies served as a catalyst for invasion .
 Grozny was besieged by pro-Russian militias against the Islamists . The Russians rapidly maneuvered to the Terek River, and methodically seized the city .
 Planners and leaders had learned hard lessons in the First Chechen War and applied them during this invasion .
 Russian forces focused on securing their rear area against insurgents and terrorist attacks . Conventional attacks were more deliberate and cautious .
 The Russian offensive moved into the mountains to destroy the remaining insurgent groups, including bands of Islamic foreign fighters .
 Use of properly aligned proxies became another key feature of Russian unconventional warfare within the periphery . Use of proper aligned proxies was a key feature in Russian unconventional Warfare within the peripherals .
 The FSB and MVD (Ministry of Internal Affairs) directed proxy forces . The agencies were the agencies that directed proxy force .
 From 1999 through 2009 Moscow directed a sustained campaign that effectively destroyed the Islamic insurgency in Chechnya . From 1999 to 2009 Moscow has reasserted Russian control of the region .
 Once again the political and economic situation in Chechnya was a key factor in Russian success . The political and political situation in the country was a major factor in Russia's success .
 separatist government proved unable to effectively administer the economy and rapidly lost popular support . The separatist government became unable to govern the economy .
 The rift between separatist leader Aslan Maskhadov and the Islamists left the region’s political framework fragmented and ripe for exploitation by the Russians .
 Russian forces assume the mantle of liberators and protectors and furnished Moscow with an acceptable premise for invasion . This environment allowed Russian forces to assume the role of liberator and protector .
 The wars in Chechnya and Dagestan were characterized by allegations of excessive use of force and indiscriminate use of violence against civilians .
 The charges and graphic images of the Russian invasion threatened Putin’s domestic political base . The images attracted unwanted criticism from human rights organizations and the international community .
 Moscow was able to deflect charges of aggression. Because the wars were technically considered internal affairs, Moscow could deflect charges. Moscow was also able to defend itself .
 Georgia had fought to regain control of the two breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Russian support for the separatists foiled the plan and left the two regions with de facto independence .
 Russian citizens with Russian passports made up the majority of the population in South Ossetia . Putin decided to strengthen Russian control in the region .
 Georgia’s application for NATO membership and the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline runs through the country underscored Moscow's intention to bring Georgia to heel . Georgia”s application to NATO membership was rejected by Russia .
 In early summer 2008 Putin directed a series of intimidating moves, including overflights by Russian aircraft . More forces (masquerading as peacekeepers or railway repair units) were introduced .
 President George W Bush sent his secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice, to Tbilisi on a state visit . U.S. troops trained 13 with Georgian counterparts .
 Putin and his allies in Moscow viewed this as American interference on the Russian periphery . Putin's allies in Russia view this as an American interference.
 The situation heated up in early August as South Ossetian forces began shelling Georgian villages and Georgian forces responded . The situation heating up in August.
 The Russians moved in more forces and began to evacuate civilians from the region . The Russians began to move in more troops and evacuate civilians .
 Georgian forces launched an attack into South Ossetia, initially seizing the key city of Tskhinvali . Georgian forces initially seized the city.
 The Russian forces had been expelled from the region by August 11 . Russian forces deployed units of the 58th Army along with paratroopers into the fight .
 Russian forces then followed up with attacks into Georgia, and threatened the capital of Tbilisi . Russian forces also seized the city of Gori, Georgia .
 Georgia opened a second front against Georgia through operations in Abkhazia and adjacent districts. Simultaneously they opened a third front against the state . Georgia has also opened another front against its neighbor Georgia in the past .
 The Russians alternately denied involvement or downplayed the size and activities of their forces . Throughout their operations, the Russians alternate denied involvement.
 They introduced the use of information warfare on a scale previously unseen . They also introduced the Use of information Warfare on a Scale previously unseen.
 Russian operatives employed cyberwarfare and strong propaganda to neutralize Georgia’s warfighting options and to vilify them in the press .
 The Russian military brought journalists into the theater of war to strengthen the message of Russia protecting the population from Georgian aggression .
 Moscow carefully managed television broadcasts both at home and in the region . The Georgians allegedly inflicted atrocities on the population of South Ossetia .
 Russian military forces performed notably better in the Georgian war than they had in the Chechen wars . Russian forces performed better in Georgian war, in part due to renewed reliance on professional soldiers .
 Georgian air defenses were able to limit the use of Russian airpower, which complicated reconnaissance and the rapid deployment of Russian airborne forces . Russian air power was limited by Georgian air defense .
 Russian leaders viewed the relative success of the Georgian operation as an indicator of the need to continue modernization . In general, Russian leaders view the relativesuccess of theGeorgian operation as a sign of modernization .
 All these factors would play roles in Russia’s intervention in Ukraine in 2014 . Russia's intervention in the Ukraine is expected to take place in 2014.
 Russian Information Warfare Russian information warfare techniques are an amalgamation of methods evolved within the Soviet Union and deliberate developments in response to scrutiny of Western operations in the twenty-first century .
 As an academic discipline it reaches out to military personnel, intelligence operatives, journalists, and diplomats . The discipline is a discipline for military personnel and intelligence operatives .
 The doctrine specifies that an information campaign is multidisciplinary . It includes politics, economics, social dynamics, military, intelligence, diplomacy, and psychological operations .
 In general, Russian information warfare has in view the broad Russian-speaking diaspora that fragmented into the post-Soviet era . Russian states.
 It aims at affecting the consciousness doctrine, information is of the masses, both at home and abroad, and conditioning them for the civilizational struggle between Russia’s Eurasian culture and the West .
 Information warfare is likewise the accessible and permeates chief tool with which the state achieves all state borders without diplomatic leverage and attains its foreign restrictions .
 It links directly to geopolitics in service to the state and the Russian civilization . It also links to the Russian state and its civilization .
 Both men have experience in prosecuting information warfare firsthand . Both men not only promulgate their doctrines, but also have experience.
Igor Panarin holds doctoral degrees in political science and psychology . Igor Panarin is a former president of the United States .
 He is a professor in the Diplomatic Academy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . He is also a member of the Military Academy of Science .
 He attributes the Velvet Revolution in Czechoslovakia to the Arab Spring to American conspiratorial influence . He also blames the Velvet revolution in Czechs and Arab Spring on the United States .
 Panarin advocates for a centrally controlled information warfare campaign . Panarin says it uses propaganda, intelligence, analysis, secret agents, media manipulation .
 He is the leading proponent for ‘netwar,’ “net-centric warfare,” and a ‘Eurasian network’ He is also the leader of the “Netwar’s’ "netwar” network .
 Dugin, like Panarin, sees the color revolutions as engineered by the United States to keep Russia fragmented and weak .
 He states that the Americans accomplished this goal through a broad application of net-centric warfare . He says it was a curious interpretation of American warfighting doctrine from the 1990s .
 Net-centric warfare was a tactical/ operational idea designed to use computer and communications networks linked with sensors to command and control widely dispersed military forces .
 Dugin extrapolated from that application and conceived of the theory as a geopolitical idea . The theory was based on the information apparatus of a state and culture in a contest for political and social domination .
 Having perceived this structure in the West, Dugin calls for a similar approach in Russia .
 Dugin’s Eurasian network would include political leaders, diplomats, scientists, military organizations, intelligence, media, and communications linked together to counter Western influence and information .
 He insists that the creation of the network must be attended by a shift toward postmodernism . He seems to mean an evolution in Russian culture that can appeal to 20-first-century masses .
 Dugin’s theory and practice seem somewhat bipolar in that he pushes for a postmodern, postliberal approach . He integrates it into the conservative themes of other Russian elites .
 He views twentieth-century history as the titanic ideological struggle among fascism, communism, and liber16 alism . He says Western liberalism was the victory of Western liberalism .
 He argues liberalism has run its course and must be replaced with a neoconservative super-state leading a multipolar world . He argues that liberalism, focused on individualism, technocracy, and globalism, has ran its course .
 At the same time, this ideological superpower will defend conservative values and tradition . The U.S. government will defend its own conservative values .
Dugin’s theory demonstrates the evolving nature of Russian information warfare through its incorporation of social media tools .
 Russian observers noted how the color revolutions and Arab Spring outflanked state-controlled media through the use of Facebook, Twitter, and other forms of social media .
 patriotic Russians must be organized and seize the domain of social media in service of the state, Dugin says . Dugin insists, therefore, that patriotic Russians should be organized .
 He prescribes a vigorous campaign of combating pro-Western liberalism through a set of polemics designed to vilify Russian liberals as lackeys for Americans .
 Dugin insists that Russians must sustain the social media campaign relentlessly over a prolonged period to effectively paint the opposition as corrupt . Dugin says Russians must maintain the campaign relentlessly.
 Persistent messaging through social media gives rise to spontaneous support groups abroad . People respond with enthusiasm to the Russian message and help to propagate it without direct control from the state .
 The Gerasimov Model2° uses an analytical framework derived from the work of General Valery Ger as chief of the general staff of the Russian Federation .
 General Gerasimov’s main thesis is that modern conflict differs significantly from the paradigm of World War II and even from Cold War conflict .
Modern conflict instead features undeclared wars, hybrid operations combining military and nonmilitary activities, and smaller precision-based forces . In place of declared wars, strict delineation of military, nonmilitary efforts, and large conventional forces fighting climactic battles, modern conflict features unde
Gerasimov notes that political, economic, cultural, and other nonmilitary factors play decisive roles . Gerasimov, observing American and European experiences in the Gulf War, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and Libya.
 Even humanitarian operations should be considered part of an unconventional warfare campaign, says the author .
 Gerasimov explained that the color revolutions and the Arab Spring demonstrated that the line between war and peace has blurred . In a January 2013 report entitled “The Main Trends in the Forms and Methods of the Armed Forces’’s Armed Forces.’
 liberal democratic uprisings may not appear to constitute war, but they often result in foreign intervention, chaos, humanitarian disaster, and civil war .
 Russian military practices must evolve to accommodate the new methods . These activities may become the “typical war of the modern era’s modern era, according to the Russian military .
 Modern war, Gerasimov argued, focuses on intelligence and domination of the information space . Modern war is the focus of modern war, he said .
 Objectives are achieved in remote contactless war . Strategic, operational, and tactical levels, as well as offensive and defensive actions, have become less distinguishable .
 His model envisions six stages of conflict development, each characterized by the primacy of nonmilitary measures . But featuring increasing military involvement as the conflict approaches resolution .
 i Potential . military threat ‘1. i Potential’ is a potential military threat . ‘I Potential . Military threat’ was a potential threat to the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 During the initial stage, political opposition forms against the opposing regime . During the first stage, which will likely be protracted, politicalOpposition forms against.
 This resistance takes the form of political parties, coalitions, and labor/trade unions . The resistance takes place in the forms of political and coalitions and unions .
 Russia employs strategic deterrence measures and conducts a broad, comprehensive, and sustained information warfare campaign to shape the environment toward a successful resolution .
 If the conflict escalates, Russia exerts political and diplomatic pressure on the offending regime or non-state actors .
Economic sanctions can include economic sanctions or even suspension of diplomatic relations to isolate the opponent . These activities can also include sanctions or suspension of relations to isolated the opponent.
Military and political leaders in the region and abroad become aware of the developing conflict and stake out their public positions .
 The third stage begins as opposing forces in the conflict region commence actions against one another . The third stages of the conflict begin as opposition forces begin actions against each other .
 This can take the form of demonstrations, protests, subversion, sabotage, assassinations, and paramilitary engagements . This can be a form of protests, protests and subversion .
Intensification of conflict activities begin to constitute a direct military threat to Russian interests and national security . Intensification is a direct threat to Russia's interests, national security.
 At the commencement of this stage of conflict, Russia begins strategic deployment of its forces toward the conflict region .
 Russia commences military operations, accompanied by strong diplomatic and economic suasion . As the crisis comes to a head, Russia commends military operations .
The information campaign continues with a view to rendering the environment conducive to Russian intervention . The information campaign is aimed at rendering the environments conducive toRussian intervention .
 During this stage Russian leadership searches for the best paths to resolve the conflict . The Russian government is looking for a solution to the crisis .
 The domestic economy is on a war footing, as a way to unify the nation’s efforts toward successful prosecution of the war effort . U.S. is trying to prosecute the nation's war effort.
 The goal is to reset the political, military, economic, and social reality in the region in such a way as to facilitate a return to peace, order, and the resumption of routine relations .
 Russia oversees comprehensive measures to reduce tensions and conduct peacekeeping operations . During the final stage, which again may be protracted, Russia also conducts peacekeepers operations .
 This stage includes diplomatic and political measures required to establish a postconflict settlement . This stage also includes the diplomatic andpolitical measures needed to establish the original causes of conflict. This stage is the first stage of the process .
 Gerasimov’s model for modern conflict is a theoretical adaptation of emerging ideas about warfare . But elements of these ideas clearly pertain to Russia's unconventional warfare in Ukraine and Crimea in 2014 .
 The dominant theme of Ukraine’s history is foreign rule punctuated by movements for cultural and political independence .
Charles XI of Sweden of Sweden against the tsar in Sweden vs. Russia . Charles XI was in Sweden's first game of the World Cup . The Swedes were in Sweden for the first time in a decade .
 Ukraine has been dominated by Poland to the west and the Russian Empire to the east since the Middle Ages . Russia in the Kievan Rus’ has been dominant by Poland and Russia since the Mideast .
 In 1654, Cossack hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky signed the Treaty of Pereyaslav allying Ukraine and the Russian Empire against Poland . The treaty was signed in 1654 .
 In 1704 another Cossack hetman, Ivan Mazepa, threw Centuries later . The two figures elicit both praise and condemnation from Ukrainian nationalists and pro-Russian population .
 Mazepa's image decorates the Ukrainian ten-hryvnia note, but in Kyiv a street named in his honor was renamed under Viktor Yanukovych’s administration . The Russian Orthodox Church remains anathematized by the Orthodox Church .
 Soviet efforts to impose collectivized agriculture in the late 1920s generated a famine that killed millions in Ukraine . The famine killed millions of people in the Ukraine .
 During Stalin's Great Terror, Ukraine’s bid for cultural independence led to a brutal crackdown . During Stalin’S Great Terror , Ukraine's bid forcultural independence lead to a violent crackdown .
 Bandera worked with the Nazi regime to separate Ukraine from the Soviet Union . He then fought against the advancing Red Army late in the war .
 KGB agents assassinated him in 1959, and he became an infamous figure in Russia’s vilification of pro-Western sentiments .
 Black Sea Map of Ukraine's borders stabilized as the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was expanded at the end of World War II . Poland and Romania were taken from Ukraine and Romania .
 Propaganda stressed the unity of Ukraine and Russia on the basis of centuries of claimed historical precedent .
 In 1954, Russian premier Nikita Khrushchev transferred the Russian-majority Crimean peninsula to the Ukrainian SSR . Kyiv and Moscow would be perpetually bound together .
 Anti-Soviet and Ukrainian nationalist activism continued despite repeated Russification efforts . The Chernobyl nuclear plant exploded in 1986 .
 The disaster killed thirty-one workers and caused widespread contamination that extended the death toll from radiation-related sickness over ensuing years .
 Outrage over government duplicity in the wake of the accident led to a vote for independence from the USSR on December 1, 1991 .
 Ukrainian leadership sought to maintain cordial relations with Russia while expanding economic ties and integration with Western Europe . Ukrainian leadership and business interests sought to keep cordial ties with Russia .
 Russia viewed the prospect of integration with the West as a threat to its sphere of influence . Russia sought to compel Ukraine's membership in the Eurasian Economic Union instead .
 Moscow also pressed for continued basing rights in Sevastopol, home to the Russian Black Sea Fleet . Moscow also pressing for continued Basing rights.
 Government incompetence, corruption, and kowtowing to Russia stirred both Ukrainian Chernobyl reactor 4 nationalism and a growing affinity for the liberalism and capitalism of Western Europe .
 The Orange Revolution became known as the Orange Revolution . The 2004 presidential election between former prime ministers Viktor Yanukovych and Viktor Yushchenko led to a popular movement .
 During the campaign, Yushchenko became seriously ill, leading to suspicion that he had been poisoned with dioxin .
Mass demonstrations, civil disobedience, and strikes led to a court-mandated recount and the election of pro-Western candidate Yushchenko .
 The Orange Revolution 23 brought hopes of political and economic reform, but political corruption and infighting led to the dissolution of the Orange coalition . The new administration was led by prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko .
 Kyiv’s attempts to move toward closer alignment with the EU, World Trade Organization and potential NATO membership gave rise to a sustained national debate over the question of alignment with Western Europe or Russia .
 Trade and gas disputes with Russia soured public opinion of the government .
 The twin histories of Bohdan Khmelnytsky and Ivan Mazepa can, at a superficial level, suggest this basic duality in Ukrainian politics .
 Khmelnytsky's antipathy toward the Polish regime that had deprived him of his property . But closer examination of his life and times reveals the causes of his famed devotion to Mother Russia .
 Khmelnytsky's motivations and those of his followers in seeking alliance with Russia transcended merely personal considerations . The Cossacks wanted to protect their own interests, freedoms, and prerogatives .
 The Cossack hetman flirted with the Ottoman sultan and contemplated a union with a Muslim power . Hetman turned to Russia for protection, before finally turning to Russia.
 The Russian tsar signed the Treaty of Pereyaslav not because ideology or religion dictated his actions but because he saw it as the best guarantor of Cossack and Ukrainian sovereignty .
Ivan Mazepa is viewed as a symbol of Ukraine's defiance of Moscow and determination to be free of Russia’s domination .
 Russia's struggles against the Swedish alliance left Mazepa worried that the tsar’s generals intended to employ the Cossacks as cannon fodder in far-off battles and leave his own lands vulnerable to enemy incursions from the West .
 In 1708 matters came to a head, and Mazepa made the fateful decision to betray the tsar and ally with the Poles .
 The Battle of Poltava the following year doomed Mazepa’s new alliance, and he died in exile . The following year, he was in exile.
 Khmelnytsky and Mazepa were very much cut from the same cloth of Cossack nationalism and self-interest . They were posthumously bearing the burden of opposite political ideologies .
Modern Ukrainian politics can appear to be polarized between pro-Western and pro-Russian extremes . But the panoply of factions and parties are in reality more complex in their motivations and objectives .
 Ukrainian political leaders have a desire to carve out, protect, and sustain a Ukrainian identity . Like the famous Cossack leaders before them, modern Ukrainian leaders also have a fundamental desire to protect, protect and sustain their identity .
 The realities of the modern world force each party to look westward or eastward as they search for better ways to guarantee their hoped-for futures .
 The Rada featured intense political conflict in the months leading up to Euromaidan . The country's political conflict led to the death of the Rada in 2011 .
 In his initial foreign policy statements in 2010, the new president expressed his vision for Ukraine as a neutral state cooperating in matters of defense with both NATO and Russia .
 The Constitutional Court of Ukraine overturned the 2004 amendments, considering them unconstitutional on October 1, 2010 . Under Yanukovych’s leadership, the court said .
 The subject amendments had significantly reduced the power of the executive branch in favor of the Rada . The Rada is the country's most powerful executive branch .
 Yanukovych's move was widely perceived among the opposition as a power grab . Yanukovych’s move is widely perceived as aPower grab .
 The UDAR party was center-right and espoused nationalism and opposition to Russian pressure and involvement in Ukraine . The party was opposed to Russia's involvement in the Ukraine .
 UDAR tended to avoid polarizing political stances and instead focused on achieving social justice, cutting corruption, and reining in perquisites for government officials .
 The Fatherland party underwent a complex series of mergers and splits after its founding in the late 1990s . In general it inclined toward European integration and Ukrainian nationalism .
 In 2013 Tymoshenko proposed a party ideological manifesto that spelled out her thinking on key political issues . In 2013 she proposed an ideological manifesto.
 Tymoshenko insists that Ukrainian should be the sole official language of the country . She says the Holodomor was an act of genocide and that any infringement of Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty be resisted immediately .
 Its original power base was Lviv, and early constituents included veterans of the Soviet-Afghan War . Early constituents of the Lviv power base were veterans of Soviet- Afghan War.
 Its iconography and far-right policy stances led opponents to label the party as fascist . The party's iconography has led to some to label it fascist .
 The party established a paramilitary called Patriot of Ukraine . The party sought to support the country's military forces .
 By 2007 Svoboda severed official links with the paramilitary, but they remain informally connected . The paramilitary remains informally linked .
 Oleh Tyahnybok took over leadership of the party in 2004 and became a moderating influence . He became a Moderating influence in 2004 .
 He pushed far-right members out of the party and changed the party’s symbol to a picture of 26 a hand holding up three fingers . The picture is reminiscent of freedom movements in the 1980s .
 Tyahnybok also made public speeches in which he denigrated various groups, including Jews, calling them “scum, which attracted a lot of criticism . But he also called Jews ‘scum’
 The party continued to attract followers among the Ukrainian Orthodox Church and other nationalists . The party has also attracted followers among other nationalists.
 Svoboda vehemently opposed the Russian annexation of Crimea and formed a paramilitary called the Sich Battalion to fight in Ukraine .
 The government brought criminal charges against Yulia Tymoshenko for abuse of power and embezzlement . The charges were eventually obtained by a conviction .
 She was sentenced to seven years imprisonment, but the proceeding was widely viewed as a political ploy to rid the president of his strongest opponent .
 Yanukovych sought to balance growing popularity for closer relations with the EU on the one hand with the very real pressure he felt from Moscow and his ethnic Russian constituency .
 He sought to negotiate a more advantageous natural gas deal with Russia . To that end he signed an agreement extending Russia's lease of Ukraine's Black Sea port facilities .
 The deal split the nation's political spectrum into two camps . One championing closer ties to Moscow and the other touting nationalism and independence from Russian domination .
 Many in Ukraine viewed the continued presence of the Russian fleet in Sevastopol as an affront to Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Yanukovych tried to sell the deal as an essential part of his strategy to further Ukrainian integration with Europe . But he tried to sold the deal to sell it as a part of a strategy to strengthen Ukraine's ties with Europe.
 He argued that to sustain loans from the International Monetary Fund and to meet EU standards, the government had to keep expenditures under control . He said to meet European standards, government must keep spending under control.
 Yanukovych pointed to reduced natural gas prices as contributing to government savings . Measures in this direction included highly unpopular cuts in pensions and other social spending .
 The 1930s famine that Stalin’s Russia inflicted on Ukraine, killed nearly ten million . The Holodomor is the most poignant symbol of the struggle for a rational and effective foreign policy .
 Those more inclined to friendly relations with Russia instead seek a middle ground of condemning the forced food expropriations . Instead they blame Stalin's totalitarian government rather than Russia itself .
 The resulting famine killed many in Russia as well as many others in Russia .
 He sponsored a law that allowed for any language spoken by at least 10 percent of the population to be declared official within that local area . He pointed to problems within schools, courts, and other civil institutions .
 The law was later repealed after Yanukovych’s ouster . It was seen as an attempt to further Russify Ukraine .
 Opposition parties blocked access to the podium in an attempt to protest the direction of the government’s policies .
 The president proclaimed his intention to sign the Association Agreement in November . He pushed parliament to join together to pass the needed legislation .
 Russia's President Vladimir Putin has pledged to deepen relations with Russia . In November 2013, he bowed to economic and diplomatic pressure from Moscow . But in November 2013 he reversed his decision and declared his intent to instead deepen relations .
 Protests were initially nonviolent, and in response to government crackdowns the protests surged to hundreds of thousands of people in Kyiv and spread throughout the country .
 Ukraine signed the Ukrainian-Russian Action Plan treaty, which discounted Ukraine’s natural gas purchases by a third . Russia would buy $15 billion in Ukrainian government bonds to alleviate debt crisis .
 The treaty was met with a blockade of demonstrators hoping to prevent its ratification . The treaty has been met with an opposition to its ratification by protesters .
 The number of demonstrators dwindled after New Year’s Eve during the Orthodox Christmas season . Police injured an opposition leader while he was protesting the convictions of several Ukrainian nationalists .
 Court and legislative actions banning protests continued to escalate the crisis . Protesters demanding that Yanukovych resign .
 The passage of a series of laws on January 16 swelled the ranks of protesters, including the violent Pravy Sektor . The opposition referred to the Laws of Dictatorship .
 It became a political party in March 2014. 29 and firearms to quell rioters, which caused hundreds of injuries and several deaths .
 The government outlawed more than five cars driving together in response to the Automaidan movement .
Violence in Kyiv spread across the country in early February . The violence in the country was reported in February .
 Protesters occupied regional government buildings and the Justice Ministry in defiance of the anti-protest laws . More police actions are being taken in response to the protests .
 President Yanukovych tried to negotiate with the opposition, offering to repeal the anti-protest laws . He offered to remove Prime Minister Azarov, grant amnesty for arrested protesters, and return to presidential power .
 Negotiations broke down in February, and violence erupted, resulting in at least sixty-seven deaths between February 18 and 20 . At least 60-seven people were killed in February .
 Yulia Tymoshenko was released from prison on February 22 . The interim authorities released her from prison in February .
 Oleksandr Turchynov became interim president and Arseniy Yatsenyuk became prime minister . Oleksander Turchnov became president and Yatseniuk became Prime Minister .
 The parliament set presidential elections for May 25, 2014, and the pro-Western voters chose Petro Poroshenko as the new president of Ukraine .
 He signed the Association Agreement 30 with the EU on June 27, 2014 . He is a member of his constituents in the UK .
 The pro-Russian resistance opposed the new government, considered it illegal, and insisted it was a fascist regime . The new government was considered illegal by the pro- Russian resistance .
 The locus of conflict shifted to Crimea, where a largely Russian-speaking majority allegedly favored deeper ties with Moscow . Crimea is the region where the conflict began in Crimea .
 Crimea's leader of a large paramilitary force in Crimea appealed to Putin for help . Sergei Aksyonoy was expelled from Crimea after Yanukovych's expulsion .
 Popular support for ethnic Russians and Russian speakers in Crimea emboldened Putin to act . Popular support in Crimea encouraged Putin to take action .
 Pro-Russian protesters labeled the Kyiv government as Western fascists and adopted a position that ethnic Russians in Ukraine were in danger .
 Groups of unidentified armed men began appearing throughout the region, often in coordination with local pro-Russian militias .
 Both Ukrainian government and most Western intelligence sources claimed that the “little green men’s’ were Russian operatives . Both the Ukraine government and the most Western sources claimed the ‘little green man’ was Russian operatives.
 The Crimean "self-defense" militias seized government buildings, air bases, and military installations . The Kyiv government, desiring to avoid bloodshed, ordered its military forces not to resist .
 Sevastopol and the Supreme Council of Crimea declared their intention to hold a referendum to join Russia in March 2014 . The referendum will take place on March 11, 2014 .
Refat Chubarov, president of the Worldwide Congress of Crimean Tatars, announced that the new Crimean government and the proposed referendum were illegitimate and supported only by the armed forces from another country . RefatChubarov said the new government and proposed referendum are illegitimate .
 On March 18, 2014, a treaty was signed to incorporate all of Crimea, including Sevastopol, into the Russian Federation . The treaty wassigned to incorporate the Crimea into Russia's Russian Federation.
 The U.S. and EU responded to the move with economic sanctions and small-scale military deployments to the Baltic states and Poland . The United States and the EU responded with sanctions and military deployments .
 Russia's annexation appeared to succeed as the world turned its attention to eastern Ukraine . Diplomatic protests continued, but Russia’s annexation seemed to succeed .
Demonstrators in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts engaged in sporadic violence in the wake of Yanukovych's ouster . Russia's annexation of Crimea stimulated a new wave of demonstrations in April .
 The SBU had ejected demonstrators who seized the Donetsk Regional State Administration building in early March . TheSBU had ejected demonstrators who had seized the building in March .
 In April more than a thousand demonstrators seized the building and demanded a regional referendum similar to the one in Crimea . In April the building was seized by thousands of demonstrators again .
 When the government refused, the rebels declared the People’s Republic of Donetsk . The government refused .
 pro-Russian militants stormed government offices in Donetsk, 31 Luhansk, and Kharkiv . That month, pro- Russian militants stormed the government offices of Donetsk and Kharksiv .
 Resistance groups labeled the Kyiv government as fascist and held informal referendums on autonomy in the east . Resistance groups called the government a fascist .
 Denis Pushilin, one of the leaders of the self-styled People’s Republic of Donetsk, said his forces would not consider withdrawal until new leaders in Kyiv left power .
 In mid-April the Kyiv government launched its counterattack against rebels in the east . The Kyiv Government launched itscounterattack against the rebels in mid- April .
 The offensive quickly stalled, with scattered reports of Ukrainian soldiers refusing to fire on their fellow citizens .
 Other Ukrainian forces simply lacked the combat power to overcome the Russian-backed resistance .
 In late April, government forces launched a second round of attacks in Mariupol and to the northeast of Donetsk . In April, some success was achieved in Mari upol and the northeast.
 Slovyansk and Donetsk government forces resorted to blockades aimed at isolating the defenders . To deal with firmly entrenched rebel fighters, government forces forced to deal with them .
 Russian troops, intelligence personnel, and equipment, continue to seize buildings and hold their positions throughout the Donbass region . The rebels continue to hold their position throughout the region .
 The combatants became increasingly brutal, and allegations of torture inflamed passions on both sides . The combatants become increasingly brutal .
 In April, Vyacheslav Ponomaryov threatened to kill hostages, including an American journalist, if his forces were attacked .
 The militants mandated that Russian Orthodoxy was the state religion and that private industries would be nationalized . The militants also mandated that Russia's Orthodoxy would be state religion .
Late spring and early summer saw an increase in the pace of skirmishing . Actions remained relatively small in scale with few casualties on either side .
 The presence of Russian-made antiaircraft weapons neutralized the Ukrainian government’s air advantage . The downing of an Ilyushin [I-76 transport in mid-June, killed forty-nine troops who were aboard .
 Militants continued to expand their footprint in eastern Ukraine until the government counterattack began to gain some momentum .
 On July 1, after a weeklong unilateral cease-fire, the government counteroffensive resumed . On July 5, Slovyansk recaptured several towns, including Slovakia .
 The renewed government attacks inflicted heavy losses on the pro-Russian militants . Some insurgents fled .
 Fighting intensified through mid-July, with government forces capturing more towns and gradually pushing the remaining militants into their strongholds of Donetsk and 32 Luhansk .
 The downing of the civilian passenger flight brought increased world attention on Russian activities . The flight's downing may have contributed to a lessening of direct Russian support .
 In any case government forces began to threaten the remaining rebel strongholds .
 By early August, the government had recaptured about 75 percent of the territory once held by insurgents .
 Both sides claimed that the cease-fire would continue to be respected . Sporadic fighting continued, but both sides said that the truce would continue .
 By early November there were clear indications that the fighting was heating up . However, by early November, there had been signs that the fight was heating.
 Russian tanks crossed the border on November 12 . Media outlets were reporting that the cease-fire was over and that major hostilities had resumed .
 Putin's desperation in recouping the failures of his agents in eastern Ukraine. On the one hand it represents the failure of Russian information warfare in Ukraine, because it implies Putin’s desperation .
 The Russian information campaign is designed to set the conditions for invasion if necessary . On the other hand, it represents the logical, culminating sequel in the Russian Information campaign .
 Poroshenko also flirted with requesting Major Non-NATO Ally status . The move sure to inflame Putin, Poroshenko said .
 Russian polemics championing the annexation of Crimea and Russian involvement in eastern Ukraine . The entire operation was planned, organized, and controlled under the leadership of Putin .
 It is significant that pundits in favor of Russia’s actions point to the cult of personality that has gathered around Putin . It is not just those opposed to Russia.
Despite all the modern and postmodern features of Russian information warfare, the age-old glorification of a strongman continues to characterize Moscow's politics .
 The current generation of Russian military and civilian leadership includes a large number of siloviki-Russian leaders . They have backgrounds in the intelligence or military services .
 The siloviki represent themselves as resolute, honest, apolitical patriots . They are strong 33 bulwarks against the chaos of liberalism . They represent themselves.
 Minister of Defense Sergey Shoygu was reportedly appointed to his position because he was politically neutral . Putin wanted to avoid strengthening the “St.ęs’s ‘St.’
 Some Russians tout their devotion to Russian Orthodoxy and by so doing attract some favorable attention from religious figures in the West .
 Igor Sechin, former Soviet agent and arms smuggler, is currently Rosneft CEO and adviser to Putin . Sechin is a former Russian agent, former Rosnef CEO and former Rosnft CEO . He is also an adviser to Vladimir Putin .
 Yuri Kovalchuk, “Putin's banker’s banker, and largest shareholder in Bank Rossiya; 3.5% of the bank's shares . He is also the biggest shareholder in the Russian bank .
 Arkady and Boris Rotenberg are co-owners of SGM who control InvestCaptital Bank and SMP Bank . They also control SGM, SMP and Investcaptital Bank . SGM is also co-owned by SGM.
 Gennady Timchenko, oil trader, founder of Gunvor and Volga Group, and close associate of Putin . Timchenko is a former oil trader and founder of the Gunvor Group .
 Konstantin Malofeev is a lawyer and investment banker who backs illegal paramilitary in Ukraine . He is also a former Ukrainian soldier who has worked in Ukraine for years . He has worked with the Ukrainian government in the past .
 Sergei Chemezov, engineer and former KGB agent, Rosneft director, and director general of Rostec . 34 nationalists above all else .
 The unification and success of ethnic Russians as the key to achieving Putin’s vision of a multipolar world to counterbalance U.S. domination .
 The class of the super-rich grew in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union and the rise of Boris Yeltsin .
 Russian business interests were sold off to a new class of leaders . In the name of privatization, Russian business interest was sold off .
 Russian leaders sought to solidify their control of Russian politics and foreign policy by cultivating a pliant politician . These leaders in turn sought tosolidify their Control of Russia's political and foreign policies .
 The former KGB agent was anything but their puppet. They sponsored the rise of Vladimir Putin but soon discovered that he was nothing but their puppets .
 Putin jailed oligarchs that defied him and instructed the business elite that he would foster their economic and financial interests if they kept clear of political interference and remained loyal to his regime . Instead, Putin jailed them and instructed them to stay loyal to the regime .
 Former law professor and president, now prime minister of Russia, is prime minister . He is a former law professor, now president of Russia .
 Sergey Shoygu, minister of defense, is seen as apolitical and chosen in place of “St.’s’S’D’Shoygu. ‘St. ‘S.S.‘’ is
 Valery Gerasimov is chief of the general staff of the Armed Forces of Russia . He is a proponent of “new-generation warfare’s” and proponent of the “ new-generation” warfare .
 35 years Putin consolidated his control over the key oligarchs . They became the third pillar, along with the government and security services .
 In the current environment, elites are given positions at the head of corporations or in government . The current environment is viewed as interchangeable .
 Most members of the inner circle are Leningrad men with long associations with Putin . Most of the men have long association with the Russian president .
 Tikhon Shevkunov, a Russian Orthodox priest said to be Putin’s confessor, is another close confidant . He is a close friend of the Russian president .
 Shevkunov directed and starred in a popular documentary on the fall of the Byzantine Empire . The documentary is designed to help craft the message that a strong empire can be sapped by foreign intrigue and internal weakness .
 The Orthodox Church has influenced Putin toward nationalism and conservatism with its theme of Christian order . Over the years the Orthodox Church is influenced by Putin toward conservatism .
 Putin’s chief of staff, Sergei Ivanov, is a foreign policy hawk . Ivanov is a close adviser to the president .
 Vladislav Surkov, of part Russian and part Chechen ancestry, is the chief ideologue of the Putin regime’s ‘sovereign democracy’ theme . He is one of the leaders of the national youth movement Nashi, which targets anyone deemed anti-
 Russia’s intervention into Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea in 2014 stem from a combination of motivations, fears, and interests that drew strength from the period of pozor in the early 1990s .
 The historical and cultural experience of imperial Russia, with its control of massive swaths of territory across Asia and Europe, combined with the pragmatic concerns over the strategic security of the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is one of the world's most powerful nations .
 Moscow's global influence has changed from feared superpower to minor regional power . The West's seemingly unstoppable encroachment into Russia’s historical sphere of influence .
There is the pervasive influence of domestic politics and Putin’s paranoia over maintaining his regime, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: There is a pervasive influence in domestic politics, and Putin's paranoia over his regime .
 Russia's need to maintain influence in peripheral states as a buffer against Western invasion . President Putin's desire to strengthen the new EEU in the former Soviet sphere of influence .
 Moscow's mandate for intervention under the umbrella imperative to reclaim Russia's status as a superpower . Each of these factors contributed to Moscow’s mandate to reclaim its status as superpower .
 Moscow touts its aim to foster and protect ethnic Russians and Russian speakers who are threatened by American-inspired fascist regimes in former Soviet states .
 The reversion to autocracy in the Russian political system has affected both domestic and foreign policies . Russia's political system is in the midst of a political crisis .
 The inherent instability associated with strong centralized rule fosters a traditional Russian view of domestic reformers as a perpetual fifth column serving foreign interests .
 This insecurity is exacerbated by President Putin's struggle to maintain Russia as a superpower . This insecurity has been exacerbated by Russia's struggles to maintain its status as superpower .
 Russia views any movements within peripheral states toward integration with Europe . Putin continues to raise the specter of encroachment from the West as a pretext to justify a unitary, autocratic state .
 The deterioration of economic and sociopolitical life in Russia between 2009 and 2012 sparked backlash from the urban middle class .
 Petersburg emerged in late 2011 and continued through 2012 with protesters demanding freedoms and decrying corruption . Petersburg emerged from late 2011.
 Opposition leaders (e.g., Alexei Navalny) became icons, and Putin’s approval ratings began to decline .
 Putin has made a strategic shift to right-wing policies to garner support from the “other Russia’s” "other Russia" Putin is presenting Putin as a bulwark of traditional Russian values .
 Ukraine is central to the original narrative of the Russian nation and Eastern Orthodox civilization . losing influence in Ukraine and Crimea would threaten Putin’s political appeal among the demographics of the other Russia .
 The tidal shift against Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych and the Russian dominance of Kyiv’s politics expressed in Euromaidan constituted a serious blow to Putin's image as a defender against the eastward drive of Western influence .
 The annexation of Crimea and continued operations in eastern Ukraine have served to quell a potential domestic crisis of legitimacy for the Putin administration . The annexation and operations in east Ukraine have helped quell the potential crisis.
 Russian actions in Crimea also served to warn those within Russia who may be inspired to imitate Euromaidan or start uprisings in the North Caucasus .
After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the chaos of the Yeltsin era, political elites under Vladimir Putin reached a consensus to reestablish Russia as a great power .
 37 popular movements coincided with eastward expansion by the EU and NATO . They were perceived as a US-led conspiracy to further the reach of Western economic and security alliances Eastward to undermine Putin’s regime .
 The Westward orientation of former Soviet republics poses economic and geopolitical risks to Russia’s drive for renewed status as a great power . Russia's drive to re-energize its once-great power is seen as a threat to the West .
 Acceptance of Western institutions and values may encourage popular movements within Russia and embolden insurgents in the North Caucasus . acceptance of Western values could encourage popular movement within Russia .
 Russia’s long-standing maritime and security interests in the Black Sea highlight the importance of Crimea and the port of Sevastopol . Hj European Union i Member states joining the EU in 2007 is a history of NATO enlargement .
 The peninsula served as a barrier against invasion from Western powers . It hosted some of the bloodiest engagements on the Eastern Front during World War I Russian expansion .
 The Black Sea provides Russia with a crucial avenue to advance, Russia says . Today, Russia is 38 and safeguard its superpower status . Russia is currently in the Black Sea .
 Black Sea access allows Russia to address maritime security threats to its coastal waters and energy transportation routes, as well as to project power into the Mediterranean, the Indian Ocean, and beyond . Russia has access to the Black Sea and the Mediterranean .
 As the largest economic player in Crimea, the Black Sea Fleet also offers nonmilitary Russian influence .
 It owns more than eighteen thousand hectares of land, only three thousand of which are in Sevastopol . It owns over 18,000 hectares.
 Joseph was pondering further acts of Stalin after the devastation of World aggression . The policy of maintaining a buffer zone of friendly states falling oil prices is likely to be the most explicitly expressed .
 War II, a policy meant to ensure that Russia could never again be invaded by a Western force, was meant to prevent it from being invaded again .
 Historically, Ukraine’s industry and agriculture were the most vital economic factors in maintaining the power and 39 influence of the Soviet Union . Ukraine's industry was the most important economic factor in maintaining its power .
 Putin’s failure to compel Ukrainian membership in the EEU has rendered the organization largely impotent . It echoes failed Russian attempts to establish a CIS in the early 1990s . Today, Putin's failure to force Ukraine to join the EU has rendered it largely imp
 Ukrainian integration into the EU will restrict Russian access to Ukrainian markets and jobs . The move will undermine Russia’s stalled economy and inflaming domestic issues that threaten the current regime .
 Protection of ethnic Russians and Russian speakers is alternately a genuine motivation and an artificial contrivance for justifying intervention . Protection of Russian speakers and ethnic Russians is alternate.
 The definition of compatriot was broadened through several legal revisions to include any ethnic Russian outside of Russia who successfully applies for a Russian passport .
 The stated objective of these policies is the promotion of Russian culture and Russian language . The stated aim is to promote Russian culture.
 The persistent Russian demographic crisis, characterized by a low birth rate and high death rate, is a factor influencing Russian compatriot policies . Russia's population growth rate is near zero (0.03 percent)
 The ethnic Russian population in Russia is shrinking while Muslim populations continue to grow . The demographic landscape could change to majority Muslim by 2050 .
 The prospect of reunifying Russian diaspora is popular across the Russian political spectrum . pan-Russian nationalism decries division of Russian populations into former Soviet republics .
 The prospect of injecting 1.45 million ethnic Russians into the population by annexing Crimea became attractive .
 Russians used both military and intelligence services, along with imported volunteers and paramilitaries . Russian Order of Battle used military, intelligence services to prosecute their campaign .
 Some of the details of the actual units employed are unclear . The basic structure for supporting their unconventional warfare is known .
 The emphasis of the new strategy was the near abroad, with emphasis on the Russian Federation’s periphery . The emphasis was the close to Russia's periphery .
 "New-look" reforms aimed at a more streamlined, professional, and modernized force . The consequent “new-look’s” reforms are aimed at more streamlined and professional.
 Emerging challenges included international terrorism, narcotraffic, organized crime, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and regional and ethnic conflict .
 Russia would seek to dominate, lead, and integrate CIS military security efforts while maintaining order along the periphery . In its place, Russia will seek to lead, lead and integrate security efforts .
Russia sought to influence nearby states to reject NATO and the EU in favor of close relations with Moscow . Russia sought to use both the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization . Russia also tried to influence neighboring states to rejected NATO and EU in favour of close ties with Moscow.
 Moscow has renewed commitment from Moscow to foster and protect Russian diasporas abroad . These efforts were attended by a renewed commitment by Moscow .
 Putin and associates saw NATO as the primary threat to their plans . Putin and his associates saw it as a threat to his plans .
 Russia foresaw that NATO and EU would attempt to intervene within peripheral states to turn them against Moscow .
 Putin sought ever greater cooperation with Beijing and pursued a lucrative deal to supply China with natural gas over the ensuing decades . Simultaneously Putin sought a deal with Beijing to supply the country with naturalgas over the years .
 The changes in strategic outlook required corresponding changes in the military instrument. These changes required corresponding change in military instruments .
 The 2008 Russo-Georgian War highlighted shortcomings throughout the Ministry of Defense and the armed forces in general . The 2008 Russo—Georgian War highlighted shortcomings in the military in general.
 The war had been a watershed for Russia, representing the last war of the twentieth century . Russia fought with outdated tactics and equipment and with structures more suited to large-scale conventional war .
 The military new-look reforms sought a professional and modernized force capable of conducting more effective operations, especially on the periphery . The military's new- look reforms also sought to improve the effectiveness of the military's forces .
 Key issues were command and control, personnel policies, training and readiness, equipment modernization and the retention of nuclear deterrence .
 Divisions and regiments were eliminated and replaced by a brigade system for the Army . Air Force reorganized into air bases while Air Force was reorganized .
 Demographics indicated a drop in available recruits, and reports that the conscripts were often found unfit for duty . Russian government pressed for a dramatic change in the composition of the force .
 To boost recruitment, the government increased pay, improved military housing and launched a comprehensive public information campaign .
 Putin’s administration saw the value of professionalizing the military and replacing conscripts with contract soldiers . The costs were high, but the cost was high .
 The process is ongoing, and contract soldiers proved their worth in Ukraine . The process has been ongoing for years .
 The emphasis was on command, control, information, navigation, and precision . The emphasis is on command and control .
 Russian soldiers equipped with the “Ratnik’s Future Soldier Individual Equipment Gear have better protection against small arms . They employ a variety of subsystems, including reconnaissance, navigation, night optics, and communications .
 Mechanized forces benefited from procurement of lighter, more modern armored vehicles with digital communications . Mechanized Forces benefited from procurements of lighter and more modern vehicles .
 In practice Russian Army Brigades do not deploy as whole organizations . In practice they do not deployed as whole groups .
 Operational commanders task organize Battalion Tactical Groups capable of independent combined-arms combat missions . Instead, operational commanders task with battalion Tactical Groups .
 This command has responsibility for the Caucasus and southern Russia, as well as the Black Sea and Caspian Fleets . This command is also responsible for the Russian Black Sea, Caspians, and Black Sea .
 Per treaty provisions the Russians had forces positioned in Crimea . They were primarily used to secure the port of Sevastopol .
 They are found throughout the military, intelligence, and security services . They are also found in the military and intelligence .
 Those in the FSB are tasked with fighting terrorism and protecting the constitution . They are also tasked with protecting the Constitution .
Alpha responds to terrorists and other extremist movements and hostage rescue . Alpha responds to terrorist movements and other extremists .
Russian security experts use their skill sets to test Russian security infrastructure . They use their skills sets to “red team’s’ or test Russian infrastructure .
 In Crimea and eastern Ukraine, SPETSNAZ operated in a clandestine manner, with their faces masked and wearing nondescript military clothing . The group had no information identifying their unit .
 These infamous little green men appeared during the decisive seizures or buildings and facilities, only to disappear when associated militias and local troops arrived to consolidate gains .
 In this way they provided a measure of deniability for Moscow . In this case they provided an example of Moscow's lack of transparency .
 Russia recruits agents from among the local populations within target countries, including pro-Russian nationalists, minorities, political dissidents, and criminals . The conflict in Ukraine demonstrates that Russia recruits SPETSNAZ agents .
 Russian-Backed Proxy Organizations in Ukraine are funding, training, and equipping numerous groups with Russian nationalist agendas in Ukraine .
 Citing Igor Girkin as its leader, the group boasts some four thousand operatives . The group boasts a total of 4,000 operatives .
Russian Orthodox Church is motivated by devotion to the Russian Orthodox Church . They are concerned about the encroachment of Western influence in the region .
 Members of the group train for and conduct special activities, including storming buildings, sniping, reconnaissance, and defense . The group also conducts special activities.
 Russian leaders admit to journalists that some of their senior leaders are Russian . They have admitted to journalists they are Russian. They have also admitted that they have admitted they are not Russian .
 It has chapters in Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Latvia, Serbia, Macedonia, Romania, Bulgaria, and Germany . It is also in Ukraine, Ukraine and Belarus .
 Led by Aleksander Zaldostanov “Surgeon,’s group has an estimated five thousand members .
 The group is supported by the Russian Orthodox Church, and it often meets with domestic political and religious leaders .
 During the crisis in Crimea, the group arrived in the region, with members claiming that they wanted to ensure free and fair voting in the referendum for annexation . They wanted to assist the people in their struggle against the "fascists" in Kyiv .
 Forces are drawn from some six hundred thousand officially registered Cossacks in Russia . Forces are from some 6 hundred thousand official Cossacked in Russia.
 Russia is legally permitted to defend Russian borders, guard national forests, organize youth military training, fight terrorism, and protect local government facilities . They are also permitted to protect national forests and guard national forest .
 During the Winter Olympics in Sochi, they engaged in security operations . They were recorded using violence against protesters .
 Cossacks under Colonel Sergei Yurievich were used to defend Sevastopol and blockade and intimidate Ukrainian troops in Crimea .
 Cossack irregular troops have also operated in the Luhansk and Donetsk regions in eastern Ukraine .
 Some of the Cossack groups are from Ukraine, while others came into the region from Russia . Some of them are from the Ukraine, others from Russia.
 Elements of the former group intend to apply for integration into the Russian military after the annexation of Crimea .
 Chetnik soldiers typically have beards and wear a variety of camouflaged uniforms with shoulder patches including skull-and-crossbones insignia . The soldiers typically wear a range of camouflage uniforms.
 They also wear distinctive black fur hats with tassels and carry long knives . They also carry knives and carry distinctive black Fur hats .
 The Chetniks came from Serbia, allegedly on their own initiative to assist their Slavic brothers in their fight against the West .
 Previously he served in the 45th Detached Reconnaissance Regiment, the FSB, and the GRU . Was involved in numerous other conflicts, including those in Bosnia, Chechnya, and Transnistria .
 He has been accused of organizing civilian massacres in Bosnia and kidnappings and murders in Chechnya . He is also accused of organising kidnappings, murders and killings in Bosnia .
Before he entered eastern Ukraine, Girkin led paramilitary groups in Crimea . He negotiated with Ukrainian military officers in attempts to induce them to defect to Russia . Before entering Ukraine, he led paramilitary group in Crimea.
 Girkin organized volunteer militia forces in Crimea, drawing on Russians with military experience and pro-Russian Ukrainians . Girkinorganized volunteer militias in Crimea .
 Ukrainian intelligence Igor Girkin was under the direct authority of Moscow, which supplied him and other leaders with weapons, all with the approval of Putin .
 Girkin accused of murdering Volodymyr Rybak and a college student, Yury Popravko . Girkin has been accused of murder in Ukraine .
 In April 2014 Girkin emerged as the leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic . He claimed he had command of all its forces, but he continued to deny Russian connections .
 Girkin fled from Slovyansk as Ukrainian forces moved to retake the city . The move attracted criticism and outright condemnation from fellow insurgents and ultranationalists in Russia .
 Girkin was later accused of involvement in the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 .
 Some reports say he ordered the collection of valuables from the dead passengers and crew . Proceeds would fund the insurgency in the Donetsk People's Republic .
 He is believed to be the author of a conspiracy theory that the aircraft was deliberately downed and filled with corpses to create an international incident . He is also believed to have been involved in a conspiracy conspiracy theory .
 He is alleged to have been wounded in battle, but other reports suggest the FSB removed him from leadership of the insurgency because he failed to fully comply with Moscow's directives .
 Alexander Borodai is a Ukrainian with strong ties to Russia . He has lived and studied in Moscow and has lived in Moscow .
 Borodai was appointed the prime minister of the Donetsk People’s Republic . He resigned the office and returned to Russia .
 He is alleged to have served in the FSB as a director who achieved the rank of major general . He denies the claim .
 Igor Besler was a former lieutenant colonel in the Russian GRU . He also led insurgent operations in Crimea and Ukraine .
Of mixed German-Ukrainian descent, he considers himself Russian . He studied at the Dzerzhinsky Military Academy in the mid-1990s .
 Ukrainian intelligence says he was contacted by the GRU in February 2014 . He was directed to move into Crimea and help organize the uprising .
 He has been implicated in numerous murders and summary executions of captured combatants in Ukraine . He has also been tied to the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 .
 Alexey Mozgovoy is a Ukrainian insurgent leader and commander of the so-called Ghost Brigade in eastern Ukraine . He is a leader of the Ghost Brigade .
 Mozgovoy claims that Russia is providing ‘mostly humanitarian aid’ and that many of the pro-Russian fighters in Ukraine are foreigners who have come to fight against “fascism’
 Mozgovoy has been seen traveling openly in Moscow . He enjoys celebrity status including requests for autographs .
 His Ghost Brigade includes Russians, local Ukrainian militiamen, and foreign fighters from Germany, Bulgaria, and Slovakia . He also includes Russian, Ukrainian, German and Slovakian fighters .
 Alexey Mozgovoy Alexander Mozhaev is a Cossack militia leader operating in eastern Ukraine at the behest of the Putin regime . He is the leader of a militia leader in the eastern Ukraine.
 Mozhaev boasts of the ferocity of the Cossack warbands who are fighting the Kyiv government in the interests of Russia .
 He and his followers are motivated by Russian nationalism, Russian Orthodoxy, and a hatred of Western encroachment into Russia’s sphere .
 Cossack leaders maintain tenuous and deniable links to Russia to ensure they retain their freedom to act as volunteer paramilitaries . Supported and authorized to act from Moscow, the Cossacks are supported by Moscow, including Mozhaev .
 Russian Information Warfare in Ukraine includes the use of cyberwarfare . Russian information operations in Ukraine include the useof cyber warfare .
 Typical computer network operations feature attacks aimed at disrupting enemy infrastructure and command . Typical attacks target enemy infrastructure, command and infrastructure .
 Crimea's landline, Internet, and mobile services were nearly eliminated . Similar to the Russian prelude to its 2008 conflict in Georgia, Crimea’s landline and Internet services were almost eliminated .
 Hacktivists using the names Cyber Berkut and Ukraine Anonymous fought back, attacking Russian government sites and the Russia Today news agency .
 Russia was able to obviate a more violent scenario, Panarin said in March 2014 . In March 2014 Panarin commented on the Crimean operation .
 He contrasted this performance with operations in 2008, as well as with the poor performance of the West . He said the West had a poor performance in 2008.
 The Ukrainian secret police organization was disestablished by the Kyiv government in the wake of the alleged massacres of protesters . He also praised what he termed “the valor of Berkut’s”
 The Crimean branch of Berkut was subsequently absorbed into the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs .
 He attributed the Crimean success to the personal leadership of Vladimir Putin, who centralized the control of all the key political, economic, financial, military, intelligence, and information tools . He also attributed the Crimea success to Putin's personal leadership .
On the basis of that premise, he views the conflict as a battle between the US-led coalition and Russia, rather than as a spontaneous domestic movement .
 He predicts the collapse of the “American—British’s empire that has dominated modern history. He predicts a large coalition of powers stretching from Egypt to China and dominated by Russia .
 Russia’s three pillars of power will be spirituality, state power, and cyber-sovereignty . Russia's new role as leader of a multipolar world will be in its new role .
 Alexandr Dugin acknowledges that the country contains both ethnic Russians and pro-Russian populations on one hand and West-leaning Europeans on the other .
 He regards the country as an artificial contrivance that inappropriately combined these two groups within a common border . He regards it as an 'artificial contrivation'
 Washington, he claims, is intent on pushing the divide between the two groups to the very border of Russia . Washington is trying to push the divide to the east, he says .
 Moscow must dominate that struggle through a vigorous information campaign and push the divide westward . Instead, Moscow must focus on information campaign, rather than the divide .
 When necessary, Russian information warfare must include the military dimension . Russian information Warfare must include a military dimension, according to Russian media .
 In the Crimean operation, unidentified Russian military personnel entered the conflict region and preempted the adversary by rapidly occupying decisive points .
 Russian agents provided Moscow with deniability, if not plausible deniability . Armed but not wearing uniforms, the Russian agents gave Moscow withdeniability .
 The pro-Western press called the intruders little green men, but Dugin refers to them as “nice men’s” Dugin calls them ‘nice men'
 The goal is the very essence of Sun Tzu's “winning without fighting’s ‘winning without fight’ ideal .
 One pundit applauded the Russians’ use of blackmail, psychological manipulation, and threats of nuclear war . The Russian government is accused of using blackmail and psychological manipulation .
 The defending champions are defensive in nature. But what makes these acts justifiable in the eyes of their champions is that they are defensive .
 Each of the information warfare pundits portrays Russia’s operations as reactions to American provocation .
 International Information Themes Moscow combined secrecy, deception, threats, and accusations in crafting the narrative for the international community .
 Putin and his agents denied Russian involvement in Crimea and eastern Ukraine campaigns . Putin also touted their military capabilities if they were pushed too far .
 The West accused the West of meddling in Ukrainian affairs and warmongering . They dismissed evidence of Russian troops in the region .
 The coordinated information warfare campaign was carefully crafted to modify the messaging to the West . The coordinated messaging campaign was aimed at the West.
 In Russian media outlets aimed at American and European audiences, the themes were changed slightly to tout the essential “democracy’ of Russia’s actions.
 Everything came about because of the “people’s choice,” and Russia simply acted in accordance with local wishes, says CNN.com .
 Other messaging targeted the pacifist sectors of the West by both threatening war and assuring the world that Russia wanted peace . Other messaging also targeted pacifists and pacifists .
 Moscow has continued its themes of justifiable intervention . If Moscow fell short of convincing the more cynical critical thinkers in the West, it nevertheless persisted .
 Indoctrination of Ethnic Russians in Ukraine Russian information warfare also targeted key proxies in Crimea and eastern Ukraine, preparing them for resistance against Kyiv, a separatist insurgency, and annexation by Russia .
 Western culture views as the sine qua non for personal liberty, security, peace, and prosperity . The West seems to offer democracy, a form of government that Western culture sees as sinequa non .
 This plan for governance, which the West contemptuously dismisses as autocratic, seeks to defend tradition, conservative values, and “true liberty’s” liberty .
 The West seeks to entice former Russian clients with promises of economic prosperity and opportunity . From Moscow’s viewpoint, the West likewise seeks to bedazzle and entice.
 align48 ment with Russia and integration into the EEU would bring immediate economic aid. Conversely, align48 Ment with Russia would bring economic aid .
 Russian funds and support programs arrived in abundance after Crimea's annexation .
 Putin responded with a generous proposal to buy up Ukrainian debt and cut gas prices by a third . Yanukovych bowed to Russian pressure, but Putin immediately responded to Putin's proposal .
 The information campaign was designed to combat Western paradigms and reeducate Ukrainians along Moscow’s lines of thinking .
 Within the Russian periphery, the RT television network offers the best programming available .
 High standards for production attract viewers of all political persuasions . High standards attract viewers who are drawn to the form, if not the content, of the shows .
 RT gives Moscow the commanding heights of the information war and a strong voice wherever its signal is broadcast and not deliberately blocked . By ensuring a sustained appeal, especially to the youth, RT gives Russia the commanding height of the Information war .
 Putin administration crafted a picture of NATO encroachment toward the borders of Russia . The Putin administration proposed that the West, led by the United States, intended to annex Crimea .
 Russian people with history of religious, cultural, and military greatness were artificially divided after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Once again the West was behind the nefarious plot to keep the Russian people from enjoying unity, peace, security, and their rightful place in the world order .
 The study uses an analytical framework derived from the work of General Valery Gerasimov, chief of the general staff of the Russian Federation .
Gerasimov notes that political, economic, AQ cultural, and other nonmilitary factors play decisive roles . Gerasimov, observing American and European experiences in the Gulf War, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and Libya.
 Gerasimov’s model is a useful construct for analyzing Russian actions in Crimea and Ukraine . It makes clear that political, economic, and intelligence efforts precede military action .
 The state prosecuting the unconventional warfare campaign must be in control of the catalysts and crises that lead to escalation and resolution, rather than simply react to events . His explanation implies that the state prosecution the unconventional Warfare campaign must have been in control.
 In 2014 campaigns in Crimea and Ukraine, Russia in fact controlled and exercised a strong grip on the pace of many of the headline events . In the 2014 campaigns, Russia was in fact controlling and exercising a strong hold on many key events .
 Main Phases of Conflict Development Neutralization of military conflict Military Localization of Military conflict Crisis reactions. Immediate military threat. Intensifying contradictions transform into conflict .
 Emergence of differences of interest. 1 Direct military threat Potential military threat 3. 3.
 At the start of the conflict Russia turned its focus on securing Crimea . The conflict began in Crimea in March 2014 .
 Putin’s priority turned toward securing Russian influence and control over eastern Ukraine . Later, after the annexation of Crimea, Putin's priority was to maintain a land bridge.
 During the escalations stage Putin took actions calculated to de-escalate the situation, but they had the opposite effect . Putin's actions had the same effect as the other.
 The start of conflict activities was relatively sudden and brief, quickly transitioning to the next stage . The conflict activities were relatively brief and brief .
 This suggests intensive and deliberate planning designed to preempt any embryonic resistance against Putin’s designs . This suggestsintensive and deliberate plans designed to pre-empt any embryonic Resistance against Putin's designs .
 The crisis stage featured nearly flawless execution of Russia’s new information-based warfare, culminating in a staged referendum and political decision .
 Putin's autocratic government rapidly sealed the annexation with a legal form . During the resolutions stage, Putin’s Autocratic government quickly sealed the annexed with legal form.
 Russian troops firmly in control of Crimea, he was able to present world with fait accompli .
 The restoration of peace stage was facilitated in part by the upswing of conflict in eastern Ukraine, so as to divert attention away from Crimea .
 Military Immediate Direct Potential military threat military threat. Localization of military conflict Neutralization ofMilitary conflict Neutralized . Intensifying contradictions transform into conflict .
 Under Russian pressure, he abandons deal with EU in late 2013, sparking Maidan protests . He abandon deal with European Union in late 2014, sparking protests .
Escalations in Kyiv against President Victor Yanukovych become violent. Escalations have become violent .
Pro-Russian gunmen seize government buildings in Simferopol, Ukraine .
 Resolution @ Mar.-18, 2014 Referendum and subsequent treaty leads to Russian annexation of Crimea into Russian Federation .
 U.S. and EU impose sanctions, but annexation remains in effect . Popular approval in Crimea and Russia boosts Putin’s political fortunes .
 Crimea annexation led to an upswing of unrest in eastern Ukraine . The March 2014 annexation of Crimea led to a rise in unrest in east Ukraine .
 The start of conflict activities was framed by Russia’s deceptive diplomatic agreement at Geneva . Putin's sustained unconventional warfare campaign in eastern Ukraine under an umbrella of persistent denial .
 The crisis stage came to a head with the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17, which fueled growing international condemnation .
 The hoped-for resolutions stage instead saw surprising political resilience from the Kyiv government and people of Ukraine against Russian aggression . Ukraine's political resilience was surprising.
 US, EU, and NATO support, along with Russia’s severe economic downturn, led Russia to resort to increasingly explicit invasion . Russia's economic downturn and President Poroshenko's sustained counteroffensive, led to Russia's invasion .
 The restoration of peace stage remains in doubt as the U.S. government passes a renewed sanctions law . The United States government threatens to begin giving military aid to Kyiv .
Russian agents organize, lead, and cooperate with protesters in major cities and port of Mariupol . Start of conflict activities @ Mar.-Apr.14 Russian agents organize.
 Russians use bribery, intimidation, and subversion to neutralize government officials, police, and some military units . Russian government officials are often targeted by Russians, police and military units.
 Crisis @ May 1, 2014, Ukraine resumes conscription in face of ongoing aggression in east and south . Crisis: Ukraine resumes Conscription in the face of continuing aggression in East and south.
 The US-led NATO peacekeeping exercises commence in western Ukraine .
Despite cease-fire, fighting continues, at times escalating to major battles . Despite cease-fires, fighting is still ongoing, with major battles continuing .
Russian tanks enter, but Western sanctions and Russia’s economic downturn chip away at Russians’ support for war . Russian tanks enter.
 Russian strategists laid plans to ensure Moscow’s control of eastern Ukraine and especially of Crimea . Ukraine's government made a bid for inclusion into the alliance .
 Russia has been exerting covert pressure on Crimea and Ukraine since before the start of the new millennium .
 It would take Kyiv attempting an economic union with Western Europe to push the Putin regime into a more assertive strategy . It would be the catalyst of Kyiv trying an economic Union with West Europe .
 Russia’s actions against Ukraine began most notably with its diplomatic pressure on the government of President Yanukovych . President Yanukovych's volte-face regarding integration into the EU was announced in November 2013 .
 Yanukovych government complied with Moscow’s desires. At this point the Russian government had not necessarily decided to make the dramatic moves it later accomplished .
 Diplomatic pressure and contacts with key Ukrainian leaders also led to the parliament rejecting legislation that would have allowed Yulia Tymoshenko to leave the country .
 Russian strategists following Gerasimov’s model would have concluded that they had bypassed intermediate stages and achieved resolution and restoration of peace . These developments would have led Russian strategist to conclude that they have achieved resolution.
 Kyiv police used violence in an attempt to disperse the crowds . By the end of the month, growing popular protests against the Yanukovych government led to police using violence .
 The resulting Euromaidan movement demanded closer ties with the West . The related Automaidan Movement demanded the removal of Yanukovych .
 The crisis stimulated Russia’s use of ‘new-generation warfare’ to achieve its goals in Ukraine . The crisis prompted Russia to use “new- generation warfare”
 Putin’s government announced $15 billion in loans to Ukraine and substantial discounts on imported natural gas . Yanukovych's visit to Moscow was pursuant to his visit.
 Putin's actions targeted Ukraine's financial vulnerability and fed one of Putin’s main information warfare themes . Ukraine's economic benefit to all Ukrainians is a benefit to Russia, says Peter Bergen .
 EU and IMF called for Ukraine to deal with its debt problem with its austerity programs that were sure to alienate the population .
 Russia’s measures over the Christmas holiday appear to have been successful in lessening popular resistance to the Yanukovych government . Putin’'s agents attempted to facilitate negotiations between the president and his opponents .
 Once again it may have appeared that Russia was on the verge of achieving its goals . It may have been a sign that Russia could achieve its goals again .
 Six anti-government demonstrators’ deaths and more than two hundred jailed. Over the next month violent clashes ensued .
Escalations Information warfare began in early February . It was in the form of aggressive propaganda against Kyiv .
 Crimean Tatars protested the region’s Rada deputies who had labeled the resistance in Kyiv as fascist . The resistance is a key argument of Putin's information campaign .
 The Russians aimed at preempting the battle for legitimacy in Ukraine, the Russians said .
 Moscow began to unfold a two-pronged effort as the crisis deepened . Moscow is trying to use the situation to facilitate Russia’s designs for Crimea .
 Russian GRU dispatched several hundred members of 45th SPETSNAZ Regiment to Crimea to create a "popular uprising" aimed at facilitating Russia's annexation of the region .
 GRU agents used bribery among the ethnic Russian population to win support for annexation. Simultaneously GRU agent used bribery to gain support from the ethnic population to gain control .
 On February 20, more than 60 people were killed in Kyiv in the bloodiest crackdown of the crisis . More than 60 killed in February 20.
 Putin’s government, smarting from a significant political setback, resorted to strong diplomatic and economic pressure aimed at dividing and disrupting the opposition in Ukraine .
 opposition in Kyiv had been emboldened and moved on to negotiate a settlement agreement with the beleaguered Yanukovych on February 21 . But the opposition was emboldened by the move and it had been in talks with Yanukovych .
 Ukraine would hold presidential elections by the end of the year . A national unity government would form by early March . Russia, France, Germany, and Poland did not sign the resulting document .
 The country would be returned to the 2004 constitution, with a reduction in the powers of the president . The return of the constitution would see the country return to the constitution .
 The United Nations reports that overt violence was paralleled by a wide array of human rights violations . The U.N. report says kidnapping, torture, and murder are among the most common violations .
 In late January two activists, Yuriy Verbytsky and Ihor Lutsenko were abducted and beaten .
 Lutsenko made it back to safety after being released into a wood with sub-freezing temperatures . Verbytsky died from exposure .
 MP Volodymyr Konstantinov stated that Crimea might secede from Ukraine if tensions escalated further .
 Refat Chubarov responded, “This is our land, our country. This is our country,’ he said . This sparked a reaction from Refat.
 As before, Russia tried to seize the moral high ground in the battle for legitimacy by characterizing the Kyiv government as fascist . The Kyv government has been accused of being fascist .
 The ongoing conflict led to Russia’s commencement of activities associated with the escalations phase of conflict . The conflict was the first time Russia had been involved in the conflict .
This stage is characterized by a sharp increase in diplomatic and economic pressure on the subject state . This stage is defined mainly by the sharp increase of diplomatic andEconomic pressure on state .
 In accordance with the Gerasimov model, the third stage, start of conflict activities, began in Crimea .
 Eastern Ukraine remained in the escalations stage at this point and progressed into stage three only after Russia’s annexation of Crimea . Eastern Ukraine remains in stage three after Russia's annexation of Ukraine .
 The application of Gerasimov’s stages three through six in Crimea will turn to eastern Ukraine . The application will also turn to the model's application to Ukraine .
 Russian Operations in Crimea Start of Conflict Activities is characterized by the mobilization of active opposition forces, including demonstrators and armed militias . Russian operations in Crimea are described as Russian operations .
 Nonkinetic factors still play the principal role in conflict resolution . But irregular forces, both domestic and those imported by the external supporter, begin to act .
 Russia increased the pace and visibility of its strategic mobilization of forces to assembly areas adjacent to the troubled regions . In addition to the increase of forces, Russia increased its presence of forces in the region .
 Rada in Kyiv voted to impeach Yanukovych . Instead of backing down to Russian pressure, the Rada voted to oust Yanukovych .
Oleksander Turchynov, formerly speaker of parliament, was appointed as interim president . He was appointed by the parliament's parliament .
 Opposition leaders decide to move presidential elections to the coming spring . Opposition leaders decided to move elections to coming spring.
 Russian military forces from the Southern District began to mobilize and prepare for deployment to the region . These developments sparked pro-Russian demonstrations in Crimea, and Russia's military forces were mobilized .
Pro-Russian demonstrators labeled the new regime in Kyiv as fascist . In eastern Ukraine and Crimea, pro-Russian protesters labeled the regime as fascist.
 The vilification of the Kyiv reformers as fascists is a key theme of Putin’s information campaign . Russia is working to influence, organize, and even lead the protests, says Peter Bergen .
 The pro-Western factions in Kyiv enjoyed a brief period of triumph . They moved to disband the elite Berkut police unit that had been blamed for the deaths of protesters .
 Putin government responds to its setback in Kyiv by sparking a crisis in Crimea . The Putin government responded by sparking the crisis in Ukraine .
 Russian strategy calls for the commencement of explicit military action, as well as an embargo or similar economic suasion .
 Depending on which sources are consulted, Russia either supported or actively led an upsurge in pro-Russian demonstrations .
 Ukrainian Rada passed a bill removing Russian as an official language in Crimea . Pro-Russian groups in Crimea began mobilizing militias .
 Unidentified armed groups are believed to be Russian special forces and intelligence operatives . Most analysts concluded that they were Russian Special Forces and Intelligence operatives .
 Military assets moved in from Russia, including wheeled armored personnel carriers and helicopters . Military assets include helicopters, helicopters and wheeled vehicles .
 The unidentified operatives in Crimea used Russian military vehicles, but they otherwise hid their links to the Russian military . Moscow denied any involvement .
 The headquarters of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol later admitted that its troops had moved into Crimea to secure the port .
 On March 6, the Russian Black Sea Fleet blockaded Ukrainian ships in Novoozerne, Donuzlav Lake .
 Russia achieved an effective isolation of the region through military demonstrations along the Ukrainian border . Russia also achieved a effective isolation through military protests along the Ukraine border .
 Kyiv government confirmed that it did not intend to send Ukrainian military forces into Crimea on March 9 .
 The following few days were marked by surrounding and isolating Ukrainian forces in their bases and mobilizing political support for regional regime change .
 The mayor of Sevastopol was replaced by a Russian citizen, Alexei Chaliy .
 The Russian Federation parliament approved President Putin’s request to use armed force in Ukraine to protect Russian interests .
 The newly installed pro-Russian mayor insisted to supportive crowds that Crimea would no longer accept orders from the illegal regime in Kyiv .
 MPs in the Crimean Rada announced new planned measures to achieve greater autonomy for the region .
 Putin’s government chimed in, declaring to the international community that Moscow would support “greater federalism’ in Ukraine .
 In March the State Duma Committee on CIS Affairs announced plans for new legal procedures to annex territories into the Russian Federation .
 Crimea's announcement that it wanted to be incorporated into Russia was a clear use of a political statement as a catalyst for separatism in the region . Crimea’s announcement was a use of the political statement.
 Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov refused to meet with Ukrainian foreign minister Andriy Deshchytsia . He claimed that he represented an illegal government . But the event served only to further Moscow's disinformation campaign against the Kyiv government .
 The theme was parroted by the pro-Russian faction in Crimea on March 6 . De facto prime minister Sergey Aksyonov refused to enter into negotiations with Kyiv on the grounds that the government there was an illegal entity .
 During the crisis phase, Russian strategy calls for embargoes and other economic sanctions . During the Crisis phase, Russia calls for Embargoes, other sanctions .
 On March 7 Gazprom announced that it might suspend service unless Ukraine settled its previous debt for natural gas and finance current supplies . The company said it may suspend service if Ukraine settles previous debt.
 Crimea split from Ukraine came on the heels of Crimea's split with Ukraine . This use of economic blackmail was obvious as it came in the wake of Crimea split .
 Russia is considering ending START inspections in response to U.S. and European agitation concerning Ukraine . The move was calculated to grab the attention of Western leaders .
 The intent was to demonstrate to the West that while the matter of Ukraine may have some weight within NATO’s strategic formulation, it was no less than a vital interest to Russia .
 Resolution during conflict resolution, military operations reach their zenith with decisive defeat of any armed adversaries . Resolution During conflict resolution is a result of a resolution.
 Once the political objectives have been secured, leaders then transition to the next phase of peace . This is a way of signaling a successful resolution .
 On March 16, the interim Crimean government held a referendum concerning secession from Ukraine and annexation into Russia .
 Some 97 percent of the Crimean population supported such a move, a seeming impossibility, given the ethnic and language distribution .
 Vladimir Putin signed a bill to absorb Crimea into the Russian Federation . Two days later, he signed a law to absorb the Crimea into Russia .
 The government of Ukraine, the EU, the G7, and the U.S. all stated that they would not recognize the results of the illegal referendum .
 Three hundred Crimean “self-defense troops, likely led by Russian agents, stormed the headquarters of the Ukrainian Navy in Sevastopol . Rear Admiral Sergey Gaiduk was briefly detained .
 Ukraine's troops departed without violence, and the Russian flag was raised over captured S7 installations .
 Western powers responded with threats of further sanctions. But they simultaneously called on Russia to “pull back its troops’s” rather than insisting on a return to Ukrainian sovereignty over Crimea .
 Even Kyiv seemed quickly distracted by events in eastern Ukraine, and the Crimean annexation seemingly became a fait accompli .
 Russian prime minister Dmitry Medvedev visited Crimea on March 31, 2014 . He promised substantial economic aid, marking the beginning of the restoration of peace in Crimea .
Russian business leaders acted quickly to help integrate the region into the Russian economy . Tensions were quickly reduced in the region, and Russian business leaders quickly acted quickly .
 At the same time, leaders in Russia, Ukraine, and the West turned their attention to matters in eastern Ukraine, effectively acquiescing toward Crimea .
 Ukrainian officials accuse Russia of assisting separatists in Ukraine . Russian Operations in Eastern Ukraine Start of Conflict Activities. Ukrainian officials accused Russia of helping separatists .
 Foreign Minister Andriy Deschchytsya noted that the solider who captured government buildings carried Russian battle rifles, not Ukrainian weapons .
 Throughout March and April, pro-Russian demonstrators marched in the Donbass region . They seized government buildings in Donetsk, Luhansk, Slovyansk, and the Black Sea port of Mariupol .
 Ukrainian and Western sources allege Russian intelligence agents and special forces subordinate to the GRU led the demonstrations . Ukrainian and West sources allege that Russian intelligence agent and special force were behind demonstrations .
 Some observers claimed that Russia sent in operatives who acted in the role of local agitators . Some even appeared in various towns throughout the crisis .
 Russian agents staged the movement and that relatively few Ukrainians sympathized with the demonstrators . The demonstrators adopted the theme that they represented a large majority of separatists .
 Russia was expelled from the G8 on March 24 in a move that heralded the international community's intent to bring diplomatic and economic pressure against Moscow’s adventuring in Ukraine .
 Putin's response was to dismiss the move publicly, but he also pursued a diplomatic strategy that gave the appearance of cooperation with Western powers . Putin’s response to the move was to dismissed the move public, but also pursued the diplomatic strategy .
Russia participated in four power talks in Geneva that produced a broad agreement on 58 de-escalation on April 17 . Russia participated in the talks that produced the agreement .
 Russia's stated intentions did not match its continued intervention in the east . Russia’s stated intentions, however, did notMatch its continued involvement in the East .
 A key tactic in Russian unconventional warfare is using bribery or intimidation to coerce officials to abandon their posts .
Militants likely led by Russian agents stormed the Ministry of Internal Affairs in Donetsk . They convinced the chief of office there to resign .
 demonstrators seized the public administration building on April 16 and the television station on April 27 . Facing crumbling opposition, the protesters seized the building and TV station .
 Russian assistance curtailed Ukrainian broadcasts and replaced them with Russian television . With Russian assistance they curtailed Ukraine broadcasts .
 pro-Russian militants stormed public buildings in Slovyansk, and the mayor there, Nelya Shtepa, acquiesced in the seizures . The mayor acknowledged Russia's control of the operation and welcoming its involvement .
 The militants went on to capture the police headquarters and seized the weapons there . Government forces launched a counterattack and retook the city on July 5 .
 Police officials in Horlivka also defected to the attacking rebel militias . Chief of police was captured and beaten .
 Volodymyr Rybak, a city council deputy, was snatched by the militia and later killed . The militia killed him and his body was later found by police .
 Militants claimed that on several occasions convoys from the 25th Airborne Brigade were stopped by angry locals . Militant claims that on many occasions convoy from the brigade were stopped.
 One unit allegedly surrendered, and the militants commandeered their armored fighting vehicles . In one instance, the unit involved allegedly surrendered .
 On another occasion, a convoy was forced to unload its weapons and hand over its magazines before the crowd let it proceed .
 Ukrainian authorities disbanded the brigade because of these episodes . The brigade was disbanded because of the incidents .
 Another characteristic of unconventional warfare is the use of proxies. Local self-defense militias, mutineers from government forces and imported militants .
 In eastern Ukraine the Russians have allegedly imported foreign paramilitary groups, including the Wolves’ Head Battalion . A Cossack group known to have fought with the Russians in Georgia in 2008 .
 In eastern Ukraine, the group was not deployed as an auxiliary to the Russian main force . The group is not deployed in eastern Ukraine .
 Russian forces fought as a proxy in absence of Russian conventional forces . Instead, it fought as an alternative to Russian conventional force .
 Members of the group claimed they had come to the region on their own initiatives to defend Russian Orthodoxy and the Russian regime . They claimed to have come to Russia for ideological reasons .
 Time magazine journalists admitted they are paid, equipped, and deployed by Vladimir Putin’s government . But in interviews with Time magazine, they admitted that they were paid and equipped .
 Kyiv government began “anti-terrorist’ operations in mid-April to retake seized buildings and defeat the Russian-led “separatist’s forces, the SPETSNAZ and 59 associated operatives demonstrated another tactic .
Pro-Russian citizens surrounded an armored vehicle to act as human shields, immobilizing the target . On several occasions, government forces with mechanized combat vehicles arrived.
 The targeted soldiers, cut off from supplies and given vague orders, refrained from shooting . They complied with demands for withdrawal after disabling their weapons .
 Government forces successfully defended themselves and their installations from attacks . In other cases government forces successfully defend themselves from attacks.
 Yulia Tymoshenko formed a resistance movement with more than twenty thousand volunteers . Officials in Kyiv struggled to find a way to resist Russian aggression in the east .
 The Kyiv government announced the resumption of conscription in response to increased Russian aggression . In the run-up to Ukraine’s presidential election, the government announced a resumption.
 On May 2, some 40 pro-Russian activists perished in Odessa, Odessa . Kyiv loyalists set fire to a building they were sheltering in .
 The Russians condemned the incident, insisting it was a deliberate act of repression by the fascists in Kyiv .
Self-proclaimed Peoples’ Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk conducted referenda on May 11 . The results showed popular support for independence from Kyiv and annexation to Russia, followed by Crimea .
 Ukraine went forward with the election against Russia’s wishes, and Poroshenko won handily . Despite the distraction, Ukraine went ahead with the vote .
 Putin's statement that he would seek to work with Ukraine's new leader quickly deteriorated . Despite Putin’s statement he would work with the new leader, relations quickly deteriorated.
 Russia cut off natural gas exports to Ukraine in June . Poroshenko pursued trade agreements with the EU, and in June Russian cut off gas exports .
 The aircraft was widely believed to have been hit by a surface-to-air missile fired by separatist militia forces .
 The horrendous loss of life led to increased diplomatic isolation of Russia and the strengthening of economic sanctions against Putin and his supporters .
 Moscow continued aggressive support to separatists, especially when their tactical situation deteriorated . Nonetheless, Moscow continued to support separatists .
 Russian armored personnel carriers, artillery, and air defense equipment permeated the theater . Moscow continued to deny involvement, as it had in Crimea .
 Two dozen armored personnel carriers and other vehicles with Russian military plates crossed into Ukraine near the insurgent-controlled Izvaryne border crossing .
 NATO secretary general Anders Fogh Rasmussen confirmed that a “Russian incursion’s’ into Ukraine had occurred . NATO Secretary General Anders Foghan Rasmussen confirmed the incident .
 Russia continued to deny that any of its forces were operating in eastern Ukraine . Reports from both sides confirmed that at least a thousand Russian military personnel were actively supporting the insurgents .
 By late August Ukrainian civilians were reporting the appearance of Russian special forces .
 Ukrainian forces captured ten Russian paratroopers, forcing Moscow to admit to the presence of Russian soldiers . Russian soldiers were captured by Ukrainian forces .
 Moscow claimed soldiers crossed the border by accident . However, Moscow claimed that the soldiers had crossed the borders by accident.
 insurgents began to capture towns in the southeast near the Sea of Azov . With the infusion of Russian forces and supplies, the insurgents began capturing towns .
 Russian-led insurgent forces brought renewed pressure on airports in Luhansk and Donetsk . By the end of August, they were threatening Mariupol again .
 Russian forces intervened to force cease-fire talks . It appeared that the government of Vladimir Putin refused to let the insurgents fail .
 The OSCE coordinated peace talks in Minsk that resulted in a cease-fire on September 5. Resolution The OSce coordinated peace Talks in the Russian capital .
 President Poroshenko had earlier proposed a fifteen-point peace plan, and its provisions were largely accepted by all sides .
 He promised greater autonomy for Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts as well as protection of the Russian language in the area . He also pledged greater autonomy.
 Heavy combat equipment was to be removed from the conflict areas . Prisoners were exchanged for heavy combat equipment and prisoners.
 Despite leaders in both Russia and Ukraine signaling their satisfaction with the cease-fire, fighting continued in the region .
 The U.S. signaled increased support for Ukraine in September by leading a NATO peacekeeping exercise in the western part of the country .
 The two powers concluded a renewed natural gas deal in October . Resolution from the West and Poroshenko’s political resilience pushed Putin into a posture of reluctantly dealing with the Kyiv regime .
Parlia61 mentary elections returned a strong pro-Western majority in the Rada . Putin's hopes for a weakening of resolve among Ukraine's citizens expired at the end of the month .
 rebels in Donetsk and Luhansk conducted their own local elections, which were condemned and dismissed by Kyiv . In response, the rebels held their own elections .
By early November the cease-fire had given way to increasing violence in eastern Ukraine . By early November, the ceasefire had been reached .
 Kyiv government continues to reach out to the West for economic and military aid . President Poroshenko hopes to keep the issue of Crimean annexation on the table .
 Putin has tried to walk a fine line between acquiescence to Russia's gains and provocation that Putin could use as a pretext for further adventures. Simultaneously, to prevent further bloodshed and possible Russian invasion, he has tried.
 Russia considers the Crimean annexation a fait accompli and has moved forward with economic development plans . Russia, meanwhile, considers the annexation of the Crimea as a fact accompli .
 Putin's regime intends to leverage the increased autonomy in eastern and southern Ukraine to further its policy goals there . Putin’s regime wants a secure land bridge from Russia to Crimea .
 In December the United States Congress passed a new sanctions bill, and President Obama signed it into law .
 The new provisions include the option to sell lethal military supplies and equipment to Ukraine at the discretion of the American president . The move is a strong diplomatic signal to both Kyiv and Moscow .
 Russian unconventional warfare and Moscow’s innovative approaches to IO largely succeeded in the recent annexation of Crimea . The annexation of the Crimea was a major success for Moscow .
 Russia's intervention in eastern Ukraine experienced difficulties, leading to an extended conflict . Russia’s intervention in east Ukraine has experienced difficulties.
 Russian leaders have absorbed the lessons of their post-Cold War setbacks, most notably those in Georgia in 2008 . The current outcome for the Russians is mixed, it is clear .
 Over time they have observed and adjusted to American moves during the color revolutions and the 2010 Arab Spring .
 Russian neoconservatives have embraced an aggressive foreign policy designed to reverse the losses associated with the collapse of the Soviet Union, especially along the Russian periphery .
 The current generation of siloviki have crafted a multidisciplinary art and science of unconventional warfare . Driven by a desire to roll back Western encroachment into the Russian sphere of influence, they have crafted an unconventional warfare.
Capitalizing on deception, psychological manipulation, and domination of the information domain, their approach represents a notable threat to Western security interests .
 A critical first step toward confronting modern Russian information warfare is to develop an understanding of its character and conduct . A critical step is to developing a understanding of Russia's character and Conduct .
 In conventional warfare, defenders learn to anticipate the likely “avenues of approach’ that an attacking army might use . In conventional war, defenders can anticipate the ‘avenues’ of approach.
 Russia can learn to anticipate Moscow’s next steps in the use of unconventional warfare and its likely implications . nations and regions, particularly those on the periphery of the Russian Federation, can learn.
 When Western governments are knowledgeable of the broad range of capabilities associated with this new threat, they can fortify vulnerable sectors of society, says Peter Bergen .
 The United States and its allies must coalesce their defense strategies into whole-of-government efforts to confront and address new types of threats emanating from the Russian Federation .
 Existing security treaties, including NATO Charter, must evolve toward effective resistance against this form of warfare .
 Implications for Latvian Defense Policy (Riga: National Defence Academy of Latvia, 2014), 8.3.5 .
 The Solidarity Movement and Perspectives on the Last Decade of the Cold War, ed. Mark Kramer, “The Soviet Union, the Warsaw Pact, and the Polish Crisis of 1980-81,” in The Solidity Movement .
 Managing Moscow After the Georgia Crisis, November/ December 2008. Managing Moscow after the Georgia crisis .
 Dale R Herspring and Roger N McDermott, “Serdyukov Promotes Systemic Russian Military Reform,” Orbis 54, no. The two men wrote the book .
 Simon Shuster, “Meet the Cossack ‘Wolves’ Doing Russia’s Dirty Work in Ukraine’ Time, May 14, 2014 .
 "Serbian Paramilitaries Join Pro-Russian Forces in Crimea,’ says Alexander Vasovic . Vasovic: “SerbianParamilitaries join Pro- Russian Forces in Ukraine .
Combat Studies Institute, United States Army Command and General Staff College, 1993 . Combat Studies Institute. U.S. Army Command, U. S. Army command and General staff College,1993 .
 Boltenkov, Dmitry, Aleksey Gayday, Anton Karnaukhov, Anton Lavrov, and Vyacheslav Tseluiko are among the six members of the Russian parliament .
 The Britannica. Britannica, Inc., Inc., is a British-based encyclopedia . The Britannique .