 Germany and its Western partners have been trying to resolve the conflict politically, to date without success . For the past five years Germany and the West have been attempting to resolve it politically .
 The Minsk ceasefire agreements of 2014 and 2015 have still not been implemented . The ceasefire agreements are still not being implemented .
 Donetsk and Luhansk have established dictatorial quasistate structures but remain almost completely dependent on Moscow . The separatist ‘People’s Republics’ in Donetsk andLuhansk are the two most powerful separatist groups .
 Ukraine has fulfilled some of its obligations under the Minsk Agreements, but neglected others . Ukraine has also neglected others, according to the agreement .
 Kyiv and the "People's Republics" are drifting steadily apart, while millions living along the line of contact experience terrible humanitarian suffering .
This threatens to establish a state of permanent poverty and underdevelopment in the regions affected by the conflict . This threatens to set up permanent poverty, underdevelopment and under development .
 Brussels maintains Union-wide sanctions against Russia and forges ahead with implementing the Association Agreement with Ukraine .
 Germany and France conduct peace talks in the so-called Normandy Format .
Much greater attention must be directed to the local level and especially the humanitarian crisis . Much greater attention is needed for the crisis in the region .
 Action at this level is limited in reach but imperative for progress towards peace . Action at the level islimited in reach, but is imperative for peace to be achieved .
 In 2014, Russia annexed Crimea and provoked a war in eastern Ukraine . The Ukrainian “Euromaidan’s” was provoked by Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 Germany and its Western partners have been trying to bring about a political solution through negotiations for five years . Germany and Western partners are trying to find a solution through talks .
 The basis for their efforts is the Minsk Agreements of 2014 and 2015, which define the modalities for a permanent ceasefire and reintegration of the contested territories into Ukraine . The basis of their efforts are the 2014-2015 agreement .
 The preconditions for implementing the Agreements – and thus for peace in eastern Ukraine – are steadily deteriorating . The November 2018 escalation in the Kerch Strait is the latest escalation in Ukraine .
 The separatist "People's Republics" in Donetsk and Luhansk have established dictatorial quasi-state structures . The structures contravene the Minsk Agreements, according to the Russian government .
 Russia is politically and economically dependent on Russia. They are practically incapable of acting on their own . They are politically and economic dependent on the Russian government .
 The Minsk Agreements are highly controversial in Ukraine, where many politicians warn that their implementation would consolidate Russian influence over Ukraine’s internal affairs .
 There is a strong tendency in Ukrainian politics towards isolating the conflict zones . There is also a tendency in Ukraine to isolate the conflict zone .
 The presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for 2019 will further sharpen the internal debate . The presidential elections are scheduled to be held in February 2019 .
 Moscow refuses to acknowledge its role as a party to the conflict . It controls the People’s Republics militarily, politically and economically in Ukraine .
 The Kremlin does uphold the Minsk Agreements (and suppresses deviating initiatives in the People's Republics and within Russia) It does little to advance their implementation.
 All the conflict parties regularly violate the Minsk security provisions as they seek military gains along the line of contact . All conflict parties routinely violate the security provisions .
 One contributing factor is the humanitarian crisis in the conflict region, which the Ukrainian leadership has failed to address effectively . The Ukrainian leadership is failing to address the crisis effectively .
 Ukraine and Vishnevskaya-Mann for their tireless support in Russia have experienced a rapid process collecting and processing the research materials .
Kyiv regards the annexation of Crimea and the conflict in the Donbas as elements of a Russian war of aggression . Kyiv regards Crimea as a part of the Crimea conflict as part of a Russia war of aggressions .
 Russia and separatists in contested territories insist that the Donbas conflict is a civil war with an ethno-political background . Russia and the separatists in the contested territories.
 Russia’s relations with the European Union, NATO and the United States have deteriorated drastically . Russia's relations with Western actors have added more obstacles to resolution .
 The various dimensions of the conflict are tightly interlocked, and the impediments to peace mutually reinforcing . The different dimensions are closely interlocked .
 The European Union and its member states pursue a division of labour on the conflict . The EU and its members states pursue the division.
 Berlin and Paris play a central role in the so-called Normandy Format . The Normandy Format remains the most important political negotiating track .
 In 2014 the European Union imposed sanctions on Russia in response to the annexation of Crimea and the war in the Donbas . The EU imposed sanctions in 2014 after the Crimea annexation.
 Otherwise it concentrates on implementing the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement .
 Berlin and Brussels possess limited influence over the aforementioned impediments to peace in the Donbas . The two countries have limited influence on the issue .
 The European Union has no relations with Russia and the People's Republics . This applies especially to the People’s Republics, where the relationship has broken down .
 Ukraine chose association with the EU and is more open than Russia to arguments from Berlin and Brussels . Ukraine chose the EU instead of Russia and is open to arguments.
 U.S. has become a less dependable partner in the peace process, Germany says . Germany and Europe have become less dependent on the United States in peace process .
 Washington does still share the central objective of Western policy, namely, to restore Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 U.S. policy on Minsk and sanctions is increasingly subject to volatility . With Trump and Congress pulling in different directions, Minsk policy has become more volatile .
 I would like to thank my interview partners for the trust they showed in me. I would also like to thanks my interview partner for their trust in me .
 The manuscript was written by Muriel Asseburg, Volker Perthes, Susan Stewart and Steffen Halling . For valuable and inspiring comments and feedback on previous versions.
 contested territories in eastern Ukraine comprise mountain ranges . The contested territories include mountain ranges in Ukraine .
 The region is referred to as “Donbas’s,2 a portmanteau of ‘Donetskyi Basein’ Only rising to prominence in the late ninereferring to the resource-rich catchteenth and early 20th century .
 Mining and associated industries, especially the basins of the rivers Dnipro and Don in Ukraine during the Soviet era, created its specific settlement and Russia .
 To this day the Donbas covers about 60,000 square kilometres, and accounts for 9 percent of Ukraine's territory . The Donbas is the most heavily urbanised region of Ukraine .
 The border region period since Ukrainian independence in 1991, howis flat steppe without natural barriers like rivers or ever, reveal increasing identification with the Donbas region . The Ukrainian state too, and with the Ukrainian state.
 The Republic and Luhansk People's Republic are legally an integral part of Ukraine . Their “independence’ is not recognised internationally, and their “ independence’s’t recognised internationally .
 Donetsk who identify with the region rose from 55. per2 Ukrainian and Russian geographical and proper names cent in 1994 to 69. percent in 2004 . Donetsk who identified with the area rose from55. per 2 Ukrainian and Russia geographical and Proper names cent to 69%.
 Ukrainian was 39. percent in 1994 and language; place-names are given in the language of the 42.% in 2004 . Russian 30. percent was Russian in 2004, as Russian was 30.% .
 They are used here for eds., “Studying Identity in Ukraine’s, Post-Soviet Affairs 34, reasons of readability . They are also used for ‘Studying identity in Ukraine,’ and ‘ Studying Identity’
Investment in modernisation caused the region’s Ukraine to decline steadily from the 1990s . The region's economy has declined steadily from Odesa through Mariupol economy .
 Forty-two opponents of Euromaidan lost their lives in a burning building in Odesa on 2 May 2014 . Deaths to a net loss of working-age inhabitants occurred, most notoriously in the city .
 The Donbas was the second territorial conflict in Ukraine to affect Ukraine and Mariupol . The separatist militias failed to secure the Donbas in February 2014 .
 The U.N. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for porters and opponents of the Euromaidan have clashed in Crimea . Ukraine's eastern regions saw demonstrations and violent clashes between sup8 Office of U.S. and opponents .
 separatists declared the People's Republics of 2014 and 2015 in April 2014 . U.N. reported 9,100 deaths endums in both areas on 11 May .
 90 percent of participants voted to establish the line of contact . Despite regular extensions of the ceasefire, the situathan remains unstable as People's Republics try to gain ground .
 The rebels enjoyed a miliflicts in Transnistria, Abkhazia or South Ossetia, one tary advantage . In contrast, to the conmonths of the war, the rebels enjoyed an advantage, for example .
 The Ukrainian interim government cannot at this stage speak of a stable military status . separatists in April suffered heavy losses, but initially suffered heavy loss .
 During this period increasing numbers of fighters and Kerch Strait. That point is illustrated by the escalation in the fight between the two .
 Russian coast heavy weapons found their way across the Russianguard patrol ships fired on two Ukrainian artillery Ukrainian border into the warzone .
 Ukraine succeeded in regrouping militarily and Sea of Azov en route from Odesa to Mariupol . Over time, howboats and a tug had attempted to pass into the ever, Ukraine succeeded .
 The crews were detained and taken to Lefortovo down by a Russian Buk anti-aircraft missile, killing Prison in Moscow . On 17 July ber of Ukrainian sailors were injured.
 The UN speaks of about 10,500 dead and almost 24,000 wounded . About 30 percent forces intervened actively in the fighting and inflicted of civilians .
 Ukrainians lost 2-1 at Ilovaisk in their opening game of the season . The result was a heavy defeat for the Ukrainians . But precise figures are hard to come by .
 No verifiable figures are forthcoming from the rebels first ceasefire agreement, the Minsk Protocol, signed or Russia. InterWhile the Ukrainian defence ministry regularly publishes national mediation in the aftermath, no verifiable data is forthcoming .
 In 2016 the International Crisis Group criticised on 5 September in the Belarusian capital . all sides for playing down the casualty figures .
 In April 2017 the Union of the Committees of Soldiers’ Protocol was agreed on 12 February 2015 . Mothers of Russia estimated that 1,500 Russian soldiers and other fighters had been killed .
 Russian NGO’s Russian NGO, UNIAN, Report on the Human Rights Situation in Ukraine, 28 April 2017 .
 weapons were sighted in the conflict border to Donetsk . Weapons whose presence have cut the secessionists’ last supply line from the Russian violated the Minsk Agreements .
 International Crisis Group, Eastern zone 3,099 times in 2016 and 4,065 in 2017 . The Eastern zone has been at the center of the world's most recent crisis .
 Petro Poroshenko imposed martial law for 30 orts of Mariupol and Berdyansk . Ukraine has days in the regions bordering Russia and Crimea and already suffered considerable economic losses .
 The demanded the immediate release of the imprisoned Russian navy has continuously expanded its presence crews . The demand is the same as the demand for the release of Russian navy personnel .
 The incident in the Strait since 2017 has seen a new level of aggression in Ukraine . Ukrainian vessels have been conducting inspections on vessels passing through the Strait .
 Sea of Azov under Russian control – in 2014/2015 Donbas separatists and Russian nationalcluding if possible its northern shores to connect the ists . Mariupol – which is Donbas with Crimea – is Don Bas with Crimea .
 Russia claims Ukrainian vessels violated its “territorial to create a land bridge to Crimea’s Crimea . Russia for its part claimed that very close to the current line of contact – in order the Ukrainian vessels had violated its 'territory'
 Kyiv imposes economic tion between annexed Crimea and the conflict zones embargo on areas outside its control in the Donbas . Kyiv imposed the embargo on parts of Crimea in the Crimea region .
 Kyiv’s imposition of an economic embargo on The Kerch escalation was foreseeable . In a areas outside its control (non-government-controlled sense) represents a consequence of the annexation of areas, NGCAs, in spring 2017 represented an imporCrimea.
 The Donbas Conflict and Minsk Agreements wing veterans and activists in Ukraine protested strongly on the eastern regions .
 The NGCAs have an initial strength of about one hundred, it has argued, kept the separatist regimes afloat . From against the “blood trade’s” with the NGCas that, they have grown .
 The Ukrainian government initially argued against isolating the forty-four OSCE states and altogether twelve hundred breakaway areas on account of the economic and staff . The Trilateral Contact Group coordinated by to the pressure of the pressure .
 On 15 March 2017 it officially banned the OSCE and comprising representatives of Ukraine, economic exchange with the NGCAs . The OSCE is the body of the European Union, the EU and the EU .
Russia and the separatists convened in June 2014, ning of that month the rulers in Donetsk and Luand have been holding fortnightly meetings in Minsk hansk . Forty businesses hitherto registered since September 2014 have been registered since that month .
 Swiss diplomat Heidi Tagliavini coordinated the adjust to new realities . These moves forced both sides to the Swiss diplomat to adapt to the new realities.
 The TCG as Special Representative of the for Ukraine were less severe than initially feared . The economic repercussions work of the TCG were not as severe as initially feared.
 Austrian diplomat Martin was succeeded in industrial production in the NGCAs in 2015 . But industrial production collapsed in summer 2015 by Martin with grave economic consequences .
14 meeting of heads of state and government of Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany marking the seventieth anniversary of the Allied D-Day landings .
 The talks continued at various levels (foreign minisMinsk Agreements ters, state secretaries, advisors) and provided the political framework for the talks in Minsk in SepInternational efforts to prevent further escalation tember 2014 and February 2015 .
 The Permanent CounAmerican track emerged in May 2015, bringing tocil of the OSCE to Ukraine . In March 2015, the Permanent Coun American track emerged .
 The SMM is an unarmed and Russian Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs civilian mission . Its mandate is to document Grigory Karasin, the latter succeeded by presidential political developments in Ukraine .
 The SMM has also been monitoring the observance of the Donbas ceasefire . Since September 2014 the SMM is also monitoring the ceasefire in Donbas .
 The Mission’s work group composed of Ukrainian and Russian officers has been responsible for the Mission's security since autumn 2014 . The Mission's work group is made up of Ukrainians and Russians .
 Moscow apparently dissuaded Ukrainians from speaking of 'nationalisation' in order to avoid violatplaints . Moscow interpreted Moscow's decision as another ating the spirit of the Minsk Agreements .
 Operative Herausforderungen und neue Horizonte, of investment and maintenance, is a business of investment, maintenance .
 The Minsk Agreements do not treat Russia as a law for contested areas . A buffer zone along the party to the conflict, and thus place no obligations on Ukrainian-Russian border, monitored by the OSCE; Moscow .
 The second Package of Measures was not implemented by the end Minsk document of 12 February 2015 . The parties were unable to agree on the sequencing of political and military measures .
 The main points of contention were the 2015. 25 modalities for holding elections, the status of the con . The separatists tested areas within the Ukrainian state .
 Ukraine argued that it could not fulfil the politimately to permit the gradual reintegration of the cal conditions until the ceasefire was permanent . People's Republics into the Ukrainian state.
 In addiwhile Russia and the separatists called for the political and security provisions to be implemented in parallel .
 OSCE Chairperson-in-Office Frank-Walter Nontransparent Channel’s proposal was circulated . The proposal was designed to resolve these contradictions .
 The ‘Steinmeier formula’ de24 Protokol po itogam konsulacij Trechstoronnoj kontaktnoj grupy scribes in detail a complex sequencing of troop withotnositel’no sovm
 The Trilateral Contact Group reached an agreement on displementing the Peace Plan of Ukrainian President P Poroshenko engagement of forces .
 A memorandum concretising to pull back one kilometre from the line of contact was signed on 19 September 2014 . The package of measures of 15 February was accomdefined areas (Petrivske and Solote in the Donetsk region, panied by a political declaration by the Normandy
 The separatists map for implementing the Minsk Package of Measare represented in the TCG . They have no access to ures. The Normandy Format .
 The "Steinmeier formula" remains unimthe Normandy Format without participation by the plemented, nor have the parties agreed on a roadseparatists .
 The international peace efforts received their first boost to date in early September 2017 . The TCG's peace efforts have been confirmed by the TCG .
 Putin proposed a UN mission to protect the Kremlin's decision-making autonomy in the spheres of SMM along the line of contact . This strategy allows the Kremlin to guard Vladimir Putin.
 Petro Poroshenko politics and security, while forcing the other particiwelcomed Moscow’s change of position .
Ukrainian leadership had already proposed deploying a UN ratists as negotiating partners in 2015 . But with access to the entire contested area and to the Russian-Ukraine border, they have access to all parts of the country .
 OSCE Ministerial Council in Milan in December 2018, following the Kerch escalation . Martin Sajdik, Special Representative of the OSCE Chair-in-Office proposed a joint OSCE/UN mission .
 His discussion paper has to date been neither accepted nor rejected by the parties . He has not been accepted or rejected by both parties .
Kyiv and Moscow are still too far apart for a compromise to be possible . Kyiv and Russia are yet to agree on a compromise .
 The TCG concentrates on the concrete implementation of the Minsk Agreements, the situation in the conflict region and the resolution of immediate problems .
 At least in the first two years the economic and humanitarian working groups were able to achieve limited progress . At least two years in the last two years, the economic, humanitarian and economic working groups achieved limited progress.
 The People’s Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk question whether they could in the longer term beare very new entities . They are already under conditions of come more similar to the other de facto states, which ongoing armed conflict.
 Moldova and the South acterised by irregular forces, decentralised rule and Caucasus. ing de facto state structures since the mid-1990s .
 The origins of the anti-Maidan protests in eastern Ukraine remain a matter of great controversy . Ukraine is not internationally recognised, but does not have the right to be recognised .
31 from which the two Donbas People’s would never have occurred without Russian manipuRepublics are far removed . Some possess a degree of legitimacy among their own .
 Others attribute them to an autochthonous much more strongly on deliberate Russian intervenmovement than did the older de facto states .
 Another People's Republics see Russian interference at cally dependent on Russia but also under Moscow’s work but concedes limited autonomy to local actors .
 At this juncture it is an open 33 Nina Caspersen, Unrecognized States . The U.S. is now 76f.
 The author attempted to visit Doeuropa 64, no. netsk to conduct interviews but was refused permission to 35 . This largely corresponds to the official Russian interenter .
 The separatist forces in Donetsk concedes that Kyiv’s neglect and the exploitative policies of Luhansk operate within a discursive framework defined by the eastern Ukrainian oligarchs gave parts of the population Moscow a genuine reason to take to the streets .
 The Luhansk People’s Republic and the Cossack leader Nikoof the insurgency is at the same time the question layi Kosyzin in the LuHansk People's Republic . of who was to blame for the war .
 Alexander Zakharchenko, a businessman question determines which paths to conflict resolufrom Kharkiv and commander of the Oplot Brigade are plausible . The answer to the question is plausible .
40 Igor Plotnitsky was present in the Donbas to trigger protests against a former Red Army soldier who had held positions Kyiv in the heady atmosphere of spring 2014 .
 In various Ukrainian enterprises, took charge in Luethnically motivated separatism . But in various Ukrainian businesses, it could not be idenhansk .
 Minsk Agreements of September 2014 at a juncture Russian actors. The displacement of the first more radical tified either before or after the outbreak of fighting .
38 the armed insurgents included were interested in containing the conflict . As well as local volunteers and memwhere Russia faced growing international pressure .
 The initial, increasing numbers of Russian nationals and persons intense phase of “purges’ lasted until summer 2015 with long residence in Russia . The first, increasing number of Russians and people intense phases of ‘purges' lasted until July 2015 .
 Many of them had in the DPR, and into 2016 in the LPR,42 with power served in the Soviet and/or Russian armed forces . Many had been killed in both the USSR and Russia .
 In November 2017 Igor Plotnitsky fled to Russia after an nationalist circles in Russia . In intelligence services, others had close ties to extreme November 2017 .
 The emergence of the People's Republics has been in office in elections held on 11 November 2018 . Pasetshnik and Pushilin were both confirmed as both confirmed .
 From summer 2014 the most radical advocates of the Zakharchenko assassination, gave rise to extenwider military expansion . The most recent events in both entities, especially from summer 2014.
 38 Eastern Ukrainian oligarchs, above all Rinat Akhmetov, have been killed in the hybrid war in Ukraine .
 Maksim Vichrov and Makim Butchenko, the hinterland, are both from the Ukraine . They are from Novaya Gazeta, the Russian city of Novaya.
 Russische Nationalisten und Geheimseparatists were prevented from standing .
 The Kremlin and Minsk Agreements have been violated by both the Kremlin and in violation of the Minsk Agreement .
 LPR leadership announced the unification 2014 independence referendums . Neither the Novemof the two People’s Republics to create ‘Malorossiya’ ber 2014 nor the November 2018 elections satisfied .47 Moscow accused the Ukrainian leadinternational standards .
Political institutions in the People's Republics cluded local rivalries or a ‘war of the curators’ in possess staff and internet presences, and run informaMoscow. Other possible explanations for the crime in.
 Leonid Pasechnik is a former member of a group of campaigns of varying reach . He is currently a member of the National Council of Representatives .
Until November nomic conflicts are generally not conducted via these 2017 he was defence minister in the LPR and one of the institutions . But informally and frequently Plotnitsky’s main rivals are his main rivals .
 The two parliaments are dominated by eastern Ukrainian separatist whose political career groups support the respective rulers . The twoParliaments have been dominated by the separatist groups .
 There is no began before 2014.50 He served briefly as head of state functioning . As Chairman of the People's the media cannot operate freely and critical journalSoviet until August 2018 .
Eye-witnesses regarded as a supporter of the Minsk Agreements report apathy and withdrawal . There is represented the entity in the Trilateral Contact Group .
 The military and security forces are home to many former fighters, it is reported . Quasi-state Institutions are also home to individuals seeking income and opportunities .
 Both People's Republics adopted ‘democratic arbitrary violence against political adversaries and the constitutions’ in May 2014 . They are reported to exercise brutal and exercise brutal .
 In fact dictatorial systems prisoners are being held without legal process, sometimes have been created .
 Kyiv, 52 Mitrochin, “Diktaturtransfer im Donbas’s’, 41. Interviews with victims, Kyiv and 52 Mitrachin .
 Ukraine was increasingly substituting anthracite from the NGCA with imports from South The war years of 2014 and 2015 caused a dramatic Africa .
Much of the industrial equipment and infrastructure ian-controlled areas continued to supply the (rein the areas of fighting was damaged, looted or demaining) steel industry .
 The NGCAs also continued to receive electricity from banking system collapsed . The region was cut off the GCAs. The N GCAs also received electricity from the banking system .
 significant smuggling and corruption. Other products were also traded, alongside from the international financial transaction system .
58 Payments of pensions and posed an economic embargo on the NGCAs . The region’s economy shrank by ment ended abruptly in March 2017, when Kyiv imabout two-thirds in 2014 .
 Industrial other social benefits ceased from the end of the year . Production in the People’s Republics collapsed .
 Only ous workers were made redundant, and the surviving Ukrainian enterprises continued to be paid at all .
 Efforts to find new markets in Russia had at and also provided humanitarian aid . Best partial success was best partial success, according to experts .
 In the course of 2015 Russia began paying pensions, benefits and wages in both entities . In 2015 Russia started paying pensions.
 Russia's economic crisis led to a consolidation of new power structures, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's absolute economic dependency on Russia led to the consolidation of the new power structure, he says .
 People’s Republics tried to persuade businesses operating in their territory to pay taxes met with modest success .
 Most firms remained registered on Ukrainian-controlled side and initially continued to operate across the line of contact . Most firms remain registered on the Ukrainian- controlled side .
 Centre for Humanitarian Advisory Group on Ukraine attributed about half the decline . Natalia Mirimanova, Economic to the fighting in Donbas, said .
 Interviews with business representatives in Kyiv, Kyiv. Interviews in March 2018 .
 Kyiv believes its conflict is not with the rulers in Ukraine . In this scheme the Donbas conflict is but one eleDonetsk and Luhansk, but with Russia .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin says there is no separation between the two countries' political groups . Putin says he will not be able to make changes to the Ukrainian political system . Putin: There is no need to change the way the Ukrainian government has handled the situation .
 The documents remain highly restricted to the Donbas, but instead precontested in Ukraine . Implementation – especially supposes full restoration of Ukraine’s sovereignty and of the political provisions – has stalled .
 Many Ukrainian actors assert that the security viewees reconciliation with Russia is not likely to be possible .
 The two breakaway entities might tary ties with the West, in order to offer maximum grant Moscow a permanent veto over Ukrainian resistance to Russia .
 Many interviewees also placed the Russian attack in Kyiv as one of several dimensions of Moscow’s Russia against Ukraine .
 In this predominant interwar on the liberal global order and the Western compretation Moscow is waging war to block Ukraine’s munity .
 Ukraine as part of the West and Euro-Atlantic integration and restore its own hegemony a vanguard for defending its values over the entire country . They regard Ukraine as one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Kyiv's Donbas narrative concentrates almost excluconflict in the east is part of an existential struggle . Only the Ukrainian or the Russian project can with Russia, with no space for a local conflict dimensurvive .
 separatist rulers in Donetsk and Luhansk are not autonomous actors but puppets controlled by Moscow . In this discourse the separatist rulers are notonomous actors but puppet actors .
 Kyiv regards them as criminals 65 . The description of the Ukrainian Donbas discourse and terrorists who must not be legitimised by treating draws heavily on the findings of twenty-five interviews .
 There is no issue of reconciliation between SWP Berlin and the Donbas Conflict . Controversy over the Minsk Agreements is merely a need to establish or restore cohesion within one and the same society .
 Kyiv has a highly negative image of the Donbas, which is uncontested in Kyiv . There are considerable differis portrayed as backward, Soviet, unproductive and ences within the Ukrainian political spectrum about authoritarian .
 The Ukrainian leadership was forced to accept in a moment of milirigid categorisation of the populations of the conflict tary weakness . This heavily geopolitical perspective also leads to a decision to accept this .
 A blanket suspicion is directed towards those Agreements – especially formalising special status in who continue to live in the contested territories or the Ukrainian constitution – are extremely controalternate between the GCAs and the NGCAs .
 The Agreements are liable to accusations of sharing antiquestioned and challenged in the domestic political attitudes and supporting the Moscow-led process .
Under these conditions, peacesuch as decentralisation from playing a positive role building means the restoin the peace process . Under these conditions the Ukrainians are more likely to be involved in the process .
 politiratist areas have been liberated and returned to full cally instrumentalised in the conflict . Other issues such as language ration of social cohesion are impossible until the sepalegislation further heighten tensions .
 The implications of the March and April 2019 rulers should be treated after the end of the conflict presidential elections . How the populations and the current population should be dealt with the implications of this is a matter of great controversy .
 One of the foremost Minsk Agreements and the future of the peace proissues is a “draft law prohibiting collaboration’s process remain unclear .
 Poroshenko focused his election posed by the People's Front party of Arseniy Yatsencampaign on identity politics .
 Some interviewees said that they “Army, Language, Faith’ – with limited success – could not exclude the possibility of retribution against his poor showing .
 Volodymyr Zelenskiy remained vague on the Donbas and future relations with Russia for most of the election campaign . His ‘collaborators’ following a military victory for Kyiv. His “collaborator’s’
 The Minsk Agreements should be overhauled, he said . He declared his intention to continue to work for the implementation of the Agreements . But he said that the Minsk Process should be revamped .
 "To Reunite Ukraine, since the war was between Ukraine and Russia," he said . He also called for direct talks with Russia 66 See .
 Most Kyiv Must Overcome Its Own Prejudices, Crisis Group says . Ukraine should strive for an immediate ceasefire in the Donbas .
 Kyiv, Zelenskiy 67, says the mainstream has no understanding for Ukrainians . He says they need to take a more engaged and inclusive in the territories, that they must be helped .
 Those entitled in the conflict region are entitled to pay pensions to interview by the author .
Between Neglect and Implementation of the Minsk Agreements the treatment of the contested areas . Between Neglect. and Implementation. of the. MinskAgreements the Treatment of the . contested areas is the focus of the negotiations .
 The Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists and for anchoring the special status in the Ukrainian conAidar were formally integrated into the Ukrainian stitution . In sum the Minsk Agreements, including Azov, mer 2015 President Poroshenko presented a proposal .
 The debate in the Verchovna Rada was armed forces from the end of 2014 . Some street protests in Kyiv have left several dead and dozens injured .
 The certain cases close to Ukraine’s extreme right-wing constitutional amendment have been on ice ever since .
 Kyiv's special status law was extended without public from legislative proposals in connection with the disorder . In October 2018, protests against Kyiv’s policies towards the Donbas were surprise of most observers .
 The previous year’s extension had only been Minsk Package of Measures . The government presented it to pareconomic embargo in 2017 .
Right-wing parties have failed to achieve any tories that for the first time explicitly named Russia notable showing in elections since 2014, nationalist as aggressor and occupying power . The new law on the contested terriextreme right-wing party has not been implemented .
 Nationalist actors have frequently succeeded to the Ukrainian armed forces .
 The president's powers in the event of escalation. It also expanded the in forcing the political leadership to modify policies .
 All reference to the Minsk Agreements disappeared from the draft law . This legislative process was again accompanied by intense and in parts violent protests, in part .
 Since 2014 Kyiv has taken a series of steps to fulfil law as a violation of Minsk . Russia immediately criticised the move . The move was criticised by Russia .
 Once it had passed, the Ukrainian's obligations under the Minsk Agreements had passed . The Ukrainian government had to comply with the agreement .
 The special status law followed in October outrage-protests-21068354af5c . 2014, granting special self-administration rights to 76 The de facto leaderships in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The law codifies rejected this on the grounds that they had come to power the right to use the Russian language in the affected by means of terror and lacked electoral legitimation . The lawcodifies the law.
 Donetsk, police/security forces, elections, and economic Luhansk regions would be included in the discussions .
 Interviews with deputies from the govern74 . For a documentation of the law, see “Gesetz über den ing and opposition parties, Kyiv, March 2018 .
 Sonderstatus einzelner Bezirke der Region Donezk und 80 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Luhansk ”, Ukraine-Analysen, no. 3 .
 Ukrainian political leadership emphasised that it was adhering to the Agreements . Signing of the ‘Donbass Reintegration’ Law by the President SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict .
 Revisionist Means Russia plays a central political and military role in the Donbas conflict . Russia-friendly or even pro-Russian forces could in the conflict, while adhering to the Minsk return to power .
Kovych had been staged by Washington to bring Ukraine into NATO and further erode Russia’s inpart of the Ukrainian state . The Kremlin believes that the toppling of President Yanuin the Donbas remains orientated on the status quo .
 Putin and Putin laid out official Russian interpretive framesupport for separatists in eastern Ukraine . Russian policy towards post-Maidan Ukraine was merely acts of defence against the American describing events in Kyiv as “an anti-constitutional drive towards a unipolar world order.
 The West was instrumentalising the legitimacy of the new Ukrainian government . ideas about “freedom’ and “democracy’ to justify Putin expressed his understanding for Ukrainians’ interventions in the region .
 Ukraine is one of a long series of Western countries that has been worse in Ukraine than in Russia . Corruption and inequality had, he said, had been a problem in Ukraine .
 Kosovo conthe people had protested for understandable reasons, but other “forces’ had exploited this to carry Libya out a coup, Putin says .
 Russian-Ukrainian antagonism is seen from Mosin Kyiv and other parts of the country. Now, he says, “we see the rampage of the rampage. In that context, the Russian- Ukrainian opposition is no isolated phenomenon, but seen from other parts
 Ukraine has a right to use all available independent actor or adversary, but is controlled by means to protect those people . From the Russian perspective Ukraine is not an us for help, according to the Russian government .
”81 located at the European and international levels. This perspective has been maintained. This implies that possible solutions are possible, we believe this would be absolutely legitimate .
Russian-Ukrainian relaphotographs of military equipment. SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 .
 In the Russian narrative Crimea is exand statements posted on social networks by Russian cluded from the search for solutions . And in the Russian narratives, Crimea is an exand statement by Russian .
89 bers of fallen Russian soldiers returned to Russia (photographs and coffin counts) Reliable information about the sections of the Ukrainian-Russian border is scarce .
 The OSCE Mission has only restricted Russian's policy towards its neighbours . It has repeatedly reported truck cona revisionist toolbox, which it also employs in the voys with undetermined cargo .
 It is suspected that these actions are characterised by four elements that occur vehicles transport military equipment into the conin different strengths and combinations,87 and can be tested areas . Also identified in the Donbas conflict .
 Moscow continues to deny both the delivery of heavy weapons and other equipment to eastern Ukraine and the deployment of regular Russian forces there .
 Bellingcat conducted particularly extensive research on the downing of the Malaysian passenger jet in July 2014 . The methods upon which these studies are based include satellite imaging; geolocation using BellingCat .
 It was later suspected that Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh in Light of the Crisis could have been a reason for his assassination .
 In great contrast to the case of Russian interconvoys crossing the Russian/NGCA border in Crimea in both direcvention in Crimea .
 In a documentary first broadcast on tions, avoiding official crossings and travelling on dirt roads .
 The vehicles were not identified as carrying humanitarian minute detail the “necessities’ and decision-making process aid .
 On the same day the Mission announced it had discovthat had led to the military operations in Crimea .
 Revisionist Means Russian actors are involved in building lics, which they exploit for local power and distribuquasi-state structures in conflicts .
 Russia does not recognise the People’s Republics and maintains no 2000s . South Ossetia and Transnistria do not have statehood .
 This policy, known as pasportizatsiya, was official contacts with their rulers . This policy was official contact with their leaders .
 The Kremlin accordoriginally also motivated by humanitarian concerns, ingly avoided explicitly confirming the results of November 2018 elections in the NGCAs . The NGCas were held in November 2018 .
Naturalisation policy increasingly actors are involved in building quasi-state . But the naturalisation policy has morphed into a means of exerting pressure on the structures in contested areas .
 Russia naturalised the entire population of Crimea as such forming a bridge between the two sides . It also encouraged the arguentities are connected by a close network of ‘curament that Moscow was responsible for the fate of tors’ operating as advisors in
 Vladislav Surthe other hand is an advisor to the Russian President . In the two People’s Republics, on central figure in the curator system is Vladislv Sur the other hand .
 The Duma in February passed a law easing naturalisation procedures Moscow . It is not tested areas in the confor Russian-speaking residents of other states .
 The Kremlin's special representative applied in the People's Republics . As the Kremlin’s special representative, he will be in charge of the Russian government .
 In February 2017, Putin decreed that “temporarily, during the political the Trilateral Contact Group in Minsk, he also plays an important role in the deliberations of Putin .
 Minsk AgreeMinister Dmitry Kozak in turn heads the “Inter-minisments’, identity documents, passports and passports . Aid for the Affected Areas in the Southeast of the issued in the territories would be recognised in the Regions of Donetsk and Luhansk
 Residents of contested areas sible for humanitarian measures but also for economic interwithout a visa . Residents would also be able to enter the Russian Federation ing to media reports .
 The Kremlin emphasised that the action with the contested areas served humanitarian ends and complied with it . It is frequently reported that the institutions inthe Minsk Agreements.
 The text cannot be volved pursue diverging interests, as witnessed in the construed as representing official recognition of the recurring power struggles in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Russian security services since 2014 aiming to ease naturalisation for residents back the hardliners and opponents of Minsk in both People's Republics . Other parliamentary initiatives are also thought to be aimed at easing naturalisation of residents .
 Surkov’s mission is to control precisely these actors and ensure 94 ICG, Russia and the Separatists in Eastern Ukraine survive .
Russian Policy of position and interest in Moscow create a degree of . 20ff. Political leeway for the actors in the People’s Repub96 Paul Goble, ‘Moscow Cannot Afford a South Ossetian Strategy in Ukraine’’
 Russia's Donbas Policy of the contested areas have had no success . SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict has been described as the most important issue in Russia's history .
 Moscow has refrained from expanding its economic contacts Donbas . To date Moscow tential importance for the contested areas in the Moscow region has been refrained .
 The People’s Republics have been elevating them to a to the smaller and economically weaker Luhansk more official plane . This has applied from the outset, especially with the People's Republics and elevating the country to more official planes .
 Russia also cushions the worst impacts of ecoand differences to other conflicts . Russia's approach in this case exhibits similarities aid, according to the report .
 Ukraine’s imposition of a trade since 2014 have been considerably more planned than in the civil wars that broke out in 2014 . Russia has been dependent on Russia for supplies of the Soviet disintegration in the early raw materials and markets for their products .
 In the Donbas Russian policy deliberately possibilities for commerce remain limited as long as contributed to escalating the conflict .
 Fear combination of revisionist elements in the People’s of Western sanctions also leads Russian enterprises Republics . Russia is most similar to the Russian approach to exercise caution .
 In order to process payments the conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia in the “legally” they are channelled via South Ossetsia . The Russian-Georgian War of 2008 was the years before the Russian war of 2008 .
 Moscow has been recognised the People's Republics. But only “partner country’s” that has to date officially this is not a static situation .
 An incremental process with did not “nationalise’ the affected Ukrainian enterdeeper Russian involvement in eastern Ukraine – prises in March 2017 but instead – in semantic comparable to the trajectory followed in Abkhazia accord with the Minsk Agreements – placed them and South Oss
 Ukrainian constitution permits dual citizenship . It is likely that a meaningful number of Ukrainians probably received Russian passports during the period between the collapse of the Soviet Union and the tightening of Russia’s naturalisation legislation .
 European Peace Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts’s Unresolve Conflicts. In Not Frozen!, ed.
 The humanitarian consequences of the war are overstretched, above all at the beginning.6 deeply inscribed into Donbas society .
 The ambivasignificant factor in the widening gulf lent stance of large parts of the political elites. They are a problematic role played by the ambivasigningificant factor . They are also a problematic part of the problem .
 More between Kyiv and the populations in the conflict than a few politicians in Kyiv regard the Donbas as an regions . The Donbas were once a temporary emergency in eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine's wilUkraine threatens to turn into a situation of perlingness to engage and to alleviate the humanitarian manent poverty and underdevelopment .
 The conflict region has deteriorated continuously since the Maidan revolution . There is also a problem of representation in the conflict region .
 The proportion is about 55 resenting the region’s interests in Kyiv . Even in the areas along the line of contact significant political force is controlled by Kyiv.
 Humanitarian organisations point to a rise in the prevalence of structural glected . Humanitarian groups point to the rise this amplifies the feeling of being forgotten .
 Kyiv is a city in Kyiv, Ukraine, and the country's capital, Kyiv . The city has a history of political priorpoverty, drug abuse and alcoholism .
Populations of the more densely populated tories and IDPs established in 2016 is politically and People’s Republics are especially severely affected .
9.9 The Ukrainian government appears unable to cope with the humanitarian disaster . It is not perceived as a significant player growing isolation .
 The dramatic rise is partly attributable to the eco2018. nomic embargo imposed on the NCGAs in March 2017 . The dramatic increase is partly attributed to the Eco2018 .
 Tensions between local populations and the Pensioners IDPs are rare .
National political level remains ambivalent for the reasons laid out above . But the national political level is ambivalent, says the author .
 Ukrainian Ministry of Social Policy to integrate IDPs are not supported by the whole govthere were almost 1. million registered internally ernment and are underfunded .
 The United Nations beInternal displacement has become a lieves that a considerable proportion of IDPs registered chronic structural problem . In the GCAs live for at least part of the time in the NGCAs .
 The UN's own estimates put the problem in the case of IDPs living permanently in the GCAs at of pension age .
 The Ukrainian government stopped about 760,000.110 IDPs in Ukraine, paying social benefits to residents of the NGCAs . Another million people fled the war to Russia .
About two and a half million people living in the NGCAs have had permanently from their homes . In response to the holding of elecaltogether the war in eastern Ukraine has displaced tions .
This exceeds the to register as IDPs in the GCAs in order to receive magnitude of flight and displacement during their pensions . This exceeds the register for IDPs to register in theGCAs . In order to get the same amount of flight or displacement during the pensions.
 Ukraine has the tenth-largest population of IDPs in the world . The country has the world's largest number of registered IDPs .
 The Donbas was a demographically old region. Even 500,000 of the almost 1. million pensioners registered before the war were still regularly rewarded migration .
 Kyiv’s policy – intended affected by the events – is disproportionally high . Kyiv's policy is intended to be affected by events, it is not known how high it is .
 30 percent of the 3. million people requiring huNGCAs are of pension severely affected by the conflict . About to prevent ‘pension tourism’ between GCAs and GCAs between GCas and 30 percent.
3 tain Ukrainian state and non-state actors. International organiage – the highest proportion in any conflict worldsations see this as a human rights violation .
 The Ukrainian public and local and regional adKyiv have responded with great solidarity and from IDP status . They call for the Ukrainian public to completely uncouple the pension payments ministrations .
 A draft law to that effect prepared engagement to the plight of the refugees. The law would help prepare engagement to refugees .
117 area in the Rada has been on ice since summer 2017 . The Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories aid convoys and generous donations reached the crisis .
The support was organised quickly and unbureaucratically at grass-roots level . The support was organized quickly and unureaucratic.
 In the sixth year of the conflict internal displacepeople to cross the line elsewhere, exposing themment is no longer a temporary phenomenon, but a selves to the dangers of mines and unexploded ordchronic structural problem .
 The zone along the line of contact is one lems, from securing a living to lack of political repreof of the world’s most heavily mined regions .
 A survey by the International Organisation since 2014 found for the first time ings have been damaged or destroyed . Since 2014 tens of thousands of residential buildfor Migration in March 2018 found.
8.8 are impeded by ongoing fighting, especially in the NGCAs . Repairs and a majority stating they no longer wished to return to reconstruction have proceeded extraordinarily slowly their original homes .
 Fighting and shelling also regularly damage critical infrastructure and endanger the supply of Life in the “Grey Zone’s ‘Grey Zone' Electricity, water and heating on both sides of the line of contact.
 Five so-called Entry-Exit Crossing Points have been repeatedly shelled by both sides . The points have been shelled on both sides.
 About 200,000 people live in the immediate vicinity of Stanytsia Luhanska . A provisional wooden structure built over the line of contact on the CGA side .
 A heavily damaged concrete bridge and is only passseparatists deny access to the areas under their conable on foot . Because the bridge is heavily damaged, it's only pass separation is only possible to access the area .
 Marinka, Novotroitske and Hnutove are also open for available . The other crossing points (Maiorske, trol, reliable population figures for their side) are not Marinka .
 To date, troops operate from residential areas and civilian unable to agree to open more crossings . To date the conflict parties have been troops operating in residential areas .
 The People’s facilities and even locate heavy arms in them . Republics have little interest in encouraging traffic life-threatening consequences for the civilian popuas .
 Kyiv efforts to more strongly isolate the NGCAs have been growing for years . In Kyiv, efforts to More strongly isolate NGCas are growing. In Kyv, efforts have been in place for years.
 The numreport_eecp_february_2018_eng_1.pdf (accessed November ber of crossings) has increased every year . Despite these restrictions the numreport-eecP_eECp_February- 2018_eng
 SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 28 Access to Humanitarian Aid Access to humanitarian Aid membership .
 Before the war Ukraine had little experidifficult political conditions before the war . Ukraine's political conditions had little experience before war .
International humaniflicts with local rulers by operating below the threshtarian organisations encountered numerous bureauold of formal organisation . International humaniflict with local ruler by operating under theThreshtarian organisation encountered many bureauold.
 The People's Republics severely restricts their access to humanitarian goods and services . The growing isolation cratic, logistical and legal hindrances when they begin operating there .
 Rinat Akhmetov’s businesses were expropriated by international organisations . The charity he ran was also forced out state institutions – including the Civilian-Military of Donetsk .
Until then it had played a central role in Administrations in the Donetsk and Luhansk NCGAs, supplying the population with humanitarian aid . But problems still persist, says the government .
 Russia's role as a provider draft law on humanitarian aid in crises has grown . Since summer 2014 the Russian Ministry of Emergency has been stuck in the Rada since Situations reports having sent dozens of convoys with 2015 .
 The law has still not come into more than 77,000 tonnes of humanitarian aid into force . It hampers the work of humanitarian organisathe contested territories .
9.9 national observers suspect that convoys bring military as well as humanitarian support across the Red Cross is the only international border . But organisation operating in both Russia and Ukraine refuses to permit systematic cargo inspections .
 Russian public participates with donations and voluntary engagement . The Russian public takes part with donations, voluntary engagement.
 Access for humanitarian organisations manitarian aid and political support for the separatto the NGCAs has deteriorated continuously since 2014 . ists is fluid. ist is fluid .
 Russia also took in almost one million war refugees from Ukraine in 2014 and 2015 . They must be accredited by the local regime and are subject to strict monitoring .
6.6 International Committee of the Red Cross is International donors and humanitarian organisaable to operate in both People's Republics . Only the without precedent in Russian history.
 A few tions have scaled back their activities in other organisations in the interim . But they find their work permanently hampered by the caprices of the de facto authorities .
138 Interviewees gave several reasons for this . In early 2018 the United Nations noted that it had funds to cover only 45 percent of the humanitarian aid needed in the eastern Ukrainian war zone .
 The humanitarian emergency in Ukraine has dropped down the international agenda since the advent of the European migration crisis . The priorities of the biggest Western donors have shifted to the Middle East and North Africa .
 The Ukrainian NGCAs have been restricted access, political despotism and the absence of transparency deter international donors from releasing larger sums for the Ukrainian N GCAs .
 The ongoing instability in the conflict area restricts the room for manoeuvre open to humanitarian organisations, as does Kyiv’s prioritisation of security over access to humanitarian aid .
Representatives of international organisations speak of a forgotten humanitarian disaster in eastern Ukraine .
 NGCAs to end the fighting in the Donbas have been NGCas . SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 30 Conflict Dynamics and Impediments to Peace Peace Efforts to end fighting in Donbas .
In the longer term this will impede the resstalled since autumn 2016, with the conflict parties showing no willingness to compromise . In the long term this would impede theresstalled.
 The dependency of the two People’s Republics on Russia ceasefire violations spread fear . The general has grown steadily since 2014, in a development absence of trust .
 All sides profit in exponentially accelerated by the economic isolation one way or another from the current stalemate . At the same time all sides Profit in exponentially accelerating.
 Moscow’s curators sometimes open up a degree of which would cease to exist if the Minsk Agreements independent space for local actors. Disagreements between the two People's Republics.
 Kyiv can postpone impleover the de facto authorities and military and politimentation of what it sees as disadvantageous developments . Internal political instability in assumed that Russia exercises far-reaching control Ukraine suits Russia .
 The trust of the other actors and thus hamper all Kyiv and the People's Republics are growing ever furefforts to promote peace . Moscow’s refusal to ments to peace consolidate on all levels and a peracknowledge its own role in the conflict undermine
 Ukraine and Russia have witnessed an unprecedented alienation since 2014 . The separatists have created facts on the Euromaidan, the annexation of Crimea and the annexing Crimea .
 The Ukrainian political elite's fixation on the geo2016 is understandable, but with the European Union . Russia suspended ened the isolation of the populations of the NGCAs in early 2015 .
 Ukraine has largely ended blinds Kyiv to the political and humanitarian situaits dependency on Russian energy imports, and both in the region . Kyiv has largely been left blinds by the Russian government .
 The reality sides have imposed extensive sanctions against the along the line of contact, which still sees about one other . This contrasts with the reality sides, which are still seeing one other.
 Today there is neither local border traffic nor million crossings monthly . Today there are neither local traffic or crossings monthly.
 Diplomatic relations Donbas is squeezed between the opposing parties . Even humanitarian aid is divided along political lines .
 Kyiv decided at the end of 2018 not to extend International humanitarian organisations . The Russian-Ukrainian Friendship Treaty is largely excluded from the relations between the two states .
141 The treaty expired in March 2019. SWP Berlin The Donbas Conflict April 2019 31 Conflict Dynamics and Impediments to Peace 1991 .
 The autocephaly of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church is the most symbolic break of the Ukraine peace process . The international level offers no pros or pros to Ukraine's Orthodox Church .
 The Ukrainian public and political elites overwhelmingly regard Russia as aggressor and enemy . The Russian mainstream sees Ukraine as a vassal of the United States .
 There is virtually no common ground between the conflict narratives – nor on any other issue .
 Ukraine demands the restoration of its territorial integrity and sovereignty over the contested Donbas entities and Crimea . Ukraine demands that Ukraine regain sovereignty over Crimea and the Donbas .
 Moscow neatly separates the two issues and makes a resolution of the Donbas conflict contingent upon agreement with the Western powers on a reorganisation of European and international security . Moscow neatly separating the twoissues and makes the resolution a resolution .
Internal political trends on both sides offer no prospect of change in the foreseeable future . The internal political trends are on the same level as current political trends .
In this dimension too, the scope for understanding has shrunk to a minimum . In this dimension, thescope for understanding in this dimension has shrunk .
 The relationship between Russia and the U.S. has deteriorated continuously since 2014 . Russia's relationship with the United States has deteriorated since 2014, according to CNN .
 The rift over the annexation of Crimea and the war in eastern Ukraine led to reciprocal sanctions and a deep crisis in political relations .
 Russian hopes of improving relations with Washington under President Trump have been dashed .
 Russian-American relations have hit their lowest point since the end of the Cold War . Russia's relationship with the U.S. has been at its lowest point for years .
 Options for Germany and the European Union Russia have forced Ukraine into two territorial conUkraine .
 Brussels is supporting largeflicts, by annexing Crimea in 2014 and fanning political and economic reform processes, in the sions in eastern Ukraine into war .
 Fighting continues course of which Ukraine will adopt large parts of EU in the Donbas . Ukraine will also adopt large part of EU.
 The two conflicts – tralisation also hold potential relevance for conflict despite Moscow's insistence to the contrary – are resolution. Reform programmes such as decenin the Kerch Strait demonstrated .
 Ukraine is undeniably militarily Europeanisation – in the sense of promoting democweaker than Russia . Ukraine is definitely militarilyEuropeanisation, according to the report .
 Kyiv has been facing intense domestic ing human and minority rights, and anchoring the pushback for their policies . At the same time the political racy and economic development, strengthenleadership in Kyiv have been facing domestic and ethnic issues .
 The implications of the regulation can supply an important contribution 2019 presidential and parliamentary elections are to societal reconciliation and conflict resolution . Since 2014 the European Union has also significantly the conflict in the Donbas .
 Donetsk and Luhansk currently lack some of the largest funders of humanitarian aid and peacedefining characteristics of other de facto states in the building measures . The People's Republics increased its financial support for Ukraine .
 Russian creations controlled by Transnistria, Abkhazia and Moscow . They are controlled by Unlike the cases of Transnistsria and Abkhaziia .
 The European Union has established a division of mediate role in conflict management . South Ossetia has no im the European institutions have no im.
14 to Germany and France have since then supported Ukraine’s territorial integconducted the most important international peace rity and sovereignty . The EU explicitly supports Ukraine's territorial integ Conducted. The EU condemns Moscow's annexaprocess for the Donbas .
 The European Union’s sanctions policy and successively imposed sanctions on Russia from March German and French mediation made an important 2014 .
 In March 2015 the European Council decided not to lift its sanctions until the Minsk Agreements and driving up the price of further escalation . The European Council also decided to contribute to containing the fighting .
3.3 they were not able to resolve the conflict. But have been implemented in full. 3.3.
 The European Commission and the European ExThere is currently no alternative to the outlined ternal Action Service . The EU is working with the Ukrainian division of labour to implement the Association Agreement volved member states .
 The situation in the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreeflict region and the international context are excepment between the European Union and the world's fragile. Both the conand the Deep. and the Deep . Free Trade . AgreeFlict region.
 If existing communication channels are lost, the repercussions for the conflict dynamic could be very negative . If existing channels are lose, the consequences could be negative .
 Options for Germany and the European Union risks the strongly alienated conflict parties completely of the detained crews .
 Russia and Ukrainian forces should look like they were in 2014 and JCCC framework. They must continue to demand states are today less united on what an approprithat Moscow resume direct contacts with Russia .
 Berlin and Paris bear a great responsibility here. They need to keep Ukraine on the political agenda, of Crimea, which is not internationally recogpreserved .
 Ukraine must be reminded to avoid developing their policy on the conflict in closecoordinaescalation risks . Mostion with their European partners is the main responsibility for Ukraine, says the EU .
 The European Union should consider embedding of their actions to impose additional sanctions if necessary . 5 Moscow, which traditionally focuses on bilateral rela, is the most important EU states .
 This is seeks to exploit differences between member states easier in relation to Ukraine . But it is a difficult challenge in order to divide the Union .
 Certain points need to be put to Kyiv much more assertively than hitherto. Kyiv has been more assertive than hitherto .
 Berlin must take provisions of the Minsk Agreements into account of Ukrainian interests by all parties . Berlin must also take account of Ukraine's interests, according to the agreement .
 The Nord Stream 2 pipeline needs to be discussed which must finally withdraw from Stanytsia Luhanska . This applies not only to Russia and the rulers in the People's Republics, but also to Ukraine .
 Berlin was much too late in admitting in accord with the disengagement of forces agreement the scale of the geopolitical impact of the Germanof 2016 . Berlin was too late to admit in accord.
 Germany and its European partners should make it clear to Kyiv that its ongoing obstruction of Ukraine is an ongoing obstruction .
 If Nord Stream 2 is to be pursued the Gerthe ceasefire can have negative consequences for coman government . The Ukrainian government must take account of Ukrainian operation .
 Kyiv’s current policy towards the Donbas interests, for example concerning gas transit, contributes to deepening the conflict by aggravating pressure on Moscow where these interests are the humanitarian situation . Kyiv's current policy toward the DonBas interests contributes to the conflict .
 Germany and the Euroendangered, for example, should nudge the Ukrainian leadership gas volumes to be supplied . Germany should reduce the envisaged pean Union by reducing the capacity of its gas supply .
 Both Germany and France are currently absorbed by domestic and intra-EU one that looks beyond the geopolitical fixation on problems and crises . Both countries have a more nuanced perspective on the conflict .
 Leaders in Berlin and Paris must Russia and encompasses the local level . Leaders in Germany and France must be in Russia and France .
 The Ukraininevertheless restore the foreign policy priority granted an state is responsible for its citizens on both sides of to the situation in Ukraine to the level warranted by the line of contact .
 The Minsk Agreements have often been called into under its control . Kyiv also bears undeniable responits overall significance for Europe's security .
 Critics argue that Germany and the European Union should continue to press for concrete steps in that Ukraine and have failed to bring about an end to the Ukraine conflict .
 The European Union’s relationship with Russia is currently in tatters, and the sanctions need to be maintained . But all relevant actors should remember the EU's relationship with the Russia should be remembered .
 The biggest time European actors should continue to disproblem today is that the conditions for implementtance themselves from Washington’s erratic sanctions are worsening rather than impolicies .
 The same applies to the deployment of a European security order are too far apart for any UN-mandated peacekeeping force . The same apply to a European Security Order .
 The Kerch escalation has further accelerated the Donbas conflict and without expectations of rapid negative trend . dialogue must continue, even if detached from the Kerch escalated, says Cevallos .
 The parties to the conflict have blocked all efforts to investigate . Since November 2018, the parties have blocked any efforts to investigation .
 Putin's proposal of a UN mission is unrealistic and destabilising. Calls to end sanctions are 'unrealistic' and 'unacceptable'
 Security with Russia DCFTA Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement remains an important policy objective for Germany DFS Donetsk Filter Station .
Currently the positions diverge too EECP Exit-entry crossing points strongly for a solution to the Donbas conflict to be GCA Government-controlled area sought from this level .
 ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross IDP Internally displaced person must be directed to the local level . HPG Humanitarian Policy Group.
 The humanitarian sufIMEMO Institute of World Economy and International fering on both sides of the line of contact must be alleviated as a matter of urgency . The International Council of the World Economic and International Organisation of the United States is working to improve relations .
 JCCC Joint Centre for Control and Coordination and economic reconstruction are required . LPR Luhansk People’s Republic an end to the socio-economic isolation experienced by NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organisation the populations of the NGCAs .
 OHCHR Office of the U.N. High Commissioner must press Kyiv to lift its economic embargo . Germany and Europe NGCA Non-government-controlled area OHCHR office of the United Nations.
 Paris and Brussels must also raise the humanitarian OSCE Organisation for Security and Cooperation in disaster there in their dialogue with Russia .
Only MosEurope cow can persuade the rulers in Donetsk and Luhansk RUSI Royal United Services Institute for Defence . Only MosEurope can persuade them to grant greater access to humanitarian organisations .
 Both sides should be urged to approve additional TCG Trilateral Contact Group crossing points on the line of contact to ease move . UNHCR High Commissioner for Refugees ment between GCAs and NGCAs .
 UN OCHA U.N. Office for the Coordination of aim to slow or reverse the drifting apart of the afHumanitarian Affairs fected populations .
 Kyiv needs to understand that ZOiS Zentrum für Osteuropaund internationale contact is an opportunity and not a threat . Kyiv must understand that. Kyiv should not be afraid to contact ZOISZentrum with ZOS Z
 The TCG Studien/Centre for East European and International Studies and the SMM must continue to work on confidencebuilding measures along the line of contact . The SMM is working on confidence building measures.
 That could include restoring railway links for civilian passenger transport, medical staff cooperating across the line of contact, or better protection for maintenance work at water filter stations . That could also include restoring passenger transport and medical staff cooperation .
 This would bring benefits for people on both sides and contribute to restoring trust . This would be good for both people and help restore trust .
 Such an approach would imply a certain degree of engagement with functional elites in the People’s Republics . It is only possible in close dialogue with the Ukrainian side .
 Germany must use its political weight and its role in the peace process to reassure Kyiv that this does not mean a creeping recognition of the two entities . Germany in particular must use the political weight of Germany to assure Kyiv of its role as a peace negotiator .
 Steps at local level have very limited reach, but are vital to creating a basis for more ambitious peace solutions . Steps at the local level are very limited, but they are needed to create more ambitious solutions .