 Secretary of State Rex Tillerson says Russia must make the first moves to rein in separatists and remove its weaponry from eastern Ukraine .
 He vowed that sanctions would remain in place until Moscow reverses its actions and respects the border between the two countries . He also vowed that Moscow would continue its actions until Moscow reversed its actions .
 Moscow and Washington will not improve until Ukraine gets back full control of its territory from separatists, Tillerson says . He characterized Russia's "proxies" in two breakaway provinces as Russia’s “ Proxies’ in two provinces .
 Tillerson was in Kiev with his new special envoy, Kurt Volker, as part of a U.S. push to resuscitate stalled negotiations over ending three years of war .
 Tillerson also squeezed in a meeting with young reformers who are pushing for the government to be more responsible and attractive to foreign investment .
 President Recep Tayyip Erdogan talks with Turkey's President about the fast-moving offensive against the Islamic State militant group in Syria . Then he heads to the Persian Gulf for four days of shuttle diplomacy to mediate a dispute between Qatar and its neighbors .
 The multipronged trip represents something of a pivot for the former Exxon Mobil chief executive . He came to the State Department with no diplomatic experience .
 Tillerson is asserting himself in a more conventional manner for the top U.S. diplomat by throwing himself into an intensive round of diplomatic forays abroad .
 Trump administration is trying to improve relations with Russian President Vladi­mir Putin’s government and break the logjam in peacemaking efforts in a conflict that has brought sanctions for Russia .
 Many Ukrainians are encouraged by the greater U.S. involvement and the appointment of Volker, a seasoned diplomat . Volker has backed sending lethal arms to Kiev to defend itself .
 Ukrainian government has been fighting separatists since 2014 . Russia annexed Crimea and began providing munitions and sending troops to fight alongside Ukrainian rebels .
 In 2015, Germany and France helped broker agreements that provide a road map to peace that requires Russia to withdraw its support for the separatists and Ukraine to give Donbas autonomy .
 The road map was enshrined in the Minsk accords after the city in Belarus where they were negotiated . But the road map has faltered over each side's reluctance to compromise .
 The Ukrainians insist they will amend the constitution to provide the desired autonomy only after Russia backs off . The Ukrainians say they will be able to provide autonomy only if Russia backs out .
 Ukrainians are concerned that President Trump might make a deal with the Russians unfavorable to Ukraine . Volker’s appointment mollifies Ukrainians who have been concerned that the deal is bad for Ukraine .
 Kiev's capital, Kiev, has few signs of a nation at war, apart from occasional military recruiting poster and young men on the streets in uniform .
 Sidewalk cafes are thronged, and fountains in the heart of the city . Protesters encamped for months in 2013 to oust the Russia-friendly government .
 Progress on reforms that can restore confidence in the government is slow. However, progress on reforms is slow, according to the government .
 Some improvements are notable, such as a U.S.-funded program to train, equip and adequately pay police patrol officers so they don't take bribes from motorists .
 corruption is still so endemic that people routinely make small payoffs to university professors to pass an exam . But corruption is so endemic, people make small payments to pass exams or get appointments .
 U.S. can help restore Ukrainian sovereignty in the east and in Crimea, she says . By keeping sanctions against Russia in place and possibly adding new ones, many in Congress want new ones .