 The United Nations S/PV. Sixty-ninth year 7287th meeting Friday, 24 October 2014 .
 Mr Pressman Agenda Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council . The letter contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches.
 Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ivan Simonovic to participate in this meeting .
 Since the last time we met to discuss Ukraine, the results of efforts to end the conflict remain mixed . The last time they met, the result of the last meeting remains mixed .
 On 5 September 2014, under the auspices of the trilateral contact group, the Minsk protocol was signed to halt the violent conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 It outlined specific steps that, if fully implemented, would help the people of Ukraine emerge from the national nightmare that they have endured for much of this year .
 The Minsk memorandum was signed on 19 September . It clarified the implementation of the ceasefire agreement . As a follow-up, the Minsk agreement was signed .
 The Secretary-General joined many other leaders in welcoming those agreements and urging their full implementation .
Despite important agreements, we are here today because much more work needs to be done to ensure that lasting and durable peace prevails in Ukraine . However, despite those important agreements we are still need to do more work .
 Initial steps have been undertaken by various stakeholders to implement the Minsk protocol and memorandum . The ceasefire, the exchange of detained persons and the Ukrainian Government’s steps toward decentralization have been taken .
 The ceasefire agreement is a daily occurrence, with a regular loss of life . However, violation of the ceasefire deal is a regular occurrence .
 We must all collectively make every possible effort to support the urgent implementation of the Minsk protocol and memorandum . We must also support each other's efforts.
Fighting has decreased since 5 September, but sporadic fighting in Donbas continues .
 It is largely concentrated around Donestk airport and the areas around the strategic towns of Luhansk and Mariupol . It is mostly concentrated around the airport and areas around Luhansi.
 Ivan Simonovic will provide us with the latest information on the human rights situation .
 The special monitoring mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe is charged with the responsibility of monitoring and verifying the ceasefire and other provisions of the Minsk protocol .
 The U.N. has engaged continuously with the mission and the OSCE secretariat to identify specific areas where United Nations expertise and resources can be of assistance . The United Nations has also engaged continuously to identify areas where U.S. expertise is needed .
 The international community should fully support the OSCE efforts so as to ensure that it has the full capacity, as well as access, to monitor and to verify the ceasefire and to observe that the Russian-Ukrainian border is fully secure .
 In recent days, we have seen deeply disturbing reports on the alleged widespread use of internationally banned cluster munitions . At least six people were killed and dozens others wounded in eastern Ukraine in recent days .
 The Charge d’affaires also underscored the commitment of the Ukrainian Government to actively assist and participate in an impartial investigation of such claims . The Ukrainian Government also underscores the commitment to participate in the investigation .
 The reports should be urgently and fully investigated, and those found to be responsible should be held accountable . The reports must be urgently investigated, according to reports .
 The humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine, particularly with the onset of winter, remains of the utmost concern . The situation is a concern for the Ukrainian people .
 There are continuing security challenges, which hamper relief efforts . Despite the ceasefire, there are still security challenges .
 The United Nations continues to work to ensure humanitarian access to all people in need . The more volatile areas of eastern Ukraine are among the most volatile parts of the country .
 We urgently need to redouble our efforts to assist the internally displaced and the refugees to cope with the effects of the conflict and prepare for the coming winter . We need to help the refugees and internally displaced to cope.
 We need to ensure that the current humanitarian situation in southeastern Ukraine does not further deteriorate. We also need to be careful to ensure the current situation is not further deteriorating .
 The international community needs the support of the international community and a high level of coordination with the Government of Ukraine .
 Today, we meet only two days before the polls officially open for the early parliamentary elections in Ukraine .
 The elections and local elections are scheduled for 26 October and 7 December . It is more important than ever that the extraordinary legislative elections and the local elections can take place peacefully .
 Reports of alleged violence against several parliamentary candidates and representatives of various parties in the upcoming legislative elections are deplorable .
 armed rebel groups threatening to disrupt voting in eastern Ukraine and to hold their own elections on 2 November, should he be condemned by all .
 All national and international stakeholders should make every effort to support the successful holding of peaceful parliamentary elections . The elections are scheduled to take place in the next two weeks .
 The United Nations welcomes efforts by the Ukrainian authorities to ensure that all Ukrainian citizens have the right to exercise their franchise under the Ukrainian Constitution . The U.N. also welcomes efforts to ensure all Ukrainians can exercise their rights under the constitution .
 The upcoming elections are an important step forward for Ukraine, says the Ukrainian government . The elections will need to be followed by the rapid implementation of the comprehensive political, legal and economic reforms announced by the Ukrainian Government .
 Ukraine must all work together towards the peaceful resolution of the conflict in a manner that upholds Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity .
 eastern Ukraine is just the latest in a string of frozen conflicts in Europe. We cannot and should not allow eastern Ukraine to become just another in a series of frozen conflict in Europe .
 Recent discussions on the conflict in Ukraine on the margins of the 10th Asia-Europe Meeting, held on 16 and 17 October, are welcome .
 The continuing bilateral discussions between the Ukrainian and Russian Presidents on the means to fully implement the Minsk protocol and memorandum remain critical .
 Secretary-General remains committed to using his good offices to help resolve this violent conflict . The Secretary- General remains committed.
 Council will continue to keep the Council informed of the collective efforts of this Organization to help the Ukrainian people and Government to restore peace and stability to their country .
Despite the critical agreements reached in Minsk, we are still far from a sustainable peace in Ukraine . It has become clear in the past weeks that, despite the critical agreement, we're still far far from their full implementation .
 It's incumbent on all actors to fulfil their responsibilities and to refocus their efforts in that direction . It is incumbent on them to fulfil the responsibilities of all actors .
Madam President. I thank you, Madam President, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the human rights situation in Ukraine . The Security Council will discuss the situation in the Ukraine .
 The U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights issued the sixth monthly report on the situation of human rights in Ukraine . The report covered the period from 18 August to 16 September .
 I will then focus on recent developments, since the cut-off date of the report . The report will be published next week .
 Donetsk city, especially around the airport, and Debaltseve in the Donetsk region, are major flashpoints . Some areas in the conflict zone reported calm, such as Luhansk city, artillery, tank and small arms exchanges .
 The actual number is likely to be significantly higher. Let me add that that number covers killings registered by available resources and that number is probably higher .
 approximately nine people have been killed per day since the ceasefire agreement . Approximately nine people are killed a day since ceasefire agreement began .
 At the height of the fighting over the summer, an average of 42 people a day were killed .
 The current death toll per day is close to the level of that from mid-April to mid-July, which was slightly above 10 people a day . The death toll is currently at 10 people per day .
 Residential areas continue to be indiscriminately shelled by various artillery and multiple rocket-launch systems .
 The 1 October rocketing of the centre of Donetsk hit a bus and killed six civilians and wounded another 25 .
 On 14 October, a funeral procession in the village of Sartana, near the city of Mariupol, in the Donetsk region, was hit by a rocket that killed seven civilians .
 Recent reports of the use of cluster munitions in residential areas are alarming .
 cluster munitions regularly have an immediate indiscriminate impact when used in areas with a civilian presence . Cluster munitions have a wide impact radius and are often indiscriminate .
 Their use in such situations constitutes a violation of international humanitarian law and may amount to a war crime . Their use of such situations could amount to war crime, according to the UN .
 The Government has denied the use of cluster munitions when approached by the Human Rights Monitoring Mission .
 It is imperative for the reported use of cluster munitions to be investigated promptly and thoroughly, as well as the reports of indiscriminate shelling of residential areas .
 Armed groups continue to terrorize the population in areas under their control . They commit killings, abductions, torture, ill-treatment, and other serious human rights abuses .
 Ukrainians continue to abduct people for ransom and forced labour . They continue to use them in exchanges and simultaneous releases of detainees with the Ukrainian Government .
 They also practice forced mobilization of civilians and threaten the local population with execution . They also continue to practice forced mobilisation of civilians .
 Some volunteer battalions under Government control have been performing police functions in some towns and villages taken back by the Government . There have also been continued allegations of human rights violations committed by some battalions .
 We have continued to urge the Government to exercise more control over all of its forces . We want to ensure accountability for any violations and crimes committed by their members .
 The humanitarian situation in the Luhansk region remains precarious, especially in the area controlled by the armed groups .
 Many people in the conflict area have remained for a second month deprived of regular access to water and electricity . Despite the ceasefire, many people have been deprived of access to health care and educational services .
 Humanitarian assistance largely depends on volunteers and a few international organizations . The International Committee of the Red Cross and Medecins Sans Frontieres is one of the most important organizations .
 I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere condolences to the ICRC on the loss of one of their staff members in an attack in Donetsk city on 2 October . The ICRC is based in Donetsk, Ukraine .
 Perpetrators of that and other violations of international humanitarian law must be brought to justice . They must also face justice for their actions .
 The ceasefire has encouraged many internally displaced persons to return to their homes in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk . The ceasefire is expected to continue until the end of the ceasefire .
 Some went simply to collect belongings; others have remained in their homes . Some went just to collect items; others went to collect things .
Private property has been destroyed or damaged, and employment is limited, as many business or industries have been closed . Those who have returned face serious difficulties, including the volatile security situation .
 As of 24 October, the overall number of registered IDPs has reached a peak of 430,059 . The State Emergency Service of Ukraine says the number of IDPs is at a peak.
 The conflict in the east has triggered a wave of solidarity among Ukrainians towards IDPs . The capacity of host communities to continue to absorb IDPs has been shown to be weakening .
 Some IDPs still have no access to their deposits in Ukrainian banks . Most IDPs continue to live from their savings .
President Obama is expected to sign the bill on Thursday . The bill will provide access to health care, employment and shelter .
 The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees will monitor its implementation . The U.N. will also monitor the implementation of its refugee policy .
 Some of those acts have involved violence against individuals, particularly when officials were manhandled into rubbish containers . Some of the acts have been carried out by individuals .
 In the Kharkiv region, over 12 statues of Lenin have been toppled by pro-Unity groups since early September .
 Such acts appear to have been tolerated by local law enforcement officials . Such acts exacerbate tensions between the communities .
 There are also indications in some areas of election-related intimidation and violence against campaign workers, party infrastructure and candidates .
 The lustration law, passed on 9 October, has been widely criticized by the Ombudsperson as well as civil society .
 The law is broad in its scope, with a prohibition against allowing current office holders to maintain or regain those positions . The law allows the lustration of a number of positions, with the prohibition against maintaining or regain that positions .
 Government must take measures to combat corruption, such measures must include basic due-process guarantees . Such measures must be applied in a non-discriminatory fashion .
 I encourage the Government to align the legislation with the relevant regional standards . I encourage government to align legislation with regional standards.
Ukrainian government should move forward with peace plan and national reconciliation. These developments have negative human rights implications and can lead to a deepening of the divide within the Ukrainian population at a time .
 In that context, accountability is not only a prerequisite, but also a cornerstone of any lasting peaceful solution to the crisis in Ukraine .
 After the 5 September ceasefire, opportunities to collect the unburied remains of people killed as a result of hostilities and to identify ad hoc and irregular graves have increased .
 As a result, hundreds of bodies have been found, but many remain unidentified . Many of them remain unidentified.
 The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights welcomes the efforts to establish the identities of the dead and to hand the bodies over to their relatives as well as to ensure burial in dignity .
 The issue of the alleged mass graves near the village of Nyzhnia Krynka in the Donetsk region has received extensive publicity .
 One of those graves, located near the entrance to the village, contained five bodies . One of the graves was found near the village's entrance to a village .
 The people whose bodies were found in the first grave were identified as members of the armed groups . They were reportedly killed in action .
 There are no allegations that they were summarily executed . Currently, to the knowledge of the human rights monitors, there are no claims .
 Donetsk People's Republic officials say there is forensic evidence of a summary execution . As regards the four people from the two graves near the mine, there is also forensic evidence.
 On 15 October, a monitoring team visited the three locations of the reported mass graves .
 The team interviewed relatives of the two people whose bodies were reportedly identified . The team also interviewed relatives.
 testimonies indicate that those people may have previously been detained by Ukrainian forces . Their testimonies indicate those people were detained by Ukraine forces .
 A number of other graves containing more than one body were reportedly found in the conflict zone . Human rights monitors do not have information that those graves may contain the bodies of victims of arbitrary or summary executions .
 Efforts must also be made to hold accountable members of armed groups who have perpetrated grave human rights violations, including killings, enforced disappearances and torture .
 Minsk protocol excludes amnesty for such crimes as genocide, terrorism, murder, the infliction of serious bodily injury, sexual abuse, hostage-taking and human trafficking . The 12-point protocol includes the passage of a law on non-prosecution of persons.
 Law appears to allow amnesty for acts of torture, which should be clarified in order to bring the law in line with international norms and standards .
 Four Crimean Tatars were abducted during the past month in Crimea, one of whom has been found dead . One of them was found dead.
 It is imperative that the whereabouts of those missing persons be clarified and those responsible are held accountable . The whereabouts of the missing persons should be clarified .
 The implementation of the 5 September ceasefire agreement remains fragile . The Implementation of the ceasefire agreement is fragile .
 Human rights violations and violations of international humanitarian law continue to be committed . Human rights abuses and human rights violations are still being committed .
 There is a clear threat that we may be facing another low-intensity conflict, as mentioned by Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco .
 The 5 September ceasefire agreement still presents the most significant opportunity for a peaceful solution to the situation in the east .
 I firmly believe that the 12-point Minsk protocol has its best chances of holding if it is implemented in line with human rights standards . I firmly believes that the Minsk protocols have its best chance of holding .
 The 12-point Minsk protocol could have a direct positive bearing on the human rights situation . Almost half of the provisions of the protocol could, in fact, be positive .
 To contribute to sustainable peace and facilitate reconciliation, the agreement should be based on respect for the rule of law and human rights . The implementation of the agreement would also need to be based upon respect for human rights, the authors say .
 I also welcome the decree signed by President Poroshenko on 15 October . The decree is to create a mechanism for the comprehensive protection of human rights .
 The document requires the Cabinet of Ministers to oversee the drafting of such a strategy . It requires the participation of State authorities, local government bodies, civil society organizations and international experts .
 The Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights is working hand in hand with the United Nations system as a whole . The Council of Europe, the Council of European Union and the Government to ensure a comprehensive approach to United Nations requirements .
 Ukraine's parliamentary elections will be held on Sunday in Ukraine . We call on the authorities to ensure that they are concluded in a free, fair and open manner .
 The United Kingdom requested this morning’s briefing because we remain deeply concerned about the situation in Ukraine . The United States requested the briefing because of the situation.
 The illegal annexation of Crimea, the dire human rights situation there and in the east of Ukraine and Russia’s failure to implement its commitments under the Minsk agreements leave us in no doubt that the situation continues to present a clear threat to international peace and security .
 The United Kingdom welcomes the work of the U.N. Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine . It cuts through Russia’s misinformation and propaganda .
 In those areas, killings, abductions, torture and other serious human rights abuses carry on unchecked . Neither protection nor justice is available to victims in those areas .
 The Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights is rightly concerned about a lack of accountability .
Independent investigations take place into all serious allegations of violations, whoever the perpetrators are . It is essential that independent investigations takeplace into allserious allegations .
 The Human Rights Watch report alleges the use of cluster munitions by the Ukrainian army .
 Ukraine refutes those allegations and denies that the Ukrainian army uses such munitions . We are aware of the allegations and are aware that Ukraine refute those allegations .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe has said that its monitors have seen no evidence of cluster bombs . We welcome Ukraine's commitment to cooperating with Human Rights Watch .
 OHCHR report's account of a deteriorating human rights situation in the illegally annexed Crimean peninsula . We are deeply perturbed by the report’s account.
 The treatment of the Crimean Tatar population is particularly troubling . The treatment is particularly disturbing .
 Russia has often claimed to have concerns about rights of minority populations in Ukraine . We see no evidence of that concern for the rights of the Tatars in Crimea .
 The humanitarian situation in the areas controlled by the armed separatist groups remain precarious . The situation will become even more serious as winter approaches .
 The sending of convoys into Ukraine by Russia without the agreement of the Government of Ukraine and in breach of Ukraine’s sovereignty is a provocative act .
 Humanitarian assistance is necessary, says Ukrainian official . Humanitarian aid must be coordinated by the appropriate agencies, he says .
 Russia should immediately withdraw its remaining military forces from Ukraine, stop its flow of weapons to the separatists and instead help to restore Ukrainian sovereignty and secure a political solution to the crisis .
 Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco’s briefing described the fragility of the situation in eastern Ukraine .
 The Minsk agreements offer a real prospect of de-escalating tensions in eastern Ukraine .
 All parties must match words with actions with actions and implement commitments they have made . All parties need to meet words with words and implement the commitments they made .
 The Government of Ukraine has taken important steps, including approval of a special status for districts of Donetsk and Luhansk regions . The OHCHR report notes that the law meets international human rights standards .
Local elections to be held under Ukrainian law in separatist-controlled areas of Luhansk and Donetsk .
 Russia continues to supply separatists with weapons and material, including rocket launchers and artillery . Russia, by contrast, continues to maintain several hundred of its forces in Ukrainian territory .
 All illegally armed groups, military equipment, fighters and mercenaries should be withdrawn, says the U.S. State Department . The UkrainianRussian border is secured with increased monitoring under OSCE verification .
 Russia is seeking to prevent effective monitoring of its border so that it may continue to supply weapons and equipment to militant groups . That violates article 4 of the Minsk protocol and demonstrates that Russia is trying to prevent such monitoring of the border .
 stability will not be restored if Russia continues to support separatist groups . Russia has expressed its intentions to expand the territory under their control .
 This Sunday's parliamentary elections mark Ukraine's commitment to democracy . This Sunday’s parliamentary elections will be the first in Ukraine's history .
 Ukrainian authorities are taking steps to ensure that as many Ukrainian citizens as possible can exercise their right to vote . They are putting in place arrangements for people displaced from their homes by the instability in the east and those from the illegally annexed territory of Crimea .
 Russia's expectation is that Russia will work to restore peace and security in Ukraine by respecting the outcome of the elections and supporting local elections held under Ukrainian law .
 We urge the Russians not to renege on commitments they have made, but rather to use their influence to prevent the organization of any separate elections by separatists in Donetsk or Luhansk in November .
 Such elections would be illegal, would contravene the Minsk agreements, would present a significant obstacle to a lasting peace in Ukraine . Such elections are illegal, and would present an obstacle to lasting peace, according to a report .
 I would like to thank Assistant Secretaries-General Oscar FernandezTaranco and Ivan Simonovic for their briefings .
 U.N. human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine continues its work . We thank the United Nations.
 The monitoring missions of the United Nations and Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe must be provided with full, free and unrestricted access to the whole territory of Ukraine, including Crimea .
 A ceasefire has come into effect, or rather a "fire and cease" in the interpretation of separatists . Since we last met on the situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.7253)
 Zakharchenko claims that all of the Donetsk region is theirs . He claims that they could take the towns of Berdiansk and Izium, among others . The self-proclaimed Premier of the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic.
 Russian soldiers continue to die on Ukrainian soil — soldiers who allegedly are not even there . Russian soldiers are still being held in Ukraine .
 The self-appointed separatist chieftains in eastern Ukraine are wasting no time in causing to erode what was achieved in Minsk .
 Relentless attacks by illegal armed groups on Donetsk airport are a daily reality . The airport has been targeted by armed groups for years .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission speaks of attempts by separatist armed groups to seize strategic targets . The latest reports speak of the attempts by separatists to seize strategically targets .
 Russian military equipment, multiple rocket launchers, tanks and ammunition continue to cause death and destruction on Ukraine’s soil . Border remains wide open for the comings and goings of men in military fatigues and Cossack uniforms .
 Russia single-handedly blocked the extension of the OSCE Observer Mission’s activities along the entire border . The OSCE Permanent Council held a meeting on 22 October .
Andrei Purgin is self-proclaimed First Deputy Prime Minister of the Donetsk People's Republic . He says he does not need international mediators on the border .
 In August and September, Russia sent three unchecked humanitarian aid convoys into Ukraine in clear breach of Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 The rebels were quick to regain ground and reverse Ukraine’s successes in clearing the area of illegal armed groups .
 The separatists are planning an election of their own on 2 November, a cynical and blatant breach of the Minsk agreements . Ukraine is preparing for the critical national elections on 26 October .
 Russia has not spoken even once against the multiple violations of the ceasefire by the illegal militants . Russia has been quick to make accusations against Ukraine, including long-debunked ones .
 The human rights situation in the areas controlled by Russian-backed armed groups remains of most serious concern . The situation is of mostserious concern.
Extrajudicial killings, torture, intimidation, public humiliation, and forced labour remain trademarks of the pro-Russian militants in eastern Ukraine .
 Violence against women in separatist-held areas, including rape, has reached disturbing proportions, says monitoring group .
 Information on child soldiers among the militant separatists and military schools for children points to violations of international humanitarian law .
 The situation of the indigenous Tatar community in Russia-occupied Crimea continues to deteriorate . The situation in Crimea has been deteriorating for years .
 Reported cases of kidnapping, torture and killing of young male Crimean Tatars . interrogations of the community's activists continue unabated .
 Yet once again, in spite of the multiple atrocities committed by the illegal separatist groups, we have yet to hear a single condemnation of those crimes .
 Russia has consistently ignored Human Rights Watch reports on such abuses, including on enforced disappearances in the Crimea . It is quite ironic that Russia should now widely quote a report on the alleged use of cluster bombs in Ukraine .
 Ukraine has denied their use of the Oslo Convention . We urge Ukraine to join the convention to prevent further speculations .
 Ukraine is demonstrating its commitment to implementing the Minsk agreements . Russia’s claims that Ukraine is implementing the agreements are false .
 Life is slowly returning to normal in areas freed from the illegal insurgents . Life in areas released from the insurgents has slowly returned to normal .
Important legislation has been adopted, as noted by Assistant Secretary-General Simonovic . Important legislation has also been adopted .
 Ukraine’s commitment to pursuing the path of difficult but necessary reforms . We commend Ukraine's commitment to pursue the path. We strongly encourage the Government to continue the national dialogue .
 The Minsk agreements will be worth no more than the paper on which they are written . At the same time, we must stress that without Russia’s full cooperation and compliance, the Minsk agreement will not be worth it .
 The only viable solution is one that fully respects Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity, including Crimea as an integral part of Ukraine .
 Russia must immediately withdraw all its armed formations, military equipment and fighters from the territory of Ukraine, stop supporting and arming the separatists . Russia must unequivocally condemn the illegal elections planned by the separatist commandos .
 Permanent monitoring and verification on both sides of the Ukrainian-Russian border must be ensured . Permanent monitoring of both sides must be monitored and verification is needed .
 The draft agreement on alliance and integration between the Russian Federation and the surrogate republic of Abkhazia is nothing else than a de facto annexation of an integral part of Georgia .
 With thousands of human lives lost and hundreds of thousands displaced, it is also essential to establish accountability for the human rights violations and abuses that have taken place during the war against Ukraine .
 Those who commit serious violations of international humanitarian and human rights law must be brought to account . Those who have committed serious violations should be brought into account .
 Ukraine should accede to the International Criminal Court Statute and accelerate its national efforts to pursue accountability. In that respect, we encourage Ukraine to accede.
 We also reiterate our position that those responsible for the downing of Flight MH-17, as well as those who obstructed access to its crash site and interfered with the investigation, must be brought to account .
 I thank Assistant Secretaries-General Oscar FernandezTaranco and Ivan Simonovic for their briefings . I thank them for their briefing. I also thank Assistant Secretary General Oscar Fernandez Taranco for his briefings .
 The United States has always been and remains steadfastly committed to finding a peaceful solution to the crisis in Ukraine . The U.S. is committed to the peaceful solution in Ukraine.
 Peace requires respect for international law, respect for borders and respect for other nations’ sovereignty, says the author .
 It requires living up to one’s commitments and owning up to the actions of one's actions . It requires one to live up to their commitments.
 The Security Council on Ukraine has proved an overwhelming challenge for Russia . Russia has held 25 meetings in the Security Council in Ukraine .
 Russia continues to provide separatists with resources, arms and training, all the while continuing to deny it is doing so .
 Ukrainian pilot Nadiya Savchenko was seized by separatists in Ukraine and unlawfully transferred to Russia . She is now being forced to undergo what is termed ‘psychiatric evaluation’ in which her human rights are violated through the use of a practice made infamous in the Soviet Union .
 We have seen reports of other Ukrainians detained in Russia with similar disregard for international standards . We have also seen other Ukrainians similarly detained.
 All sides, including Russia and separatists, must honour commitments they agreed to on 5 September in Minsk .
 The commitments include an immediate end to ceasefire violations, restoration of Ukrainian control of its side of the international border, monitoring of the border and a security zone .
 All sides agreed to 12 commitments on 5 September, and the Ukrainians have taken action on all those for which they have a responsibility .
 Both the Russian Federation and Russia itself have failed to implement their Minsk commitments . Both the separatists supported by the Russian federation and Russia themselves have failed.
 separatists have declared unilaterally that they would hold their own local so-called elections in November . In response to Ukrainian laws on special status that provide additional autonomy for parts of Donetsk and Luhansk, they have declared unilateral elections to be held on 7 December .
 That is unconstitutional and completely inconsistent with the Minsk agreements . That's unconstitutional andcompletely inconsistent with Minsk agreement. That's not what's happening in Russia .
 It also reveals the separatists’ true intentions, which are not to empower people with a choice within the legal political process of Ukraine, but to set up another vote that they can once again rig .
 Continued separatist assaults in locations throughout Donetsk and Luhansk have resulted in the killing and wounding of scores of Ukrainian armed forces and civilians . The destruction of vital infrastructure has been the result of the attacks .
 attacks have occurred since the agreement in Minsk and after the ceasefire went into effect . Those attacks have been carried out since the ceasefire began in the Belarusian capital .
 The children are being forced to live with no water or electricity and no opportunity to earn a living . Their schools are in the crossfire .
Ukrainian people go to the polls to elect a new parliament on Sunday . The people of Ukraine will celebrate a milestone on Sunday as they go to polls . They are demonstrating their commitment to an enduring democratic process .
 We hope to see wide participation in the elections by all Ukrainians, including in Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk . We strongly condemn any interference in that legitimate democratic process .
 Russia continues to occupy Ukraine . While Ukraine seeks to build a peaceful, stable and secure future, Russia still occupies Ukraine .
 Report documented abuses, including detentions, expulsions, restrictions of movement, restrictions on freedom of expression, peaceful assembly, association and religion or belief . Report after report documenting abuses.
 The Russian occupation of Crimea must end, and until it does it does, Russian occupying authorities must cease their harassment of religious and ethnic minorities . OSCE monitors and monitors from the OSCE full access to Crimea must be allowed .
 In Crimea, a group of separatists who seized power on the pretext of protecting one minority have become the cruel oppressors of another .
 We should expect nothing different from the separatists trying to seize control in eastern Ukraine, says Ukrainian official .
Eight bodies were discovered in Sloviansk following the town's liberation from separatist control . Ukraine began an investigation into grave sites containing eight bodies .
 The U.S. supports a full, thorough and impartial investigation of all alleged grave sites . No one is above the law, and the United States supports an impartial investigation .
 Full implementation of the Minsk agreement would create an environment that would enable those investigations to move forward . Full implementation would create the environment for investigations to take place .
 We are aware of reporting by non-governmental organizations on the use of cluster munitions . We are also aware of reports on use of Cluster munitions .
 Ukrainian Government denies use of such weapons. We take note of Ukrainian Government’s denial of use of weapons .
 We take very seriously all accusations regarding harm to civilians. We unequivocally condemn any indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas . We also unequivocally condemn the shelling of civilians .
 There can be no excuse for abuses committed by anyone fighting in eastern Ukraine. All such accusations should be fully investigated as soon as the security conditions allow .
 That means separatists and their Russian backers must cooperate . That means that the separatists and Russian backers will cooperate .
 There has been much focus in recent days on the lines demarcating the ceasefire . But let us not forget a more important line, the international border .
 The Government of Ukraine recently submitted a plan to provide for monitoring, restore Ukrainian control on its side of the border . The plan would create a security zone free of weapons in the areas adjacent to the border in Ukraine and the Russian Federation .
 Russia has not engaged on this plan, neither have the separatists, and Russia has refused to expand OSCE monitoring along the border . But Russia is not engaged in this plan.
Until a full monitoring mission is in place on the international border, supplies and equipment will continue to flow from Russia to the separatists .
 President Putin said in Milan that he would not discuss OSCE monitoring of the border until residents of the Donbas are secure .
 The residents of Donbas will not be secure until the OSCE is monitoring the border . The residents will not have access to the border until the border is monitored .
 Ukraine's sovereignty must be restored over the entirety of its border with Russia . Ukraine’s sovereignty must also be restored.
 If the border can be secured, elections can be held on 26 October across Ukraine for the Rada, but also on 7 December in the areas of Donetsk and Luhansk . Everyone will benefit, as will the cause of peace and security .
 Russia's actions have challenged the most basic principles of our international system . Russia’s actions over the past months have challenged most basic Principles of our system .
 Borders cannot and should not he redrawn at the barrel of a gun or on the whim of a single leader and the circle of his cronies around him . Borders can't and shouldn't he redraw at a gun.
 Ukraine has taken real steps to fulfil its commitments, while Russia and the separatist it backs have not . Ukraine has been accused of failing to fulfill its commitments .
 We call on them to act immediately to implement obligations they undertook, and we call for them to do so now . We call for the British government to take action immediately .
 I would like to thank Fernandez-Taranco and Mr Simonovic for their briefings, and my British colleague for initiating this meeting . I would also thank Mr Fernandez- Taranco for his briefings .
 The human rights situation in Ukraine continues to deteriorate, according to the U.N. Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine . The sixth report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights makes clear .
 It has been marked by an escalation of hostilities that came to a head at the beginning of September . It was just before the signing of the ceasefire agreement .
 The report emphasizes that for the fighting to have reached such a level of intensity, the pro-Russian militias must have been supported by many foreign fighters, including Russians . The report also emphasizes that the fighting must also have been reinforced with sophisticated weaponry .
 Ukrainian sovereignty could be violated, in defiance of the Charter of the United Nations . Those responsible for the escalation are the same as those who decided that Ukraine's sovereignty was violated .
 Since the signing of the Minsk agreements, the front as a whole has stabilized, leading to a diminished overall level of violence . The ceasefire is regularly violated and fighting continues here and there owing to the separatists' wish to homogenize their territory .
 The situation this summer led to a significant increase in casualties, both civilian and military, and to an increase in violations of human rights, including torture, summary executions and abductions . The situation has led to the increase in human rights violations.
We condemn all violations of international standards, including protection of human rights . We condemn all human rights that should be respected by all parties to the conflict .
 Thousands of civilians have fled from the areas controlled by the separatists . People are living in fear and under threat in the areas.
 The death penalty has been reinstated in Donetsk . When people leave their homes, they are confiscated . There are no more police or courts to defend Ukrainians against militias .
 Thousands of people have taken to the road, forced to leave everything they own . As a result, thousands of people are forced to take to the roads .
 With winter approaching, the displaced populations will be in a seriously precarious situation .
 We are following with concern the deteriorating situation for the people of Crimea . We are also following with concerns the deteriorating condition for the Crimea people .
 The Tatars are experiencing abuse from self-defence groups as well as numerous administrative problems, expropriations and arrests .
 Their human rights, such as the freedoms of expression, religion, conscience and movement, are routinely flouted . Their rights, including freedom of expression and religion, are regularly flouted.
 Ukraine says it is committed to sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine's international borders . In that regard, we wish to reiterate our commitment to the sovereignty of the country .
 With the ceasefire agreed in Minsk on 5 September, followed by the 19 September agreement, a diplomatic process has finally begun between Kyiv and Moscow .
 France, together with its European partners, will continue to support that engagement between the Russians and Ukrainians . France and the European partners agreed in June to engage in the format agreed in Normandy .
 Presidents Putin and Poroshenko met in Milan last week on the sidelines of the Asia-Europe summit .
 There has been some progress on border monitoring and the monitoring of the cease-fire .
 "We will remain vigilant to ensure that support for the separatists finally ceases" "The weakening of the State and the rule of law is checked, and that the ceasefire is fully respected"
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Russian territory should be strengthened and expanded as quickly as possible to cover other border crossings . We believe the mandate of the OSCE special monitoring mission should be stronger and expanded .
 Those efforts testify to our collective commitment to resolve the crisis in Ukraine. Those efforts are part of the effort to resolve Ukraine's crisis, says the group .
 The crisis can only be resolved if all the actors act in equal good faith . But that crisis can be resolved by all actors in equalgood faith .
 Ukraine's parliament has adopted a law envisioning an interim status of local autonomy for certain regions . We welcome the measures taken by Ukraine to implement its commitments .
Local elections may provide an opportunity for all parties to resolutely commit to a de-escalation and to a solution to the crisis . In that regard, we would hope that the establishment of that new status through upcoming local elections might provide a solution .
Ukrainian elections will be held in accordance with international standards and on all of the Ukrainian territory . We call on all parties to work effectively to make it po s s sible to hold early parliamentary elections this Sunday .
 Ukraine's elections are crucial to enable Ukraine to continue on its necessary path of reforms . Those elections are important to enable the country to continue its needed reforms .
 The elections on Sunday are an opportunity for a fresh start for Ukraine, for Russia and for stability in the whole region . The elections are a chance for a new start for the Ukraine.
 I thank Fernandez-Taranco and Simonovic for their briefings . I thank the Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez- Taranco for his briefings .
 The Republic of Korea has been closely monitoring the situation in eastern Ukraine since the Minsk agreement was signed . It is expected that there might be a turning point towards a political solution to the crisis .
Fighting has continued to flare up in Donetsk, with daily reports of shelling and skirmishes threatening to derail a fragile ceasefire . Flowever, despite the overall decrease in violence, has remained in the area .
 The risk of the re-escalation of tensions still remains, says U.S. State Department .
We need to keep in mind that the slightest provocation could once again cause the situation to spiral further out of control . We need to be careful of the possibility that the situation could become worse if the situation gets worse .
 In the light of such a volatile situation on the ground, all concerned parties must take immediate and credible steps towards the observance of a durable ceasefire, including the full implementation of the Minsk ceasefire memorandum .
 Any further incitement or provocative actions aimed at disrupting the peace process must cease immediately . Any further provocative actions must stop immediately, says the UN .
 There must be effective control and credible verification of the ceasefire as part of the Minsk ceasefire memorandum, the U.S. says .
 A monitoring mechanism of an international and impartial nature, as embodied in the Organization for Security and Cooperation Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, is an indispensable tool for verifying cease fire commitments .
 At the same time, the safety and security of international personnel under difficult and challenging conditions must be fully guaranteed by all actors on the ground .
 U.N. Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine is working on human rights issues in Ukraine . The mission is based in Ukraine.
 The protracted fighting in eastern Ukraine has resulted in further deterioration of the human rights and humanitarian situations, says a recent report . The situation continues to be a source of deep concern .
 There have been over 3,000 casualties to date, and a large number of internally displaced persons . The situation is becoming increasingly precarious with the onset of the winter .
 Reports of widespread human rights violations by illegal armed groups speak to the urgency of bringing perpetrators to justice and establishing accountability .
Ukrainian elections are scheduled for 26 October . An inclusive political process is the essential foundation for a stable and democratic future for all Ukrainians .
 Ukrainian Government has adopted a draft law on amnesty and special status for the eastern region . We hope it can provide a sound basis for the de-escalation of tensions, says the author .
 The Republic of Korea supports the ongoing diplomatic efforts towards the stabilization of Ukraine . It supports the recent meetings on the sidelines of the Asia-Europe summit in Milan .
 The situation on the ground remains tense, but diplomatic efforts give us reasons for hope . The situation remains tense.
 We encourage all concerned parties to continue exerting maximum efforts to seek a peaceful political solution . We once again encourage all concerns to continue seeking a peaceful solution .
 I wish to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr Fernandez-Taranco, for their very comprehensive briefings on recent events in Ukraine and the human rights situation .
 Jordan has also taken note of the sixth report of the U.N. human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine . The report was issued by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights .
 Ukrainian forces and separatists have been fighting in Ukraine for more than a decade . The peace plan has been agreed to a halt to the confrontations between the two sides . But the frequency of such confrontations has been reduced .
 There have been increasing numbers of crimes against citizens, including forced displacement, torture and forced labour . The deprivation of the right of citizens to stability and security is among the most common crimes .
 That is a violation of the provisions of international law and a dangerous development that imperils the lives of citizens . That's a violation. That's an international law violation, says the British Foreign Minister .
We call for an international inquiry, an objective inquiry, to investigate the use of such internationally prohibited weapons . In that framework, we call for a international independent inquiry .
 Jordan expresses support for U.N. Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine . Jordan expresses its support for OSCM in Ukraine and for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission .
 The Council on the ground in Ukraine has been monitoring events regularly and presenting periodic reports to the Council . The Council is in Ukraine, especially in the eastern part of that country .
 We call on the Government of Ukraine and the separatists to facilitate the entry of those missions to all parts of the country to promote security and stability .
 We reiterate our full support for efforts to find a solution to the crisis through dialogue and diplomacy . We reaffirm the need to protect citizens and respect the provisions of international law, human rights, international human rights law .
Putting an end to the conflict is a political responsibility and a moral responsibility for all those concerned . Putting an end is apolitical responsibility, says the author .
 The Security Council must play its role and make every possible effort to facilitate a political solution with regard to Ukraine’s sovereignty and unity .
 We call on all parties to respect their commitments, the peace agreements and the Minsk memorandum, and to remain open to the various viewpoints in order to reach a lasting solution . We also call on the parties torespect their commitments.
 We call on the Government of Ukraine to make greater efforts aimed at guaranteeing freedom and equal rights of all citizens of Ukraine .
Political, social and cultural rights are all equally important for stability . Political, social, cultural and political rights are also important to stability .
 The parliamentary elections scheduled for 26 October will be organized in a climate of stability and confidence in order to facilitate the reform process and a return to the rule of law and democracy in Ukraine's political life .
 Oscar Fernandez-Taranco and Ivan Simonovic thank each other for their briefings . I too would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs .
 Luxembourg is deeply concerned by the human rights situation in eastern Ukraine . The region is now outside the control of the Government of Ukraine .
 We condemn many cases of killings, abductions, torture, mock executions, forced labour and forced recruitment . The armed separatist groups are responsible, we say .
 The 16 September report of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights also mentions the adoption of an illegal criminal code re-establishing the death penalty for certain crimes .
 We also condemn the human rights violations committed by the battalions of volunteers working alongside the Ukrainian forces . We are also condemning the battalion's human rights abuses .
 We have become aware of the allegations regarding the use of cluster bombs by the parties to the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 The Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe has not been able to confirm the truth of those allegations . Ukraine has denied that its forces have used such weapons, the mission says .
 Ukraine's willingness to cooperate with an impartial and independent investigation to shed light on serious allegations . We expect the separatists to do the same .
 Ukraine has the right and the obligation to defend its territory against the continuous and repeated violations of its sovereignty and territorial integrity . Ukraine has a right and obligation to protect its territory from repeated violations.
 Ukraine to respect its international obligations and respect its obligations . Ukraine should always act in a proportionate and restrained manner, says Ukraine's foreign minister .
 The High Commissioner for Human Rights has said it is crucial to ensure accountability and the fight against impunity .
 The rights of minorities continue to be violated, especially those of the Crimean Tatars and Ukrainian-speaking populations . The great majority of those who oppose political changes oppose the recent political changes .
 We are particularly concerned by the repeated intimidations targeting the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People and its members . We are also concerned by a number of intimidations against journalists and activists .
 The Minsk memorandum of 19 September represents a step towards a lasting political solution to the crisis . We welcome the approval, in the context of the trilateral contact group .
 Ukraine's independence must be based on respect for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity . That solution must he based onrespect for Ukraine's sovereignty and sovereignty .
 We note the decrease in the overall level of violence following the ceasefire agreement . The ceasefire agreement has seen a decrease in overall violence .
 The ceasefire continues to be repeatedly violated, particularly by the separatists, which we strongly condemn . However, the ceasefire is still being repeatedly violated by separatists .
 Luxembourg welcomes Ukraine’s efforts to implement commitments it has made . Ukrainian Parliament's adoption of legislation providing amnesty and transitional status of local autonomy .
 Minsk documents show that the parties must fulfil all the other commitments made in the documents . They must now redouble their efforts to ensure that all the parties fulfil their commitments .
 OSCE monitoring mission deployed at border posts of Gukovo and Donetsk to other border crossings adjacent to the territory occupied by the separatists . We regret that it has not yet been possible to extend the monitoring mission to the border posts .
 Government of Ukraine aims to hold parliamentary elections two days from now on 26 October .
 The elections will enable the country to continue the positive reforms that began a few months ago . Those elections will allow the nation to continue its positive reforms .
 The OSCE electoral mission will play a key role in ensuring free and fair elections . OSCE will be actively involved in that mission, and my country, like others around the table.
 Russian Federation to use its influence on separatists to encourage the proper holding of local elections . Ukrainian elections are scheduled for 7 December under the new Ukrainian law .
Only that election will make it possible to elect legitimate representatives of the relevant regions . Ukraine will be able to participate in a resumed inclusive national dialogue .
 More than 3,700 people have died in the conflict, including at least 36 children . It is high time to put an end to this conflict, which has already led to more than three,700 deaths .
 The agreements reached in Minsk present a unique opportunity that should be seized so as to restore peace . The agreements present aunique opportunity for peace to be seized .
 It is in no one’s interest for a new conflict to take root on the European continent . It is not in the interest for the new conflict.
 I thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco and Assistant Secretary General Simonovic for their briefings . I thank them for the briefings .
 Australia supports the ongoing work of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on the human rights situation in Ukraine . It is so important to enable the Council to assess developments in Ukraine, says Australia .
 The sixth report of the human rights monitoring mission gives rise to serious concerns . As we have seen, the sixth report gives rise, yet again, toserious concerns .
 There have been some encouraging developments in the reporting period, including the ceasefire agreement and the Minsk protocol in early September . Some Russian military personnel and equipment from Ukrainian territory.
 The latest report details significant casualties, significant numbers of displaced people, the dreadful state of critical infrastructure and of thousands of children who are unable to access education .
 Australia calls for all parties to uphold the ceasefire and to engage in a genuine and constructive dialogue to find a political solution to the conflict .
 The report paints a very disturbing picture of life in the eastern Ukrainian territories occupied by armed groups . The report was published in the Ukraine.
 The U.N. report documents the breakdown in law and order in areas under separatist control . Yet again, we have another United Nations report that documents the situation .
 Reports of abductions for ransom and forced labour, torture and extrajuducial killings are all the hallmarks of criminality and illegitimacy .
 Any violations of international humanitarian law by any party to the conflict must be properly investigated . The perpetrators must be held accountable .
 Upholding the ceasefire is an important step towards a political solution, but so, too, is the preservation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe is troubled by credible reports of foreign fighters moving across the Russian border into Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian-Russian border must be secured, ideally with permanent monitoring under expanded OSCE verification . The Ukraine-Russia border must also be secured .
 We note reports of the possible use of banned munitions and of indiscriminate shelling . We note the report of the potential use of prohibited munitions .
 The Government of Ukraine has denied having had a role in any such abuses . We also note that the Government ofUkraine has denied any role in such abuses.
 The ongoing violation of the ceasefire prevents the resettlement of the many thousands of internally displaced persons that the conflict has generated . We also note that the ongoing ceasefire prevents resettlement of thousands of displaced persons .
 Assistant Secretary-General Simonovic has emphasized this morning that the onset of winter is particularly worrying .
 Ukrainians have the right for those elections to be free, fair and transparent . Ukrainians have a right to vote for Ukrainians to vote in free and fair elections .
 Ukraine's legislative framework must protect freedom of expression and peaceful assembly and association within Ukraine’s legislative framework . They must take place in a secure environment that protects freedom of speech and assembly, association .
 Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics to hold separate elections in November . Announcements by the self-proclaimed Donetsk andLuhansk Republics contravene both the letter and the spirit of the Minsk protocol .
Report notes parallel governance structures being created in Donetsk and Luhansk do not comply with international norms and standards . Ukraine’s Constitution.
 The report again draws the Council’s attention to disturbing, multiple and ongoing human rights violations in the illegally annexed territory of Crimea . Russian laws restrict the freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly, association and religion .
 The persecution and intimidation of Crimea’s Tatar population is unacceptable. The persecution of Crimea's Tatar residents is unacceptable .
 The international dimensions of the conflict in Ukraine are known to us all . Families in Australia are still grieving the loss of their loved ones on Flight MH-17 .
 The Dutch Safety Board says MH-17 was shot down by a surface-toair missile fired from a location under the control of Russian-backed separatists .
 Australia is committed to returning to the crash site when conditions are safe to do so . Australia, along with Dutch and Malaysian partners, remains committed to bringing to justice for those responsible for the downing of Flight MH-17 .
 There is a clear path towards an end to the violence in eastern Ukraine. However, there is still no clear path to end the violence .
 Russia must withdraw all its support to separatists, remove all its military forces and assets from Ukrainian territory . Russia must observe its obligations under the Minsk agreements and engage in genuine dialogue with Ukraine .
 Russia's refusal to heed the international community's call to de-escalate this crisis can lead to Russia's further isolation . Russia’s continued refusal will lead to further isolation, according to Russian media reports .
 Ivan Simonovic, Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, gives briefing on Ukraine . Oscar Fernandez-Taranco is Assistant Secretary General for Political Affairs .
 The U.S. Secretary-General and the Secretary-general are working together to help the country . "We appreciate the efforts that they, together with the secretary-General, are making in that country," says President Obama .
 The report before us describes the human rights situation in eastern Ukraine in a worrying way . The report was published before us.
 The dramatic increase in violations of the rights to life, liberty and security now affecting civilians in Donbas . The need to restore the rule of law and respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine in accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/262 and international law .
 The recent reports indicating the possible use of cluster bombs in eastern Ukraine are of particular concern .
 As we have pointed out in various forums, we condemn the use of such weapons . We have also pointed out that such weapons have been used in the past .
 We call on those countries that have still not signed and ratified the Convention on Cluster Munitions to do so in the near future . We call for those countries to sign and ratify the Convention in the future .
 We reiterate that accountability for all human rights violations and abuses committed in Ukraine must be guaranteed . We reiterate we reiterate that Accountability for all Human Rights violations in Ukraine is guaranteed .
Those responsible for the deaths of 48 people in Odessa on 2 May will be brought to justice . There should be clarification as to why the security forces did not act in a timely and decisive way .
 Ukrainian nationals and the Tatar minority. We are also concerned about the human rights situation in Crimea, in particular .
More than 400,000 people, mostly women and children, are displaced in eastern Ukraine . The situation is a clear sign of the severity of the crisis, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs says .
 Ukrainian Parliament of the law on rights and freedoms of internally displaced persons on 20 October . In that regard, we commend the recent adoption by the Ukrainian Parliament .
Ukrainian elections are scheduled for this weekend . An inclusive political process, based on dialogue, is essential to a stable and democratic future for all the people, says the government .
 Ukrainian Government to implement provisions of Minsk protocol, including release of all prisoners, withdrawal of armed groups and disarmament of those groups .
 Ukraine has called for full respect for the rule of law, democracy and human rights in Ukraine . Ukraine's human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, along with the monitoring mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
 I wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for their briefings . I also thank assistant secretary-general Simonovic for his briefings .
 China notes that there have been no large-scale armed clashes in eastern Ukraine . Since the signing of the Minsk agreements between the Ukrainian Government and eastern militias at the beginning of September.
 Security situation on the ground remains fragile with sporadic violent attacks in violation of the ceasefire agreement . However, the security situation still remains fragile .
 The top priority now is for the parties concerned to implement effectively and comprehensively the Minsk agreements and to ensure the realization of a ceasefire and cessation of violence in eastern Ukraine .
 That is the fundamental way to ease the humanitarian situation of the country, and it will create the necessary conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance, says the UN . The UN says it will help the people in need of aid and assistance .
 China hopes the international community will continue to play a constructive role in the improvement of the humanitarian situation in Ukraine . China hopes that the internationalcommunity will play aconstructive role.
 China maintains its consistent position that the U.N. human rights organs and humanitarian relief agencies should adhere to the principles of objectivity and neutrality in carrying out their work .
 The question of Ukraine involves a complex history that has a bearing on contemporary issues . The question is whether Ukraine's history has a relevance to contemporary issues.
The parties concerned should address the root of the problem and find a fundamental solution . The parties concerned must address theroot of the issue and find the solution .
 Ukraine's rights, interests and claims of all regions and ethnic groups in Ukraine should be fully accommodated . Attention must be given to addressing legitimate concerns of the parties and to achieving a balance of interests among all parties .
 A political solution is the only proper way to solve the question of Ukraine, says Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin . The Ukrainian government is trying to find a political solution to the Ukraine crisis .
 China hopes that the parties concerned will continue to implement the Minsk agreements . China hopes to launch an inclusive dialogue that will reach a balanced, durable and comprehensive political settlement of Ukraine .
 The international community should prevail on the parties concerned to make full use of existing communication channels and opportunities for dialogue, according to the UN .
 China supports any effort that will help the parties to engage in dialogue and consultations leading to a political settlement of the crisis . China will continue to play an active and constructive role in seeking aPolitical settlement of Ukraine .
 The Security Council has been preoccupied with the conflict in Ukraine since February . The conflict has been the focus of the Security Council's attention since February.
 More than 3,700 people have been killed in the intervening months . More than 9,000 civilians have been wounded and more than 824,000 Ukrainians have been driven from their homes .
 The position of Rwanda is clear and constant; it revolves around three key principles . Rwanda's position is clear, constant and revolves around the three principles .
 The first is putting a stop to the hostilities and ensuring respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine . The second is putting the first to the end of hostilities .
 The second is promoting genuine dialogue among Ukrainians, fostering national reconciliation, establishing self-governance and promoting rights for minorities . The third is promoting real dialogue between Ukrainians and minorities .
Third is securing a diplomatic settlement to the crisis, involving the countries and organizations of the region . Third is securing the diplomatic settlement, involving nations and organizations.
 Rwanda welcomes the signing of the 12-point Minsk protocol agreement on 5 September . Rwanda also welcomes a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine, as well as its implementation memorandum .
President Petro Poroshenko and the Ukrainian Parliament to implement both agreements . The agreement includes the implementation of the ceasefire, the exchange of detainees and the adoption of laws on amnesty and selfgovernance .
 The parliamentary elections on Sunday will help implement those agreements, says the Ukrainian government . They are critical to the consolidation of democracy and to diversity and the rule of law in Ukraine .
 We are concerned by the inflammatory statements of armed separatists denouncing those elections . We emphasize that only elections organized by the legitimate Government in Kyiv will be constitutional and in line with the Minsk agreements .
 Prime Minister of self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic officially declares end of ceasefire . The ceasefire had for a while raised hopes for peace in Ukraine .
 Ukraine has called on all illegal armed groups in Ukraine to lay down their arms . In that context, we urge the trilateral contact group to use its influence to ensure the work of the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe is not hindered .
 Rwanda is deeply troubled by the findings of the U.N. Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine . The report was released by the United Nations Human Rights monitoring Mission .
 We condemn the continuing terror activities of armed groups in areas under their control . They have perpetrated killings, abductions, torture, ill treatment and other serious human rights abuses .
 Some volunteer battalions under the control of the Government of Ukraine. We equally condemn the violations of international human rights law by some of the battalions .
 We express our concern about the use of heavy weaponry and the indiscriminate shelling of densely populated areas, including through the reported use of cluster munitions .
Ukrainian Government denies use of illegal munitions in Ukraine . Ukrainian government denies using illegal munitions . U.S. calls for full, thorough and independent investigation .
 Rwanda urges all warring parties to comply with international humanitarian and human rights law . More generally, given the dark picture of the human rights situation in Ukraine, Rwanda urges more generally .
 Ukrainian Government to investigate human rights violations, including reports of mass graves . We stress perpetrators, including those who bear the command responsibility, should be held accountable .
 Ukraine's eastern part of the country is heading towards a humanitarian catastrophe. The fast-approaching winter season and the current gas shortage in Ukraine are leading to a humanitarian crisis .
 Ukraine crisis has been going on for too long. We call on political leaders in Ukraine to show leadership and a sense of responsibility .
 I would like to join others in thanking Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ivan Simonovic for their briefings . I would also like to thank Mr Fernandez- Taranco for his briefings .
 Chad notes that despite the Minsk agreement, the use of heavy weapons and bombings in inhabited areas continue on a daily basis .
 The Ukrainian army and separatist forces are using cluster bombs in their confrontations in eastern Ukraine, sources say .
 Sometimes, when a bomb does not explode immediately, it becomes the equivalent of a mine . Sometimes, a bomb doesn't explode immediately and becomes the same as a mine.
 Chad emphatically condemns the use of those weapons of mass destruction in violation of international treaties and calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities . Chad emphatically calls for the end of hostilities in Chad .
 civilian victims have increased sharply in this situation of intensified combat. On the humanitarian level, the figures demonstrate that civilian victims are increasing sharply .
 Over 3,000 people have been killed to date and 9,000 have been injured in eastern Ukraine .
 The majority of the population in the conflict zones are facing substantial difficulties, with no access to education, sanitary facilities, shelter or work . The majority are facing significant difficulties, according to reports .
 The Russian Federation and Ukraine on the provision of natural gas will be subjected to an untenable situation, says the writer . The advent of winter and the stalemate in the negotiations between the Russian Federation.
 In Donetsk and Luhansk, thousands of people have been deprived of income due to fighting . Nearly 40,000 small and medium-sized businesses have closed shop due to the fighting .
 War-related practices are being committed against the civilian population by Government forces as well as by separatists, and are unacceptable .
 Chad condemns all acts of violence and violations of human rights and international humanitarian law . Chad condemns the use of torture, torture and sexual abuse of children and children .
 Chad believes that the situation is not simply fragile, as stated in the report . Instead, we are on the verge of an acute humanitarian crisis, Chad says .
 Chad urges the parties to the conflict to exercise restraint and calm . Chad calls on the countries with influence over the actors on the ground to exert all efforts to find a political solution to the crisis .
 Chad congratulates the Government of Ukraine on its peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts in Ukraine . Chad congratulated the government on its peacebuilding and peacemaker efforts in the country .
 First was the signing of the Minsk accord and memorandum under the auspices of the Trilateral Contact Group on 19 September .
 Ukrainian Parliament ratified law on special autonomy for certain regions of Donetsk and Luhansk . Law on amnesty and the immediate release of all hostages and detained persons .
 The elections scheduled for Sunday will be another key step of the will for peace in Ukraine . The elections will be held in Ukraine's capital Kiev .
 The humanitarian situation requires responsibility on the part of the authorities and political actors . The situation needs responsibility for the authorities, political actors.
Recommendations contained in the report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the human rights situation in Ukraine . Lasting solutions must be provided to the affected population, making a priority of structural issues affecting human rights .
 Nigeria welcomes the efforts of European leaders towards resolving the crisis in eastern Ukraine . Nigeria welcomes European leaders' efforts to resolve the crisis .
 The recent meeting between President Putin and President Poroshenko during the Asia-Europe summit has opened a promising vista .
 We see such high-level engagements as providing a platform for exploring ways to end the instability and violence that have engulfed eastern Ukraine .
 We stress that a diplomatic solution is the only viable option for resolving the crisis in Ukraine . We stressed that the only option is to solve the crisis is to resolve it.
 The Minsk agreement is an encouraging development that provides an avenue for de-escalating tension in eastern Ukraine .
 We believe that if fully implemented, it could restore peace and stability in the region . We believe it could also restore peace in the Middle East .
 We strongly urge all parties to abide by their commitments under the provisions of the agreement . We therefore strongly urge them to adhere to their commitments .
 separatist forces to hold local elections in November. In that connection we condemn the plans by separatist forces .
 It is contrary to the spirit of the Minsk agreement and can further threaten the peace, unity and sovereignty of Ukraine . It is not a sign of peace, peace and sovereignty, says the Ukrainian government .
We appeal to Member States with influence over the separatists to prevail on them to drop their plans to hold the elections in the interest of peace and security in Ukraine . We appeal to members of the U.S. to prevail.
 This is about the twenty-fifth meeting to date in which we have discussed the internal Ukrainian crisis . The Ukrainian crisis has basically been transformed into a civil war, says John Sutter .
 Ukraine's slide towards the abyss has only accelerated. Despite dense planning and significant international efforts carried out under various formats, Ukraine’s slide to the abyss is only accelerated .
Last winter's events in Ukraine could open a deep division of the country, says David Frum . The crisis could be overcome through national dialogue, he says .
 Russia, the United States, Ukraine and the European Union agreed principles on 17 April . But they have not been implemented .
 Not everyone among the new-old Ukrainian elite or among its foreign sponsors agreed with them . Not everyone in the new Ukrainian elite agreed with the sponsors .
 The war party in Kyiv continually received prompting from Western capitals to conduct a punitive operation, to fight dissent . Instead of moving towards a balanced solution that would have helped to stabilize the situation and strengthen Ukrainian unity, the war party was forced to act against dissent .
We urged parties involved to stop tearing Ukraine apart and setting before it the false choice of being either with the European Union and the West, or with Russia .
 Yanukovych had sought to postpone the association agreement with the EU, which the ousted President Yanukovych wanted to postpone . Today in Kyiv and in Brussels, everyone has returned to the issue.
 The cost of delaying the decision for almost a year is thousands of lives, almost a million refugees and internally displaced persons, a destroyed economy and a civil war . The very severe situation is being endured by civilians in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 The Red Cross will accept no obstruction, whatever the hypocrites may say. We are ready to cooperate with Ukrainian authorities and with the International Committee of the Red Cross .
 Some colleagues on the Council have stated more than once that the Maidan uprising resulted from the democratic aspirations of the Ukrainian people and their expectations with regard to European values and rule of law .
 There are those in Ukraine who truly desire the civilized development of their country . There are many such people, and we can only commiserate with them .
 The current election campaign is especially characterized by bad faith and cynicism . The current elections campaign is particularly characterized bybad faith, cynicism .
 The political field has been cleansed of competitors, both figuratively and literally . The field has now been cleaned up .
 A law on lustration has been adopted, which is the precursor to a major witch hunt . The law is the first law to be adopted in the UK .
 If a television channel broadcasts in Russian, it is immediately considered to be separatist . A newspaper even contains the word ‘Russian’ in its name is considered separatist .
Ukrainian authorities encourage neo-Nazi sentiment in Kyiv, says U.S. Embassy in Ukraine .
 On 14 and 15 October in Kyiv, Kharkiv, Odessa and a number of other cities in Ukraine, parades of torch-carrying neo-Nazis with fascist insignia.
 There are calls for violent actions against representatives of different ethnic groups . There are also calls for violence against representatives from different groups .
 Following precedents that are unfortunately known in history, there have been public burnings ofundesirable publications .
 The Ukrainian Insurgent Army was formed as the Day of the defence of the Fatherland . Kyiv authorities have designated the date of 14 October as the day of the defense of the fatherland .
 It is particularly unacceptable to see such actions on the eve of the seventieth anniversary of the victory in the Second World War . It's particularly unacceptable.
 The Russian Federation condemns the celebration of Nazis as heroes . That proclamation grossly violates the General Assembly resolution 67/154 — adopted seven times at the initiative of the Russian Federation .
 The proclamation poses a serious threat to the post-war world order and to international peace and security, according to the proclamation . The proclamation is also a threat to peace, security and peace, says the president .
 Western colleagues have said nothing about that as if they had lost their sense of smell . Our eloquent Western colleagues say nothing about the smell .
 The topic was completely left out of today’s briefings by U.N. officials, Mr Fernandez-Taranco and Mr Simonovic . We think it strange and unacceptable that the topic was left out.
 We call on them to focus on combating the glorification of Nazism and countering attempts to rewrite history . We call for them to stop glorifying Nazism as a priority, as a focus .
 Prospects for a political resolution in Ukraine have taken on a realistic character since the signature in September of the Minsk protocol and Minsk memorandum . The Minsk Memorandum was signed in September .
 Kyiv and the southeastern part of the country are based on direct agreement between the two countries . The agreement was achieved with the contribution of Russia and the Organization for Security and Cooperation.
Major military clashes have been brought to an end and major principles of peacekeeping observed . Also important is the fact that, thanks to the Minsk process, major military clashes are brought to a end .
 Ukraine and the armed groups agreed to a deal in Minsk. But that only points to the need for painstaking work and good-faith international support for negotiations .
 Vladimir Putin of Russia once again underscored his support for full implementation of the Minsk agreements . Russia's President Vladimir Putin once again clearly underscored our support for Russia .
 Milan negotiations have shown that it is vital for the essence of the agreements to be upheld . At the same time, the Milan negotiations show that it's vital to be in a certain sequence .
 A report of the U.N. human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine was mentioned today .
 The report is very far from being objective. Unfortunately, once again, the report is not objective .
 Kyiv authorities invited the mission in, and they have been guiding its activities . In fact, it was theKyiv authorities that invited the missions in .
 Certain facts that do not favour the Kyiv authorities cannot be ignored. Nevertheless, certain facts that don't favour the authorities can be ignored .
 Ukrainian military and other battalions under control of the Kyiv authorities, specifically, the Aidar, Azov, Dnepr and Kyiv-1 battalions . The disappearance of people, killings, looting, extortion and arbitrary detentions, all of which have been carried
 ordinary Ukrainians are being harshly detained under the pretext that they have been involved in terrorism . At the same time, ordinary Ukrainians have been harshly detained in Ukraine .
 There is an alarming and growing number of civilian victims, including children, as the result of indiscriminate artillery fire in densely populated areas .
 There has been a lack of progress in the investigation into the deaths of people on the ‘Maidan’ and the tragedies in Odessa and Mariupol, as well as attempts to hide evidence .
 It is essential to investigate objectively and thoroughly the graves of peaceable citizens found in Nyzhnia Krynka . It is also essential to look at the graves in the town of Nyzhnyk, Russia .
 The reporting in one of the statements we heard today of an unconfirmed version of what happened there is irresponsible . The reporting is unconfirmed, the report says .
 The Security Council has called for the investigation to be expanded and deepened . We still do not understand the nervous reaction of certain members of the Security Council to our proposal of 19 September .
 During the years that the peninsula was forced to be part of Ukraine, many socioeconomic problems accumulated . The peninsula has been part of the Ukraine since the 1990s .
 Kyiv authorities are trying to take revenge on the population of Crimea for their decision to join Russia . That will not be affected by efforts on the part of theKyiv authorities to take Revenge on the Crimea population .
 Some members of the Security Council have expressed unqualified support for all of the actions of the Kyiv authorities, even though the latter represent the party of war .
 The Ukrainian people are not interested in the Ukrainian people. That support is based on their cynical geopolitical calculations that have nothing to do with their interests .
 The Security Council should help the parties to the conflict to maintain complete observance of the ceasefire, prevent bloodshed, and engage in an honest and fundamental national dialogue, says David Cameron .
 It is essential that a clear signal he sent in support of those who are in favour of the peaceful resolution of the situation in Ukraine based on the Geneva document and the Minsk agreements .
 Argentina's president says he will now make a statement in his capacity as representative of Argentina . Argentina is the country's most populous country .
Mr Simonovic thanks his colleagues for their respective briefings on the situation in Ukraine .
 Argentina expresses concern about continued deterioration of the security, human rights and humanitarian situation in Ukraine . Argentina expresses its concern about the continued deterioration in the Ukraine .
 We are also troubled by the effects of the resurgence of violence on the civilian population, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We are also concerned about the impact of the resurgent violence"
 We are emphatic that no peaceful way out of the situation in Ukraine can be found through unilateral actions of any kind . We are adamant that no peace can be achieved through unilateral action .
 It is imperative for all stakeholders to frame their actions strictly within international law and the principles of the Charter of the U.N. It is also imperative to frame the actions strictly in international law .
 The U.N. Charter requires all States to settle their international disputes through peaceful means . "We recall the obligation of all States, under the United Nations Charter, to settle the international disputes by peaceful means," U.S. says .
 The only possible solution is through dialogue and negotiation, says Ukraine . Ukraine's management of its domestic affairs is due respect, says the government .
 Argentina calls for an end to confrontation and all forms of interference in internal affairs . Such interference is military, political, economic or rhetorical in nature, Argentina says .
 The Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine agreed to the protocol to implement President Poroshenko’s peace plan and President Putin's initiatives . It was also signed by armed groups opposing the Government of Ukraine .
 We recognize that the fragility of the ceasefire is a true concern, but we recognize that it is a real concern .
 The Presidents of Ukraine and Russia met in Milan last week to discuss the conflict . They called for continued discussions in order to find a way out of the conflict.
 The use of cluster bombs in densely populated areas has been reported in the past .
 The parties must unreservedly respect human rights and international humanitarian law . They must ensure accountability wherever violations of human rights occur . The parties need to respect human Rights and International humanitarian law.
 We deplore the reports of killings, kidnappings, abductions, torture, abuse and other serious violations of human rights . We need truth, objective information, a speedy, reliable investigation and justice, we say .
 International Committee of the Red Cross and Medecins sans frontieres is providing assistance to the humanitarian situation .
 The international community should continue to support those efforts, says the U.S. State Department . The parties should ensure that there is access for humanitarian aid, he says .
 Argentina would like to emphasize the Council’s primary responsibility for ensuring the maintenance of international peace and security . Argentina has done every time the Security Council has dealt with this issue .
 The Council has not been able to play a positive role in Ukraine, it says . We deplore the fact that, despite the many times we have met to discuss the situation, the Council has been unable to help .
 As in other cases, constructive diplomacy has given way to politicization and personal attacks within the Council .
 Those of us with the greatest influence should contribute the most to constructive diplomacy. Those with the most should contribute most toconstructive diplomacy, he says .
 The international community must unite its efforts to help the parties find a peaceful solution to the complex situation in Ukraine . The world must unite to help find a peace solution to Ukraine's crisis .
 I would also like to thank Fernandez-Taranco and Simonovic for their briefings today . I would like to also thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez- Taranco.
 U.N. Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine continues to report on human rights in Ukraine . The United Nations Human Rights monitoring mission is in Ukraine.
 We are fully committed to protecting and promoting the human rights of all Ukrainian citizens, including those who live in the temporarily occupied territory of Crimea and Sevastopol .
 Monitoring Mission’s latest report was released by the Monitoring Mission . We have taken careful note of the issues raised by Mr Simonovic .
 In order to ensure the proper protection of civil rights and to eliminate the remnants of the totalitarian economy and the injustices of Yanukovych’s rule, Ukraine needs comprehensive reforms .
 President Poroshenko has launched a reform strategy for 2020 . To that end, he has launched the reform strategy.
 Its eight priority areas are reform of the judiciary and the fight against corruption . Its eight priorities include reform of law enforcement bodies, deregulation and development of entrepreneurship, tax reform .
 Last week Parliament passed a package of anti-corruption measures and legislation aimed at strengthening the rule of law .
 The President also signed a decree initiating work on developing a national human rights strategy . The decree also began work on a national Human Rights strategy .
 The reforms were drafted in close cooperation with civil society and are public-inspired and people-oriented . The reforms are designed to be public-oriented and public- inspired .
 All crimes relating to violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms must be fully investigated . But even as we work to build a better future, we continue to make it absolutely clear that all crimes must be investigated .
 That applies to the killings in the Maidan in February as much as it does to the tragedy in Odessa on 2 May . The Maidan was killed in February, and the Odessa tragedy in May.
 The first cases connected to those tragic events are already before the courts . The first case is expected to be heard before the court .
 Human Rights Watch published a report suggesting that Ukrainian armed forces may have used cluster munitions in Donetsk .
 Our forces have never used cluster munitions or any other prohibited weapons, says the U.S. military . The U.N. military has never used Cluster munitions or other banned weapons .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe confirmed on Wednesday that there is no evidence that Ukrainian forces have used such weapons . But they are ready for an open and transparent investigation .
 The latest report of the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission presents further details of the appalling human-rights situation in the areas under militant control in eastern Ukraine .
 It highlights the role of foreign militants, particularly those from the Russian Federation, and the continuing grave human rights violations committed by illegal armed groups . It highlights that foreign militants are responsible for the violations .
 Ukrainian citizens are terrorizing Ukrainian citizens in the areas under their control, report says .
 They resort to daily acts of abuse, including torture, killings and kidnappings, they say . They say .
 The report details the introduction of a criminal code, based on that of the Russian Federation . It also provides for the establishment of military tribunals and the use of the death penalty .
 Ukrainians are being abused by militant groups who claim to be protecting them . These are Ukrainians, and their rights are being abuse by the militant groups .
 The latest report also draws attention to cases of Ukrainian citizens’ capture and subsequent illegal transfer to Russia .
 Nadiya Savchenko was kidnapped in July on Ukrainian territory by Russian security services . Savchenko is currently being kept under illegal arrest in Russia .
 The Russian law-enforcement agencies and courts have handled her case in a very untransparent way, she says . She says she has been repeatedly violated by Russian law enforcement agencies .
 The Ukrainian film director Oleg Sentsov is also being illegally held captive . The Ukrainian movie director is being held captive in Ukraine .
 Both captives have been ill treated in Russian prisons, according to information from Ukraine .
We continue to be gravely concerned about the massive and systematic violations of human rights in illegally occupied Crimea . We continue to have a human rights problem in Crimea.
 Russia has forcibly imposed its national legislation there. In complete violation of international law, Russia has forced Russia to impose its legislation there .
 Occupation authorities have also encouraged criminal acts against Crimean Tatars and others belonging to national minorities and religious groups .
 The Russian authorities have refused to facilitate proper investigations or even to comment on the killings and abductions of pro-Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar activists . Reshat Ametov, Tymur Shaymardanov, Seyran Zinedine, Leonid Korzh
 Tatar leaders Mustafa Jemilev and Rifat Chubarov have prevented them from travelling to the Crimean peninsula . The Crimean peninsula is their historical native land .
 Illegal detentions, torture, property searches, confiscations, and pressures on business and social activity groups have become daily realities for the residents of Crimea .
 We demand Russia, as the temporary occupier of Crimea, stop violating the rights of our citizens . We demand that Russia, which has been in Crimea for three months, stop.
 At a minimum the situation there must be internationally monitored on a constant basis . At a least the situation must be international monitored.
 U.N. has committed to ensuring that those suffering in Crimea are not forgotten . We welcome the continuing commitment of the United Nations .
 President Poroshenko has repeatedly stated, Ukraine is fully committed to a peaceful settlement of the situation in the east of our country .
 That situation was not of our making, but we are striving to end the bloodshed, we say . That situation is not of their making, and we are trying to end it, we said .
 The Minsk protocol and the Minsk memorandum amoong Ukraine, the OSCE and the Russian Federation were signed . Russian Federation representatives of militant groups also participated .
 The Ukrainian Government moved quickly to implement the Minsk protocol .
 Our Parliament adopted a law on interim local self-government in certain districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and set the date for local elections .
 It also adopted a law granting amnesty to those involved in the recent unrest . The law also gives amnesty to people involved in recent unrest.
 We entered into talks regarding hostage exchanges, resulting in over 1,000 people being freed . The talks resulted in more than 1,500 people being released .
 New law adopted on Monday on temporary status of internally displaced persons will further facilitate humanitarian efforts . We continued to provide humanitarian relief, working in close partnership with United Nations agencies and other international organizations .
 We prepared a plan for economic renewal and growth, including plans for the economic revival of the Donbas region . We have called for a donor conference later this year .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in order to create conditions for its experts to verify the ceasefire . We have rendered all possible assistance to the OSCE special Monitoring Mission .
 We fully support current efforts to step up those monitoring efforts, as demanded under articles 2 and 4 of the Minsk protocol . The Ukrainian border is a key part of the protocol .
 Despite being signatory to the agreement, Russia refuses to undertake tangible steps to implement it . It is of grave concern that despite being a signatory, Russia is not taking steps to implementation .
 Russia is trying to maintain daily flows of arms, weaponry and militants from Russia to Ukraine . It is clear that that is simply a cynical attempt to maintain the daily flow of arms and weaponry .
 The details of the ceasefire regime are specified in the Minskmemorandum . We have strictly observed the truce regime .
 Ukrainian Armed Forces have not undertaken offensive operations and have used their weapons only to defend themselves . Since its signature, the Ukrainian armed forces have not done any offensive operations .
 Militant leaders have openly stated their intentions to violate the terms of the ceasefire . The aim is to capture new territories, including the cities of Mariupol and Sloviansk .
 Fierce fighting has been occurring around Donetsk airport and the outskirts of the towns of Debaltseve and Shchastya .
 The positions of the Ukrainian Armed Forces have been shelled over two thousand times . Since the truce started, the positions have been Shelled over 2,000 times .
 At least 54 Ukrainian civilians have been killed as a result of separatist shelling . 7 killed by separatist rocket fire near the village of Sartana last week .
 If the Minsk agreements are to succeed, all parties must live up to one hundred per cent of their commitments . All parties must be able to meet their commitments. If the agreement is successful, it will be the first time all parties have met their goals .
 The Russian Federation must cease its illegal supplies of weapons and equipment, says the Russian Federation . It must limit the flow of so-called volunteers across our sovereign border .
 Russia is building a military build-up along our border and in north Crimea . Russia is also building up its own military base in Crimea .
 The illegal militant groups have been able to strengthen their military capabilities . They are now threatening to seize other cities of Ukraine by further offensive military actions .
We are urging Russia and its pro-Russian separatist allies to live up to the agreements they freely entered into . In making those calls, we are simply urging Russia to liveup to those agreements .
In particular, we warn them to refrain from any provocations aimed at disrupting the coming elections . In particular, they should not be provocative, we say .
 This Sunday, national parliamentary elections will be held across Ukraine . Ukraine's parliamentary elections are scheduled to be held on Sunday .
 Local elections in the Donbas region envisaged by the Minsk protocol are scheduled for December . The leadership of Ukraine will do its utmost to ensure their fair and transparent conduct .
 Both votes are an integral part of the peace process and are vital for an inclusive dialogue at the national level . Both those votes are important for a dialogue at national level, says the BBC .
 parliamentary representatives will identify parliamentary representatives from all regions of Ukraine and legitimate local representatives in the Donbas . They will identify parliamentarians from all countries and local representatives from Ukraine .
 As of today, parliamentary elections can be held in 11 of 21 constituencies of the Donetsk region and in 4 of 11 constituencies of Luhansk region . Due to the security situation in the east, the elections will be held today .
We urge that free and secure access to polling stations be granted to those Ukrainian citizens who reside in the areas that remain under militant control .
 We call on Russia to unequivocally condemn the attempts by the illegal armed groups to hold their own local elections .
 Moscow must make clear to the militant authorities that that effort will hinder the peace process . The results of that illegal vote, organized in violation of Ukrainian legislation, will never be recognized . Moscow must also make clear that the vote will not be recognized, Moscow says .
 Since the beginning of this year, Ukraine has suffered immense upheaval . Since the start of the year, the country has suffered enormous upheaval .
 Russia has instigated a brutal insurgency in the Donbas region that has led to the loss of numerous lives, including the passengers of Flight MH-17, shot down by a separatist missile . In pursuit of its own narrow self-interests, Russia is instigating a
International law has been trampled and the human rights of Ukrainian citizens abused . Ukrainian citizens have been abused, according to the UN .
 U.N. members of the European Union and European Union have stood up for the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of this Organization .
 We need he Council’s help now more than ever to bring an end to the violence. We need him more thanever to end the violence, we say .
 In September we engaged in arrangements with the hope of ending the bloodshed and ensuring sustainable peace . In September they engaged in plans to end bloodshed and ensure peace .
 To fulfil that goal, the terms of the agreement must be implemented in full by all involved in the trilateral dialogue . To fulfil the goal, it must be carried out in full in full.
 Ukraine's representative of Ukraine made the statement in all its details . The statement was made in 24 previous meetings, often anti-Russian statements . I will not comment on the statement .
 I will just focus on three aspects of his statement and statements of several other colleagues . But I will only focus on the statements of his colleagues .
 It is inappropriate to bring to the Security Council discussions that are ongoing in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . This is in regard to the implementation of the provisions of the Minsk agreements regarding border monitoring .
 The proposal to deploy OSCE observers at certain border crossing points was made by the Russian side in the context of the ceasefire .
 Even in the absence of a ceasefire, we would be ready to deploy observers on the Russian side of the Russian-Ukrainian border . We said that, even in the absent of a truce, we will be ready.
 Russian Federation's gesture was a significant gesture by the Russian Federation . "Any criticism in that regard is unacceptable," says the Russian government .
 The sequence is first and foremost based on the implementation of the ceasefire, which unfortunately did not take place . The sequence was based on a ceasefire that didn't take place.
 The Ukrainian representative made a very important appeal for an end to the shelling of areas where civilians live .
 civilians are dying in the Donbas region as a result of shells being fired by the Ukrainian Armed Forces . Sometimes as many as 19 people are killed in one day in the region .
 It seems that they are under such command, but the impression is that they're not . It's not clear if they're under such control, but they are not .
 A separatist missile shot down a Malaysian Airlines flight, according to an unverified version of events . The Malaysian Airlines plane was shot down by separatists .
I want to reiterate that it is irresponsible to voice unverified accounts in the Security Council . I want to reiterate that it's irresponsible to Voice unverified account in Security Council.
 As soon as the tragedy occurred, rumours were circulated in Kyiv . Everyone now knows that as soon as it occurred, the tragedy was over .
 False information that was supposed to affirm a particular version of events was given . False information was given to the public .
Experts have drawn up some 40 important questions that need to be answered in order to understand what happened . What is more serious is the fact that our experts are drawing up some important questions .
 The Ukrainian representative has made no attempt to reply to one of those questions . The representative has not responded to any of the questions .
 It is time for him to cease — in particular at Security Council meetings — his endless repetitions of unverified versions of events and to answer those questions . It's time for he to cease.
 The representative of Australia has asked for the floor to make a further comment . Australia's representative has asked to make further comment on the floor .
 I would like to agree with my Russian colleague on the importance of answering all questions that need to be answered in respect of the independent investigation that is currently under way with regard to Flight MH-17 .
 It is being undertaken by an independent body — the Dutch Safety Board . The independent body is being overseen by anindependent body . It is the first time the Dutch safety board has been in charge .
 All the questions that have been raised are being systematically looked at. As we understand it, all the questions are being looked at .
 Australian experts are participating in the investigation, but they do not have access to the nature or detail of that participation . The Australian government does not know the nature of the investigation .
 An independent investigation has drawn up one preliminary report so far but which continues . It is an independent investigation that has also drawn up a preliminary report . The independent investigation continues to look at other aspects of the investigation .
 All participating Governments and other bodies have been assured that it will be very proper and very systematic and will answer all the questions that have been raised .
 I agree with my Russian colleague that such kinds of questions need to be looked at . I therefore agree with his Russian colleague.
In terms of what he said in his earlier statement, what I said was that all the apparent evidence that has been produced so far is consistent with the initial assessment that that event, that atrocity, was consistent with a surface-to-air missile from the areas .
 I did not assert that that was a definitive conclusion — certainly not yet — of the independent investigation, which is still looking to establish what happened rather than who was responsible . I didn't assert that was the definitive conclusion.
 Hundreds of prosecutors from 13 countries are being coordinated by the Dutch Government . They will seek to establish the culpability and then lay the basis for accountability .
 Ukraine's representative of Ukraine has given the floor to the representative for a further comment . I now give thefloor to the representatives of Ukraine .
 The independent investigation into the Flight MH-17 aircrash is being undertaken by the Netherlands and competent authorities and that the investigation includes an international team .
 The Russian delegation has been accused of using unconstructive rhetoric . "I regret that it continues to use such unconstructives rhetoric," says Russian official .
 I just want to reiterate our main message regarding the accusations levelled at the Government of Ukraine that our troops committed some crimes. I just wants to reiterate the main message. I'm not happy with the accusations made against our troops .
 We take very seriously all credible information about any crimes committed on the territory of Ukraine . The Ukrainian government says it takes very seriously to investigate crimes .
 The Government of Ukraine condemns all crimes, especially serious crimes in breach of international law . The government of Ukraine condemned all crimes.
 Those responsible will be held accountable sooner or later. They will be investigated and those responsible will have to be held responsible .
 Ukraine is open to cooperating with international partners in the investigation of such crimes . Ukraine is also open to cooperate with international partner in the probe of the crimes .
 Russia is casting such unfounded allegations against Ukraine in order to distract the attention of the international community from the main issue, which is the Russsian aggression against Ukraine and its interference into the domestic affairs of my country .
 The occupation of Crimea, the instigation of unrest in eastern Ukraine and the supply of weapons and manpower for the needs of the separatist movements in Ukraine are among the main causes of those dramatic events .
 The Russian delegation has not agreed to comply strictly with the Minsk arrangements, to which it is a party .
 We have not heard any expression of Russia’s firm intention to withdraw its troops from Ukraine or its readiness to cooperate with Ukraine .
 The U.N. Monitoring Mission’s report says crimes are clearly reflected in the report . We have not heard a condemnation of the serious crimes committed by the illegal armed groups .
 Russia would condemn separatists to hold local elections on 2 November . It would violate the Minsk arrangements, signed by Ukraine and Russia .
 It would be quite difficult to settle the situation in eastern Ukraine without addressing that issue, we said today .
 The leadership of Ukraine has demonstrated by its deeds its readiness to work for a peaceful resolution . Ukraine's leadership has demonstrated its readiness and willingness to be peaceful, says Ukraine's president .
 It is time for the other parties to step up and show their sincere will to engage in dialogue. It's time for them to show their sincerity, says CNN's John Sutter .
Ukrainian minister asks Ukrainian colleague to reread text of his statement . Russian President Vladimir Putin and Foreign Affairs Minister Sergei Lavrov made statements in Sochi .
 There is no official English translation, hut I think it will be useful . I will give the Council the text, but there is noofficial English translation .
 Australian colleague says he is happy that he sounded so constructive about the investigation . He says he does not think we need to have a broad discussion on the independent investigation .
 I was concerned about one thing, however, on which I think we need to be very clear . I was also concerned about a problem that needs to be addressed .
 The Australian Permanent Representative stated that the version referred to today is supposedly generally accepted or that it might be the version resulting from such an investigation . The Australian permanent Representative said the version of today is generally accepted .
 It was just a version constructed by the United States, which did not provide any justification . The U.S. version of the version did not give any justification.
 That version said a missile was fired from the region that was supposedly under the control of the separatists . That version simply stated that a missile had been fired from that region . It was actually a missile fired from a region allegedly under the controls of separatists .
 A journalist from the Russian Service of the BBC gave a four-minute report from the region . It clearly demonstrated that no one had shot any missiles from that location .
 The Security Council Chamber is holding a debate on what happened in the U.S. on Friday night . It is the first time the council has held a debate over what happened . The debate is being held in the Security Council.
 We should ensure that the independent investigation is substantive and wait to see how the investigative team continues to work and what kind of report it produces. We should be able to see what the investigation will produce .