 The Ukraine conflict is having serious consequences for Russia and Ukraine, but it also potentially threatens to damage the still frail economic recovery in Europe .
 In Ukraine, which is the main victim of the conflict, the economy may decline by up to 8% this year . Ukraine is the country's main victim, and the economy is expected to decline by 8% .
 In Russia, the costs of the conflict are estimated to be in the tune of 1% of GDP in 2014 2016 . The costs are primarily on account of increased investment risks in Russia .
On the assumption of a 10% loss in exports of goods and services to Russia, the estimated GDP loss would be about 0.4% for Lithuania and Estonia, and less than 0.1% for Austria . The estimated GDP lost would be 0.3% for Estonia and Lithuania
 The estimated impact of Russia’s ban on agro-food imports from the EU imposed in August 2014 is expected to be the highest in the Baltics .
 The question is whether these losses are justifiable and will achieve the desired effects – to change Russia’s behaviour in Ukraine and beyond .
Trade exposure to Russia is 4.5 percent of the world's total trade exposure to the country .
 Twenty-five years after the fall of the Iron Curtain, the current grave crisis in relations between Russia and the West represents not only a major setback, but also a dangerous geopolitical conflict .
 In Russia, which was already ‘stuck in transition and stagnation’ before the current crisis erupted, the repercussions of the conflict hamper urgently needed investments and GDP growth .
 The main victim of the conflict is Ukraine where, apart from the human and material losses already incurred, a severe economic recession has set in .
 Prospects of an enduring civil war in eastern Ukraine can now be hardly avoided . Similar to that in Transdniestria, Abkhazia, South Ossetiya or Nagorno Karabakh .
 The resulting de facto disintegration of Ukraine represents a serious threat with geopolitical consequences that reach far beyond the scope of the present note . The result of the Ukraine crisis is a significant threat to the future of Ukraine .
 The EU’s unfortunate handling of the Ukrainian crisis initiative also contributed to the present geopolitical conflict .
 The tug of war between Russia and the EU over Ukraine escalated in the second half of 2013, prior to the envisaged signature of Association Agreements . The EU on the one hand and four EaP countries (Armenia, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine) on the other
 Both Russia and Ukraine were suddenly alerted by the possibly adverse economic consequences of AA/DCFTA signature . The signature became public in 2013 .
 Russia started once more to implement and ‘test’ countermeasures, such as import restrictions from the EaP countries Ukraine and Moldova .
 Armenia decided in September 2013 not to sign the AA/DCFTA with the EU and announced the accession to the Russian* This version as of 28 October 2014 .
 Ukraine's President V Yanukovych announced the postponement of the AA/DCFTA signature just a few days before the Vilnius EaP Summit in November 2013 . The decision sparked the first wave of protests .
 Representatives of Maidan protesters, President Yanukovych and EU mediators signed a deal in February 2014 that envisaged early elections and constitutional changes in the autumn .
 The ousting of President Yanukovych and his flight to Russia on the very next day sparked the internal conflict in Ukraine . The new transitory government was led by Mr Yatsenyuk as acting Prime Minister and the new parliamentary speaker Mr Turchynov .
 The Russian annexation of Crimea triggered the first round of Western sanctions in March 2014 . The annexation was triggered by the Crimea annexation .
 The anti-Maidan protests in the eastern parts of Ukraine turned violent as the new government in Kyiv attempted to restore control over the rebellious regions by force . In contrast to Crimea where the ‘re-unification’ proceeded peacefully, the anti-maidan protest
 Mr Poroshenko, an oligarch with business interests in food and media industries, was elected president with a convincing majority vote . The vote was 'respected' by Russia though not recognised by separatists in Donbass .
 The situation in eastern Ukraine escalated further after the tragic downing of a Malaysian passenger plane on 17 July 2014 . The responsibility for the accident so far not fully clarified .
 Despite a fragile ceasefire negotiated between Kyiv authorities, Moscow and Donbass separatists in September 2014, a lasting settlement of the conflict is not yet in sight .
Only negotiations between Ukraine, Russia and the EU along the lines proposed earlierg. by Havlik and Emerson can help to de-escalate the conflict .
 Both Ukraine and the European parliament simultaneously ratified the AA/DCFTA on 16 September 2014 . Implementation of trade-related provisions will be postponed until end 2015, reflecting the trilateral agreement between the EU, Ukraine and Russia .
 The CIS free trade regime with Ukraine will continue to apply and consultations will continue . The latter has confirmed that the CISFree trade regime will continue.
 AA/DCFTAs with Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine were signed on 27 June 2014 . In the meantime, AA-DCFTas with Georgia and Moldova were signed in the meantime .
 Though the bill was never signed by acting President Turchynov, it sufficed to trigger mass protests in these regions .
 Ukraine is now facing a similar situation with the implementation of the DCFTA being delayed . This time with the consent of the EU, this time the EU.
 Western sanctions aimed at ‘stopping Russian action against Ukraine, restoring Ukraine’s sovereignty’ were initiated by the United States in March 2014 after the Russian annexation of Crimea .
 The spiral of sanctions rapidly escalated in the subsequent weeks and months . Largely symbolic in character initially, initially, the spiral began with sanctions .
 The exchange of letters between Putin and Barroso in late September/early October 2014 on the implementation of Ukraine’s AA/DCFTA and related Russian threats to abolish the CIS-FTA illustrates grave divisions within the trilateral agreements .
 The sanctions are supposed to last for one year and until July 2015 respectively . Barring other developments, the sanctions will last for a year and a year .
 USA imposes a ban on travel and transactions of 18 more Russian politicians . The ban also bans US dollar transactions involving Chernomorneftegaz and 15 other companies .
 Ukraine’s President Poroshenko imposes a ban on military and dual-use exports to Russia on 16 June 2014 . USA imposes ban on travel and transactions for an additional 7 Russian politicians and Ukrainian separatists .
 The U.S. Department of the Treasury is the largest government agency in the United States . The United States is the second largest in the world .
 The above asymmetries bear a number of important policy implications, not least regarding the implementation of the AA/DCFTA with the EU and Ukraine’s trade relations with the Russian-led Customs Union .
 The Russian economy is much smaller – a mere fifth of the EU GDP, even at purchasing power parity . It urgently needs Western technology if it is to modernise .
 U.S. exports to Russia were just 0.7% of the total in 2012 . United States imports from Russia were only 1.3% of their total .
 Cyprus, Greece, Great Britain, Britain, Portugal and Spain have minimal trade in goods with Russia . Spain has minimal trade with Russia. Greece, Greece and Great Britain have little trade in Russia .
 The latest available WIOD data on domestic content of exports in terms of GDP for 2011 were applied to 2013 GDP data in order to estimate domestic content.
 machinery and transport equipment are the most important export branches exposed to Russia . In absolute terms, machinery and transportation equipment are most important exports .
 Cyprus and Lithuania have a 25% share in total services exports . Russia is the most exposed to Russia, according to data .
 On EU average, transport, tourism and construction services exports to Russia accounted for more than 3% of the total exports .
 The UKRAINE CONFLICT 7 Policy Notes and Reports 14 / November 2014 electrical equipment .
 In Austria, it is machinery and equipment and pharmaceuticals that play a key role in exports to Russia .
 The bulk of these imports – 80% on EU average – consist of energy . 15.15% of energy imports are energy .15 4.15%.
 It is not easy to quantify the economic impacts of the sanctions separately . The sanctions have been imposed on Russia and Ukraine .
 We consider the ‘effects of the conflict’ in more general terms . We, thus, consider the effects of the war in moregeneral terms .
 15 Austrian imports from Russia reported by Eurostat show a gap of about EUR 2 billion in 2013 . The gap is presumably attributable to gas imports .
 similar reporting gaps exist also in data for Germany and the Netherlands . Similar reporting gaps also exist in Germany and Netherlands .
 EU sanctions have so far been rather disappointing (and a revision of the annexation of Crimea is completely unrealistic) EU sanctions are not punitive.
 Russia was ‘stuck in transition and stagnation’ already before the Ukraine crisis . The sanctions have undoubtedly augmented the negative economic developments in Russia .
 The economies of individual EU countries are affected to very differing degrees by the conflict . The conflict affects their trade exposure to the Russian market .
 The differentiation in the economic impact and other factors also explains in part certain features . See EC Factsheet, Press Release, 29 April 2014 .
 Russian government reckons with a GDP drop by 10% in 2015 . In a pessimistic scenario, the Russian government says it will see a 10% drop .
 Baltic States 19 have adopted a much ‘tougher’ attitude towards Russia given their historical experience . Hungary, Bulgaria, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Czech Republic favour a ‘softer’ approach . Austria, Greece and Cyprus have also adopted a
20 Scenario illustrates a more extreme escalation of the conflict with far-reaching economic and political consequences . Scenario corresponds more or less to the present situation, with Russian imports from the EU dropping by 9% in nominal EUR terms in first half of 2014 .
 This scenario would most likely be associated with the interruption of Russian gas supplies to the EU, confiscation of Western assets in Russia, wholesale travel bans and similar measures .
 We take into account trade in both goods and services, but do not consider all sector-specific effects . The lack of data is a factor in the study .
22 we quantify separately the impact of the food import ban imposed by Russia on 7 August 2014 . In the case of exports, we distinguish between gross exports and domestic value added in exports .
 There seems to be some indication that Russian imports started to diversify away from the EU, the Customs Union and Ukraine .
 Austria would lose less than 0.1% of GDP – a fairly small amount which is comparable to the EU average . Austria would have lost less than 1% of its GDP .
 The Ukraine conflict bears serious consequences not only for Russia and Ukraine, but it also poses a potential threat to the still frail economic recovery in Europe . The conflict is also a threat to Europe's still frail economy .
 Russia has retaliated with a ban on agro-food imports and restricted travel to the West . Russia has also banned travel to West for a year .
 The general climate between Russia, Ukraine and the West has been seriously damaged . The climate between the two countries has been severely damaged .
 Donbass used to account for 16% of Ukraine’s GDP and a quarter of its exports . Industrial production has nearly come to a standstill, largely as a result of power cuts and railway disruptions .
 The ban on exports of military and dual-use goods to Russia has further contributed to the export decline .
 Domestic consumption has been eroded by the spike in inflation and the IMF-imposed austerity measures .
 Ukraine's economy may contract by 8% this year, and the stabilisation prospects are unclear . All in all, Ukraine’s economy maycontract by 8%.
 In Russia, the country was ‘stuck in transition and stagnation’ already before the Ukraine crisis . The impact of the conflict is increasingly felt as well .
 The Western sanctions and the related political risks are hampering investments, economic growth and modernisation still further . The West sanctions and heightened political risks have hampered investments, according to analysts .
 A crude estimate of economic effects – lower GDP growth by about 1 percentage point compared to the pre-conflict scenario – yields a loss of Russian GDP close to EUR 20 billion in 2014 . More than EUR 30 billion in 2015 and EUR 50 billion in 2016, and more than
 The effects on the individual EU countries differ depending on their varying exposure to the Russian markets . The effects of the Russian market are similar to those of other countries .
 Cyprus, Greece, Great Britain, Portugal and Spain have very little trade with Russia . The two former countries have extensive exposure in tourism and finance .
 In Austria it is machinery, equipment and pharmaceuticals which play a key role in exports to Russia . In Austria, it is equipment, equipment, pharmaceuticals, which play the key role.
 Russia does not feature prominently among EU exports to Russia . It is not the first time the EU has exported to Russia.
Number of Russian tourists has already suffered a blow in 2014, by 20% in some cases . In EU services exports, travel and transportation are important, and the number of Russians is up 20% .
On the assumption of a 10% loss in gross exports of goods and services to Russia, the estimated GDP loss would be in the order of 0.5% for Lithuania, 0.4% for Estonia and 0.1% for Austria .
 The estimated impact of Russia’s ban on meat, dairy products, fruit, vegetable and fish imports is expected to be the highest in the Baltic States .
 The banned products amounted to more than EUR 5 billion of EU exports to Russia . Lithuania, Poland, Germany and the Netherlands affected the most in absolute terms .
 Russia might consider imposing an embargo on car imports from the EU, restrict state purchases of pharmaceuticals or even freeze some Western assets as a retaliatory measure . Russia might also consider imposing a car embargo on cars and pharmaceuticals .
 Excluding round-tripping of Russian flight capital via offshore havens (e.g. The Russian capital is located in Russia's eastern part of the country .
 The Russian sanctions information gap is the largest in the world . The gap is estimated to be the biggest in Russia's history .
Russia needs a ‘Finland option’ for Ukraine, says Brzezinski, Z. Brzezzinski .
Russia/Ukraine crisis casts shadow over emerging economies, London, 18 September. EBRD: ‘Russia/ Ukraine crisis castsShadow over emerging economy’
 EBRD: ‘The impact on the EbrD region of Russia’s food ban’, News, 9 September .
 The EU-Ukraine-Russia Sanctions Triangle has been dubbed the 'EU-Ukraine Sanctions triangle' by the EU .
 In Yalta about progress towards signing the Association Agreement’, Speech/13/727, 10thYalta Annual Meeting, 20 September . The Ukraine-Ukraine Association Agreement is currently being held in Ukraine .
 Centre for European Reform, London, 30 September . ‘Ukraine, Russia and the EU’
 Ignatieff, M . ‘The post-Ukraine world order’, 50th Annual Lecture, Ditchley, 12 July . The post-Ukrainian world order is the post- Ukraine world order .
 Inayeh, A., D Schwarzer and J Forbrig. ‘Regional Repercussions of the Ukraine Crisis.’ The Ukraine Crisis has been dubbed the Ukraine crisis .
 'Are the Economic Sanctions against Russia Effective?’ is DIW Roundup .
 EU Economies would be Resilient to a Russian Recession, according to the EU .
 The economics of sanctions between Russia and the West’, Bruegel, 17 September, is the economics of Russia’s economic sanctions .
 ‘Potemkin money’ is the wrong way to help Ukraine’, Financial Times, 10 March, 7.
 A round-up of EU foreign & neighbourhood policy’, www.hannes-swoboda.at, 27 August.at .
 Techau, J. J. ‘Europe’s Five Deadly Sins on Ukraine’, 4 March, is published in Carnegie Europe . The book is based on the book "Europe's Five Deadly sins on Ukraine"
 Trenin, D . ‘A War of Escalation’ is a war ofEscalation . The war was fought in Moscow between Russia and Russia .
 The Ukraine Crisis and the Resumption of Great-Power Rivalry. Trenin, D , ‘The Ukraine crisis and the Ukraine crisis’, 9 July, is at Carnegie Moscow Center .
 Medieninhaber: Verein "Wiener Institut für Internationale Wirtschaftsvergleiche" "A 1060 Wien, Rahlgasse 3.