 Lebanon, Turkey, and Jordan are not the world's only major ‘refugee’ hosting nations . Jordan is one of the world’s only major "refugees" nations .
 Ukraine hosts enormous numbers of people who have had to leave their homes because of war . Ukraine too hosts enormous number of people whose homes have been destroyed .
 Millions fled their homes in 2014 after Russian operatives and tanks invaded Ukraine’s eastern regions and annexed Crimea . Millions fled home in Ukraine in 2014.
 Instead, they are defined as “internally displaced persons,’ or IDPs, and are living in hovels, on couches, in shelters, or sometimes five to a room .
 According to Ukraine’s Ministry of Social Policy, 1. million Ukrainians are registered as IDPs .
 50 percent of people have applied for financial help from the state, which amounts to about $34 per month for people who are able to work and $17 a month for disabled persons . Approximately 50 percent have applied.
 The death and destruction caused by Russia’s occupation, in human terms, is horrific . The death of Russia's occupation is horrific, according to the author .
 Ukraine’s Ministry of Social Policy reported that 25,000 children live in towns and villages along the conflict line . They are still in insecure conditions.
 According to a February 2016 UNICEF report, twenty-eight children have died or were wounded by mines or other explosives .
 The conflict in the Donbas has affected more than half a million children in Ukraine . The conflict has affected the lives of more than 50 million children .
 Each third child -200,000 children -needs at least some psychological assistance . Each child needs some psychological help .
 Durnyeva: "They are certainly frustrated by the loss of their homes, as well as the broken families and social bonds" She says they are frustrated by loss of homes and broken families .
 The exodus began immediately after the Revolution of Dignity drove Ukraine’s larcenous President Viktor Yanukovych back to Russia .
 Russians invaded, cities have been ransacked, and millions of dispossessed persons have been victimized . Thousands of people have been affected by the attacks .
 Russia has not abated its aggression; the only reason it is not in Kyiv now is because of the Ukrainian military’s resistance . The Ukrainian military's resistance is to blame for the Russian aggression .
 Ukraine's foreign affairs committee chair Hanna Hopko says it's not a genuine offer to secure peace . Hopko is a member of Ukraine's parliament and chair of its foreign affairs Committee .
 Ukraine's dispossessed are invisible to the world. This is a refugee catastrophe, but unlike those millions forced to flee Syria or Sudan, Ukraine’s dispossess are invisible .
 If this were the case, the world would finally see -and fully condemn - Russian President Vladimir Putin's predation and flagrant breach of international law .
 Some of her relatives, who cannot travel, remain in the east near Russian-controlled areas . Some of their relatives are in Russia, but some remain in Russia's east .
 A friend who returned to the non-government-controlled area to get clothes was captured . The friend was captured.
 She works as an activist and registered as an IDP for her children to enter school . She is also registered as a mother to her children.
 Her organization helps local communities near the conflict zone by advising people on available resources and their rights . Her organization also helps people near the war zone by providing resources and rights .
 Russia has yet to be brought before the U.N. for waging this terrible war against Ukraine .