 The thesis is intended to examine how the actions of Sweden, following the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea, fit within the international relations theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism . The thesis was written by Derek Stanford Hutcheson.
 The thesis is built upon the pragmatic idealism theoretical perspective of international relations . It attempted to address how this perspective accounted for, or failed to account for, Sweden in the face of the escalating Russian threat .
 The thesis examined how Sweden-Russia relations evolved in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. First, the thesis examined the relationship between Sweden and Russia .
 Sweden-NATO relations changed after the 2014-15 annexation of Crimea by Russia . Second, the thesis examined how Sweden-Nato relations changed.
 The paper analysed how the evolution of these relationships affected Sweden's neutrality . In both cases, the paper found that the evolution was consistent or not consistent with the “pragmatic and “idealist” dimensions of the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism .
 Sweden's application of neutrality to international relations is an example of a pragmatic idealism . The paper drew an inference of the applicability of the perspective of the view of the Swedish government .
 Sweden's neutrality both prior to and following the invasion, as well as its subsequent actions, were in line with the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism . It concluded that Sweden's neutralism both prior and after the invasion was in line to a pragmatic perspective .
1.1. 1.2.1 . 1.3 . 2.2 . 1 . 2 . 2%. 1.4 . 2: 1.5 . 3: 2:1.5: 2.4: 3:5: 5:5.
 Research problem. 1.1.2.3.1 . 1.4.2 . 2.3 . 2 . 3.4 . 3 . 4.5 . 1 .3.5.5%. 1.6.5% . 3% .
 Research area and purpose. Research area: Research area, research area, and purpose .
5.5 1.6.5. 5.6 . 5.5 . 5 .5 . 4 . 5%. 5 . 4.7 . 5% . 5th . 3% .
 Thesis structure is a structure of a structure . Thesis structures are designed to create a structure.
 Literature Review. Literature Review:. 7 2.7 2.2.7.7 1.7 .
 Theoretical approaches to the study of neutrality are considered to be the best way to study neutrality .
 Neutrality and realism. 7.1.7.1 . 7.7 . 7 .
8.8.1. Neutrality and liberalism are the two most common terms for liberalism .
 Neutrality and pragmatic idealism. 9.9.1. 1.9 . 9.2.1 .
 Neutrality and Sweden are two of the world's most popular countries .
 Methodological approaches to the study of neutrality are considered to be the most effective method .
2.2. Comparative approach to the research on neutrality in international relations .
 Case study approach to the research on neutrality in international relations .
 Discourse analysis in the research on neutrality in international relations in the UK .
 Theoretical framework. 17 3.17 3.3.17. 17.17 . 17 .
 Definition of pragmatic idealism and neutrality is 18 4.18 .
18 4.3.2.4.5.6.2 . 4.5 . 5.4 . 3.5%. 5.5% of the world's population is under the age of 18.5 years old .
19 4.3.2.5.5 . 4.2 . 5.5%. 4.5% of the time spent on the study was spent in the study . 5% of time was spent on a single study .
 Thesis model is based on a series of images of a human body . Thesis is a model of the human body.
21 4.6 million people have been born in the U.S. since 2004 . The first time the number of people born in America was 4.5 million . The number of children born in U.N. was 3.2 million in the United States .
22 5.3.2.5. Validity and limitations .
23.23 5.3.23. 23.23 . 23 . 23. 23 .
 Russia's Invasion of Ukraine and its significance to Sweden. Russia's invasion of Ukraine is part of the country's history .
 Sweden-Russia relations are at 5.3.3 .
 Swedish neutrality in the context of Sweden-Russia relations. 27.3% of Swedish neutrality is based on the relationship with Russia .
 Pragmatism in the context of Sweden-Russia relations................28 5.3.3 .
 Sweden-Russia relations are in the context of Sweden- Russia relations .
 Sweden-NATO relations. 29.4.5.4 . 4.5 . 5.6 . 4 .5 .
 Pragmatism in the context of Sweden-NATO relations................33 5.4.4 .
In the context of Sweden-NATO relationship. Idealism in thecontext of Sweden's relationship with NATO .
36 7.36. Conclusion: "It's time for the world to get ready for the next few years"
39 Chapter 1. Bibliography: The first chapter of the book . The second chapter is the first chapter in the book, "The First Chapter of the Book"
 neutral states during violent conflict are prohibited, at least in principle and/or legally, from violating or attacking the territory of neutral states . Their implementation leads to the protection ofneutral states during violence, as countries engaged in combat are prohibited .
 Neutral states are prohibited from violating the territory of neutral states or attacking them . Adhering to these principles protects neutral states during a war .
 Sweden’s neutrality has remained unchallenged for the large part since it was adopted in the 1800s . Throughout the Cold War it remained neutral as far as the US and Russia .
 Sweden is outside of NATO, leaving the state more vulnerable to the risk of attack by Russia . Sweden is more vulnerable than Russia to attack, say Russia .
 An exception to a relatively steadfast neutrality though, emerged early in the twenty-first century . The first time the world has seen such a neutrality was in the early 20s .
 Russia’s actions in 2014 occurred after Swedish leadership had already begun to embrace wider views of neutrality . Sweden's leadership embraced the idea of solidarity .
 Sweden is a NATO-friendly non-NATO state close to Russia . Sweden is vulnerable to Russia as it is a member of the NATO- friendly state .
 Russia's actions before and after Crimea do not take attacking Sweden off the table . Russia does not attack Sweden off- table .
 Sweden has reintroduced military conscription for the first time in over 40 years . In 2018, Sweden sent out leaflets telling its citizens what to do if war comes .
 Sweden has signed an agreement with NATO to act as a host nation . The agreement allows for much closer cooperation, mutual access to military assets, and the stationing of NATO forces on Swedish soil .
 Sweden has discarded neutrality and departed from pragmatic idealism. These actions suggest that Sweden has abandoned neutrality . Sweden has departed from pragmatism.
 Sweden's actions suggest that the state is propelling itself towards the strategy of bandwagoning . Sweden has a history of neutrality, but its actions have been seen as an attempt to be neutral .
Research exists in the change of stance regarding Sweden's participation in international politics . Due to this, there is a problem necessitating research .
 The thesis of this paper focuses on how Swedish neutrality has evolved in recent years . It also focuses on the background of the recent developments in Ukraine .
 Study will focus on how Sweden's recent actions related to Sweden-Russia relations and Sweden-NATO relations fit within the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism .
 Sweden's actions seem to test the limits of the pragmatic idealism approach . If they do not, this thesis will explore what other theoretical perspectives could best explain Sweden’s actions .
 The study will also determine what the changes in Swedish neutrality mean for pragmatic idealism philosophy . Sweden is one of many small states in the unipolar world .
 The paper will focus on how pragmatic idealism accounts or fails to account for the actions of Sweden in the face of the escalating Russian threat .
 Prior to 1812, Sweden was largely engaged in conflict across Europe . At its peak, Sweden controlled a vast expanse of land .
 Sweden’s leading role in the Thirty Years War was significant, as it helped determine the political and religious balance of power in Europe at the time .
 Sweden’s neutrality was stretched on many occasions, yet still it came out largely unscathed in each World Wars . Although officially neutral in 5 both of the World Wars, Sweden's neutrality was also stretched .
 Sweden seems preoccupied with self-preservation, which from the realist stance on neutrality avoids questions of morality . Sweden seemed preoccupied by self-Preservation.
 Count Folke Bernadotte acted as a representative of Sweden through the lens of pragmatic idealism . He helped bring prisoners of war home, attempted to mediate a peace deal between Himmler and the leaders of England and the US .
 This represented the birth of true pragmatic idealism as an IR theoretical foundation for Sweden’s foreign policy and international affairs . This represented a real-life idealism.
 The focus of neutrality in the evolution of pragmatic idealism as a theoretical approach to IR in Sweden points to the end of Swedish neutrality, or the loss of morality from the practice of neutrality .
 Swedish neutrality would signal a retreat from pragmatic idealism 6 and back to small state realism . Swedish neutrality and its pragmatic idealist approach would be a departure from neutrality 6 .
 In the first part, the literature on the theoretical approaches to the study of neutrality will be reviewed .
 The thesis will then, in parts three and four, lay out the theoretical framework and present the methodology that is to be applied in the analysis of the data as well as the operationalization of the study .
 The fifth part will conduct an extensive analysis of the selected case using the methodology laid out . The analysis will include an analysis of a selected case .
 The sixth part will provide a summary of the study as well as the research implications of the findings . Finally, the sixth part as a conclusion will provide the study's conclusion .
 Research studies on the strategy of neutrality in IR attempt to situate neutrality within one of three mainstream theoretical perspectives . The strategy is based on the theory of neutrality.
 The first perspective is Realism, which considers neutrality as a strategy for selfpreservation . The first view is neutrality, which is considered a strategy to protect the environment .
 The second perspective is Liberalism, which believes that the decision by states to adopt neutrality as a strategy is based on domestic factors and international normative considerations .
 The final perspective is Pragmatic Idealism, which believes that neutrality is a practical strategy for IR that is moved by ethical considerations .
 Realists consider any action to be justified as long as it increases the security of the state .
 A realist considers neutrality as a way for the state to protect its self-interest in terms of security .
Realists view neutrality as an IR survival tactic, one with little place for morality in IR since "moral considerations of right and wrong do not apply in this anarchic, self-help state of nature" Realists believe neutrality is a survival tactic.
 Sweden was faced with the dilemma that joining the European Economic Community would be incompatible with neutrality . For instance, Sweden faced with a dilemma about joining the EU .
Tabensky says realists are pessimistic about man, while idealists are overly optimistic about man . Tabensky also says idealists overemphasising redemption .
 The pragmatic approach to IR leans more to the side of idealism than to the sides of realism, which minimizes morality . This is why the pragmatic approach is more likely to be more pragmatic .
 Sweden refrained from joining NATO in much the same way it had approached its 1972 dilemma . For a later example, even when the Cold War ended and Sweden joined the EU in 1995, it did not join NATO .
 The best theoretical perspective to explain Swedish neutrality is pragmatic idealism . The best theory to explain Sweden's neutrality is practical idealism.
 Sweden has departed from neutrality, according to some authors .
 I would however claim that these views form a all too straight forward view of neutrality, as will be seen . I would also claim that this is one that is unable to accommodate the ideas of pragmatic idealism .
 Methodological approaches to the study of neutrality Methodologically. There is a range of possible approaches to presenting discussions of neutrality .
 One approach compares neutrality of different states to each other . One approach is to compare the neutrality of each other to the neutrality of each state .
Case study takes one state's neutrality as case study without comparing it to other states' neutrality . The comparative approach involves several specific case studies .
 A 12 third possible approach utilizes discourse analysis as a prism through which to analyse the language, conventions, and conceptualization of neutrality . The 12th possible approach uses discourse analysis to analyse languages, conventions and conventions .
 The scholars collect texts and communications relating to neutrality . They critically analyse their use in defining and creating the idea and practice of neutrality .
 The comparative approach was used to compare two neutral countries and draw out patterns about their application of neutrality in their foreign policy and IR . This is the first time the two countries have been compared to each other .
 The comparative approach as applied by Jesse involves applying the same measures across the states to reveal unique characteristics of the neutral states that are the focus of the study .
 The advantage of the comparative method used by Jesse and Eliasson is that it helps to link theory to evidence, often across multiple cases .
 This is contingent on the researcher finding adequate data, which is not always the case . However, this is contingent upon the researcherFinding adequate data .
 Case study approach to the research on neutrality in international relations . Case study focuses on a specific case demonstrating neutrality in IR .
 A Case Study in Neutrality’s attempt to evaluate the viability of neutrality as a foreign policy .
 Hopper examined the background of Sweden’s neutrality, as well as the changes in the conditions of Swedish neutrality through various time periods .
 Discourse analysis is a common approach to research within IR to determine public opinion about neutrality . It shows how this fits within given theoretical perspectives .
 Analysis of Public Discourse on Neutrality in Austria and Ireland by Dagmar Zakopalová 15 examines public discourse on neutrality in two neutral states .
 The study concluded that while neutrality has been reconceptualized and narrowed down throughout the past 60 years, it is still perceived as an important principle of national security policy in IR . It is hard to follow in regards to applying it to contemporary wars .
 domestic factors more than international factors play a role in defining neutrality in the 21st century . Zakopalová comes to the conclusion that domestic factors are more important.
 Pro-neutrality rhetoric is more often than not prevalent in relation to public opinion and voter preferences .
 Sweden's neutrality is an interesting idea that should be considered when we shift our focus to public opinion in Sweden surrounding neutrality and the actions taken in the context of the Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 Deconstructing Concepts of Irish Neutrality using International Relations Theories . Theories are a series of concepts that have been used to build up the concept .
Ko�’an concludes that one limitation of the study of the development of neutrality in Austria is that those involved in the academic, as well as the political discourses, were too quick to provide an ”objective account’ and explanation of reality’
 The above are just a few examples of the different methodologies and how the research is generally approached .
Special focus needs to be placed on how we frame neutrality and how that neutrality is perceived both domestically and internationally .
 The literature on the theoretical perspectives of neutrality broadly examines neutrality in the context of realism, liberalism, and pragmatic idealism . The literature is based on the theories of realism and liberalism .
 The thesis of this paper is built on the assumption that Sweden’s exercise of neutrality is grounded neither in the extremes of realism nor idealism, opting instead for pragmatic idealism .
 This paper was interested in situating Sweden’s strategy of neutrality in IR within the pragmatic idealist theoretical framework . It combines the concepts of pragmatic idealism developed by Nossal and Tabensky .
 The paper combined the concepts developed by Simpson, Heywood and Czarny to establish a definition of neutrality . The paper also combined the concept developed by Heywood to establish neutrality .
 Sweden will determine the degree of Sweden's neutrality in the Russia-Ukraine conflict . The concepts of positive neutrality and negative neutrality will be utilized .
 Negative neutrality will refer to Sweden’s unwillingness or refusal to send its troops to one of the belligerent states . Sweden will not allow belligerents to use its territory.
 The paper will capture the full scope of Sweden’s neutrality . By using both positive and negative neutrality, the paper will be able to capture the whole scope .
 The case study method was the best suited to approach the research subject of Swedish neutrality in an attempt to answer the research question .
 This is not what the research is intended to accomplish, says the author . While the qualitative approach through discourse analysis would be excellent for examining the concept of neutrality .
 The Swedish response to Russia invasion of Ukraine is still a developing situation, despite military reports and Swedish rhetoric surrounding the invasion . The comparative method was undesirable because data on this topic might have been inadequate .
 Sweden is the first country to focus on Sweden . The country has been a focus for 18 years .
 The use of the case study was the most promising approach, according to the study . This left the use of case study as the most successful approach, allowing for the most powerful focus in line with the research question .
 Sweden’s response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine exists in the form of events, according to the Swedish government . The data from these events can be characterized into specific cases, so the case study method was amenable to the form in which data relevant to the research question existed .
 The analysis was conducted on cases that were selected to establish the level neutrality of Sweden's responses and level of threat of attack by Russia . Sweden's response to Russia's threat to attack was chosen to establish a level of neutrality .
 The meta-case was Sweden's response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, more specifically the cases of Swedish-NATO relations after 2014 and Russo-Swedish relations.
 This overarching case was selected because it was the most recent test of Sweden's claim of neutrality . The case is selected because of the recent Swedish referendum on the issue .
 The 2014 invasion of Ukraine by Russia was a significant turning point in the post-cold war relationship between the U.S. and Russia . The case selected was also relevant for the study of pragmatic idealism .
 The attack in 2014 represents the most recent time when the balance of power politics between the U.S. and Russia were significantly reinvigorated in modern times since the end of the Cold War . The Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2014 was in response to the Russian invasion.
 The case of Sweden also fits the least-likely case study method, which is interested in cases that pose the most severe test of IR theory .
 In the proposed research, the essential cases were the cases 19 least likely to fit the theory of pragmatic idealism . They suggested a shift in neutrality .
 A change from neutrality to partiality would be revealing of the failure of the theory of pragmatic idealism to explain Swedish neutrality . A change would reveal the failure to explain Sweden's neutrality .
 The Swedish response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine was the best method to test the pragmatic idealism theory . This paper is based on the thesis of this paper .
 A shift from neutrality to alignment for a neutral state indicated a shift from the pragmatic idealism strategy in IR if the shift was not justified ethically and/or was not practical given the prevailing political reality . Thesis model was the central assumption.
 The paper examined data from various primary and secondary texts for the case study .
 Swedish media sources include statements by government officials, policy documents, official Swedish government press statements, public records, and international media reports .
 Sweden's government or Swedish media might have provided a one-sided account of Sweden's response . For instance, relying mainly on the data from Swedish media may have provided an account .
 The primary and secondary texts selected were strictly focused on the topics of Swedish-Russia relations and Swedish-NATO relations prior to the Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 The scope of analysis was limited to texts published within a short period of time . From 20 February 2014 to 12 August 2019, texts were published within the short period .
 The date 20 February 2014 was the day Russia officially occupied the territory of Crimea .
This provided data relevant to the variable of compliance to pragmatic idealism principles . This provided datarelevant to the Variable of Compliance to pragmatic Idealism principles.
 The second kind of data that was collected related to the prevailing political reality that provided the context for Sweden's response to the invasion .
 This data included incidents of direct threats from Russia on Sweden, as well as any verifiable verbal threats in the texts collected . This data includes incidents ofdirect threats from Russian on Sweden .
 Sweden's response to questions about how it reacted to criticism of its treatment of the country . This gave legitimacy to Sweden's responses, and allowed me to examine how and why Sweden reacted to the criticism .
 The analysis of the texts started by reviewing what the Swedish response was to Russia's invasion of Ukraine . The analysis focused on Swedish-Russia relations and Swedish-NATO relations after the 2014 invasion .
 The analysis then determined whether Sweden's responses in the wake of Russia's invasion of Ukraine were practical given the prevailing political reality .
 This tested the pragmatic dimension of pragmatic idealism in the exercise of neutrality by examining if Sweden's actions were justifiably practical under the circumstances .
 Analysis determined if Sweden's responses were justified by moral principles that are the ethical foundation of pragmatic idealism . The analysis also determined if Swedish responses are justified bymoral principles .
 Sweden has always practiced its neutrality in the modern era in conflicts and IR in general . The analysis was conducted within the context of a reference point .
 Sweden's response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine was pragmatic and idealist or not, according to analysis . The analysis attempted to situate Sweden's reaction to the Ukraine invasion within the pragmatic idealism theory .
 Sweden would instead offer a more applicable perspective to approach how Sweden exercised its neutrality .
 The best of my ability laid out the reasoning behind picking the data, as well as the methods in doing so . I have to the best of his ability to pick the data .
 The coding protocol has been laid out in section 4.3, and the conclusions to the analysis have been explained in section 5.5.5 .
 Ko�’ans research concerning Austrian neutrality. There is a lack of what he calls “epistemological realism’s” in order to explain certain phenomenon .
 Swedish actions prior to and following the Russian invasion of Ukraine. I have to the best of my ability taken into account historical and political factors regarding Swedish actions .
 Case study methodology allows us to investigate how or if Sweden's actions fall in line with pragmatic idealism . However, a limitation that is already apparent here is that while case study methodology lets us investigate how and if Swedish actions fall into line with idealism.
 Sweden has practised its neutrality since it became a neutral state . Sweden's response to the invasion of Ukraine by Russia is contingent on first coming to terms with how Sweden has been neutral since the invasion .
 Sweden has been a renowned arbitrator in conflicts because all sides recognize and trust the state’s impartiality .
 The 2014 attack on Ukraine took place in this context of long-standing Swedish neutrality and diplomatic leadership .
 Russia's interests within its sphere of influence were threatened when Ukraine started leaning closer towards EU and NATO integration . Russia was unsure if it could maintain control over its warm 24 water base in Syria .
 The invasion of Ukraine for Sweden is that it created a precedent that shows what would motivate Russia to invade countries in Europe . The invasion was a precedent for Russia in Europe and Sweden .
 Sweden does not have to pick a side in NATORussia balance of power politics . As a neutral country, Sweden does no need to pick side in power politics, says the country .
 Sweden would be unwise to ignore the threat of Russia when it comes to both its internal affairs and its border security . Sweden is also dealing with cyber, political, and hybrid warfare .
 Russia's expansionist ambitions may put Sweden at risk of being attacked in the same way Ukraine was invaded . Sweden may also be at risk from being attacked by Russia in same way as Ukraine was.
 Sweden's response to the Ukrainian crisis was conducted in a way that bolstered the credibility of its neutrality . Sweden was a victim of Russian violations of international law, and neutral diplomatic activity with both Russia and Ukraine that took into account those objective violations by Russia .
 Sweden’s advocating for the idea that staying true to international law can thus be seen as a form of neutrality .
 Sweden's relationship with Russia can be characterized by a tough but respectful attitude within cordial diplomatic relations . On the one side, Sweden's relations with Russia have been described as "tough"
 Sweden put it at the center of the international response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine . Sweden's status as a neutral country put it in the spotlight after the Ukraine invasion .
 Sweden committed to neutrality by not isolating Russia and remaining aware of the role Russia could play in resolving the conflict . This displayed Sweden's interest in becoming a partner in the peace process .
 Sweden has shown its solidarity with Ukraine in terms of international law . Sweden has also shown its support for Ukraine in the past . Sweden also has shown solidarity with Russia in the same way .
 Sweden has involved balancing between standing in solidarity with Ukraine and international law . Sweden has left open diplomatic channels for engagement with Russia regarding the role that it can play in de-escalating the situation .
 Swedish neutrality can be positive if a country abstains from getting involved in a military conflict or allowing belligerents to use its territory for military purposes . Swedish neutrality in the context of Sweden-Russia relations is positive .
 The U.S. can be negative if the country decides to align with one belligerent or allows the belligerents to use its territory for military purposes .
 Sweden’s relationship with Russia has remained diplomatic after Russia invaded Ukraine . Data suggests that Sweden's relationship with the Russian country remains diplomatic .
 Sweden has openly declared Russia’s actions as a violation of international law . Sweden has also kept the diplomatic channels open .
 Sweden's willingness to lead a military mission in Ukraine on the condition that Russia is on-board shows its commitment to impartiality . Sweden will lead a mission in the Ukraine on a condition that Russian is on board .
 Sweden has not sent any of its soldiers to Ukraine or Russia, and it has not allowed its territory to be used by either Russia or Ukraine . Sweden is not allowed to send any soldiers to Russia, or Ukraine.
 Swedish neutrality after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine could be classified as being positive .
 NATO signals to Russia that it is prepared to rethink neutrality if Russia continues to pursue aggressive, threatening courses of action . At the same time, its growing relationship with NATO signals that it will rethink neutrality .
 Sweden's actions in response to the annexation of Crimea were consistent with the pragmatic dimension of pragmatic idealism . Sweden's response to Crimea annexation was consistent with a pragmatic dimension.
 Sweden shaped its values within the broader global interests of territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine . Sweden shaped the values of its territorial integrity in the Ukraine .
 Sweden's response was consistently framed within the EU response as a pragmatic calculation that would enable it to speak out against Russia as a deterrent if the same aggression was to be directed towards Sweden . Sweden's reaction was consistent with the European response to Russia .
 Sweden was redrawing Europe's map near its borders and there was a possibility that Sweden would suffer the same fate as Ukraine . The simple political reality was that Russia was red drawing Europe's maps near its border .
 Sweden engaged with Russia on a diplomatic platform, knowing that its military capacity cannot help it fend off such an attack . Sweden's practical approach for Sweden was the promotion of broader global interests that would also serve Sweden's interests .
 Russia's actions against 28 Sweden are making it harder for Russia to get away in the future with any similar actions directed at 28 Sweden .
 Sweden's pragmatism then facilitated the flexibility of its neutrality to advance its own interests without necessarily violating its neutrality . Sweden's pragmaticism then, then, facilitated the flexible of its neutralism .
 Sweden's response to Russia and Ukraine encompassed the majority of the ideals of pragmatic idealism . Sweden-Russia relations were discussed in the context of the Sweden- Russia relations .
 The relationship between Sweden and NATO has also evolved after Russia's attack on Ukraine . Sweden-NATO relations have also evolved since Russia's attacks on Ukraine.
 Sweden has now grown to become one of NATO's most active partners in the Baltic region . Sweden has 29 of the most active members in the region .
 Sweden has a policy of military non-alliance in line with its stance of neutrality . The invasion of Ukraine by Russia by Russia in 2014 brought Sweden and NATO closer in a relationship .
 Sweden only did so in late May 2016, another gesture of its non-eagerness to do anything to disrupt its neutral persona . Sweden did not move aggressively to ratify it, rather than move aggressively.
 The agreement overall allows NATO to operate more freely in the Swedish territory . The agreement also allows the U.S. to operate freely in Sweden .
Support for Sweden joining NATO has become increasingly popular among Swedes overall . Data shows that these views are not isolated to the political class .
 Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has stirred up the Swedes and increased public support for joining NATO in Sweden .
 The closer relationship established between NATO and Sweden through the signing of the Host Nation agreement in 2015 also created a path for NATO to participate in Sweden's military exercises . NATO will participate in the exercises in Sweden.
 SwedenNATO relations have evolved after the 2014 invasion of Ukraine by Russia by Russia . Sweden's claim to neutrality has been questioned during a conflict .
 Sweden has forged a closer relationship with NATO, but it remains a partner as opposed to a member of NATO . It can at least signify an attempt to remain impartial in NATO-Russia power politics .
 Sweden's policy of neutrality to guarantee national security without a 32 military alignment is still rooted in public consciousness .
 The prospect of shifting Sweden's doctrine of defence policy was met with opposition from the leadership of Sweden's military . The current neutrality-based policy was the best approach for Sweden.
 Sweden's claim to neutrality in NATO-Russia power politics is the signing of the Host Nation Agreement in 2014 . The only major thorny issue in Sweden’s claim to neutralize Russia is the sign of the agreement .
 The signing of the agreement would be considered as a positive shift in Sweden's neutrality with regard to NATO . The agreement allows NATO to use Sweden's territory during a conflict .
 NATO does not oblige Sweden to provide NATO with any help . Neither does it require NATO to help Sweden in a conflict as long as it remains a non-member .
 Sweden has promised both Russia and its citizens it will not do. The status quo is preserved in the short-term even in the face of the Host Nation Agreement because of the lack of any binding agreements .
 Sweden abstained from joining NATO because it recognizes that doing so would indicate that it had abandoned its neutrality . This means that Sweden is abstaining from joining the alliance because it does not want to join NATO .
 NATO and Russia are clearly hostile to each other. Sweden's close ties with Russia are still an act that Russia would fairly consider hostile and not neutral .
 This move weakens the strength of such neutrality, but does so for entirely practical reasons . The move is not to be seen as a sign of neutrality .
 The actions of Sweden were pragmatic because they were the most practical choices given the prevailing political reality .
 The political reality was that Russia was redrawing Europe's map, and there was a possibility that Sweden would suffer the same fate . Sweden would also suffer from a similar fate .
 Sweden needs to forge closer relationships with viable partners during conflict . Sweden can count on a partner during a conflict, according to the Swedish government .
 The decision to stay out of NATO was a pragmatic decision because it did not force Sweden to directly choose a side in a war which did not involve it, such as a conflict between NATO and Russia .
 Sweden-NATO relations are founded on pragmatism, says Göranson . Being closer to NATO is the most practical thing that Sweden can do in the face of Russian political and military activity in the Baltic region .
 Sweden’s relationship with NATO is part of a greater pragmatic plan to guarantee its sovereignty without having to abandon its claim to neutrality in a practical sense .
 Sweden's relationship with NATO was a practical calculation meant to reinforce Sweden's capacity for receiving help from other countries in the event of a conflict . But it was not a realist attempt at picking a side in a conflict between NATO and Russia .
 Sweden's neutrality in the context of how it related to NATO after the Ukraine crisis was consistent with the “pragmatic dimension of the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism. This provides evidence that Sweden's exercise of its neutrality is consistent with its approach to the Ukrainian crisis .
 Sweden's response to Russia and Ukraine encompassed the majority of the ideals of pragmatic idealism .
 Sweden practised moderation when relating to NATO by avoiding an escalation through NATO membership . First, Sweden practises moderation.
 Sweden shows commitment to the value of solidarity with countries in need by its readiness to stand with Ukraine and also its Nordic neighbours . Sweden also has support from NATO to maintain Nordic stability .
 Sweden cultivates its relationship with NATO within an environment framed by ideals of moderation, solidarity with countries, and cooperation in international affairs . Sweden is a member of the NATO alliance .
 Sweden’s exercise of its neutrality in the context of how it related with NATO after the Ukraine crisis was consistent with the ‘idealism’ dimension of the theoretical perspective of pragmatic idealism . These three values are part of the idealistic basis of
 Sweden chose to remain neutral by avoiding the joining of any military alliances that would be involved in the confrontation in Ukraine . Sweden's response to Russia’s attack on Ukraine relates to the Swedish-Russia relations .
 This pragmatic calculation to remain neutral would avoid antagonizing Russia unnecessarily . This is a pragmatic calculation.
 Sweden framed its response within the ideals of an authentic commitment to international law and moderation . Sweden's emphasis on diplomatic, multilateral solutions to international problems.
 Sweden's exercise of and adjustments to neutrality when dealing with Russia and Ukraine in the Russia-Ukraine conflict was consistent with the predictions of pragmatic idealism . Sweden has been criticized for its neutrality in the conflict with Ukraine .
 Hypothesis 2: adjustments were made both ethically and practically that kept or enhanced Sweden’s practical reality . This finding provides support for Hypotheses 2, namely that adjustments were make both ethical and practically.
 Sweden managed to balance practical and idealistic ideals in the face of the Russian threat . The Host Nation agreement allowed NATO troops to work within Swedish territory and partner with Swedish forces .
 The invasion of Ukraine was part of the Russian expansionist agenda bent on redrawing Europe's map . Putin’s dream of reversing the events since the fall of the Soviet Union has come true .
 The conflict in Ukraine over Crimea involved Russia and Ukraine, but also included NATO and its allies by extension .
 Sweden has to remain impartial in its relations with Russia, Ukraine, and NATO in this conflict . This means that as a neutral country, Sweden must remain impartial. This means the country has to be impartial in the conflict .
 Swedish government aligns itself with the West after Ukraine’s invasion by Russia . The actions of the Swedish government may point to a possible departure from neutrality to partiality .
 The most useful cases through which to consider were Sweden-Russia relations and Sweden-NATO relations . Sweden- Russia relations are the most useful case to consider .
 Sweden refused to participate in the Russia-Ukraine confrontation in Crimea except for peacekeeping purposes with a blessing from Russia . Sweden-Russia relations were enhanced by adjustments to their neutrality .
 Sweden's practice of neutrality in Sweden-Russia relations was a pragmatic calculation . It was able to stand for law and peace but also operate in a way that took Russia’s concerns and interests into consideration .
 Sweden's practice of neutrality in Russia was furthering human values such as solidarity with victim countries in need, commitment to international law, and emphasis on diplomatic solutions to global problems . Sweden's policy of neutrality was also furthering its human values.
 Sweden stood in solidarity with Ukraine without isolating Russia for both pragmatic and idealistic reasons . Sweden's practice of neutrality was consistent with pragmatic idealism .
 The study concludes that pragmatic idealism allows Sweden to be flexible in its practice of neutrality in international relations .
 Sweden has a wide range of choices when dealing with NATO, Russia, and Ukraine . This gives Sweden a range of options for dealing with the three countries .
 The analysis is grounded in case study methodology, but it's based on quantitative data . The analysis would have delved into how elite/international opinions shape neutrality policies as well .
 Sweden and Finland would make for an interesting area of study as well in the context of NATO allegiances and an encroaching Russian Federation .
 Sweden has applied its policy of neutrality in the wake of Russia's invasion of Ukraine . Herein it has been shown that the flexibility is consistent with the theory of pragmatic idealism .
 Sweden's application of neutrality in international relations has not only been infused with idealistic norms but also remained practical given the increasingly harsh political realities in Sweden’s neighbourhood .
 The implications of these findings are that they build support for the position that pragmatic idealism is still relevant for small neutral states such as Sweden .
Small states can practice flexible neutrality to serve their interests within broader global goals without having to be sucked into power politics or abandon morality .
 Pragmatic idealism helps nations to practice neutrality within a set of principles . It allows for flexibility to accommodate the prevailing political realities while still advancing norms .
 Sweden's shifts fall squarely within what has been described in this thesis as pragmatic idealism . A great case indeed, that Sweden’s shifts fall within what is described as pragmatic ideals .
 Sweden's neutrality is not as hypocritical or as abandoning neutrality then, but as sticking to neutrality as much as possible without setting itself up for geopolitical self-destruction .
In Pikulicka-Wilczewska, Agnieszka and Sakwa, Richard. Richard. How It Works, and How It Doesn't’, in Pikulicki- Wilczewski, in the book .
 The origins of the Ukraine crisis and the need for collective security between Russia and the West. Sauer, Tom ‘The origins of Ukraine crisis’s crisis and need for Collective security between the West and Russia .
 Wood, Elizabeth and Pomeranz, William and Merry, Wayne and Trudolyubov, Maxim Roots of Russia's war in Ukraine, were all involved in the Ukraine conflict . Wood,Elizabeth and Pomersanz were among those who died in the conflict .