 New forms of censorship online are carried out through distributed attacks on freedom of expression . The attacks are often as effective, if not more, than the kinds of brute force techniques by state agents .
 Their goal is not always to block users, content or themes, but to attack the democratic discourse . They want to weaken trust in institutions like the media, other governments, the opposition, and civil society .
 These strategies increasingly polarize and diminish the networked public sphere, author says . Media and civil society are more dangerous and confined, he says .
Multiple sources, not just the state, use the state to amplify campaigns that intimidate, confuse, and ultimately silence . They come from multiple sources, including the state. They use both complicit and unwitting citizens.
 As soon as the internet became an important tool for sharing independent news, authoritarian governments and their political allies started to seek ways to censor and block content that might undermine their grip on power .
This represented a direct form of censorship in which regimes suppressed objectionable content by removing it from the public sphere . This represented adirect form ofcensorship, says the author . The author says it was a form of censorship in which regimes suppress objectionable content .
 authoritarian actors are becoming more sophisticated in the strategies they use to curtail access to information and freedom of the press . Now, however, they are using more sophisticated strategies to curtail information and press freedom .
New technologies have developed novel, distributed forms of censorship that utilize new technologies, such as automated social media accounts and selective throttling of bandwidth, to constrain news circulation and public discourse .
 New tactics are often less perceptible by the general public, but they have the overall impact of undermining an open and independent news media ecosystem .
 Traditional forms of censorship seek to overtly block content from circulating . These new forms are less focused on totally removing content from the public sphere .
 Rather, they seek to disrupt the media ecosystem by overwhelming it with content, often hyper-partisan stories and even downright disinformation, or by chilling communication through slower internet speeds .
When viewed together, these tactics represent what can be called a distributed attack on expression and press freedom . When viewed together. These tactics represent a distributed attacks on expression.
 As in a DDoS assault, in isolation, none of the incoming requests is out-of-the-ordinary or seen as malicious, but together the effect is paralyzing .
 The attacks are launched from different systems operating in conjunction with each other rather than a single source . They can also be more difficult to address because they are distributed .
 authoritarian regimes and other political actors have used new mechanisms to influence the flow of information in ways that undermine the ability of journalists to report stories, disseminate their content, and assess what information is reliable and accurate .
 These conditions curtail the ability of media to fulfill their role to inform the public, stifle discourse in civil society . These conditions have the longer-term effect of eroding public trust in the news media .
 Over the past couple of years there has been a heightened, global awareness about the impact that disinformation campaigns can have on political processes .
 Social media has taken on new manifestations in the age of social media . It is not a new tactic, but it is one that is taking on new forms of cynicism .
 Little attention has been given to the chilling or stifling effects of disinformation campaigns on freedom of expression and the press. Little attention is given to disinformation campaigns.
 Even when audiences remain unconvinced by disinformation or propaganda, the distribution of intentionally misleading information can still achieve its goal of undermining a free and open news media ecosystem .
 disinformation campaigns may be directed by state actors or their direct proxies, in many cases . In many cases they are independently amplified by real individuals acting on their own accord .
 This is another way in which these new mechanisms are distributed, and therefore harder to counteract . This is one of the new ways to distribute and distribute. This is also another way to counteract the distributed mechanisms .
 The blurred lines and multiple vectors from which this type of content emanates make addressing these distributed attacks on freedom of expression and the press incredibly complex .
 The media ecosystem has also undergone a dramatic shift over the past twenty years . Complicating matters even further, the media ecosystem is also changing .
 New tech platforms, like Google, Facebook, and Twitter now play a central role in the global circulation of news . The advertising market has had a negative impact on privately-owned news outlets traditionally supported by advertising .
Business models of social media corporations have generated perverse incentives, says the author . Social media companies have created perverse incentives that have exacerbated the problem at times, he says .
 In many instances, the lack of transparency practiced by private companies has also obfuscated the true scope of these challenges and how are they affecting societies .
Report will examine how new forms of distributed online censorship have undermined freedom of expression and press freedom in ways that defy conventional notions of control . In Ukraine, Turkey, Turkey and the Philippines, Bahrain, and China, this report will look at how new online censorship has undermined press freedom .
 These various methods are often used in conjunction with each other, by teasing them out as much as possible . We gain a better sense of how public and private sector entities and broader civil society can respond to each other .
Journalists and those concerned with the development of news media ecosystems must understand how these techniques operate .
There is no easy policy solution to the new forms of censorship because these practices often take advantage of technologies that when utilized for other means, are benign or even beneficial . Unfortunately, there is noeasy policy solution.
 They are in a sense dual or multi-use, and difficult to gauge and implement effectively . They are hard to gauge, and are difficult to implement effectively, say experts .
 An automated social media account that warns people of traffic congestion is quite different from one that disseminates state propaganda . For example, an automated social network account that tells people of congestion is different from a state propaganda account .
 Ultimately, we need to develop responses that address the problem while at the same time do not undermine freedom of expression or the development of new technologies .
 Internet shutdowns are only the bluntest instrument in a large toolkit of authoritarian or semi-authoritarian rulers . They come at a cost, and they come at the cost .
 A report from the Brookings Institution estimated that the costs of 81 internet and social network shutdowns during a period from 2015 and 2016 totaled over $2. billion in dictatorships . Saudi Arabia, Ethiopia, Brazil and India were among the countries affected .
 In all cases, there were clearly economic costs to shutting down the internet, or even blocking individual pages, domains or social networks .
 HTTPS makes it difficult for regimes to block specific pages a user requests from a domain because the request is encrypted . Many countries have increasingly had to block entire networks, as Turkey did for Twitter in 2015,12 or China and Iran .
 A state will come under criticism for shutting down the internet, and not only for the costs, but also for the political implications of blocking a key avenue of communication, information and expression .
 Government agencies, police, emergency services and command and control systems also rely on the same networks, both social and technical .
 regimes are relying on new technological tools to monitor and disrupt the flow of news and information online . These tools include automated accounts, analyzing fast-expanding stores of data, or manipulating algorithms .
 authoritarian governments and other undemocratic actors are using to disrupt and manipulate democratic dialogue online . The new methods are designed to allow the internet to continue to operate, while providing greater control over how information is disseminated and reaches the intended audience .
 Some of these techniques can be used domestically, but also abroad . More importantly, some of the techniques can also be used abroad .
 This is feasible given that they often employ global social media platforms . This is possible given that the social media platform is often used on global platforms .
 The tactics include the use of networks of automated accounts, as well as individuals employed by the state or a private company with connections to the state .
 Other forms of computational propaganda include the manipulation of algorithms to change the topics of conversation . The manipulation is also used to manipulate pages, posts, advertising and other content that users see .
 Governments and other entities can make use of large stores of data that private entities have gathered on individuals to target them very precisely and filter what they see online .
 This power to change the trends of social media is combined with the influence these social networks and topics can have on traditional media . This power can be used to change social media trends and topics .
 For instance, if stories go viral on Facebook or Twitter, they are often picked up on television or in newspapers and online outlets . For example, stories on Facebook and Twitter go viral.
 automated tactics can be amplified and augmented with various methods, computational, viral, and supported by various forms of media .
 The following sections of this report contain examples of how these new forms of censorship are operating in different authoritarian and contested democratic environments all over the world . The report also contains examples of the new form of censorship.
 The examples illustrate techniques that are being used by regimes to monitor populations, censor citizens, block networks, and affect social media that often originates or is hosted in democratic countries .
 In each case, the stifling impact on the news media is clear, from the disruption of content distribution to the de-legitimatization of sources .
 Evident too in each case is a grave threat to the possibility of democratic dialogue, says David Cameron .
 Social media has become an increasingly important arena for the circulation of news and the formation of public opinion . marketers and political advocates have taken to these platforms to promote their brands and messages .
 Influence campaigns take on a whole other dimension when funded by states with deep pockets and enacted with specific geopolitical intentions .
 In these instances, the motive is not to reach individuals with information that could potentially be useful, but to flood the public sphere with false content . It's often difficult for citizens to filter what information can be trusted and what cannot, says author .
 The Russian government launched a concerted effort to disrupt the news media ecosystem amid the political upheaval of the EuroMaidan protests . This is what happened in 2014 in Ukraine when the Russian government launch a concerted attempt to disrupt news media .
 The use of state-sponsored trolls to spread disinformation and to attacks Ukrainian journalists online was one of the primary tactics that the Russian government employed .
 Russia's ability to successfully coordinate these efforts in Ukraine was based on several important factors . Russia’s ability to succeed in Ukraine is based on numerous factors, including Russia's success in Ukraine .
 Russian government had already developed a network of paid posters under the government of Dmitry Medvedev .
 President Medvedev embraced social media and became known as the “blogger in chief’s” for his use of blogs and other social media .
 The first instances of organized networks of paid posters and automated accounts connected to the government surfaced at this time .
At the onset these activities were mostly to promote and draw attention to the president’s writings and other content online . However, in contrast to the campaigns that would come to attack democracies in other countries, at the onset were mainly to promote the president.
 Putin implemented a more aggressive internet policy in 2012 . He implemented more sophisticated filtering systems and the weaponization of troll networks to attack opponents .
 Internet Research Agency, a quasi-independent organization with deep connections to the state, emerged at this time . Companies such as the Internet Research agency have deep connections with the state .
 Petersburg based group brings together a complex of programmers, spammers, and simple computer users who design and participate in varying online campaigns against opposition candidates .
 Russia's political and legal climate seriously affected the way that the media operated in Russia . These tactics combined with the oppressive legal and political climate affected the media's operations .
 Those few outlets that remained independent had to develop strong cybersecurity practices to protect sources and keep their operations online .
 Many Ukrainians got their news from Russian language television and radio . This cybernetic connection with Russia made the country very susceptible to a disinformation campaign .
 Ukraine represented one of the most fertile places in the world for a new kind of propaganda, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This intervention, which began in 2014, showed the power of these networks to extend their reach outside of Russia . This intervention was the first in 2014 .
 2004 Orange Revolution had resulted in the defeat of Russia’s ally Viktor Yanukovych in an election that pitted him against a Western aligned, European-oriented candidate Viktor Yushchenko .
 Yanukovych's government cancelled an agreement to move towards integration with the European Union . Six years later, Yanukovych regained power in another election only to be challenged by another round of protests .
 The protests coalesced in Maidan Square in Kiev and the movement they generated came to be known as the EuroMaidan .
 Yanukovych and many of his key ministers fled to Russia and parliament called for special elections to replace him . Russian soldiers took control of government buildings and strategic infrastructure in Ukraine's Crimea region .
 Crimea was incorporated into the Russian Federation in November . Crimea was under Russian military occupation and was denounced as illegitimate by the west .
 Russia-backed agitations for succession have since embroiled Ukraine’s Donbas region . Further Russia- backed agitations.
 Russian government denies assistance to Ukrainian paramilitaries in Ukraine . The downing of a Malaysian Airways flight by those groups during the war became foci of disinformation campaigns by Russian government .
 Research by the Oxford internet Institute’s Computational Propaganda project shows that networks of “trolls’ or paid social media accounts have been particularly prevalent in Ukraine throughout these events .
 Accounts manipulated by paid users to post about specific topics or “like other posts, accounts or pages cost as little as $0.90 on social networks such as Facebook, Twitter, and VK.21 These networks were often based in Russia or other former Soviet Russian republics .
 Some trolls, often amplified by bots, spread messages based on common themes and central organizational principles . In other cases they did so in more decentralized and multifarious ways .
22 bots and trolls were used to amplify content that supported the Russian narrative that the EuroMaidan movement was a Western-backed coup . Users who objected to this narrative, confuse users about facts on the ground, or encourage various hashtags to trend on social networks .
 Bots or trolls could even be used to monitor real users for violations of the terms of service and report them with the goal of getting them banned or suspended .
Bots and trolls sent thousands of requests for takedowns to Facebook and other moderation teams . One journalist had their Facebook account disconnected for posting about the downing of a Malaysian Airways commercial airliner MH17 .
Ukrainian journalists say they were targeted by a distributed form of attack on freedom of expression and the press . They said they sought to hinder the ability of journalists to communicate the news and prevented citizens from being able to easily access high-quality information .
 Ukrainian journalists have played a major role in exposing bot networks and the use of Russian computational propaganda .
 New forms of journalism can counter new forms of propaganda and censorship, says CNN's John Sutter .
This model is especially powerful when applied with traditional forms of narrative journalism . This model is particularly powerful when used with traditional form of journalism .
 Ukrainian government registered 40,000 individuals to work to oppose false narratives . The Ukrainian government attempted to form a user base of social media agents .
 The government has not been able to confirm that they have used this base in any consistent way . However, the government has been unable to confirm it .
 The Poroshenko administration chose a more blunt strategy, banning Russian television and radio from Ukrainian networks . It also blocked Russian social media sites such as VKontakte.
 It was a questionable decision, as this kind of blanket censorship seriously affects freedom of expression in democratic society . It was also a dubious decision, given the numerous ways to pierce the ban, such as VPNs or encrypted networks .
 Ukraine is currently divided by civil war, and unfortunately this division is reflected in its social networks . Ukraine has been exploited by Russia and its allies, which have been exploiting it .
 The country provides examples of how networks, both human and robotic, can shape narratives about events and people . StopFake and Texty can begin to describe and counter these narratives by identifying the networks that propagate them and the content they are sending .
 They are working to push back on these narratives by explaining why they are wrong and how to use social media to discredit them . They are also working to explain why the stories are wrong .
 Ukraine is both a sign of how new forms of distributed censorship can operate in contested contexts . Ukraine is an example of how civil society and media can begin to form effective responses, says author .
Developments in Turkey over the past five years provide another example of how authoritarian state agencies use large networks of pro-government users to undermine free exchange of ideas .
 Turkey exemplifies how these tools are being turned on their own populations to create a new form of distributed censorship . The work of independent journalists is incredibly challenging .
 Attack opposition social media accounts through networks of trolls and bots . Attack opposition accounts through network of trolls, bots and trolls .
 Often these coordinated attacks are complemented by the regime's supporters working in direct coordination with government agencies .
 Lodge complaints with Twitter and other social networks against accounts that are challenging the regime . The regime is trying to pull done the content .
 Hack journalists accounts and expose their private conversations to the public . Hack journalists account and expose private conversations.
 The first component comes through a network of supportive social media accounts . The first part of a social media network comes through the social media account .
 The central node in the network of these campaigns was often a group of over 6,000 supporters attached to the ‘New Turkey Digital Office’ that promoted ideas supporting the regime and attacked others that did not agree with the government’s perspective .
 These networks were also capable of activating thousands of followers in online social networks to support these campaigns . These networks also were also able to activate thousands of Twitter followers .
 Government affiliated and supporting groups increased their use of these tactics in March 2014 . They focused on defending Erdoğan and his allies from accusations of corruption .
 This account leaked confidential information that showed questionable business dealings of his Minister of Communication, Binali Yıldırım, and his son . The account was leaked to the media .
 The Shorenstein Center at Harvard defines this kind of campaign as a form of "malinformation" It describes information that is often true, hacked and leaked to discredit the user . Erdogan pledged to wipe out Twitter and even temporarily blocked it .
 #TurkeyBlockedTwitter helped end the blockage relatively quickly . Civil society and opposition groups responded by using VPNs and other workarounds to virtually tunnel out of the country .
 The use of state-led troll networks brings to bear state sponsored campaigns combined with members of the public that are influenced by them to post their own social media .
 This constitutes a distributed attack on democratic discourse, according to the U.S. National Security Council .
Second tactic used by the government was to tap these same networks to attack journalists by submitting complaints against their content .
 The objective of these repeated complaints from multiple different users would encourage social media platforms to remove the content . The objective is to remove content.
33.33 After the 2016 coup attempt, attacks on journalists, their organizations, and others in civil society extended to the online sphere . These trends only increased over time, as it became one of the largest supplicants of account deletion or content removal on the network through
 User accounts associated with the regime, or simply supporters, launched attacks on anyone critical of the government . The attacks are often fueled by a climate of hatred toward any opposition .
 A study of tweets attacking journalists in 2016 by the International Press Institute found that almost 10 percent of them were sexually related comments directed overwhelmingly at women .
34 networks have encouraged a climate of fear, self-censorship, and suppressed social and political expression online . Other methods catalogued included humiliating tweets intimidating content and “Threats of violence, other abusive behaviors, legal threats and technical interferences ”
 The government and its allies have also moved to attack journalists via a third vector, through hacking their private accounts and spreading confidential conversations with sources, coworkers, and other contacts .
 IPI found 20 cases of journalists having their accounts hacked in this period . Usually announced by the culprits taking control of their Twitter account and posting messages supporting the regime .
 Can Ataklı’s account was hacked by attackers who scrawled ‘I apologise to our honourable president to whom I was unfair and bashing all this time with my libels and insults’ with a picture of the President attached . His direct messages
 It should be noted that these types of attacks not only impact the journalists who are the targets, but also sow doubt and confusion among the broader population about who to trust .
 It can become more difficult to know what is real and what is false online. They create insecurity as it can become harder to find out .
 These tactics are combined with a fourth, more traditional tactic of simply prosecuting and jailing journalists . Finally, these tactics are more traditional than just prosecuting and jailed journalists .
 A new constitution criminalizes many kinds of speech against the state or the security services . This is now bolstered by a new constitution that criminalizes speech against state or security services.
 New forms of censorship are more effective in combination with stringent laws against threatening state security . The use of troll armies and hackers to find incriminating materials is more effective .
 Turkey provides a primary example of how distributed attacks on freedom of expression and the press can work in a country struggling to maintain a semblance of a democratic system .
 It is a powerful new tool in the arsenal of censorship that states can now employ . It can be a force multiplier in terms of policies and ideas, encouraging a public sphere defined by the narrative of the regime, and disparaging and inciting fear .
 The combination of legal, physical, and online threats has taken a toll . It has been effective in silencing the media, confusing users and blunting the effects of critical press from any source .
 Automation brings another level of coordination and computing power to bear through distributed forms of censorship . Automation is a form of censorship that can also be used in the future .
 Networks of automated accounts or bots, known as botnets, can be used to promote content, create trending topics or attack others . Individual users can operate thousands of individual accounts or even enable them to operate autonomously .
 The Philippines is now more commonly invoked in the study of how media freedoms and democracy can be unwound . The country's experience also illustrates how a strong response from media organizations can push back against new forms of censorship and control .
 Bots are especially good at inflating the importance of topics, repeating hashtags or other trends and content online . Bots are particularly good at using the tactic during elections, debates and other moments of acute political importance .
 Four days after Duterte declared his candidacy, observers found examples of suspicious increases in the tags associated with his campaign rising to over 10 times the combined mentions of his rivals .
 The Philippines provides an example of how automated systems work, but also how they can be identified and confronted via new independent media networks . The Philippines is one of the countries where these automated systems are being used .
 The organization has also profiled the use of bots by supporters of Duterte’s party and campaign . This led to a surge in support during his election in 2016 .
 They interviewed members of the campaign apparatus as well as organizations and companies that supported them, augmenting their reporting of the content of the messages with network analysis and interviews . They interviewed people who supported them .
 Uson's tactics paint a compelling picture of the state of the online space in the Philippines . She has requested that they be reclassified as a social networking group rather than a news organization .
 This reclassification would make Rappler more accountable to Uson’s office .
 The government has challenged its tax status by questioning its foreign funding . Others have sued it for libel under a 2012 cybercrime law .
 The government is trying to define Rappler as a social media company while pursuing it for tax evasion . Its methods of finding and identifying government accounts have achieved a qualified but notable level of success .
 Turkey's government blocked Twitter in recent weeks . The government has also blocked Twitter from Twitter .
 Throttling the internet is a form of censorship that is more difficult for users to detect . Users may believe their device or network has another technical issue unrelated to any form of government involvement .
 It is a distributed attack that covers many users who are reliant upon cellular networks to connect to their allies, friends, and family . It is an attack that is distributed on cellular networks . The attack covers many people who use cellular networks.
Several regimes in the region developed new systems for the control of their domestic internet . Bahrain provides an important example of the Arab Spring .
 As a small gulf kingdom under the control of a single family, the regime often censors speech that is harmful to its image, whether political, social or related to security issues .
 The media in the country is tightly controlled . Only outlets that are friendly to the government can operate, and multiple journalists have been jailed .
 The internet provides a key conduit for citizens to access information about the world . The internet is a key source of information for citizens .
 The country engages in widespread surveillance of activists and opponents of the regime, including with software that hacks the phones, computers, and other devices .
 These advanced surveillance systems are marketed by corporations as a method for law enforcement or intelligence investigations . But in the hands of authoritarian regimes, these systems can also be used to stifle opposition, track dissidents, incite fear in citizens .
 Cybersecurity becomes a critical element of operational security for any media organization working in these contexts . Cybersecurity is a critical part of operationalSecurity for any news organizations working in such contexts .