 Since Russia’s seizure of Crimea in early 2014, American and European efforts to resolve the standoff in Ukraine and reverse Russian aggression have failed .
Despite talks, sanctions, and repeated ceasefire agreements, Russian backed separatists, and even Russian troops, continue to instigate violence in eastern Ukraine . Despite talks and sanctions, the violence continues to continue .
 All too many underestimate the severe ramifications of allowing Moscow to violate the territorial integrity of yet another one of its neighbors .
 U.S. efforts to alter Russian President Vladimir Putin's calculus in Ukraine are on the rise . With circumstances unchanged, it is time to intensify efforts to change Putin’s calculus .
 Ukraine has steadily aspired to become more integrated with the West . Like many Eastern European countries that were once Soviet satellite states, Ukraine is now more integrated .
 Ukrainians, fedup with decades of corruption and economic stagnation, made this clear during the “Euromaidan’s Revolution of February 2014 .
 A month after Ukraine's pro-Russian president, Viktor Yanukovych, was removed from office, the Kremlin ordered an invasion of the country’s strategically important Crimean Peninsula .
 Vladimir Putin is terrified of the prospect of strong independent states aligned with the West existing on his country’s border .
 Free societies can determine their own future while sitting so close to Russia represent a direct threat to Russia's authoritarian hold on power . Free societies that can determine its own future can decide their future .
 Russian forces invaded the Republic of Georgia in 2008 because of its warming relationship with the Euro-Atlantic community .
 Georgia had its own proWestern revolution in the years preceding that Russian invasion . Like the Euromaidan in Ukraine, Georgia had a proWestern Revolution in years before Russian invasion.
 Moscow turns to concocting fake crises that are used to justify Russian military intervention . Moscow cannot subjugate its neighbors through disinformation, intimidation or corruption .
 Putin has used this method to defy international law and to break promises his country made to live at peace with its neighbors . For far too long, Putin has been using this method for too long .
 The 1994 agreement assured newly independent Ukraine that in exchange for giving up nuclear weapons positioned within its borders, the signatories would not threaten or use force against the “territorial integrity or political independence’ of the former Soviet republic .
 Russia broke this pledge in 2014 when its “little green men’s’ appeared in Crimea . Russia broke it in 2014.
 The 1975 Helsinki Accords and the 1997 Friendship Treaty between Russia and Ukraine also stipulate that signatories will respect each other’s sovereignty and borders . Additional agreements, such as the 1975 HelsinkiAccords, also stipulates that signatory will respect the other's sovereignty and border .
 Moscow’s unilateral annexation of Crimea and intervention in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine clearly violate these guarantees . Putin has no interest in abiding by diplomatic agreements or international norms, according to Russian media .
 The West is quickly becoming a war forgotten by the West . However, these violations are still climbing death toll in Ukraine .
 Between April 2014 and August 2017, at least 10,225 people died and 24,541 were injured from conflict-related causes in the region, the United Nations says .
 The Kremlin’s land-grab in Crimea and war in the Donbas could have far larger repercussions beyond Ukraine and the post-Soviet space .
 The blatant violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity by Moscow undermines the rules-based international order that the United States established following the Second World War . Moscow has led since the conclusion of the Cold War .
 Pro-Russian separatists refuse to abide by a complete ceasefire or to withdraw their heavy weapons . Putin ordered them to do so, something that would undoubtedly occur if Putin ordered it .
 Some of our European allies continue to insist that a new agreement with Moscow can resolve a crisis that Russia itself created defies logic .
 Russia has been under pressure to strengthen Ukraine in recent months . Russia has also been under increased pressure to help Ukraine . Russia is also under pressure in Ukraine to strengthen its economy .
 Putin sees that his objectives in eastern Ukraine are unachievable, or that holding Crimea is more trouble than it’s worth . Only when Putin sees his objectives are unACHievable.
 To alter the status quo, the U.S. must remain committed to bolstering Kyiv’s democracy and rule of law . The United States must continue to bolster Kyiv's democracy.
 Ukrainian state still controls, protect against further Russian subversion, and deliver on reforms that Ukrainians demanded during Euromaidan . This will maintain stability inside the Ukrainian state .
 The European Union is ratifying the Association Agreement that lies at the heart of the 2014 revolution . The EU is playing its part in this process .
 The agreement ensures that Ukraine has access to the economic benefits of the West . It also requires reforms to enable an independent judiciary and fair electoral laws . The agreement also requires reform to enable independent judiciary.
 The United States can build on the EU's efforts and expand Ukraine's ties to the Euro-Atlantic community by offering similar economic carrots that incentivize Kyiv to continue on the path towards good governance .
 The FY2018 appropriations package provides $410 million in assistance to Ukraine . More can be done, such as removal of existing barriers to trade .
 Ukraine has been backsliding on anti-corruption reforms, according to reports . It is important that we in Congress move quickly to encourage our friends in Kyiv to stay on course .
 The agreement does not go as far as Article 5 of the NATO Charter, which would require the U.S. to consider an attack on Ukraine as an attack. It does nevertheless stipulate that Washington and London should seek immediate UN Security Council action in the event of a violation of Ukraine
 Russia vetoed every such Security Council attempt back in 2014 . Unsurprisingly, Russia vetoed all such attempts back in 2013 .
 The U.S. must demonstrate that Moscow cannot veto American commitments without consequence . The United States must maintain credibility that its assurances mean something .
 The most effective way to reassure Ukraine and penalize Russia is to provide the weapons Kyiv needs in order to gain superiority on the battlefield and halt Russian advances .
 For the past three years, Russia has poured weapons into eastern Ukraine, arming separatists who show little restraint . The July 2014 downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over eastern Ukraine by separatist forces killed 298 .
 The Ukrainian Armed Forces need the edge that U.S. defense technology can provide . To increase the costs of Putin’s war in the Donbas, the Ukrainian armed forces need to increase their technology .
 President Trump's State Department has agreed to provide anti-tank missiles and other lethal assistance . The Obama Administration hesitated to supply the missiles, but the State Department agreed to help .
 Such weapons would render Russian-supplied armor vulnerable and minimize collateral damage . Such weapons, including the highly accurate and mobile Javelin anti-tank missile, would render Russia's armor vulnerable .
 The Javelin has a superior range, guidance system, and penetration abilities . It is true that Ukraine produces similar weapons .
 The provision of lethal military aid sends a clear signal to Moscow that the United States is willing to match its escalation and firmly back Ukraine .
 Ukraine must also make clear who is responsible for any further bloodshed. With this major step forward in strengthening Ukraine, we must also be clear who's responsible for further bloodshed .
 OSCE monitoring regime has provided much needed transparency to the conflict in the Donbas . More could be done to hold Russia responsible for the increasing number of violations there .
 The United States and our European allies must make it a priority to publicize each violation and support Ukraine’s right to defend itself in a proportional manner .
 Teeth can be applied to this policy by enabling the counterbattery features on previously supplied Firefinder radars that would allow Ukrainian forces to accurately return fire on the source of every violation . Teeth will be able to use these features on the previously supplied radars.
 A significant number of Russian troops are engaged in the fighting in Ukraine, according to evidence . Whatever escalation occurs will undoubtedly result in Russian casualties .
 Putin frequently shrugs off Western pressure, but he would find it difficult to ignore internal dissent spurred by the growing cost of blood and treasury lost in a war that Russia is supposedly no part of .
 The U.S. must also go on the offensive against the Kremlin’s worldwide support for terrorism .
 Putin has repeatedly shown that he prefers the use of violence to achieve his goals . From the murder of journalists and opposition members to the support of known terrorist groups, Putin has shown he prefers to use violence .
 Reports indicate that the Kremlin is providing arms not only to Ukrainian separatists but also to the Taliban in Afghanistan and to Iranian-aligned militias in Syria .
 Putin critics who have fled to the West have frequently ended up dead . Even Putin critics have been found dead .
 Putin has ordered an assassination campaign in Ukraine to eliminate those who stand in his way . Now it appears that Putin has orders an assassinationcampaign in Ukraine .
 In the past 16 months, six car bombs have rocked Ukraine, targeting security officials, journalists, and Kremlin critics .
 Exposing Putin as a state sponsor of terror will further isolate him on the world stage, strengthen his opposition at home . Ukrainians and others in the post-Soviet space that their struggle against Russian aggression is far from forgotten .
 The war in Ukraine may not always make headlines, but its importance cannot be overstated . The war is not always making headlines, and its importance is not overstated.
 Permitting Putin to continue violating international norms endangers the world order our forebears fought so hard to establish and preserve .
 Washington will demonstrate that it remains committed to leading the free world and maintaining the security of democracy around the globe . Washington will assist states that seek to break free of the Kremlin’s grip .
 Putin and other rogues must be reminded that aggression toward neighboring states comes with lasting costs . In order for that to happen, Putin and others must be warned that aggression against neighboring states can be costly .
 The U.S. has not only a strategic obligation to future stability and our own security, but a moral obligation to those seeking to live free . The United States has a moral responsibility to those who seek to livefree .