 No person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OM8 control number . Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person will face any penalty .
 The Concepts of Depth and Vulnerability Still Shape Russian Operational Approaches JUN 2016-MAY 2017 .
 School of Advanced Military Studies Program, School ofAdvanced Military Studies, is a major military studies program .
 Ukraine and Moldova have vulnerabilities in sociopolitical vulnerabilities, according to vulnerability assessments . Russia has a multi-faceted infonnation campaign with an asymmetric ground-game .
 specific vulnerabilities within the “depth’ of Ukraine and Moldova allowed “hybrid warfare’ to function effectively. Thus, specific vulnerabilities in the ‘depth” of Ukraine, Moldova let ‘hybrid Warfare’ function effectively .
 This work concludes with specific recommendations for identifying and rectifying such vulnerabilities . Warning against preparation for ‘hybrid warfare’ in at-risk countries with vulnerability .
 Russia; Ukraine; Moldova; hybrid warfare; information operations; framing; vulnerability assessment; deep operations; destabilization; psychological operations . Russia, Ukraine, Moldova and Moldova.
 The opinions and conclusions are those of the student author and do not necessarily represent the views of the Army Command and General Staff College or any other government agency .
 How the Concepts of Depth and Vulnerability Still Shape Russian Operational Approaches, by MAJ Peter C Bakke, United States Army, 45 pages .
 Russia allowed Russia to couple a multi-faceted information campaign with an asymmetric ground-game to enable conventional military operations . Case studies of Ukraine and Moldova show that specific sociopolitical vulnerabilities in those two countries allowed Russia.
 The Historic Deep Operation, Contemporary Approach, and Russian View of the Whole are all written in the book .
 IV Acknowledgement I would like to thank my wife Adriane and my three children for your patience as 1 researched and wrote this paper . I would also like to thanks my wife and three children .
 Gorman helped steer this work into a researchable direction, and for creating a research syndicate that provided feedback from his Moldovan and Ukrainian colleagues .
 The discussions within our syndicate kept this work grounded, weeded out some personal bias, and provided me with access to subject matter experts . The discussions in the syndicate were kept grounded.
 COL Leyde's perspective as a German Army officer and member of NATO was extremely helpful in broadening his aperture beyond a United States centric point of view .
 LTC Sergiu Cirimpei of the Moldovan Army and LTC Oleksii Tsariuk of the Ukrainian Army, thank you for the invaluable perspective you provided for the study .
 The work is a post-mortem of Ukrainian and Moldovan sovereignty from the viewpoint of the Russians who violated it . This work is the result of an investigation into what happened in Ukraine and Moldova .
 Perhaps there was an interaction between conditions in those countries and Russia's methods of warfare .
 This paper engages the above questions and proposes that Russia’s operational employment of asymmetric warfare and information operations were particularly well matched against sociopolitical vulnerabilities in Ukraine and Moldova . This paper is published in the U.S.
 Russian planners understood Moldovan and Ukrainian vulnerabilities prior to the application of force . The benefit of hindsight, the discussion throughout assumes that Russian planners understand Moldovan, Ukrainian vulnerabilities .
 It investigates what kind of information indicated exploitable vulnerabilities and how that information shaped Russian courses of action .
 The examination continues with objective analysis of Russian actions during the Moldovan and Ukrainian conflicts . The examination is part of an ongoing investigation into Russian actions in the region .
 The following chapters seek to unpack a mental model underpinning the contemporary “Russian conceptualization’ of warfare . Together, the following chapters unpack the mental model of warfare.
 It is important to distinguish between an undergirding mental model and the variety of operational approaches that can result from different operating environments .
 The Russian approach in the Chechen and Georgian conflicts manifested differently than 1 in Moldova and Ukraine . Russia had limited aims in all four conflicts .
 The Moldovan and Ukrainian conflicts book-ended those in Chechnya and Georgia . It's unclear whether Russian conceptualizations of warfare evolved at all .
 The paper argues that the Russian mental model of warfare has remained consistently tied to the metaphor of “deep operations’ and the exploitation of vulnerabilities beyond the front line . The paper also argues that Russian mental models of warfare have remained consistent with the metaphor.
 Russia’s recent action in Ukraine indicates a brand new operational approach for future operations . In practical terms, this thought process includes linking adversarial vulnerability assessments with the selection of military means . However, much recent writing implies that Russia's recent actions in Ukraine indicate a new approach to future
 Isserson’s historical deep operation and holistic view of warfare provide a useful mental model . We can better grasp how Russian planners assess problems and develop solutions .
 Russian planners visualize warfare is critical in grasping how they select and employ means . Such a frame is important because it is important to understand how Russian planners see warfare .
 Russian military writers provide direct evidence that “deep operations’ serve as a mental model for shaping operational approaches and the employment of military means .
Gerasimov discusses the use of conventional, unconventional, and informational warfare as an integrated whole to attack an enemy’s vulnerabilities in depth . Gerasimov: Use of conventional and unconventional warfare as a integrated whole.
Friendly capabilities and adversarial vulnerabilities are acting against each other in entirety . Friendly capabilities and vulnerabilities are a common problem in the world .
 He borrows the quote from Alekandr Svechin, another proponent of the deep operation and holistic view .
 The depth metaphor, as explained by Gerasimov, entails matching capabilities against a system of vulnerabilities presumed to exist throughout the depth of the enemy’s state structure .
 Russia might initially employ ‘hybrid warfare’ against Ukraine and conventional warfare against Georgia . This has real explanatory power for understanding why Russia might first employ “hybrid Warfare’s’S” against Ukraine .
 Proposals of a “new operational approach’ or a Russian revolution in military affairs simply do not account for the difference . Proposalions of a new operational approach or a Russia revolution in Military affairs simply don't account for difference .
The next section will clarify the depth metaphor to establish the framework between Russian vulnerability assessments and employment of force . The next section is to establish a framework between vulnerability assessment and employment.
 The Russian approach used in each case might subvert NATO Article 5 triggers if implemented against a member state . These particular case studies are important because the Russian approach is important .
 The driving assumption is that Russian information campaigns create, reinforce, and target the security concerns of ethnolinguistic outgroups . The driving hypothesis is the belief that Russian info campaigns create and reinforce, according to the author .
 This hypothesis and underlying assumption originate from a review of open-source material and news reporting on Russian actions in Ukraine .
 The initial research suggested that wedge issues like language and cultural affiliation held the potential to aggravate regional rifts and force Ukrainian operational planners to divert resources away from conventional military threats .
 Ukraine's Maidan Square protests took place amid widespread pro-European sentiment among many Ukrainians . Such actions took place amidst the backdrop of widespread anti-EU sentiment .
 Western media accounts of one particular conflict are insufficient for proving, or generalizing, the above hypothesis . But, Western media reports are insufficient to prove or generalize a particular conflict .
 The first case study examines potential sociopolitical vulnerabilities in Ukraine prior to the 2014 Russian incursions . The first study examined potential socioppolitical vulnerabilities.
Next, it explores whether Russian 10 and asymmetric warfare seem specifically tailored to those vulnerabilities . Next, it will explore whether Russia's 10-and-a-half vulnerabilities are specific .
 This case study focuses primarily on the conflict in the Donbas region . For brevity, this case study focus on the region .
 Second case study examines Russian actions in the Trans-Dniester region Moldova in the same context . The second case study examined Russian actions.
 The criteria above focus heavily on information campaign because the associated propaganda provides a written record of Russia’s desired perceptions .
 Results from the two case studies will be compared to determine whether generalizable conditions existed to facilitate the use of asymmetric and informational warfare to destabilize in depth .
 The metaphor employed throughout this work, like Gerasimov’s article, visualized vulnerability assessments and selection of military means as a deep operation . The metaphor was used throughout the work .
 Chapter one briefly traces the development and describes the concept of the historical deep operation . Chapter one describes the development of the deep operation. Chapter one also describes the history of the operation .
 Gerasimov’s “depth’ metaphor to demonstrate that his though pattern is a continuation of past Russian traditions . It also ties historic Russian thought concepts to Gerasim's ‘depth” metaphor to show that his “ depth’
 The following two chapters will examine the Ukrainian and Moldovan conflicts as described above . The following three chapters will include the Ukraine and Moldova conflicts .
 The fourth and fifth chapters will provide case study comparison and conclusions . The fourth, fifth chapters are expected to be released in the coming months .
 Unpacking this mindset is critical to understanding the metaphor employed by Russian strategic and operational thinkers as they envision the military defeat of their adversaries . Unpacking the mindset is crucial to understanding Russian strategic thinkers .
 A holistic view of depth captures the lens through which Russian planners assess the vulnerabilities of their adversaries .
 This is also the lens through which they select military means to exploit such vulnerabilities . This is the way they select such vulnerabilities and how to exploit them .
The vulnerability assessments of Ukraine and Moldova presented later follow this script . The vulnerability assessments were presented later followed by this script.
 Literature on Russian self-concept and word-view is extensive and complex . Literature on the Russian self concept is extensive.
 There are some consistent elements that repeatedly cut across specific and current ideological, political, and military discourse . However, there are also consistent elements.
 Russian thought, deep operations, and current operational approaches are most important for understanding the linkage between Russian thought and operational approaches .
 Russian thinkers historically compared their society with that of Western Europe . They found it wanting in terms of social, economic and technological development .
 Russian culture has experienced a dialectic between attempts at westernization and conservative backlash . Russian culture consistently experienced a reaction to westernization.
 The holistic view understands a complex entity not as a system of discreet sub-components, such as in the analytic western view . Put simply, the holistic view is that of the analytic Western view .
 The essence of an entity is found in the relationship between all of its parts, as well as the physical and spiritual components of its environment .
In 2008, Surkov wrote, “Russian culture is the contemplation of the whole,’ he said .
 The organic whole plays a clear role in the historical and contemporary military concepts of Isserson, Svechin, and Gerasimov .
 Isserson’s interwar writings and criticism of Western military operational approaches were not only an indictment of static trench warfare, they were a criticism of the analytic Western worldview .
 If belligerent forces are to be viewed as a whole, the friendly force must be arrayed to destroy an enemy as a entire . The friendly force will have to be able to destroy the enemy.
The whole of an enemy is defeated by the simultaneous destruction of his fighting forces and supporting systems . The whole of a man's fighting forces are defeated by his own fighting forces .
Isserson attributes this mode of thought as unique to a Marxist-Leninist form of war . Isserson attributes it to Marxist- Leninist mode of thinking .
 Isserson infused the traditional Russian holistic understanding of an enemy with a Marxist bent . Isserson viewed enemy social structures as the ultimate deep objective .
 This is a conceptual shift away from previous linear tactical formulations of depth . This is the first time this type of tactical formulation has been developed in a linear tactical formulation .
 Isserson understood interwar theories of airpower, armored formations, and long range indirect fire munitions . Isserson also understood airpower and armored formations .
 He envisioned how each theory’s attributes fit together and harnessed new technology to attack an adversary . More importantly, he envisioned how the attributes of each theory fit together .
Gerasimov urges Russian General Staff to develop tailored operational approaches to defeat adversaries . He urges them to harness new technology, information, and asymmetric advantages .
 Gerasimov’s own words inform the reader that the application of high precision weaponry is taking on a mass 10 Isserson, 4, 6 .
 He maintains a holistic view of Russian adversaries, employing a deep operational framework . He maintains his holistic view.
 The nature of the adversary will determine the type of emergent technology used to disrupt in depth . It will also determine the kind of technology used by the adversary .
Based upon Gerasimov’s assessment of the contemporary operating environment, 12 Ger asimov, 25, is considered a good candidate for the job .
 The Russian General Staff's attempts to develop an operational approach will guide analysis of the following case studies .
 The work hypothesizes that ethnolinguistically diverse former-Soviet countries engaged in nationalist discourse are at particularly high risk “hybrid’s destabilization methods. This work hypothesized that that ethnolsistically diverse nations engaged in nationalism are at high risk .
 If supported, this hypothesis implies that one should not assume Russia will always apply information operations to destabilize in depth . This hypothesis is not true .
 Recent actions in Syria and Georgia stand opposed to examples in Ukraine to show Russia has the capability and is willing to initiate conventional operations in an enemy’s depth with a much more modest asymmetric and informational effort .
 The task here is to identify what factors lead to asymmetric and information-related destabilization of the kind that is most likely to circumvent NATO treaty obligations .
Multiple versions of Ukrainian history have been written by historians with particular social and political agendas . Ukrainian history is a tricky subject because multiple versions have beenwritten by historians .
 There are many facts upon which most histories agree, but the following paragraphs inevitably focus on difference .
 There are two Ukraines with different conceptions of their role as part of the Western European and Russian spheres of influence . It is not a simple cliche to deduce that there are ‘two Ukraines’
 A 1999 study of Ukrainian elite opinion in the cities of L’viv and Donetsk showed that elites in Donetsk perceived themselves to be more culturally similar to ethnic Russians living in Russia than their Ukrainian compatriots living in L'viv .
 The same study goes on to discuss inherent dangers in such cultural heterogeneity, especially when one group holds political power .
 Such differences are based upon differing historical experiences among the Ukrainian population . Such differences based upon different historical experiences.
 The Western Ukrainian provinces of Galicia / Volhnia were historically subservient to larger European powers such as the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, Austro-Hungarian Empire, Germany, and Poland .
 Russia's social and political fabric totals less than a half century of Russian dominance .
 Donetsk, on the other hand, existed as part of the Russian Empire until it became part of Ukraine's Soviet Socialist Republic . Donetsk was once part of Russia's Russian Empire .
 Less than a generation separates average resident of Donetsk from nearly five centuries of Russian affiliation .
 Ukrainian people still self-identify as Ukrainian, but have greater affinity with Russian culture and systems of governance .
 The distribution of Ukrainian versus Russian language throughout the country. Evidence of this divide becomes most immediately apparent when examining the distribution of the language .
 Ukrainian scholar Oleksandr Taranenko, writing several years before the 2013-2014 conflict, described the basic 19 Shulman, 1015 .
 The 2001 Ukrainian census paints a more detailed picture of the breakdown of the Ukrainian population .
 In Western Ukrainian provinces, approximately 95% of respondents described Ukrainian as their primary language . In Western Ukraine provinces, about 95% described Ukrainian.
 In Crimea and Eastern provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk, seventy to ninety percent of respondents selected Russian as their primary language . In Crimea, 70 to 90 percent of people selected Russian.
 The geographic divide between predominantly Ukrainian and Russian speakers is rather sharp, with the three provinces mentioned above averaging a twenty to forty percent increase over neighboring provinces to speak Russian .
 Soviet repression of Ukrainian language bears heavily on the collective memory of many Ukrainian citizens . The country's history of Soviet repression has been marked by the Soviet regime .
 ProUkrainian language segments of the population maintain a strong political appetite for the restoration of Ukrainian language throughout all areas within Ukraine’s borders .
Residents of historically Russian-speaking areas view the post-Soviet language restoration efforts as an impractical political imposition . The restoration efforts are no better than the original repression of Ukrainian speakers .
 Many Ukrainians speak both languages, preventing the either-or dynamic common among linguistic disputes elsewhere . Many Ukrainians spoke both languages .
 The same two randomly selected residents of Ukraine’s cultural poles would be able to converse without any trouble .
 A language and experiential difference existed in Ukraine well prior to 2013 .
 Language becomes a salient issue for identity politics in contemporary Ukraine . Unfortunately, this dynamic appears to be changing as language is changing .
Differing Ukrainian historical understandings of the period form 1932-1945 provided another dormant area of potential division . Differing Ukrainian history provided another potential division.
 Soviet collectivization and war between Soviet and Nazi totalitarianism ravaged Ukraine . The war between the two sides ravaged the country .
 G Paul Holman described how ‘the true extent of Ukrainian suffering under Lenin and Stalin is beyond reckoning’
 affiliations from the Soviet-German war and characterizations of the Great Famine generally coincide in strength and polarity with areas of strong language preference .
Historical differences underpin propaganda used to frame Western Ukrainians as fascists . As will be discussed, historical differences will be debated .
 The International Journal of the Sociology of Language 2010, no. 35, is published in the Russian language journal .
 Language and historical cleavages happen to coincide with oppositional political affiliations . Language and political cleavage happen to be linked to oppositional politics .
 The political power of a political party can appear to represent the power of one group over the other . In an adversarial atmosphere, political power appears to represent one party's power .
 The dynamics of this division will be discussed in greater detail later . The dynamics will be talked about later in this division .
Ukrainian society has ethnolinguistic groups that are opposed in historical understanding, language, and politics . For now, the important point is that Ukrainian society has ethnic groups opposed to each other .
 From 1991 to 2013, no single issue or division was important enough to destroy Ukrainian nationhood . From 1991-2013, there were no single issues or division in Ukraine .
Each issue held latent potential, if bundled with the others in the right political context, to create opposing identity constructs . Each issue held potential, but each issue had latent potential.
 Ukrainians rejected President Yanukovych’s proposed entry into the Russian Eurasian Customs Union . Such was the context when Ukrainians rejected Yanukovych's proposed entry.
 Russian leaders seemed to understand that highlighting threat regarding one issue (e.g. language) could potentially polarize groups into opposing camps .
 Literature regarding ethnic conflict treats identity as an aggregate of shared physical, symbolic, linguistic, cultural, and practical behaviors that cause individuals to co-identify as members of the same group .
 Eastern Ukrainians may reject allegiance to the Ukrainian government if a perceived threat is strong enough to make political, historical, and linguistic difference more salient than areas of Ukrainian commonality .
 Resurgence of Ukrainian Nationalism is important in identifying countries at risk of hybrid warfare . The resurgence of nationalism is important.
 The discourse of nationalism in multi-ethnic or multi-lingual states opens a window for exploitation by outside groups seeking to divide the population .
 This section demonstrates the presence of nationalist discourse in Ukraine leading up to conflict with Russia . This section also shows the existence of a political divide between Russia and Ukraine .
 In 2004, two diametrically opposed candidates ran for the presidency of Ukraine . In 2008, Ukraine's president was elected by a narrow majority of voters .
Ukrainian authorities organized a second runoff supervised by international authorities . Ukrainian authorities organized the second runoff.
 Yuschenko emerges victorious with a perceived mandate to enact wide ranging social projects . Yuschenko emerged victorious with the perceived mandate for social projects.
 Yuschenko’s most significant projects were the recognition of the famine of 1932-33 as a genocide of Ukrainians . The rehabilitation of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists, the establishment of Ukrainian language in all primary schools .
 The rehabilitation of Ukrainian nationalist and anti-Russian symbolic leaders sent a clear political message to Russians and Eastern Ukrainians as to the nature of Ukrainian identity under Yuschenko .
By no means is this a complete and two-sided view of Ukrainian nationalism. By no means this is a complete view of Ukraine's nationalism .
 The Orange revolution was the period of 1932-45, events of the Orange revolution, and the resultant perceptions of Ukrainian nationalism by Yuschenko’s political opposition .
 At worst, such events might be manipulated to create the perception of Western-backed attempts to empower an OUN-like junta in Kiev .
 Russia simply needed to balance coercion and information around specific vulnerabilities . Russia needed a ground-game to balance coercive and information about vulnerabilities .
 The level of effort placed on Russian 10 planning and propaganda is comparable to U.S. military examination of host-nation infrastructure prior to forced entry .
 Russian planners “look to gain assets in an area with the sole purpose of observing the area and identifying core ethnic groups’s ethnic groups.
 The author’s research suggests that such collection efforts shape an operational approach carried out by Russian agents or ‘crisis managers’ who specialize in “community organizing’ and disruption .
 COL Bircher, Director of the United States Army Information Operations Proponent, is contributing to a forthcoming study on Russian use of information operations .
 Girkin has a sordid history of combining murder with separatism in Crimea, Bosnia, and Chechnya before entering Eastern Ukraine . Former head of the DPR, former head of DPR, has a history of mixing murder and separatism .
 Russian proxy groups needed a vehicle to mask their origin and gain at least some semblance of support from among the population .
 This is where the vulnerability assessment meets the information campaign . This is the place to check your vulnerability. This is a vulnerability assessment .
 This work rests on two assumptions. Propaganda Origins, Target Audience, and Content are based on two assumption .
 Russian information campaigns are deliberately planned affairs based on vulnerability assessments . First, Russian information campaign is based on vulnerabilities, according to experts .
 Russian permeation of the information environment is a comprehensive multi-level game . The game addresses audiences inside and outside the operating environment for varying puiposes .
This section focuses specifically on the first assumption by examining the process and content behind propaganda geared toward Donbass Ukrainians . This section focuses on the First assumption. The first assumption is to examine the process of the Ukrainian Operating environment .
 Earlier sections described exploitable wedges within Ukrainian society . Earlier sections describe exploitableWedges in Ukrainian society.
 One would expect to see evidence of such divides in the themes of Russian propaganda .
 Since Russia does not place a watermark on their information efforts, this work uses information put forth by Russian proxy separatist organizations in Donbas .
 In general, the documents on the DPR and NRU can be broken down into ideological documents and news updates that double as separatist propaganda .
 This work subjectively classifies forty-five documents as ideological statements of puipose . They attempt to characterize the nature of Russian backed separatism and the Ukrainian government as a whole .
 In general, as will be seen below, the ideological documents focus very heavily on socially divisive themes .
 Daily updates employ a wider array of topics presumed to be of interest for the target audience . Daily updates use a wider range of topics believed to be popular with the audience .
 A May 2014 call for support to militias is a good start point for breaking down propaganda content . It was to influence the general population in Donbass to commit violence against the Ukrainian military .
 The actions outlined within represent a link between the information campaign and disruption in depth of the Ukrainian military . The actions are outlined within the actions outlined in a statement .
 The document states that for “the first time since the Great Patriotic War... events occurred that not only resemble, but directly coincide with the actions of the Nazi occupiers .
 The author maintains digital and paper copies all of the documents referenced throughout this section for a separate project . The author maintained digital andPaper copies all the documents references throughout the section for the separate project.
Political cleavages of 2004 /2013 regarding the Western versus Russian orientation of Ukrainian nationhood are clearly being framed as the latest installment of Nazi collaboration versus Great Patriotic War loyalty .
 In this version of events, the Ukrainian military takes the place of the Nazi’s themselves and directly threatens the existence of ‘loyal’ Ukrainians . The Ukrainian military has been accused of being the Nazi's themselves .
 The Russian affiliated Ukrainian existence is threatened with the fascist policies and violent acts of the Nazi-like machine in Kiev . The Russian affiliation is threatened by fascist policies.
 In order to survive, Donbass Ukrainians must band together with their Russian brothers to form their own state under the protective umbrella of greater Russia .
 Russia has a cover to use non-military avenues to smuggle weaponry to irregular and proxy fighters . Third, it provides Russia with a cover for smuggling weapons to irregular fighters .
 Donbas Ukrainians are being used as props to link a destabilization in depth with conventional use of military force . In this sense, the propagandists are using the Donbas as props.
 The following quote, posted by the DPR in April 2014, is lengthy but provides the overall theme for several such documents .
 We don't want to do this and we are ready to fight for our future and the future of our children. We don’t want toDo this, we're ready toFight for our children's future and their future . We're not going to do
 Ukrainian army is already amassing military forces of the Ukrainian army, which put the order to act against its own people . appeal to you Vladimir Vladimirovich as a last hope .
 The ideological documents of the NRU and DPR conspicuously lack economic arguments, nostalgic appeals to Soviet prosperity, or political framework for cooperation with Ukraine or Russia .
 The NRU propaganda frames the current conflict in terms of the German Soviet War . The divisive identity components above generally coincided with opposing sides in that conflict .
 Donbass Ukrainians are being asked to reassume their past role and identity . Ukrainians are asked to re-assume their former roles and identity in a new role .
 The bridging device implies that Western Ukrainians have reassumed their past roles as well . Conversely, it implies that West Ukrainians have re-entered their former roles .
 Earlier, this paper discussed how the potentially divisive elements of Ukrainian identity might be bundled together to become salient .
 Ideological propaganda clearly calls upon those very divisive elements while introducing the ingredient of threat .
 The government in Kiev is trying to illicit an Eastern identity hostile to the government . The conditions indicate that the ideological propaganda is engineered along the fault lines of specific identity constructs .
 The hostile identity serves as the bridge to motivate the hostile actions needed to destabilize in depth. Further, the hostile identity is the bridge.
 This section briefly discusses the use of day-to-day propaganda linked with asymmetric warfare in Eastern Ukraine . This section also discusses the uses of day to day propaganda linked to asymmetric war in Ukraine .
 These documents should be seen as part of a multi-faceted information campaign that includes Russian media and government communication . These documents are part of the multi- faceted Russian media campaign .
 The “news” posted by the NRU and DPR ensures that local citizens interpret events in a specific way .
Daily updates provide examples and pictures to back up that claim . If the Ukrainian military characterize the military as “SS Death squads,’s daily updates provide example and pictures .
 The content of the news updates is generally short, usually half a page in length . The content is accompanied by imagery that this author has found to be inauthentic .
 The main headline of the news section incorporates a 24 story about the Ukrainian military killing civilians . The main story also boasts about a local militia victory .
 The language used in the stories is similar to the ideological documents in the World War 11 frame . The language is used to describe the war's ideological documents . The words used are similar to those used in its 11 frame.
 Ukrainian military forces are “Nazis,” while separatists are ‘patriots’ depicted wearing the historical Russian military Saint George ribbon . Ukrainian forces are "Nazis," while separatists were “patriots,’ according to the Russian military .
For example, imagery of a Ukrainian tank, taken from stock imagery, might have a swastika added .
 Images claiming to show carnage caused by the Ukrainian military are generally used several times . Images claim to show evidence of different atrocities .
 Other imagery and stories claim a Western conspiracy to destabilize the region . Other images and stories also claim Western conspiracy.
 The author found one story claiming to have “proof’ of U.S. Special Forces involvement in Ukraine . The author also found a picture of a fighter wearing a United States Army patch .
 The patch was of the 1-145 th Aviation Regiment, the holding company battalion for flight students at Fort Rucker, Alabama . Coincidentally, the patch was the 1.145th Aviation Regiment .
Despite its poor quality, the daily updates still seem to have the same target audience and purpose of the ideological documents .
 Donbas Ukrainians are under siege from a combined Ukrainian / Western fascist threat . Russia stands as a bulwark against an international cabal .
 The "news" updates seem intended to bombard the target audience with information that maintains that opinion . If the ideological documents are meant to sway the targets' opinion, they may be intended to sway them toward action .
 The propaganda does, in retrospect, line up correctly with military actions and indicates a link between the Russian proxy organizations, fighters, and information campaign . Although of poor quality, the propaganda does.
 The unique aspect of the routine propaganda is its specific calls to action . The unique element of the propaganda is the specific calls for action .
 Many documents specifically requested the assistance of metal workers, miners, and policemen for tactical engagements . Many of the documents specifically asked for the help of metalworkers and miners .
Routine propaganda provides details and forums for action . However, the routine propaganda provides information and forums .
 It directs existing sympathizers regarding how and when to make use of their frustration . It also directs already sympathizers about how to use their frustration.
In this sense, it mirrors the use of social media in the Arab Spring and Maidan crises . In this sense it mirrors social media.
 Donbas is an industrial heartland where control of the mining and metal working population can pay dividends for Russia and severely hamper Ukraine . Donbas has been a key part of Ukraine's economy for decades .
 It is possible that such calls to action serve the dual purpose of signaling identification with key audiences as well as generating support for military operations .
 The routine propaganda is written for a carefully selected target audience and based upon a vulnerability assessment of that group and Ukraine writ large . What remains certain, however, is that the routine propaganda was written for the target audience .
 "Demokratizatsiya" is the name of the Ukrainian Orange Revolution . It is called the "Orange Revolution" and "The Orange Revolution" It is the first time the Ukrainian government has taken control of the Orange Revolution in Ukraine .
 This article describes the evolution of the political character and self-image of the Donbass region . It describes the development of the region's political character .
 The article argues that depictions of Donbass Ukrainians as “Communists’ or as an apathetic pro-Russian voting block are inaccurate .
 Kiev and other regions benefit from the work of Donbass laborers. As such, Kiev and others benefit.
 Without the fruits of their labor, in this view, the industrially underdeveloped and overly aggressive Western Oblasts would collapse, writes John Sutter .
 Donbass Ukrainians do not receive an adequate share of benefits, due to underrepresentation in government, according to government .
 This self image combines with a proclivity to vote only for candidates from Donbass .
 His presidency was seen as a nod to industry and to Donbass itself . Thus, his presidency is seen as an indication of his support for Donbass .
 The article describes how Donbass candidates, particularly Yanukovych, tended to demonize Western Ukrainian candidates for their own political gain .
 Normally, this demonization hearkens back to World War II with the implication that Westerners pose an aggressive fascistic threat . The demonization of Westerners is usually a sign of an aggressive threat .
Political jockeying might have helped set conditions for Russian propaganda to the same effect . Of note, such political jocKEying may have help set up conditions for Russia's propaganda .
 Vulnerability Assessment Ukraine and Moldova have much in common if considering the tug-of-war between Russian and Western domination over the course of the 20 th century . Vulnerable Assessment: Ukraine, Moldova.
 The western section of Moldova, historically called Bessarabia, lies between the Dniester and Prut Rivers . The western part of Moldovan is known as Besserabia .
 The term Bessarabia is a loaded term but will be used here to differentiate between Moldova and the historic homeland of ethnic Moldovans not to include the Transnistria region .
Transnistria refers to the area east of the Dneister River . Transnistrian refers to area east east of Dniester, except when called “Dnieter’ster” in media reports .
 The MASSR was dissolved in 1941 when German and Romanian troops reentered the region . It was reunited with Romania under the Fascist “Iron Guard’s regime .
 The Soviet Union reconquered the area in 1944 and reestablished the MASSR by truncating the northern and southern portions of Bessarabia and adding Transnistria . However, the Soviet Union reestablished MASSR in 1944 .
The inclusion of Transnistria into the MASSR held potential to be socio-politically problematic . The inclusion of transnistrian into theMASSR has been criticized for being socio-political.
 As the MASSR entered into a nationalist discourse, its constituents faced a similar challenge as their Ukrainians .
 Others recognized historical kinship with Romanians but asserted their own ethnic identity . Others recognized historic kinship but claimed their own identity .
 Members of both groups view their language and culture to be intrinsically linked with those of Romania .
 The history of Moldovan participation in World War II carries some of the same divisive baggage examined in the Ukrainian case study .
 Moldovans divided between supporters of German-backed Romanian regime and supporters of the Red Army . Moldova is divided between the two sides.
In retrospect, one can clearly identify an ethnolinguistic minority with potentially pro-Russian political sentiment . In retrospect, it can clearly be seen as a pro-Russia minority .
 This group was separated by a physical and historical barrier from their more Romanian oriented brethren . The group was also separated by an historical barrier .
There are divisive identity constructs that could potentially be bundled together to create an adversarial population under the right conditions . There are divisive identities that could be bundledtogether to create adversarial populations .
 prior to conflict, prior to the conflict, Kaufman notes, “although ethnic fears were strong, ethnic hostility was not. However, as Kaufman says, ‘although ethnic fear was strong, it was not .’
 This section discusses Moldovan nationalism and the fear it seems to have created with Russified populations living in Transnistria . This section also discusses the fear of Russified people living in the country .
 The Soviet Union unwittingly played a role in the nationalist sentiment that, in some ways, led to its own destruction .
 This was particularly true in the case of Moldovans living in Bessarabia and Transnistria . The Moldovan people are said to be living in the country's capital city of Moldova .
 In order to maintain the integrity of the subordinate Soviet Socialist Republics, early Soviets often highlighted the unique ethnolinguistic aspects of groups living within those republics .
 Later Soviet leadership sought to Russify parts of each republic or install Russified individuals into positions of power within the party apparatus . Later Soviet leaders sought toRussify parts in each republic .
 In a study of Moldovan identity, Natalia Cojocaru notes that “Soviet propaganda propagated the idea of a Moldovan’s name .
 The Soviet system exacerbated ready-made identity conflicts by privileging Russian language and Slavic party members with higher paying management positions in business and government positions .
 The conditions were set for post-Soviet Moldovan nationalism as well as its backlash Transnistrian nationalism . The conditions are set for a post- Soviet Moldovan nationalization .
 Popular Front threatens to make Russian-speaking Slavs in Transnistria a national minority .
 Moldovan is Moldovan's official state language . Moldovan Parliament passed language laws that eliminated Russian from the stratum of business .
 Soviet elites in Transnistria framed them as a threat to the welfare of their constituents . The laws accounted for the concerns of minority groups .
 A detailed listing of Moldovan legislation and discourse indicating nationalistic tendencies is extensive . A detailed list of Moldovans' legislation is detailed .
An ethnolinguistic out-group of Russified Moldovans perceived a threat. What is important here is that nationalism was present in force, and that nationalism is present inForce .
 The next sections examine the role of the Soviet information campaign in stoking such fears and the resultant violent destabilization within Moldova . The next section examine the impact of the Russian information campaign on the country .
 Examination of the Propaganda. This section examines the information content available to the Russian-speaking Transnistrian population .
 Firsthand examples of on-the-ground propaganda, such as that used in the Ukraine case study, are difficult to find in the quantities needed to draw general conclusions .
 The conflict occurred in the early 1990s, but there is no primary source trail on the internet .
Transnistrians were exposed to throughout the period prior to and during the 1991 1992 conflict . Other research avenues provide a window into proRussian themes Transnistrian were exposed .
Transnistrian media, the sole source of outside information for the Russophone population, served as an echo chamber for Moscow based Russian media organizations . Stuart Kaufman notes that Transnistrians are the only sources of outside info for the Russian population .
 The bias of the Moscow press was significant because it reinforced the biased messaging reaching residents of Transnistria from their own local press, he writes .
Transnistrians would have been exposed to, based on trends of bias evidenced in Moscow-based media services . To be clear, this section is inferring themes Transnistrian would have be exposed to .
 The following analysis draws upon daily media translations issued by the Foreign Broadcast Information Service in the 90-day period from October 1990 to January 1991 .
 FBIS maintained over twenty international media monitoring stations for the U.S. government . FBIS issued daily paper and microfiche reports from 1941-1996 .
First, seemingly neutral coverage of cooperation efforts tends to highlight economic benefits of Russian / Moldovan Union . First, seeminglyneutral coverage of the cooperation efforts tend to highlight the economic benefits .
 discussion of Moldovan nationalist discourse usually highlights fears of unification with Romania . Second, discussion of the Moldovan national discourse usually focuses on Moldovan nationalists .
 Third, discussion of conditions on the ground highlight conditions of lawlessness and ethnic conflict . Third, discuss conditions on ground.
 Most articles reflect a bias in favor of Moldovan unity with Russia or sympathy for Russian speakers following passage of the 1989 language laws . Most of the articles in Moldovan are written in the 1990s .
 To refer to them as propaganda of the sort used by Ukrainian separatists is a stretch . However, to refer to the separatists as propaganda is not a stretch, it's a stretch.
 The intended message is much more subtle that those employed in Ukraine . The intended messages are more subtle than those employed.
 Most outlets mixed non-partisan coverage of more benign issues with inflammatory stories regarding the buildup to conflict . Most of the coverage was focused on benign issues.
 Positive coverage of Moldovan conciliation efforts became much less common, while characterizations of leaders bowing to Popular Front’s pro-Romanian agenda became routine .
 This turning point is apparent in the media coverage between November 8 th and November 20 th 1990 . The turning point was apparent in media coverage from November 8 to November 20th 1990 .
 The tone and content of the broadcast and print media illustrate a progression from themes of hope and cooperation to themes of lawlessness and Moldovan intransigence . The tone, content andcontent of the print and broadcast media illustrate the progression from hope to lawlessness .
 In November 8th, Moscow TASS and Moscow Kresnaya Zvezda printed hopeful stories titled “Gorbachev Invited to Visit,’ and “Russian Envoy Hopes Moldova Compromise Viable’ respectively .
 The three Moscow TASS headlines show that TASS and other outlets faithfully served as an echo chamber for the CPSU's desire to portray Moldova as chaotic and violent .
 These stories mark a critical turning point in Russian media coverage of the Moldovan crisis . These stories are the latest in a series of stories published by Russian media .
 The articles captured in FBIS daily reports indicate that Kauffman’s assertion of media bias is correct .
 A clear narrative consisting of several themes and characterizations emerges in news pieces . A clear narratives emerge in news stories .
 Most of the news pieces contain more than one associated theme . However, most contain a continuous reading of the stories .
 relations between Moldovans in Bessarabia and Transnistria deteriorated beyond the ability to compromise within the communist system .
 A piece published by Krasnaya Zvezda provides an example of several themes within the narrative . A piece by ZvezDA provides a piece of a narrative .
 A Moldovan soldier describes being assaulted for asking a Moldovan for a cigarette in Russian . The soldier says he was assaulted by a soldier for asking him to smoke a cigarette .
 An unnamed observer describes ethnic Moldovans, usually wearing military uniforms or militia insignia, assaulting innocent bystanders .
 The inclusion of insignia within the mobs of ‘hooligans’ is important because it implies that the attacks are organized and nationalist in nature . The inclusion is important as it implies.
 35 employed by Moscow TASS and Pravda correspond with the few examples of ground-level propaganda available to the author .
 FBIS reports characterize Moldovan Parliament as incapable of resolving ethnic disputes . Most stories in the FBIS report characterize the Moldovan parliament as incapable.
 The logical solution is military intervention and a union treaty with the Supreme Soviet . Of course, the logical solution was military intervention .
 The Moldovan case clearly illustrates that Soviet government used mainstream media as a conduit of propaganda for the purpose of influencing public opinion in Transnistria .
 Thematic analysis of the actual news stories available to Moldovans in Transnistria shows that Kaufman is correct in asserting that the Moscow-based media served as an echo-chamber for Russian interest in Moldova . Kaufman says that Kaufman's analysis of news stories in Moldov
 Media-based information campaign was tailored to exploit the vulnerabilities of an ethnolinguistic minority on the fringes of a nationalist majority .
One can see similarity between the forces at work in Ukraine and Moldova . One can see similarities between the two countries .
 A Russian information campaign related to the above conditions worked to facilitate separatism, and that separatism facilitated conventional military operations . That is, a Russian informationcampaign related to those conditions worked for separatism .
 The next section compares and analyzes the results of the preceding case studies to pinpoint the vulnerability associated with common conditions in Ukraine and Moldova . The next part compares and analyze the results. The nextsection analyzes and analyze the results from the previous case studies .
 Previous sections showed that Ukraine and Moldova were quite similar with regard to hypothesized conditions of ethnolinguistic diversity and nationalist discourse . Vulnerabilities in Ukraine and the Moldova are quite similar.
 The presence of ethnolinguistic diversity and nationalist discourse do not explain how Ukrainian and Moldovan vulnerabilities function .
 This section cuts to the heart of how Ukrainian and Moldovan vulnerabilities function, and how Russian information campaigns exploited them . This section includes a look at how Ukraine and Moldova's vulnerabilities function .
 A synthesis of conditional similarities in Ukraine and Moldova shows that both countries have a similar vulnerability rooted in their geopolitical histories and resultant identity constructs .
Both countries have disparate groups with overlapping identity constructs . Both countries have different groups of people with overlapping identities .
 Under normal conditions, there is enough overlap between group identities such that conflict does not occur . Under normal condition, there's enough overlap to avoid conflict .
 The Transnistrian would have had enough in common with other Moldovans to allow for common ground on many issues . For example, the Transnists would have been able to find common ground with other countries .
 Research on Ukraine and Moldova shows that there is typically little animosity between Russian speaking minorities and Ukrainian or Moldovan majorities .
 minority groups are susceptible to placing more weight on identity constructs that do not overlap with the majority population . However, when fear is introduced into the equation, minority groups may be susceptible to putting more weight.
 More specifically, such groups are vulnerable to manipulation when messages of fear are tailored to resonate with identity constructs not in common with majority .
 When such identity constructs are threatened, they may become defining factors of overall identity . Such identity constructs may be key to overall identity.
 identity constructs like linguistic preference might closely tie with other constructs to create a bundle of identity 38 constructs .
 Normally, an individual’s set of Moldovan / Ukrainian identity constructs might coexist with a Russo-centric set .
 A minority group might be goaded into prioritizing the identity constructs that do not overlap with the majority in their host country .
 The Donbas identity contains overlapping elements of Ukrainian, Russian, and Donbass specific constructs . The Donbass identity is based on Ukrainian, Russia, and Russian constructs .
 A regionally specific construct (e.g. centered on Donbas mining concerns) can provide an inroads with a target audience employed in Donbas mines .
 Exploitation of a sensitive identity construct can strengthen the salience of and relationship between similar Russo-centric constructs to illicit a separatist identity .
 Such misplaced thinking has been at the root of destructive policy, throughout history, says the author .
 Moldovans and Ukrainians did not envision such a problem anyhow . As the previous sections discussed, Moldovan and Ukrainians didn't envision such an issue .
 Ethnolinguistic difference did not lead to animosity in either country without extra help. Ethnalinguistic differences did not cause animosity in both countries .
 The vulnerability is more specific, and can be minimized with some effort . The vulnerability can be more specific .
Ukrainian and Moldovan vulnerability lies in the specific wedge issues related to the reinstitution of Soviet suppressed identity constructs . Ukrainian and Moldovian vulnerability lie in thespecific wedge issues.
 The Soviet regime marginalized and Russified Moldovan and Ukrainian language . The Russian language is the language of the Soviet regime .
 majority populations viewed the reinstitution of native language as part of the normalizing process without animus toward minority populations .
 Russian information campaigns to reframe nationalistic or identity related language in terms that could be perceived as threatening to heavily Russified minorities .
 Moldovans and Ukrainians pursue a Western vector of development because of the process and language driving reassertion of identity and Westernization are intertwined . This type of vulnerability plays directly into Russian hands, says the author .
Anti-Russian language can easily be twisted to present a threat. Both governments measure their language on such issues carefully and engage with minorities .
 This is a two-sided dialogue and care must be taken not to minimize the concern of the majority . However, this is aTwo-sided discussion and care is needed to be taken .
 The vulnerability exists precisely because the concerns of the majority are related to a real historical event, says the author . The vulnerability is because the majority of the people are concerned about historical events .
 Laws and language related to language resurgence are a rejection of Russian orientation, not of a minority population .
 Russian information and asymmetric campaigns in Ukraine and Moldova specifically tai'gctcd the inherent vulnerability presented by the language of resurgent identity discourse .
 Propaganda geared toward minority populations in Moldova and Ukraine injected the element of fear surrounding the language issue in order to solidify a proRussian identity .
 Moscow-based media provides a window into the information ground-game where lawlessness and attacks on Russian language speakers dominate the information space .
 In the Ukrainian case, falsified information regarding Ukrainian government and military activities creates an imagined existential threat and closer alignment with Russia . The Ukrainian case is the latest in a growing trend in Russia and Ukraine .
 In both cases, the information campaign reframed resurgent nationalist 40 discourse and legislation to reinstitute old divisions .
 Evidence of this lies in the use of Nazi imagery in Ukraine and Romanian “Iron Guard’s’ terminology in Moldova .
 In both cases, the propaganda products of the Russian information campaign are the end-result of a vulnerability assessment .
 The "Novorossiya" flag covers Donetsk, the Russian flag over Crimea, and the Nazi flag over Western Ukraine .
 Geographic placement of flags aligns with demographic differences discussed in previous sections of this article . The flags are placed in different areas of the country .
 The map above does not show demographic conditions or political beliefs as they exist in Ukraine .
 Russian 41 information campaign. It illustrates a set of desired perceptions engineered by proponents of a Russian information campaign . The Russian government is trying to change the public's view of Russia .
 Kiev is isolated from the Euro-centric vector of Western Ukrainians, unable to access or influence the industries of Donbass . Kiev is blocked from commerce and power projection associated with Black Sea ports .
 This emasculated version of Ukraine, depicted by the Ukrainian flag, is entirely dependent on a Russian vector of development and surrounded by destabilized areas that allow easy penetration by Russian conventional forces .
 Dotted arrows suggest how destabilization might allow further penetration in depth . Dotted arrow suggests how destabilizing might allow more penetration in Depth .
 The depth metaphor suggests areas for further attempted destabilization should Russia decide to attack to the west . The depth metaphors suggest areas for more attempts to destabilize the West .
 Transnistria, Donbass, and Crimea remain “frozen’s” in an internationally unrecognized autonomous condition . The Crimea remains ‘frozen,’ in an international unrecognizedonomous condition .
From a practical standpoint, the passage of time legitimizes the status quo in Russian favor . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in power for more than a decade .
 The answer to such questions requires a thoughtful analysis of Russian techniques and the thought process underpinning them . The answer is to consider Russian techniques.
 This paper also suggested that ‘hybrid warfare’ is not the correct lens for viewing the Russian operational approach . It also suggested “hybrid Warfare’s” is not a correct lens.
 Russian planners visualize an adversary as a systematic whole and select varied means to conduct a multi-faceted approach . It combines conventional, asymmetric, and informational warfare .
 The weight placed on each type of engagement would be commensurate with the adversary’s systematic vulnerabilities . The weight on each kind of engagement will be commenurate with each of the vulnerabilities .
 Individual case studies examined conditions in Ukraine and Moldova for evidence of ethnolinguistic out-groups, majority nationalist sentiment, and Russian propaganda intended to isolate the outgroup .
 Conditions did not adequately explain the key vulnerability allowing Russian exploitation . However, the conditions did not properly explain the vulnerability .
 The discourse surrounding previously suppressed identity constructs in Moldova and Ukraine seem to be the active ingredient that allowed for an asymmetric campaign of destabilization to take hold in minority areas .
 As depicted in the previous section, the areas where resurgent nationalist discourse resonates with a Russified 43 minority coincides with areas of Russian strategic interest .
 This work does not claim to identify what strategic interests are . This work doesn't claim to identified what those strategic interests were . It doesn't say what those interests are.
 Russia can politically neuter its adversaries by holding critical territory in “frozen conflict, or provide an operational avenue to threaten future conventional actions. However, the map of destabilization paints a picture where Russia can political neuter it adversaries by hold critical territory .
 Former Soviet states and their allies can take away from this interpretation of events in Ukraine and Moldova . There are several lessons that former Soviet states can take from this .
 The presence of nationalist discourse and a Russified minority in former Soviet states should be cause for an internal vulnerability assessment . The majority element seeks a Western vector of development, says the author .
Vulnerable states should examine the physical location of Russified minority groups to determine whether Russia could use identity-based propaganda as a pretext to mobilize geographically proximate minorities for the purpose of annexing territory .
 If vulnerable states and their allies determine that the above conditions exist, they should collaborate to enact a deliberate information campaign . The campaign is aimed at minimizing the possibility of Russian propaganda gaining a foothold .
Political dialogue must assuage the fears of a Russified minority, says John Sutter . Sutter: As a critical component of this campaign, political dialogue must be a critical part of the campaign .
 Former Soviet states should examine ways to strengthen ties that bind identity constructs between majority and minority populations . Second, at-risk former Soviet countries should examine how to strengthen the ties between minority and majority populations .
 Minority populations with strong social, military, and economic ties to the rest of the state might be less susceptible to manipulation of a single identity construct .
 At-risk states should recognize when “hybrid warfare of the type’s type is not a likely possibility, says author .
Recent discourse might lead NATO and allied former Soviet states to prepare for the wrong kind of war .
 Russia's Ambiguous Warfare and Implications for the U.S. Marine Corps. The Marine Corps is based in Russia .
 Speech at Expanded Meeting of the State Council on Russia’s Development Strategy Through to 2020 .
 David A. Snow, E Burke Rochford Jr, Steven K Worden, and Robert D. Benford are among the stars of the show .
 A Primer on Modern Russian Unconventional Warfare, Ukraine, 2013-2014 . The book is published in Ukraine .