 The battle to reclaim Ukraine's occupied territories is far from over, according to the country's foreign minister . Ukraine is trying to reclaim its occupied territories back from Russia .
Comedy actor Volodymyr Zelensky thrashed incumbent Petro Poroshenko in the first round of presidential elections . His comments come less than 24 hours after comedy actor played a fictional president in a popular TV show .
 The two largely pro-EU candidates are set to go head-to-head in a run-off vote on April 21 . The two mostly pro- EU candidates will go head to head in the run-up vote .
 The presidential elections marked the first national vote since Russia annexed Crimea in early 2014 . Pro-Russian separatists in east Ukraine supported an uprising by pro-Russian rebels .
 Pavlo Klimkin told CNBC's Steve Sedgwick in Kiev, Ukraine on Monday . "We need to get Donbass back, but we need toget Ukrainian Donbass," he said .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin traveled to Crimea to mark the fifth anniversary of the annexation of the region from Ukraine .
 The Kremlin has spent heavily to try to integrate Crimea since 2014 . It has built a bridge to link the peninsula to southern Russia .
 Western sanctions designed to punish Russia for its annexation of Crimea have helped to isolate Crimea, driving up prices and slowing its development . But, Western sanctions have also slowed its development.
"We need to show also that we are able to attract people, to show them that Ukraine is their future," Klimkin said .
 Ukraine has endured five years of war against pro-Russian fighters in its occupied Donbass region . In addition to a tense standoff in Crimea, Ukraine has been fighting pro-Russia fighters in Crimea .
 The fighting is estimated to have claimed the lives of approximately 12,800 to 13,000 people, according to the United Nations .
 Successive rounds of economic sanctions on Russia go some way to showing the West is still willing to support Ukraine . The West is willing to back Ukraine.
 Some external observers argue that a desire to prevent Moscow from interfering in other former Soviet republics could also be a root cause of the sanctions . However, some external observers say that Moscow's desire to stop other former republics may also be the cause .