Candidates in the 2019 parliamentary and presidential elections will enter that year with poor support rates . Candidates in that year will have poor support levels .
 The most popular parties in Ukraine stay below 20%, according to pollsters . All fairly visible political actors are mistrusted .
This looks like a harbinger of a cut-throat political battle for every voter from the pool of those who have not decided on their choice yet . This looks like an election year-long battle for voters who have yet to decide on their choices .
Nearly 40% of Ukrainian voters were undecided about the upcoming elections as of December 2017 . According to a survey by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology .
 This share of the electorate may well bring an entirely new formation to power in Ukraine . Ukraine is a country with a large majority of the population .
 The question is whether the 2019 candidates manage to get their act together and attract the support of this segment by the time the campaigns start .
 Given the current election moods, they will have to be enormously creative, and still have no guarantee of a positive outcome . The election will be the first in a long line of elections in the U.S.
 Ukraine’s voters blame on them all developments in Ukraine, as well as their own failed expectations accumulated during the Maidan and further fueled by populism in 2014 elections .
 The extent to which those in power are actually at fault is open to discussion . The extent of the problem is not clear .
 According to the Ilko Kucheriv Democratic Initiatives Fund, 74% of Ukrainians believe that developments in Ukraine are going in the wrong direction .
 Trust for the President is at -62%, -65% for the Government and -56% for Prime Minister . Trust for President is -62% for Government and at -56%, for the PM .
 Those in power still have a strategic advantage – they have the real tools to influence life in the country . There is only a handful of those in power, of which there are only a few .
Those in power can also count the decommunization campaign as a success . Those in power are also able to count the campaign as success .
 The only thing the government can do over this time is to increase social benefits which will fuel inflation . The government can only increase benefits to fuel inflation.
 The Government has again announced an increase of minimum wages to UAH 4,100 .
 President Poroshenko and Vice Premier Pavlo Rozenko have made such statements . The pair have made the statements in the past .
 Ministry of Social Policy has promised a 20% increase in pensions in 2019 .
 The media have long been talking about tensions between the President and the Premier .
 One of the alleged reasons is Hroisman's political ambitions and closer links to the People's Front . The alleged reasons are alleged to be his political ambitions .
 If conflict does erupt, Volodymyr Hriosman may be forced to resign in order to shed the negative legacy created by the previous economic hardships .
 The top five priorities for the public include anti-corruption, pension, healthcare and law enforcement reforms . Top five priorities include the lustration of officials .
 The President, the Government and the parliamentary coalition are named among the top five obstacles alongside oligarchs and law enforcement authorities . The President and the Government are also named as the top 5 obstacles .
 It will be impossible to turn public opinion upside down even if those in power fire a number of people, arrest officials involved in corruption and send them to court .
 Too many cases of impunity have accumulated over the past years, and a pre-election performance will hardly override them . The case of impunity has been a problem for many people in the past year .
 The same goes for the rest of reforms, even if actually sped up in the run-up to the elections, they will not have a dramatic effect on the government’s negative image .
 The situation in the Donbas will also remain a sore spot as the war is unlikely to stop in 2019 . The war is also likely to continue in 2019 as it is likely to end soon .
 The build-up of the Ukrainian army is the only argument that can partly override negativity in this aspect .
 Those currently in power are walking into the presidential and parliamentary elections with something in their hands . But no tools that could change the electoral disposition to their benefit dramatically .
 The President and coalition partners will attempt to override negative information triggers by demonstrations of accomplishments and success .
 They will try to mobilize the passive part of the electorate against their opponents . They will also try to mobilise the Passive part of their electorate against the opponents .
 President Poroshenko has already slipped a mention of her one-time “friendship’ with Vladimir Putin in his New Year address .
 This will not have much effect given how similar the rivals are in their ideology, or in the lack thereof . This won't have much impact on how similar they are.
 The wing of the nominal national democrats includes Yulia Tymoshenko’s Batkivshchyna . Samopomich led by Lviv Mayor Andriy Sadovyi, and a number of parties not in parliament .
 The pro-Russian revanchists are represented by the Opposition Bloc led by Yuriy Boyko and Za Zhyttia with Vadym Rabinovych . The opposition Bloc is led by the opposition leader Yury Boyko .
 Given the current level of public frustration with those in power, the opposition should feel confident .
 The opposition’s main problem lies in the fact that its permanent leaders are mostly from the cohort of the players of the past .
 None of them is actually capable of intriguing the voters as each has a trace of failures, controversial actions and scandals behind .
 All of them are more or less incorporated into the power system, therefore they are also to blame for the state of affairs in Ukraine . All of the power systems in Ukraine are not fully incorporated.
 The opposition will try its best to find new faces as decor for their parties . The opposition — or the nominally patriotic part of it — will try to find a new face as decor .
 New faces will pop up in the entourage of candidates for presidency . They will thus try to cover up their own toxic reputations .
In 2014, party bigwigs were running for parliament behind a shield of military and volunteer commanders . In 2014, they were running behind the shield of the military and volunteers .
 Party players may now bet on socially active celebrities and anti-corruption activists .
 The only hope of the national democrats lies in getting more active in the media and criticizing those in power in the hope that the voters will choose “worse but different” in the end .
 The Verkhovna Rada will try to increase their presence in the Rada . They will definitely try to increased their presence .
 2010 parliamentary election signals that it is still too early to write it off as an outsider . Its unexpected success in the 2010 election signals it is too early for the party to write off.
 When the rates are within the standard error margins, splitting up the electorate is unacceptable . When the rate is within thestandard error margins is unacceptable.
 Svoboda, the National Corps and Right Sector declared their unity by signing the National Manifesto in March 2017 .
 Oleh Liashko's party can ruin Svoboda’s chance as it exploits a similar rhetoric and can steal a critical share of votes . Still, OlehLiashko’'s party has a chance to win a critical majority of votes.
 Given the experience of all previous elections, the share of ideologically engaged electorate in Ukraine is very low . The share of ideology engaged voters in Ukraine has been very low.
Nationalistic discourse has turned into political mainstream in the past years . Nationalistic discourse is now a political mainstream .
 De-communization, revival of historic memory and anti-Russian resistance are now conducted under control of those in power . The radical right is now conducted on the nationwide scale under power .
 Nationalists will have to look for a different format of interacting with voters and make sure that they stand out among their rivals .
 The liberation of Donbas is likely to be their key theme in 2019 . On that, they will present themselves as feisty patriots, critics of the Minsk Agreements and of the "deals" made by those currently in power .
 The core electorate of the radical right is concentrated in western regions . The radical right has a large majority in the west .
 The population of these areas that are more distant from the actual frontline is more reluctant to seek compromises . This may work as the population of this area is more likely to seek compromise .
 The radicals may take the niche of the street opposition and attract public attention with showy rallies which they tend to like and are good at .
Political forces will compete for the voters in Central and Western Ukraine mostly . But their ideological opponents will flirt with South-Eastern Ukraine .
 Crimea and the occupation of part of the Donbas has shrunk after the annexation of Crimea and Crimea .
 This rules out the prospect of a full revanche and restricts their space for growth . This rule out a full Revanche and restrict their space to growth . It also rules out aFull revanche .
 National democrats and nationalists traditionally ignore the “hopeless’ regions . They will not deal with the core electorate of the politicians with revanchist ambitions .
 Opposition Bloc and Vadym Rabinovych, leader of Za Zhyttia party, are the winner in this competition so far . The idyllic disposition of the revanchist camp is spoiled by the internal rivalry .
 Opposition Bloc’s Yuriy Boyko gains 7.7% in Southern and Eastern Ukraine respectively, and 3.6% in the Donbas .
 Vadym Rabinovych has 12% and 16.8% of support, and 17.9% in the Donbas . The Donbas have 12.8%.
 Za Zhyttia enjoys 10.9% in Southern Ukraine, 22% in Eastern Ukraine and 18.1% in the Donbas . Opposition Bloc has 7%, 13.4% and 9.6% respectively .
 South-Eastern Ukraine has the highest percentage of voters reluctant to participate in any elections . The pro-Russian forces may try to consolidate and mobilize their electorate by offering a more radical rhetoric .
 NATO and Ukrainian nationalism are likely to bring back the “threats of NATO and Ukraine nationalism,’s status of Russian etc. as the mobilizing themes in their campaign .
 The pro-Russian forces will probably act as the mouthpieces of the people who are weary of the war threat . They will support the fastest possible solution in the Donbas through a “dialogue” and “normalization of relations’ with Russia .
 There will be quite a few competitors for the undecided electorate .
 The current situation leaves no force in Ukraine’s politics confident of victory . Ukraine's political leaders are not confident of a victory .
 Both those in power and in opposition have few chances of ending up with an electoral jackpot . Both parties have few chance of winning electoral jackpots .
 DIF poll: Almost 67% of Ukrainians are looking forward to seeing new faces in politics .
Winning the trust and attention of the public is turning into an ever more daunting task .
 Unless the renewal of elite begins in the next few years, the consequences of this may prove surprisingly painful .