 Valerie Bunce, George W Breslauer and Timothy J Colton discussed the ongoing crisis in Ukraine and Russia . The Academy’s 2012th Stated Meeting was held on November 12, 2014 .
 The Academy merged remote presentations with in-person discussions . This was the first time the Academy mergedremote presentations with remote discussions .
 Due to current events, we will all speak this evening in some fashion about the ongoing Ukraine crisis .
 The crisis in Ukraine is in his view best understood as an interstate war, not an intrastate war, he says . The first is that the crisis is in the view of the world, not a war .
 Putin's fear that Euromaidan protests in Ukraine could inspire similar dissent in Russia and thereby challenge his power and destabilize his regime . I think a critical and largely overlooked factor in Putin’s decision-making was his fear that the Eurom Maidan protests would inspire similar
 Putin had good reasons to be fearful of the possibility of the diffusion of popular unrest from Ukraine to Russia .
 corruption, the abysmal state of the Ukrainian economy, and the authoritarian rule of then-president Viktor Yanukovych could easily resonate with Russian publics . Russians identify closely with Ukrainians, especially since Russians identify close with Ukrainians .
 Russia had experienced its own significant protests in 2011 in connection to many of the same issues raised in the Euromaidan protests . Russia has experienced similar protests in the past .
 In these election-based revolutions, an unprecedented coalition between opposition parties and civil society groups surprised the regime . Most citizens, most citizens, and even itself, were surprised by this coalition .
 Opposition groups were able to win despite the regime’s reliance on electoral fraud . Opposition groups deployed sophisticated campaign techniques that increased voter turnout .
 The opposition orchestrated large-scale protests when the regime refused to abide by the results of the election . In many cases, the opposition orchestrated the protests .
 The Ukrainian Color Revolution in 2004 was particularly upsetting to Putin . Putin's regime had bankrolled the candidate who, in the face of popular protests, was finally forced to admit defeat .
 The Color Revolutions were threatening Putin in a number of ways, according to a report . Putin's regime was threatening the Revolutions.
 authoritarian rulers in neighboring countries could be quickly toppled, according to experts . They demonstrated that authoritarian rulers could be quick toppled, and that these processes of political change could travel quickly .
 Putin assumed that Russia would be the next target. Because these regimes were similar to Russia, it was easy for Putin to assume that Russia was next target . It was easy to assume these regimes, however, because they were similar.
 Putin’s actions in Ukraine seem puzzling, if not very risky, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin's repertoire of intervention in Ukraine was carefully designed to accomplish several objectives simultaneously . A closer look at Russian actions suggests that Putin’s repertoire of action was designed to achieve several objectives .
 Russian actions in Ukraine played to Russian nationalism and boosted Putin’s popularity . Russia returned Crimea to Russia and won back extreme nationalists that had been dissatisfied with Putin's politics .
 Putin provided a rationale for introducing more repressive measures at home . For another, he said the purported threats posed by the “dangerous developments in Ukraine’s Ukraine.
 The intervention was designed to limit the West's capacity to respond forcefully to Putin’s aggression in Eastern Ukraine . It was also designed to remind Europe of its energy dependence and appeal to international norms .
 Putin tapped into various historical tropes in both Russia and Ukraine and, in the process, rallied Russians around the flag . By portraying the Ukrainian protestors on the Maidan as fascists and, by extension, as threats to Russian security, he tapped into historical tropes .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin wants to expand his control over the Russian media . This allowed him to build a stronger case for annexing Crimea, to speak and act on behalf of the endangered Russian minority .
 Putin was able to claim that Russia was merely embracing certain international norms, such as the responsibility to protect and the right of nations to self-determination . In addition to coding the protestors as fascists, Putin also claimed that Russia is merely embracing some international norms .
 He also emphasized the international standard of respect for the will of the voters when the deeply flawed referendum held in Crimea led to widespread popular support for joining Russia . He said the referendum was the result of a flawed referendum.
 Putin’s game of invoking certain norms essentially diverted attention away from his violation of the international norm of state sovereignty . The norm is widely understood as the foundation of international peace . Putin's game of invoke certain norms effectively diverted attention from his violations of the norm .
 This manipulation of international norms made it harder for the West to coalesce around a strong response to Russian aggression . It guaranteed Russia a role in the peace process, says David Cameron .
 Russia would serve as a coarchitect of the new Ukrainian state and regime . It also held open the possibility that Putin would be able to create a statelet in Eastern Ukraine . This would weaken the Ukrainian state as a result of its loss of territorial control .
 Putin’s strategy in Ukraine has been short-term benefits to Putin's strategy, but the long-term picture of his accomplishment is much more problematic .
 NATO has moved to redefine its mission and expand its capabilities . First, NATO has in response moved to change its mission, expand capabilities .
 Other allies that border Russia and have significant Russian minorities, such as Kazakhstan, are now distancing themselves from Russia . They are worried that they could be the next Ukraine .
 The economic burdens of Crimea, coupled with the costs of the economic sanctions of the West, mean that the Russian economy is in serious trouble . A sharp decline in global energy prices, and a huge increase in the Russian defense budget, also mean that Russia is in trouble
 Strong economic performance has served as the foundation for Putin’s power since 2000 .
 Europe is rethinking its energy dependence on Russia . Europe is focusing attention on making greater use of alternative pipelines, which is technically possible .
 Ukraine has achieved something it had not been able to accomplish in twenty-three years of independence . Russia's actions have allowed Ukraine to accomplish something it hadn't done in 20 years of independent Ukraine .
 In the recent parliamentary elections, both Russia-friendly and right-wing extremist parties did very badly . A consensus emerged supporting democratic change, an end to corruption, economic reforms, and integration with Europe .
 Ukraine is better positioned today than ever before to move out of Russia’s zone of influence and to fully embrace Europe . So ironically, because of Russian aggression, Ukraine is now better positioned than ever.
 I have never been a part of the chorus that is quick to blame the U.S. when something goes wrong internationally . I've never been part of a chorus of people quick to blames the United States for something going wrong .
 Russia has brought the current problems upon ourselves, says Putin . But in the case of Russia, he says, "I think we bring the current issues upon ourselves"
 There are two basic perspectives in the public media on how the situation in Russia and Ukraine came about .
 The first, which Professor Bunce has argued quite brilliantly in her recent work, situates Putin as the prime mover . The second, which she has argued very brilliantly, is the first .
 One could dodge the issue and say that it is something of both, but one then falls into the trap of over-determination, where it is impossible to say which factor is decisive . One could say that the issue is both.
 I don't necessarily buy into all of the secondary arguments made by advocates of this view. That is not to say that I necessarily buy in to all the secondary argument made by critics of the view .
Before Russia stoked nationalism and revanchism in Eastern Ukraine, relations between Ukrainians and Russians in that region were not especially problematic . For example, before Russia stoked nationalism, relations with Ukrainians were not particularly problematic .
 I neither idealize nor demonize either side; there are no saints in the conflict, but it was avoidable . There are no saint or saint, but the conflict is avoidable, he says .
 The U.S. views itself as the actor dictating the terms of the post-Cold War international order . This pattern of behavior was perceived in Moscow, perhaps not all that inaccurately, as consistent with the notion.
 Putin has said as much as much in his public comments, his foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has said .
In light of what has happened over the last twenty-five years, my response is no, it is not difficult to imagine . In light of the last 20 years, I'm not surprised by what's happened .
 NATO expansion has had a dual effect of emboldening target governments and angering Moscow at the same time, which is a potentially incendiary combination. Another point I would like to make is that NATO expansion had had a Dual effect of empowering target governments .
Georgian president Mikheil Saakashvili spoke with Putin on the telephone in 2008 . He warned him that the West would punish him if he resisted .
 Putin’s response was essentially to tell the Georgian president where he could stuff the West .
 This anger in Moscow is not a sudden phenomenon; it has developed gradually over time . This anger is not the sudden phenomenon, it is not sudden phenomenon .
 In the 1990s, Russia almost simultaneously lost its empire, its status as a global and regional power, and its leadership of the so-called World Communist Movement .
 The United States was more inclined to treat Russia as either a vassal or a rival. Dismay and disillusion set in when they realized that the U.S. was more interested in Russia than Russia .
 Putin came to power in the year 2000, and subsequent trends turned disillusionment into anger . More recently, anger into anger into indignation .
 The U.S. and Russia appear to have the ironic misfortune of being out of phase in their foreign policy cycles .
Self-conception was jettisoned by Gorbachev, Yeltsin, and later Putin . That self-conceptions wasjettisoning by GorBachev and Yeltsins .
 Putin sought collaboration with the U.S. on militant Islamic fundamentalism . He did not embrace a “global missionary’s ideology, he said .
 The "global missionary" strain in U.S. foreign policy came back to the fore with a vengeance under George W Bush . But just then, the “global missionary’s strain in United States foreign policy comes back to a vengeance .
 The Russians were transitioning from a “missionary foreign policy to a more pragmatic one, and that complicated the relationship enormously. That is, just as the Russian foreign policy was transitioning, we were swinging from pragmatic to missionary, he says .
 Before that date, nothing had been predetermined in terms of how this would turn out . The date of the date was not set out .
 A deal had been struck among representatives of the European Union, Russia, and the Ukrainian government to slow down this revolution and make for a more gradual transition .
 The United States then embraced this new reality rather than bemoan it, despite the fact that this deal had been struck just a day earlier . They stormed the parliament and chased out the president, but the U.S. then embraced it .
 Moscow's reaction led Moscow to again assume the worst about our intentions . Our reaction to our reaction led us to think again about Moscow .
 escalation can create dynamics of its own, regardless of original intentions . Further, escalation can make it more difficult to control the situation .
 Putin found himself in need of a retroactive justification for the act, which he found in romantic nationalism .
 Putin's brand of nationalism changed considerably with the seizure of Crimea .
 Novorossiya is the name given by Russian nationalists to an imagined empire of Russian-speaking and Russian-identified regions . It includes Crimea and the Donbass region of Eastern Ukraine .
 Putin also upped the rhetorical ante by greatly emphasizing the ethnic descriptor Russkiy at the expense of the more civic and non-ethnic Rossiyskiy . Putin also emphasized the ethnic descriptors of the Russian state .
 I want to end with a pair of strong counterfactual claims that cannot be proven, but are logically consistent with the argument that I have been making . I think have the virtue of highlighting your assumptions, says author .
There was no U.S.-led effort to prepare Ukraine for NATO membership, had we listened to France and Germany’s advice against it, had there also been no United States involvement in the Maidan protest . Crimea would still be part of Ukraine and there would be no military
 Russian military intervention in Ukraine would have happened anyway, he says . His second counterfactual claim is that were Putin not the President of Russia but had U.S. policies remained the same, he adds .
 In his remarks tonight, I wish to discuss nationalism, or perhaps more appropriately, nationalisms . In my remarks tonight he wishes to discuss nationalisms.
When the Wall had just fallen, the Soviet Union had disintegrated, and communism was being superseded by something new . Consider the 1990s, when the Wall was just falling, when it had just fall, and Communism was superseded .
 Valerie Bunce says politics should not revolve around considerations of interest . Bunce: At such a time, one should not really expect politics to revolve about interest .
Natural processes that form socioeconomic interests are largely absent, or are at least very weak . In communist societies, natural processes are mostly absent or weak .
 For example, there was no right to private property, or at least to productive private property . Income distribution was egalitarian, and income distribution was an egalitarian .
 Analysts claim interest politics may come along eventually, but not just yet . For these and other reasons, analysts claimed 20 or 20 years ago that interest politics might come along .
 It would take a while for these former Soviet countries to develop the advanced market economies and modern societal structures that would support interest-based politics .
 Analysts predicted identity politics would dominate the conversation . In the meantime, they predicted, identity politics will dominate the discussion .
 This model fits the experience of many countries in East Central Europe fairly well . This model is similar to that of many other countries in the region .
 In Russia, what we have seen in the last ten years or so is a curious inversion of the expected sequence .
 When Putin first came to power in 2000, he was very much an interest politician . When Putin was first in power, he had a very much interest politician.
 Russia must catch up with the rest in order to survive, he says . He dwelt on the fact that Russia had fallen behind its peers .
 The so-called Millennium Manifesto is a long essay written and published online in Putin’s name in December 1999 . It was published just before he became president .
 In it, Putin explicitly claims that Russia does not need a national idea . In fact, in it, he says that Russia doesn't need to have a national concept .
 He did not propose that Russia become exactly like Germany or France, but he did suggest a move in that direction . He did also suggest that Russia should become more like France .
 The politics of his first two terms in office, from 2000 to 2008, were largely about interest . One could argue that the politics of the first two years in office were mostly about interest.
 Putin also had the good fortune to be leader of the country when it was experiencing a remarkable economic boom .
 I think that boom made the state stronger, which gave it money to spend and money to reward people with, was largely responsible for the very high levels of authority and popularity that he enjoyed, as well as the interest-based politics that he pursued .
 Putin ignored identity issues completely, but they certainly did not consume him . Now, this is not to say Putin ignored Identity issues completely .
 Putin is a very different Putin, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he sees a different Putin in the last six months or so .
 nationalism has become more relevant to the politics of Russia in the last eight years or so. For reasons that I do not fully understand – that I don't think any of us fully understand - that I am not fully understanding – that he does not think anyone does .
 To some extent, this was surely a conscious choice on the part of the people who lead the country . But there is more to the story than that, he says .
 Russia's history is probably more complicated than anything we would come up with for American or French nationalism . Because of Russia’s history and the unique way the country has developed, this story is probably less complicated than any other country .
 To get at the various threads of nationalism we see in Russia, I would like to pose two questions . To get to this story, and to begin to start to parse out the various Threads of nationalism, I'd like to ask questions .
 The first question is whether we are talking about civic nationalism or ethnic nationalism . The question is if we're talking about ethnic nationalism or civic nationalism .
 There is a majority ethnic group called the ethnic Russians, or Russkie; and then there is the country, which is 80 percent Russian, but 20 percent minority .
 Russia’s borders as they currently exist, perhaps now including Crimea, may now include Crimea .
 This brand of nationalism includes things that we probably associate with patriotism or national feeling in many countries . It includes patriotic pride, anti-globalism and anti-Americanism .
 National unity was very important in Russia given its secessionist history in the 1990s . National unity is involved here, as is “great-powerism’ and the insistence that others not interfere in its internal affairs .
 There is a second school of nationalism that makes reference to some imagined “big Russia,’s boundaries extend beyond those of the current state .
Civilizational approach looks far back in history to medieval times and usually makes some association with Russian Orthodoxy . This can be defined in a variety of ways.
 The Russian Empire of the eighteenth, nineteenth, and early twentieth centuries; the Soviet Union; Eurasia; and pan-Slavism, which is probably the least relevant, are all other models of expansive Russian nationalism .
 The first question is the distinction between civic and ethnic Russianness . Both find their place in Russia's various nationalisms .
 The first President of Russia was Boris Yeltsin, who served in the 1990s . He was the first President in Russia .
 His thoughts were mostly on economic development; he wanted to keep the country together . He wanted to use force to do so, so national unity was impor­tant .
 He wanted Russia to be a great power and took patriotic pride in his country . He wanted to be Russia's great power. He also wanted to take patriotic pride.
 He was interested in spheres of influence, but did not obsess over them, because they were easy to maintain in the 1990s . He was also interested in sphere of influence but not obsessed over them .
 The West was not as present in the post-Soviet space, so strong anti-American and anti-globalist tendencies had not much taken hold . The West had not been as present as post- Soviet space .
 Yeltsin was also unconcerned with ideas of ethnic Russian nationalism . Yeltsins was also utterly unconcerned about ideas of Russian nationalism.
 Putin has embraced the full spectrum of small-Russia nationalism, but also many aspects of big- Russia nationalism . A few aspects of the third idea of “ethnic-Russian’s’ nationalism.
 Russia is at least wedded to the idea of some kind of Eurasian unit that largely corresponds to the boundaries of the former Soviet Union . He wants this to develop as an alternative to the European Union .
 The phrase Russkiy mir has now become a kind of slogan for those rallying around the idea of ethnic Russianness .
 The organization was started up by Putin that projects Russian soft power and cultural influence both in its immediate neighborhood and abroad . It is also the name of an organization started by Putin .
Irredentism has also arrived on the agenda, which has surprised most foreign observers . Irredentistism is also arriving on the agendas, which have surprised many foreign observers.
 To be fair to Putin, there are also aspects of nationalism that do not interest him . There are certainly aspects of nationalism that don't interest him.
 I do not think he is willing to give up too much for the fraternal Serbs in the Balkans, first of all . I don't think he's willing to do too much to help them .
 He is also not anti-minority, anti-migrant, or anti-Semitic; he does not have any apparent racial biases . He is not also anti- minorities, but does not appear to have any racial bias .
 He is rarely accused of harboring these feelings, even by his harshest critics . However, he is rarely charged with harboring those feelings .
 Putin is willing to address this, says Putin . Putin and various other representatives of the Russian government pull the country in different directions .
In the Russian language, the word nationalist is and always has been something of a bad word . I want to note here that in the Russian Language, the term nationalist has always been a badword .
 In the Soviet days, you could be a Soviet patriot. Today, you can be an Estonian patriot or a Russian patriot, of course . Patriot is just fine; in the Soviet day, you may be aSoviet patriot .
Being an Estonian or a Russian nationalist in Soviet days was not tolerated, largely because there really was no Soviet nation to speak of .
 nationalism is only appropriate when it benefits the people, he says . Then he qualifies this statement somewhat by saying that nationalism is not appropriate to benefit the people .
If nationalism comes to mingle with intolerance, it would destroy Russia, he says . In keeping with his part to think of worst-case scenarios, he notes that if nationalism came to m mingling with intolerance.
 Russia is a multiethnic, a multilingual, multi-confessional state . It is because it is because Russia is the country's largest country .
 He is flipping from one meaning of nationalism to another, and he is not the only one . Clearly, he is flipping here from one mean to another .
 Putin is not really an original thinker when it comes to these categories . He is not the first person to consider these categories.
 Many of the theorists of Russian nationalism have been on the scene since the 1990s . Many of them have been entrepreneurs, many of them entrepreneurs .
 Vladimir Zhirinovsky, for example, is a well-known Russian nationalist and populist . He is known for his populist views .
 Dmitry Rogozin was the cofounder of a nationalist party in the mid-1990s . He is now probably the third or fourth most powerful person in Russia .
 Vyacheslav Nikonov is a theorist of Russian soft power . He is the president of the organization Russkiy Mir .
 Aleksandr Belov is the founder of an organization called Movement Against Illegal Immigration . His anti-immigration stance has very strong racial overtones .
Nationalist thinkers are quite prominent, but there is a lot of diversity within that spectrum of views . As you can see, nationalist thinkers are very prominent.
 Some are heavily staged and scripted, though others are more like spontaneous acts of protest . Some are highly staged or scripted .
 The annual Russkiy Marsh, or ethnic Russian March, has taken place every fourth of November since 2005 . The annual Russian March has been held since 2005.
 Since about 2008 or 2009, there has been a violent undercurrent in Russia with respect to ethnic issues . There has been an ethnic undercurrent since about 2008 and 2009 .
 The so-called Manezh Pogrom of 2010 was one of the best-known events in the world . The one that scared the leadership the most was the so- called Manezh.
 A Russian soccer fan was stabbed to death in a fight with young men from the North Caucasus . Tens of thousands of people formed in Manezh Square, right under the Kremlin towers .
 Individuals who did not appear to be ethnically Russian were beaten at this protest . No one was killed, but it easily could have happened .
 This actually led to growing concern among the country's leaders, who had previously been inclined to take a tolerant “boys will be boys’s’ attitude toward these events . This led to a growing concern.
 We have a lot of polling information on how Russians feel about these various facets of nationalism . We also have polling information about how Russians are feeling about their nationalism .
 There are people who say it was done with undue haste and regard for the consequences . But for the most part that is as far as the criticism has gone, it has gone .
 Popular support for the conflict in the Donbass is actually much thinner . However, popular support is much thinner than the majority of people .
 It is not clear why Russia would intervene in a situation like this when it seems that actually very few Russians are in favor of going too far in this direction .
 52 percent of Russians polled do believe that Ukraine is an American puppet . However, 52 percent do not believe Ukraine is a puppet .
 We may not have a good basis for making a prediction, but there are certainly signals that things may soon not be so readily manageable .
 Russia is going to go down the path of irredentism and privileging ethnic Russians, this could spell a lot of trouble in some other post-Soviet countries, including Kazakhstan, their closest ally .
 Igor Girkin, also known as Strelkov, is one of the heroes of the resistance to the Ukrainian military in Eastern Ukraine . He is known as "Strelkov" for his work in Ukraine .
 Russian citizen volunteered in the conflict in the Donbass . He is a Russian citizen who volunteered in conflict in Donbass.
After being wounded in combat, he is now seen by many as a real hero . He is seen as someone who might have a political future .
 There are actually thousands of them and they have NGOs, social networks, and other resources with which they can push their politics . There are also thousands of people who can push politics .
 The falling ruble could definitely spell big trouble. Then there is the fall ruble, which could definitely cause big trouble .
 This is caused in part by Western sanctions, as well as by the falling price of oil . This is due to Western sanctions and the fall in oil prices .
 Russian paratroopers died in one of the battles this past August . The issue of Russian casualties in the fighting has been highlighted by the case of the paratrooper .
 The government is now classifying information about these men as a state secret . But they will not be able to cover these and future casualties up .
 If the Kremlin extends its adventure in Eastern Ukraine and finds itself fighting again with heavy loss of life, there will be political consequences .