 The security concerns of NATO’s Central and Eastern European member states and non-NATO member states are of particular concern . Moldova and Ukraine are among the countries concerned .
 NATO’s member states have strongly condemned Russian actions in Ukraine . They have taken steps aimed at reassuring allies and partners in Central and Eastern Europe .
Demonstrations of support for Ukraine and its territorial integrity . Measures aimed at rebuking Russia .
 NATO member states have said they will continue to conduct previously planned military exercises in Ukraine and elsewhere in the region . NATO members say they will still conduct previous planned exercises .
 The United States has been a key driver behind the NATO response to the crisis . The U.S. has taken additional military measures intended to reassure its allies and partners in Central and Eastern Europe .
 U.S. fighter jets are deployed to Poland, the Baltic states, and the Black Sea . Marines are also deployed to Romania and Poland .
 The United States has supplied the Ukrainian government with some nonlethal military assistance . The U.S. has thus far ruled out providing lethal military aid .
 Some analysts and allied governments have called for a more concerted military response . The actions have been welcomed by supporters of the U.S. and NATO .
 Critics have called for more robust forward or permanent deployment of U.S. and NATO forces in Central and Eastern Europe . Other things, including military training and anti-aircraft weapons, have been called for .
 Some members of Congress have called on the Obama Administration and NATO to take additional military action to reassure allies in Central and Eastern Europe .
 Some Members have called for a more resolute demonstration of NATO’s commitment to enlargement . Georgia, a former republic of the Soviet Union, had a brief military conflict in 2008 .
 The proposed Forging Peace through Strength in Ukraine and the Transatlantic Alliance Act was introduced on April 9, 2014 . The Act calls for additional NATO and United States military assistance to Ukraine .
 This report addresses the NATO and U.S. military response to the Ukraine crisis in Ukraine . It also addresses NATO and United States military response.
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine is NATO's response to the crisis in Ukraine . The crisis in the Ukraine is the latest in a long line of crises in Ukraine that has rocked Ukraine .
 NATO and U.S. Military Response to Russia’s Annexation of Crimea .
 The U.S. Congress has expressed deep concern over Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the ongoing crisis in Ukraine .
 Some policy makers and commentators have called for a reassessment of the transatlantic community’s progress in realizing its goal of a Europe “whole, free, and at peace,” citing security concerns in some of NATO's Central and Eastern member states .
 Questions about NATO's commitment and capacity to defend its member states have moved to the forefront of discussions about NATO’s future . Questions about the nature of the alliance's relationship with Russia are also on the agenda .
 NATO's next summit of heads of state and government is scheduled to take place in Wales on September 45, 2014 . These questions are expected to feature prominently at NATO’s next summit .
 The crisis in Ukraine has exposed longer-standing tensions within NATO regarding its strategic focus . The crisis has also exposed the strategic focus of the NATO alliance .
 Since the end of the Cold War, NATO has evolved from an exclusive focus on territorial defense and deterrence in Europe to overseeing a range of military and crisis management operations across the globe .
 The transformation was predicated largely on the perception that Russia no longer posed a security threat to NATO . This transformation was based on the belief that the primary security challenges facing the allies emanated from beyond the Euro-Atlantic region .
 NATO's transformation coidd comes at the expense of its capacity to uphold its commitment to collective defense, enshrined in Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty . Some NATO members, including many former members of the communist bloc, have expressed concern .
 Some allies are calling for a renewed NATO focus on collective defense . NATO has been in Afghanistan for more than a decade .
 Debates about NATO’s mission come against the backdrop of continued economic stagnation in Europe . U.S. concerns about a downward trend in European defense spending .
 Just three NATO allies exceeded the alliance’s goal of spending 2% of GDP on defense . In 2013, total defense spending by NATO European allies as a percentage of GDP was about 1.6%; and just three allies exceeded it .
 Analysts in the U.S. have long asserted that defense spending in many European countries is inefficient . Defense spending in Europe is at the expense of much-needed research, development and procurement .
 In 2013, only four allies met a NATO guideline to devote 20% of defense expenditures to major equipment . The NATO guideline is a key indicator of the pace of military modernization .
 The NATO Defence Force is based in the United States . The NATO force is based on the United Nations and NATO allies in the region .
 NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen and others have argued that the economic constraints facing allied governments could spur much-needed defense cooperation .
 NATO's "Smart Defense" initiative calls for cooperation, prioritization, and specialization in defense capabilities . At NATO's May 2012 summit, the allies committed to a “Smart Defense’s’ initiative .
 Some critics maintain that this is just the latest in a long line of post-Cold War efforts to enhance capabilities that have had mixed success, at best .
 They argue that the limited outcomes may reflect a general lack of public support for military engagement and divergent threat perceptions across the Atlantic and within Europe .
 Some allies have emphasized the need for territorial defense capabilities . Others have stressed the importance of more flexible, rapidly deployable units and civilian-military crisis management operations .
An increasingly strained budget environment and heightened concerns about the security threat from Russia appear to be amplifying these differences . An increasingly strained budgets environment and increased concerns about security threat are amplifying this.
 U.S. officials have consistently underscored their firm commitment to the transatlantic security relationship and the collective defense of the alliance .
 The U.S. Army's four Brigade Combat Teams based in Europe have raised questions about future commitments to European security .
 This includes providing military trainers to assist in Ukraine’s military modernization efforts . This includes helping improve the interoperability of Ukrainian and allied armed forces through exercises and joint operations .
 Ukraine's Foreign Minister said Ukraine has not requested military assistance from NATO . On April 1, Ukraine’s foreign minister said Ukraine does not expect material military assistance .
 NATO officials have announced 24 new multinational defense projects in which assets are pooled or shared, including acquisition, training, force protection, and ISR initiatives .
 The United States is currently leading the Baltic Air Policing mission, with Poland due to take command on May 1, 2014 . The U.S. is currently led by the United States .
 The mission has been led by NATO allies on a rotational basis since 2004 . detachments of four fighter aircraft for four-month rotations operating from an air base.
 In March, the United States deployed an additional six F-15 Eagle aircraft to the Air Policing mission . The U.S. deployed six more F- 15 Eagle aircraft.
 The UK, Denmark, and France are among the other allies that have committed to deploying additional aircraft to the mission in the near future .
 NATO airborne warning and control system surveillance aircraft have been conducting twice daily flights to monitor events in Ukraine, one over Poland and one over Romania .
 Cooperative activities in NATO-Russia Council that could be affected include a helicopter maintenance fund and a countemarcotics initiative in Afghanistan . Some joint counter-terrorism initiatives in the council could also be affected .
 Fie indicated that these measures could include expansion of the Baltic Air Policing Mission, with a possible increase from 4 to 12 fighter jets . The measures could also include deployment of naval vessels to the Baltic Sea, the Eastern Mediterranean and elsewhere .
 Other allies have cautioned against a “militarization’s’ of NATO relations with Russia .
 Officials in Germany have said permanent troop deployments in member states formerly aligned with the Soviet Union could represent an unnecessary and counter-productive provocation of Russia .
 NATO member states say they are moving forward with previously planned military exercises in Ukraine and other parts of Central and Eastern Europe .
 In Ukraine, such exercises are not conducted under the aegis of NATO, but rather as multinational exercises . Such exercises may include NATO allies, such as Ukraine .
 Military exercises scheduled to take place in Ukraine in 2014 reportedly include one U.S.-led ground forces exercise, a Polish-Ukrainian air force exercise, and three additional multinational ground exercises .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine will reportedly feature a combined U.S.-Ukrainian battalion headquarters practicing a peacekeeping operation .
 Last year’s Rapid Trident exercise in Ukraine included 1,300 troops from 17 nations .
 The U.S.-led annual naval exercise Sea Breeze has reportedly been the largest annual maritime exercise in the Black Sea . The exercise is reportedly the largest in the world.
 The 2013 exercise, held in Odessa, involved naval, air, and land forces from 14 countries, including NATO allies and partners .
 The U.S. is sending more Marines to Romania, Romania, and the United States sends more to Romania .
 Poland, Czech Republic, and Elungary joined NATO in 1999, and Slovakia followed in 2004 . Poland, the Czech Republic and Elunary joined the alliance in 1999. Slovakia joined in 2004 and Poland in 1999 .
 The governments of Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia founded the Visegrad Group as a platform for regional cooperation in 1991 . There have been some concerns in the U.S. and EU about an apparent backsliding on democracy in Hungary .
 Ukraine's recently reelected government of Prime Minister Viktor Orban demonstrating authoritarian tendencies and moving toward closer relations with Russia . The recently re-elected government has shown authoritarian tendencies .
 Geographical proximity and long-standing historical relationships, including the experience of Soviet domination during the Communist era, color attitudes toward Russia in the V4 countries . The relationship between Russia and Russia is based on historical relationships .
 Russia has been actively trying to extend its influence in the region through energy deals and the acquisition of energy infrastructure . In recent years, Russia has also been trying to expand its influence on the region .
 Hungary also agreed to a deal with Russia’s state nuclear company in early 2014 for the upgrade of a Hungarian nuclear power plant . The deal was financed by a €10 billion loan from Moscow .
 All V4 members agreed to the limited sanctions imposed thus far by the EU in response to the annexation . Despite possible reservations in those three countries about additional economic sanctions, all V4 member countries agreed to limited sanctions .
 The EU’s common position is that the Crimea referendum was illegal, and no EU member states recognize its outcome . The Crimea vote was held in Crimea in Crimea, Crimea's Crimea referendum .
 Poland stands out among the V4 group as having the most difficult relationship with Russia . Poland is one of the world's most difficult countries to have a relationship with the country .
 Poland is by far the most populous country, the largest economy, and the most significant military actor of the V4 . Poland is also the largest country in the world, with the biggest economy .
 Poland is pursuing a broad equipment acquisition program linked to the need to phase out remaining Soviet-era material . Despite budgetary pressures, Poland is still pursuing the broad acquisition program .
 Poland has reportedly significantly increased equipment expenditures . Poland is reportedly trying to upgrade its main battle tanks and other armored vehicles, helicopters, air defenses, and drones .
 Poland has been a leading allied participant in NATO’s ‘out of area’ mission in Afghanistan . Poland is a leading ally in NATO's “out of areas” mission .
 Poland has been leading voice in calls for NATO to focus on its traditional vocation as an alliance of territorial defense . Poland has also been a leading voice on NATO's territorial defense policy .
 A Chance for a Breakthrough in Visegrad 4 Cooperation, The Polish Institute of International Affairs, April 16, 2013, is a chance for a breakthrough .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine to be stationed in Poland as a security guarantee . Response to crisis in Ukraine will be stationed as security guarantee in Poland .
 Aegis-ashore interceptors are scheduled to be deployed in Poland in 2018 . Aegi-ashores interceptors will be deployed by 2018 .
Kaliningrad is a 5,800 square mile Russian exclave wedged between Poland and Lithuania . The area posing the most direct threat to Poland is Kaliningrad .
Kaliningrad has a heavy Russian military presence, including the Baltic Sea Fleet and two airbases . Kaliningrad is home to a large Russian military force .
 Russia has reportedly stationed, or at least threatened, Iskander short-range nuclear missiles there . In addition, Russia reportedly has reportedly threatened to station, IsKander, short- range nuclear missiles .
 Compared to Poland, the militaries of the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovakia are significantly smaller and possess more modest capabilities . The Czech Republic and Hungary are smaller than Poland and Slovakia .
 Slovak military faces a need to replace a large percentage of its ageing equipment . Analysts observe that a low defense budget presents the military with an especially difficult challenge .
 V4 countries have sought to expand their cooperation from largely political matters to security and defense . In recent years, the V4 nations have tried to expand cooperation from mostly political issues to security .
 In 2013, the V4 countries launched plans to form an EU Battlegroup, a rapid reaction force consisting of 2,500 to 3,000 troops, to be operational by 2016 . The V4 nations launched plans in 2013 to form a rapid response force of
 The V4 countries have also sought to increase military and industrial cooperation in line with NATO’s Smart Defense and the EU's Pooling and Sharing initiative . The V 4 countries are also seeking to increaseMilitary and Industrial cooperation .
 Joint procurement of ammunition, armored vehicles, individual soldier equipment, and battlefield imaging systems . Joint development of capabilities such as countering improvised explosive devices . Joint training of helicopter pilots and air traffic controllers; and cyber defense .
 From Mutual Support to Strengthening NATO and the EU, Center for European Policy Analysis, April 2, 2013 .
 The Baltic States, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, were formerly republics of the Soviet Union . They were absorbed into the USSR in 1940 after achieving independence between the two world wars .
 The USSR became independent again with the breakup of the USSR in 1991 . They joined both NATO and the European Union in 2004 .
 In general terms, the view of the Baltic countries is comparable to that of Poland in perceiving Russia as an enduring threat . The view of Baltic countries in general terms is similar to that in Poland .
 Size, geographic location, and energy dependence make Baltic countries vulnerable to Russia . Events in Ukraine have significantly increased anxiety in the Baltics .
 All three Baltic countries also have minority populations of ethnic Russians . Claims of persecution against Russian communities have been a part of the pretext for Russia’s interventions in Georgia and Ukraine .
 In 2012, a referendum rejected naming Russian as Latvia’s official second language . It is the first language for about one-third of the population .
 In Estonia, plans to relocate a Soviet war memorial led to clashes between police and pro-Russian demonstrators .
 Estonia subsequently found itself the target of a large-scale coordinated cyberattack . The attack thought to have originated from either pro-Russian groups or from within the Russian government itself .
 The Baltic countries joined their NATO and EU partners in strongly condemning Russia’s annexation of Crimea as illegal .
 All three initially called for the EU to impose harsh political and economic sanctions . Latvia and Lithuania have since moderated their stance on sanctions considerably .
Latvian and Lithuanian government enthusiasm for sanctions has been tempered by the potential economic consequences of such measures . Latvian, Lithuanian governments are concerned about the potential consequences of sanctions .
 Economists have suggested that severe EU sanctions against Russia could push both countries into a deep recession .
 The break-up of the USSR left the Baltic countries with virtually no national militaries, and their forces remain small and limited . The Baltic countries have no national military forces .
 The defense planning of the Baltic countries relies heavily on NATO membership . The Baltic countries have emphasized active participation in the alliance .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine includes by having contributed troops to the Afghanistan mission .
 Some Baltic officials have urged NATO to establish a permanent base in the region . The Baltic Air Policing mission is based in the Baltic region .
 Rotating forces, increased exercises, and prepositioning of assets may be a more likely NATO response to bolster security in the region .
 Baltic countries rely on their NATO allies to police and defend their airspace . Lacking their own fighter aircraft, Baltic nations rely on NATO allies.
 NATO’s Baltic Air Policing mission was launched in 2004 and is based at an airbase in Lithuania .
 About a dozen NATO members have taken part in the mission, including the United States, UK, France, Germany, Poland, Denmark, and the Czech Republic .
 Baltic countries pledged to increase their combined contribution to the mission from €2 million in 2011 to €3. million in 2015 to pay for the costs of accommodating the air policing contingents, providing ground services for their aircraft .
 Estonia spends a relatively high percentage of GDP on defense . Compared to most other members of NATO, Estonia spends relatively high percent of GDP.
 The country is seeking to add a second infantry brigade by 2022, upgrade its air defense system, and modernize a range of ground warfare equipment . The country wants to add another infantry brigade to its infantry brigade .
 Latvia's forces are smaller and less well equipped, and the country's defense spending has suffered from severe budgetary pressures . Latvia’s defense spending is also suffering from severe budget pressures .
 Latvia aims to double its defense spending as a percentage of GDP by 2020 . The country aims to procure new equipment including armored vehicles, transport helicopters, and air defense radar .
 Lithuania’s forces are also pursuing restructuring and re-equipment programs, but efforts have been similarly hindered by funding constraints . Lithuania's forces are likewise pursuing restructuring.
 Moldova's pro-Western government has responded to recent events in Ukraine with great concern . Moldova Moldova’s pro-West government has been concerned about Ukraine .
 Moldova and Ukraine stop armed men trying to cross the border from Transnistria to Ukraine . Moldova, Ukraine have stopped armed men crossing the border to ‘participate’ in demonstrations against the government .
 "Baltics Urge NATO to Base Permanent Force in Region," says Richard Milne .
 Moldova has redoubled its efforts to secure Russia's recognition for its independence . Moldova’s breakaway region has a strongly pro-Russian government .
 Russia has not yet done so, but may have little more to lose in doing so now, given international condemnation of its annexation of Crimea . Russia has been condemned by the world for its annexation.
 NATO's top military commander, General Breedlove, expressed concern that Russian forces could sweep across eastern and southern Ukraine to link up with Transnistria .
Such a move would have the advantage of linking the region directly with Russia . Such a move, while very ambitious, is very ambitious .
 Moscow has shown hostility toward the Moldovan government, especially its intention to sign an Association Agreement with the European Union in June 2014 . It is unclear whether Russia would take military action against Moldova to prevent it from doing so .
 Most observers believe Russia will continue to try to turn Moldova away from a pro-Western orientation . Russia will use more indirect tactics such as imposing de facto trade sanctions .
 U.S. support for Moldova’s path toward European integration and for anti-corruption efforts, says Victoria Nuland . Moldovan exports, energy security, and energy security among other areas.
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and attempted destabilization of Eastern Ukraine are the most urgent challenges facing Ukraine’s government .
 Over 20,000 Russian troops remain in Crimea, according to Ukraine’s government . Ukraine is also struggling to establish control over eastern and southern Ukraine, where Russian-language speakers predominate .
 Thousands of pro-Russian protestors have demonstrated in the Donbas region, and Kharkiv .
 On April 6, demonstrators in Donetsk and Luhansk stormed and occupied key government buildings . On April 5, demonstrators stormed and occupy key government building in Donetsk.
Demonstrators in Donetsk declared a Donetsk People’s Republic and called for Russia to send troops to protect them . Possibly inspired by the Crimean scenario, the demonstrators in Donetsk called for Russian troops to be sent .
 On April 13, armed men seized government and other key buildings in additional cities and towns in the Donbas region .
 Ukrainian officials say they have arrested Russian intelligence operatives who they say are organizing these activities . They say they are organizing the activities .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine armed forces have begun operations to take back control of buildings controlled by armed groups and clear roadblocks .
 Some observers believe Russia could use widespread violence in eastern Ukraine as a pretext for military intervention .
 NATO General Breedlove told journalists on April 2 that the approximately 40,000 Russian troops on Ukraine’s borders were capable of attacking within 12 hours and of attaining their objectives within three to five days .
 In March 2014, Ukraine’s acting President Turchynov said that Ukraine had only 6,000 combat ready troops .
 Ukraine is currently undergoing a partial mobilization to ready tens of thousands of additional troops . But the state of their training and equipment is uncertain .
 Pavel Felgenhauer has said that Putin's military window of opportunity for an invasion of eastern and southern Ukraine is from now to about mid-May . The Russian military observer has said Putin’s military window for invasion of Ukraine is between now and mid- May .
 Russia’s spring conscript call-up started on April 1 . However, this window would soon start to close, as Russia's spring conscriptions are set to start on April 2 .
 This will require last year’s recruits to be gradually mustered out as green replacements arrive . This will need last year's recruits to begin gradually mustering out .
 Felgenhauer believes that combat readiness of Russian forces on Ukraine’s borders will soon start to decline . He believes that Russian forces will recover only around August or September 2014 .
 Russian military analysts point out that even if a Russian invasion was initially successful, many more troops would be needed to occupy large stretches of eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Ukraine requested military aid from the U.S. in March 2013, according to several press reports . In March 2013.
 The Administration has declined so far to send lethal military aid to Ukraine .
 In March 2014, the U.S. sent 300,000 Meals Ready to Eat to Ukraine, at a cost of about $3 million . In March 2013, the United States sent 300k Meals ready to eat to Ukraine .
 More unspecified nonlethal aid is being considered for delivery, according to the U.S. European Command .
 The U.S. needs to show resolve in the face of Russian aggression against Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty .
 NATO-Russia Relations Russian actions in Ukraine have prompted a reassessment of post-Cold War efforts to build a cooperative relationship with Moscow .
 NATO suspended all practical civilian and military cooperation with Russia on April 2 . As noted above, NATO suspends all practical military and civilian and civilian cooperation .
 NATO Deputy Secretary General Alexander Vershbow: "For 20 years, the security of the Euro-Atlantic region has been based on the premise that we do not face an adversary to our east"
 Many in Europe and the U.S. emphasize that Europe’s long-term security will depend on cooperative relations with Russia . Russia has succeeded in drawing uniform condemnation from across NATO and the European Union .
 Some NATO members in Western Europe have expressed concern that a military response to Russian actions could hinder future attempts to boost cooperation with Russia .
 The NATO-Russia Council was established in May 2002, five years after the 1997 NATO- Russia Founding Act provided the formal basis for bilateral cooperation .
 The NRC has failed to live up to its potential, observers say . Most observers agree that despite having advanced NATO-Russia cooperation in some areas, the NRC hasn't lived up to potential .
 NATO's perceived shortcomings are often attributed to Russian suspicion about NATO’s long-term intentions . Russia has long considered Ukraine and Georgia within its sphere of influence .
 NATO and European officials stress that they continue to aspire to cooperation and partnership with Russia . NATO and EU officials stress they still want cooperation and cooperation .
 Analysts expect ties to continue to be marked by contention and mistrust, at least for the time being .
 Moscow has objected to NATO and the United States’ military responses to the crisis . The alliance’s commitment to a 1997 pledge to refrain from permanently stationing combat forces in countries that joined NATO after the collapse of Soviet Union .
 NATO and EU member states have not collectively committed to ending arms sales to Russia . Analysts and governments on both sides of the Atlantic have been critical of the move .
Sales to Russia are relatively insignificant. Compared to other European arms sales, sales to Russia were relatively insignificant .
 Some critics have drawn attention to several high profile deals over the past several years . However, some critics have been critical of the deals .
 2011 French agreement to sell Russia two amphibious assault warships in a deal worth €1. billion . First ever sale of a significant offensive military capability by a NATO member to Russia .
 The first of these Mistral ships is scheduled to be delivered at the end of this year .
 French President Fran Hollande addressed the possibility of suspending the arms sale on March 6 . Hollande said, “we honor contracts we have signed.’
 Germany has cancelled the planned sale of a military training facility to Russia . The UK and United States have also halted all military cooperation .
 Prospects for NATO Enlargement Russian actions in Ukraine have prompted some U.S. observers to call for a more concerted NATO effort to enlarge the alliance .
 NATO’s “open door” policy will not be scaled back in the face of Russian opposition, the group says .
 Some proponents of enlargement add that Russia would be less willing and less able to take aggressive actions it has in Ukraine, Georgia, and elsewhere in its near-abroad .
 Most analysts consider NATO unlikely to make any significant progress toward expanding over the next several years . Despite these calls, most analysts consider it unlikely to be successful .
 NATO has enlarged too quickly, according to some Western European countries . NATO should agree on how to resolve a complex range of issues, including managing relations with Russia, before taking in new members .
 territorial disputes with Russia in countries such as Georgia and Ukraine could be a strong deterrent to extending membership invitations to these countries .
 He added that he hoped to make the shipyard town of Saint-Nazaire, which has faced high unemployment levels, a symbol of French industrial achievement .
 European Officials, Media Concerned about French Sale to Russia, EUF2011031863900, March 18, 2011 .
 Montenegro, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia, and Georgia are considered formal aspirants for NATO membership . Georgia, Montenegro and Montenegro are also considered formal candidates .
 NATO officials have cautioned that Montenegrin security agencies and defense sector need to meet NATO standards . Montenegrin officials say further efforts need to be made to fight corruption and organized crime in the country .
 Some have questioned the level of public support for NATO membership in Montenegro . Some have also questioned the levels of support for Montenegro.
 Bosnia was formally invited to join the MAP in April 2010, but was told that its Annual National Program under the MAP would not be accepted until the country resolved the issue of immovable defense property .
 Bosnian Serb leaders have agreed in principle to resolve the issue . But many doubt whether Bosnia can agree on whether to join NATO . Public opinion polls have shown very strong opposition to membership among the Bosnia Serb population .
 NATO agreed that Macedonia met the qualifications for membership in 2008 . But its candidacy has been stalled due to a protracted dispute with Greece over the country’s official name .
 The two sides have been unable to resolve the issue during talks sponsored by the U.N. The United Nations is sponsoring the talks to resolve it .
 Representatives of Ukraine’s current government have said the country is not seeking NATO membership .
 This reflects long-standing indifference, if not opposition, to NATO membership in the country . This reflects the long- standing indifference to the NATO membership .
 34% of Ukrainians were for NATO membership, and 44% opposed, according to a March 2014 poll . A regional split of 74% for membership in western Ukraine and 67% opposed in the east .
 Ukrainian government could be cautious about expressing ambitions to join NATO for a number of reasons . Some observers assert that the Ukrainian government may be reluctant to further antagonize Russia .
 Georgia has contributed to ongoing NATO operations, including deploying the second-largest non-NATO contingent in Afghanistan . Since then, the two sides have deepened cooperation in a variety of areas, especially on defense and security sector reform .
 Most observers believe that the unresolved situation in Georgia’s breakaway regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia could continue to pose a major obstacle to possible Georgian membership for the foreseeable future .
 Some allies could oppose defining a specific timeline for membership . They contend that as long as the territorial dispute persists, some allies may oppose a specific timetable .
 Some observers have argued that recent Russian military aggression could indirectly serve to boost support for NATO membership in Sweden and Finland .
Both countries have been active participants in NATO operations . Both countries have taken significant steps to modernize their militaries .
 Russian forces have performed air and land exercises near Swedish and Finnish territory . In 2013, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev said that Moscow would be forced to “respond’ if Finland or Sweden joined NATO .
 Some analysts assert that at the least, the two governments could continue to bolster defense spending and cooperation with other Nordic states and Baltics .
 The crisis in Ukraine has renewed focus on the U.S. commitment to European security and on overall United States force posture in Europe .
 NATO and the EU have enlarged eastward since the end of the Cold War . The perceived need for a robust U.S. military presence to defend the continent receded .
 Today, about 67,000 U.S. forces are stationed in Europe, primarily in Germany, Italy, and the UK . This is down from a Cold War high of about 400,000 .
 Some allies in Central and Eastern Europe have expressed concerns about the reduced U.S. force posture . Two of the Army’s four Brigade Combat Teams have been withdrawn .
 The adjusted United States force posture has coincided with calls for European allies and the EU to develop enhanced military capabilities in order to boost NATO's effectiveness .
 The Obama Administration and its supporters assert that the United States remains prepared and able to honor its commitments to the defense and security of fellow NATO member states .
 The United States was a key proponent of NATO’s drafting of contingency plans for the defense of Poland and the Baltic States in 2009 . They draw attention to recent U.S. calls for new round of NATO contingency planning .
 U.S. Air Force Aviation detachment in Poland paved the way for the recent deployment of 12 F-16s to the country .
 The United States system is designed to defend alliance territory against possible missile attacks . The U.S. system is called NATO's "Eye Defence Options"
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine from Iran and other potential adversaries is the foundation for a new NATO missile defense capability . The U.S. assets under NATO command and control are under NATO control .
 The United States has deployed missile defense ships to the Mediterranean . The ships are ready to operate under NATO control when necessary .
 A U.S. radar, based in Turkey, is also under NATO operational control . A United States radar based in the country is also in Turkey .
 Interceptor sites are to be deployed in Romania in 2015 and in Poland in 2018 . Interceptors will be deployed to Romania and Poland in 2015 .
 The United States and NATO have consistently emphasized that the missile defense system is neither intended to nor capable of defending against a potential missile attack from Russia . The U.S. and NATO say that the system is not intended to protect against Russia .
 Critics of the Administration's and NATO's response to Russian actions in Ukraine say more should be done to support Ukraine, reassure allies .
 Some have called for bolstered and possibly permanent NATO and/or U.S. troop deployments in Central and Eastern Europe .
 Polish government has requested the deployment of two heavy brigades of NATO troops on its territory . Poland has asked for the deployment.
 The 6,000-troop exercise is the largest NATO exercise to take place in the region in over 10 years . It was intended to certify command and control elements of the NATO Response Force, including in response to a possible attack on a member state .
 The U.S. has provided some nonlethal military aid, including 300,000 Meals Ready to Eat . Ukraine has thus far declined to provide lethal military aid .
 Some analysts have argued that the U.S. and other allies should consider providing additional military assistance . Some analysts, including a former NATO military commander, have said that the United States should consider additional assistance .
 Response to the Crisis in Ukraine could continue to play an important role in shaping U.S. and NATO responses to Russia’s actions in Ukraine .
 Congressional action could include reexamining U.S. force posture in Europe and assessing its capacity and willingness to uphold its defense commitments in Europe .
 Congress could also take an increasingly active role in determining U.S. policy toward NATO . The next NATO summit is scheduled to take place in Wales on September 4-5, 2014 .
 This could include holding hearings and/or drafting legislation on issues such as development of allied military capabilities and military burdensharing within the alliance . It could also include the allied commitment to NATO enlargement and its relations with partner countries such as Ukraine and Georgia .
 The authors thank Calvin DeSouza, Geospatial Information Systems Analyst at CRS, for creating the map included in this report .