 The possibility of full-scale operations cannot be disregarded either . However, the possibility of a full- scale operation cannot be ignored .
 Vadym Skibitsky commented on it in an interview to Obozrevatel . He is the representative of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine .
 martial law was introduced in Ukraine for the first time last year . At the end of last year, martial law in Ukraine was introduced for first time .
 Ukrainians were unprepared, despite annexation of Crimea, occupation of Donbas and long-lasting hostilities . It was a shock for a lot of Ukrainians; people were unprepared .
 We’d rather proceed from November 25, from the developments in the Kerch Strait . We'd rather proceed with the developments.
 Russian military buildup near our borders began from the first days of armed aggression against Ukraine in 2014 . First, Russian military build-up near our border began from first days.
 The process of forming divisions, which now stand at a distance of 15 to 50 kilometers from our border, began . The process began at the beginning of the year .
 At the beginning of the aggression against Ukraine, Russian battalion-tactical groups were deployed there . At the start of Ukraine's aggression, Russia was deployed there, according to reports .
 Petersburg, Moscow region, the Central Military District, and the Eastern Military District . The Eastern Military district is the most populous area in the Moscow region .
 Russia lost its strategic initiative at first stage and was stopped, then it decided to deploy new divisions, new troops near our borders on a permanent basis .
 The Russian Federation has been redeployed to its border with the U.S.
 The exercises were supposed to demonstrate the strength and superiority of the Russian Federation in the Black Sea region to us and to the entire international community .
 Russia needs some time to prepare large-scale operations against Ukraine, we can no longer say . And now we canno longer say that Russia needs to prepare for large- scale operations .
 The Russian Federation has shown readiness to defend its ships, says the U.S.
 Russia fully controls the Azov Sea and can close the Kerch Strait at any moment . It can allow the passage of only those ships they want . Russia can also close the sea at any time .
 One of Russia's tasks is depriving Ukraine of an access to the world’s ocean, a complete blockade of our coast .
 The project ‘Novorossia’ envisaged the seizure of the territory of Ukraine from Kharkiv to Odesa . Then, the project “NovorOSSia” envisaged a seizure of Ukraine’s territory .
 Russia is now trying to implement a hybrid, "creeping" method . This is the plan that Russia is trying to use to implement, but through a hybrid method .
 If guided by pure logic, all should have ended long ago. Sanctions, then the second, the third . Sanctions then the third, then a third .
 The first adjustment, according to our estimates, took place in May 2014 . The first adjustments took place at the end of May 2014.
 The Novorossia project was furthered, and then there was Odesa . Initially, the NovorOSSia project had been furthered. Then, the project went further, with the first project being furthered and then the second .
 Russian intelligence services were forced to change their original plan after it was found out .
 There was a creeping aggression involving pro-Russian elements, the fifth column says . There were events in Donetsk and Luhansk. Then and now, we do not exclude the possibility that they may correct their plans and use hybrid approaches .
 The Russian Federation in the Black Sea is promoting economic projects in the region .
 Russians have been managing the three of our gas deposits captured by them after the annexation of Crimea .
 Currently, at least one of the Black Sea Fleet warships is defending these drilling platforms .
 Among other infrastructure projects of the Russian Federation, except for the bridge, is laying a gas pipeline . Other infrastructure projects, including a bridge, are also being planned .
 Russia is closing any area by Russia, and carrying out certain actions . This can also be the reason for strengthening their presence .
 Ukrainians to the reported data on the possibility of large-scale actions. We will talk about the information war and the reaction of the world community a little later .
 Reported data are a realistic assessment of the existing threats, rather than an intimidation .
 If this strengthening takes place, accordingly, the level of threat increases, according to the U.S. State Department . If this strengthens, there will be a stronger threat if the threat increases .
 The Russian Federation is capable of carrying out large-scale offensive operations . It testifies that the Russian Federation, with the available force grouping and in its readiness, is capable. It is also able to carry out large scale offensive operations.
 Our history shows that we have always faced problems from our neighbors . We have always had problems with our neighbors, we say .
 We warned about the presence of a Russian military base in Crimea, its full combat readiness and active preparation for certain actions .
 The agreement on the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Navy in Crimea expired in 2017 . Unfortunately, we failed to solve this problem until 2017, as planned .
 Crimea does not care about the problems of the rest of Crimea, population, infrastructure and agriculture . However, it doesn't care about other problems .
 The Russian Federation has an acute problem with water, which can become a reason for more aggressive actions of the Russian Federation .
 Even if the state of war with Russia is not announced, de facto armed hybrid aggression continues . It does not stop .
 The Russian army conducted combat training in early December . It was conducted by the Russian army in December .
 The Kherson region is 15 kilometers more than the region in the north . It is not difficult to fly, for example, and drop it in the region. You understand that it's not difficult.
 The goal is actually one — our infrastructure and strategically important facilities . The goal was to build infrastructure and strategic facilities . It is to build on our infrastructure .
 Kakhovka Reservoir, the energy supply system, and the life support of Crimea. This perspective applies, in particular, to the Kakovka reservoir, and to the energy system . This perspective also applies to Crimea's life support.
 These are the priority targets in case of large-scale aggressive actions of Russia . These are priority targets.
 A bronze monument to a Romani person with a broom was installed in Mukacheve, Zakapattia region .