 He didn't want them to be able to vote in Ukraine’s national elections . He didn’t want them in Ukraine's national elections, he said .
 Putin has thrown all his energy into splitting Ukraine from the inside, says Putin . Putin has also thrown his energy in splitting Ukraine.
First of all, the split of the Verkhovna Rada to conduct new parliamentary elections . First of all. The split was a result of a split in the Rada .
 Crimea and Donbas did not participate in last year’s parliamentary elections . The structure of government in Ukraine has changed dramatically .
 If voters in Donbass again have the opportunity to vote, it is clear that they will support pro-Russian politicians .
 Putin feels that Ukraine could split from the inside and hold early parliamentary elections . He will do everything he can in order to restore to us Donbass, he says .
 Donbass residents cannot be part of Ukraine; they cannot again be Ukrainians . They cannot be people who are allowed to vote in Ukrainian national elections . He's not saying that Donbass does not need to be seized and restored.
 He is saying those people must be eliminated if and when Donbass is restored to Ukraine . He is also saying that those people should be eliminated.
 The Donbass residents voted more than 90% for Yanukovych and less than 10% for Tymoshenko . The last electoral map in which the entirety of Ukraine voted for President is here .
 Donbass people were overwhelmingly the people who had prevented Tymoshenko from being elected as Ukraine’s President in 2010 . The far-right and pro-Western, pro-Gladio, anti-Russian, Tyloshenko, had been elected in 2010.
 No leader like that would stand a chance in any Ukrainian national election in which residents of Donbass would vote . Poroshenko was sufficiently far-right, and sufficiently compliant, for him .
 U.S.-installed Prime Minister of Ukraine, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, delivered a speech in Odessa .
 Yatsenyuk has often publicly endorsed a war by Ukraine against Russia . He has often endorsed the war in order to restore Donbass and Crimea .
 Donbass voted over 90% for the Ukrainian President that the Obama Administration overthrew in February 2014, and Crimea voted over 75% for that President . The residents in those two regions would need to be eliminated, if the land is restored to Ukraine .
 Yatsenyuk wants financial assistance to get rid of those people who would remove him from power . He knows what got him into power, and he knows what he got him in power .
 The Koch brothers established the Cato Institute on the right side of America’s aristocracy . Andrei Illarionove has said that the residents in breakaway areas should be simply ignored .
 Residents should have no say-so over who rules them, he says . Only this subject, and no one else, has necessary legal rights to change this territory’s jurisdiction .
 Donbass, in general, is not simply a region in a very depressed condition, it has got a whole number of problems . The biggest of which is that it is severely overpopulated with people nobody has any use for .
 There are approximately 4 million inhabitants in the Donetsk oblast, at least 1. million of which are superfluous . If we take, for example, there are about 4 million residents .
 There is a certain category of people that must be exterminated, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: I don’t claim to have a quick solution recipe, but the most important thing must be done is exterminated .
 Putin had already figured out that, in the interests of Russia's own national security, it would be far better for Donbass's voters to be voting in Ukraine, not in Russia .
 Putin had already arranged for the men in Donbass to be trained and armed to overcome the Ukrainian government . Some people would be able to survive there, but they’d need to stay in Don Bass; they'd not be Russians .
 Western news-media misrepresented the truth about the war in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The U.S. is pushing on with its efforts to restart the war, and to eliminate the Donbass residents . The United States is pushing for the end of the war .
 The United States had nothing to do with the Minsk II agreement . The Obama Administration shunned it and wants the war to resume .
 Putin, equally strongly, wants them to stay in Donbass, and to survive, as Ukrainians there . But Putin also wants the Ukrainians to stay as Ukrainians, and as Ukrainians .