 On November 14, 2016, the International Criminal Court issued a preliminary finding endorsing Ukraine's claims that Russia had committed acts of aggression against its territory, citizens and infrastructure .
 Ukrainians have called on the international community to condemn and punish Russian aggression . Ukrainians are heartened by the finding .
 The court's finding cannot change the reality of Russia's de facto control over Crimea or the conflict in Ukraine’s Donbass region .
 There simply is no “higher power’ in international law or geopolitics that can rescue Ukraine from its predicament .
 The future stability and prosperity of Donbass, Ukraine and Europe still rests with the difficult task of managing and resolving the conflict through negotiations among the key actors involved . Washington must pay attention.
 The United States has a vital interest in the restoration of Ukraine’s sovereignty and the resolution of its conflict with Russia, a key to deescalating growing tension across the wider European and Euro-Atlantic space .
 Washington needs to promote more effective management of the Ukraine-Russia conflict, says John Sutter . Sutter says the U.S. needs to take steps to improve the situation in Ukraine .
 The situation in Donbass is increasingly reminiscent of that in Moldova, Georgia and Armenia/Azerbaijan . No effective long-term conflict-settlement mechanism was found .
Low-level hostilities persist between two heavily armed camps, even as international monitors and negotiators discuss the intricacies of conflict management in a seemingly endless loop . Eastern Ukraine is now increasingly the case in Eastern Ukraine .
In Donbass itself, the local civilian population and economy have been badly depleted . In Donbass, the economy and civilian population are badly depleted.
 Many of the best educated and most capable citizens have departed the region altogether . Some have gone to Russia, others to Ukraine and Europe .
Social welfare should be the responsibility of local authorities, ideally in partnership with international experts and donors .
 Much of the world perceives the de facto Donbass authorities as little more than warlords and criminals . However, the failure so far to broker internationally recognized elections has meant that much of the World perceives them as little as warlords .
 The region’s current economic limbo, in between Russia and Ukraine, also empowers black marketeers and blockade runners . They can make enormous profits trafficking in everything from cigarettes to weapons .
 Since the fall of 2014, the only formal framework for managing and resolving the Donbass conflict has been the Minsk Agreements . Russia, Germany and France are guarantors, with Russia, France as guarantors .
 The United States has played a de facto guarantor role, but has remained outside the so-called Normandy format . The U.S. has been in the Normandy format for years .
 The Agreements were revised and updated through a second round following the outbreak of heavy fighting in February 2015 . The Agreement was revised and updates through the second round .
 The conflict has settled into a low-intensity war of attrition, with near-constant violations of the cease-fire provisions . Since that time, the conflict hassettled into a lower-intensity conflict of attrition .
 The OSCE’s Ukraine Special Monitoring Mission has confirmed many of these violations . The mission is thought to help prevent further escalation of hostilities .
 Domestic political developments on all sides may have substantially altered the incentives for pursuing concrete progress .
 Russia is under intense pressure from an economy that contracted almost 4 percent in 2015 . Double-digit inflation has left the average Russian household about 15 percent poorer .
 Western financial sanctions, coupled with Russia’s own counter-sanctions regime, have severely constrained investment and consumer spending . The recession brought on by structural weaknesses and persistent low global energy and commodity prices .
 Moscow has shown no signs of compromising on the West’s terms, perhaps in part because it perceives political developments in Europe and the U.S. to be breaking in its favor .
 The result of the UK’s ‘Brexit’ referendum, elections in Poland and Hungary have all underscored a deepening anti-EU trend in European politics . Bulgaria, Estonia and Moldova have brought leaders to power who advocate more conciliatory approaches toward Russia .
 France's presidential elections are scheduled for April 2017 . Both center-right and far-right candidates have spoken favorably about improving ties with Russia .
 President Donald Trump spoke about restoring productive U.S.-Russia relations on the campaign trail . He has already held an initial short discussion with Vladimir Putin to that end .
 Ukrainian politics has witnessed dramatic and potentially destabilizing change over the past year . Ukraine's political crisis has seen a dramatic change in recent years .
 The government was formed under Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk following parliamentary elections in October 2014 . The government pursued major reforms, demanded by international donors .
 Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman appointed by President Petro Poroshenko to replace Yatsenyuk in April 2016 . The broader political context is not favorable, Groysmen says .
 Few Ukrainians are seeing direct benefits from the painful and slow-moving reform process . A sense of deep cynicism and anger pervades, as few ordinary Ukrainians see direct benefits .
 The popular mood favors those who promise decisive action over talk . It's a rallying cry for Ukraine's own populist demagogues and far-right nationalists .
 In this context, there is an increased risk of conflict escalation from both sides . In this instance, there are an increased risks of conflict escalating from both side .
 Both Russia and Ukraine have arrested the other side’s nationals on charges of espionage, sabotage and terrorism . Both sides are accused of espionage and sabotage .
 These actions seem designed to underscore the popular perception of the other side not as legitimate combatants, but as traitors or terrorists . The actions could be a prelude to further provocations, or even renewed heavy fighting in the winter or spring .
 Russia has already acknowledged its infiltration of Ukrainian territory with special operatives . Ukraine can justify almost any operation in Russian-held Crimea, in Donbass, or even over the Russian border .
 The U.S. national interest at stake in the Ukraine conflict is the maintenance of stability and security across the European and Euro-Atlantic space .
 U.S.-led bombing of Serbia in 1999 and subsequent support for Kosovo independence violated international norms . Russia's own actions in Ukraine risk the total breakdown of that very order .
 Europe’s security is an obvious and vital concern for United States national security . World wars that began in Europe have dragged Americans into bloody conflict twice in the past century .
 NATO allies have become understandably nervous, welcoming increased reassurance measures from the U.S. and western Europe . NATO allies, especially those bordering Russia and Ukraine, have become nervous .
 Moscow continues its own substantial military buildup in the Baltic and Black Sea regions . These developments are viewed with deep skepticism by Moscow, which continues its military buildup .
 A further concern for Washington is the intersection of mounting humanitarian and economic costs of the Ukraine-Russia conflict . Washington is also concerned about mounting humanitarian costs of Ukraine- Russia conflict .
 The United States does more bilateral trade with European countries than with any other region . European economies stand to lose the most from a Ukrainian and Russian economic collapse precipitated by the one-two punch of the financial crisis and the military conflict in Ukraine .
 More than a million displaced persons from Donbass to other parts of Europe and Russia have been displaced by violence in the Middle East .
 The current situation amounts to the largest concentration of displaced persons in Europe since World War II . It is doubtful whether even the wealthiest and most stable European societies are prepared to manage its shortand long-term consequences .