 The threat of a pro-Russian party coming to power in Ukraine is miniscule for two factors . The Russians will undoubtedly interfere, and we should watch and expose their shenanigans, says Peter Bergen .
 Opinion polls show large majorities against the election rhetoric of the Opposition Bloc . The opposition Bloc promotes the elevation of the Russian language and integration into the Eurasian Union .
Only 7 percent of Ukrainians believe the war is due to the suppression of the Russian language . Only 7 percent think the war was due to Russian language suppression .
 Russia’s occupation of Crimea and parts of the Donbas have removed 16 percent of voters from participating in Ukrainian elections . Second, Russia's occupation of the Crimea has removed sixteen percent of the voters .
 Paul D’Anieri’s study published by East European Politics and Societies and Cultures shows the absence of 3.75 million voters .
 87 percent of Yanukovych's voters now live under Russian occupation and cannot vote . Of these, 87 percent voted for Yanukovych in 2010 .
 D’Anieri rightly concludes that a political party mobilizing only the eastern Ukrainian vote cannot win the presidency or form a parliamentary majority . In other words, Putin's aggression prevents eastern Ukraine from controlling Ukraine .
 Pro-Russian forces, on the other hand, seek to compromise with Putin because in doing so their voters would be able to participate in Ukrainian elections . In doing so, they would have been able to vote in Ukraine's elections .
 Opposition Bloc leader Yuriy Boyko and For Life leader Vadym Rabinovych’s anti-war election populism . This is the reason for the opposition's anti- war populism .
 Pro-Russian populism is undermined by the fact that Vladimir Putin is the only politician who can end the fighting . Putin is only politician to end fighting.
 Ukrainians want the war to end, but they are not optimistic about it ending soon . Ukrainians want to end the war, but not to end it soon .
 More than 70 percent believe there will be no change in the next 3-5 years, and 47 percent in 5-10 years . More than 50 percent believe no change will happen in next three years .
 72 percent believe Russia's goal is to destroy Ukrainian independence and sovereignty . 73 percent of Ukrainians see no normalisation of relations with Russia as long as he is Russian president .
 Pro-Russian politicians should have learnt from Orange and Euromaidan Revolutions not to ignore the wishes of their people .
 Any attempt by pro-Russian forces to strike compromises with Putin would have serious domestic ramifications, including a possible third Maidan . With a large and growing group of veterans from the war, any attempt would haveserious domestic ramifications .
 Three-quarters of Ukrainians see normalization of relations with Russia only after it ends its military aggression, withdraws from occupied territories, pays compensation, and agrees to end interference in Ukraine’s domestic affairs .
 Opinion polls show the weakness of pro-Russian candidates because Russia's aggression has made it unlikely there will be a traditional second round of ‘pro-Western’ versus “pro-Russian’s” candidates .