 The author suggests that the formation of community boundaries is not automatic .
 Boundaries are not activated by preexisting ethnic or linguistic identities, or even by political leaders who manipulate those identities .
 Analysts should focus on how specific political developments contribute to alienation from the central state .
 Movements for self-determination occur when people seek to throw off rule by authority that they consider to be alien .
 They may desire, among other goals, escape from discrimination and oppression . They may want increased control over economic policy, or the right of their community to cultural and political expression .
 As scholars and statesmen have long recognized, the nature of the community seeking self-rule is far from self-evident . But as scholars and statemen have recognized, it's not clear what self- rule means .
 Ethnicity and culture often define community boundaries, yet their constructed and changeable nature throw into question the durability of fixed political communities based on these categories .
 The appearance of a new movement for selfdetermination in east Ukraine suggests the urgency of these questions . The situation in the east Ukraine and consequent violent conflict suggest the urgency.
 Demands for separatism1 developed in spring 2014 in several cities and oblasts of east Ukraine known as the Donbass . Russian Federation was annexing the Ukrainian region of Crimea .
 The annexation was Russia's response to the Maidan protests that overthrew Ukraine’s centralized and pro-Russian Yanukovych government . It replaced it with a reform-oriented, pro-EU government .
 Initially, it looked like events in east Ukraine would replicate those in Crimea . It looked like it would replicate the events in Crimea.
 Many observers, especially during the first few months of the conflict, discounted the agency of local Ukrainian citizens in driving events .
 Russia was fomenting separatism in order to promote the ‘federalization’ of Ukraine so that it could manipulate the foreign policy of part of Ukraine . Journalists explained that Russia was trying to promote separatism to promote 'federalized' Ukraine .
 Scholars as well used polling data to make the point that there was little ‘indigenous’ support for either separation or joining Russia .
Activists seized government buildings in Donetsk and Luhansk in early April . They declared a Peoples' Republic of Donetsk and a Peoples’ Republic of Lhansk . They held referenda on state sovereignty .
 It also became clearer as the weeks passed that separatist leaders and fighters in East Ukraine were not the ‘little green men’ from Crimea .
Western observers tended to view separatism as imposed by Moscow and lacking in local support .
 Popular support among ethnic Russians for self-determination is not a pre-determined outcome . Popular support is not pre-Determined outcome, says one Russian politician .
 It is worth exploring why support for separatism emerged among a minority of the population in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Since violence tends to harden identities and attitudes, I examine the period before armed conflict occurred between the separatists and the Ukrainian government . The Ukrainian government and the separatists have been involved in the conflict .
 Analysts should place current political developments in political and socio-economic context, writes John Sutter .
 Study analyzes why Maidan demonstrations generated a deep sense of alienation among many Ukrainian citizens in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 I briefly outline recent events in east Ukraine . Before elaborating these factors, I briefly outlines recent events .
 The idea of self-determination was first articulated at demonstrations held in several cities of east and south Ukraine last March and April .
 Donetsk leaders quickly adopted a declaration of sovereignty6 that was apparently based on the author’s productive use of his internet search engine .
 Ukraine’s government, in response to capture of additional government buildings by armed groups, initiated the Ukrainian Anti-Terrorist Operation . The operation was launched after the capture of more government buildings in eastern towns and cities .
 republics’ leaders claimed that nearly 100% of the populations in the two oblasts voted for independence . The republics' leaders said nearly 100 per cent of the population voted forindependence .
 With voters casting multiple ballots, an intermittent supply of polling stations, and an unobserved vote count conducted by separatist leaders themselves, the referenda were widely condemned by foreign governments .
 A significant number of local residents participated in the referendum . The pro-independence vote was severely inflated .
 Interviews at polling stations indicate a distinct level of support for autonomy, separation, or annexation to Russia .
 'We only want economic autonomy, for now. For example, an older man told a Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty journalist, ‘We only wants economic autonomy for now'
 A middle-aged woman stated, ‘We are sick and tired of our country, of our government’s policies, so we're voting for what we’ve been offered so far.
 The idea of seceding from Ukraine to join Russia became more imaginable to activists following Crimea's annexation . President Putin mentioned the concept of ‘NovoRossiya’ in April 2014 .
 The question is to ensure the rights and interests of the Russian southeast . The Russian southeast is a key part of Russia's economy .
Some areas were gone, and the people stayed there, and we need to encourage them to find a solution . Then for various reasons these areas were going, and they stayed there .
 Donetsk and Luhansk Republics officially announced that they had formed a confederation called the Federal State of New Russia .9 Separatist ideas are not wholly new to southeastern Ukraine .
 These ideas and organizations remained politically marginal for years . Yet these ideas and groups remain politically marginal .
 Some of the current ideologues of the DNR or LNR may have emerged from these groups . The recent expansion of separatist sentiment among a broader swath of citizens there deserves explanation .
The next section considers whether Russian ethnic and linguistic identity translates into attitudes supporting separatism . The next section looks at whether Russian identity translates to attitudes supporting separatistism .
 The rhetoric articulated by Russian leaders claims that ethno-cultural differences create a political divide between Russians and Ukrainians .
 A simple correlation between ethnic demography and political mobilization provides little information about whether or how ethnicity translates into political attitudes .
 Cultural differences that are often present in multi-ethnic societies and that sometimes produce inter-ethnic conflict do not apply in Ukraine. Cultural differences are oftenpresent in multi ethnic societies .
 Cultural boundaries between Russians and Ukrainians are fuzzy and faint, as indicated by the high rate of inter-ethnic marriage there . The high number of Russian-Ukrainian marriages is also indicated .
 Russians and Ukrainians share a common religion, for the most part, a secularism inherited from the Soviet era . A common language, a mixture of the two; and a host of social practices and cultural expectations .
 Some people from both groups have ancestors who settled the land of present-day Ukraine as long as the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries .
 The ancestors of other ethnic Russians migrated from Russia to Ukraine decades ago . They were lured by the prospect of good jobs in coal mining and metallurgy .
 Russians there do not see themselves as migrants or outsiders. Such deep roots in the region mean that Russians there are not seen as migrants .
 The porosity of cultural boundaries suggests that ethnic identity by itself provides little information about why many people in the east feel alienated from Ukraine .
 Language Language has been a controversial issue in Ukraine since independence . Language Language in Ukraine has been controversial since independence.
Ukrainian nationbuilders consider language to be a key attribute of nationhood . Language is a key part of the country's nationalhood .
 Since ethnic Russians form 17% of the population, there are clearly many more Russian-speakers than ethnic Russians in Ukraine .
 It does not make sense to talk about bounded language groups . Aside from several regions in the west and the east, it does not makes sense to discuss bounded languages .
 A generational change is occurring in the southeast where a majority of citizens are monolingual Russian-speakers . But even in the south, a generational change has been occurring .
Many younger citizens whose first language is Russian are learning Ukrainian . Many younger citizens who are learning Ukraine are also learning Ukrainian.
 There is no priori reason why people’s linguistic identity trumps their other identities and interests. Second, there is no reason why they are different .
 In Ukraine’s regionally polarized politics, both Russophones and Ukrainophones in the southeast have shared a political orientation in the past .
 In Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, even those who reported that their native language is Ukrainian . They voted together with Russophones for Yanukovych in the 2010 presidential elections .
Politicians and other elites have politicized language in the past and did so again following the Maidan .
 One of the first acts of Ukraine’s interim government was to annul a language law that had been passed by former president Yanukovych in 2012 . Former president Yanukovych gave Russian the status of an official regional language .
Citizens could use Russian rather than Ukrainian in official government business within their region . This status meant that citizens could use Russia rather than Ukraine in official business within the region .
Interim Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov’s elimination of the law could have been interpreted by Russophones as an attempt to ban Russian . More anti-Russian discriminatory acts would follow, according to Russian media .
 The European Parliament criticized the law, calling on Ukraine to protect minority rights and languages . The EU Parliament also criticized the Ukrainian law .
 Turchynov quickly reversed the law and preserved the status of Russian state .
 Despite this episode, it is not clear that ordinary people maintain the same intensity of preferences about language as Ukrainian politicians and elites .
Public opinion surveys from April 2014 show that even among Russophones in southeast Ukraine, who we would expect to be the most distressed by Turchynov’s action .
We should be cautious in assuming that politicians’ manipulation of language in Ukraine divides people into discrete political blocs .
 Understanding Separatism in East Ukraine grew during and after the Maidan protests among Ukrainians in the southeast and especially in the Donbas .
 Two other aspects of the Maidan, I argue, contributed to rising support for separatism in the Donbas .
President Yanukovych's decision to reject economic integration with the EU and join the Eurasian Customs Union led by Russia. The original issue that brought protesters to Maidan Square was the original issue .
 Popular opposition to integration with the EU can be understood, in part, as a rational response based on material interests . The opposition to EU integration can be seen as rational response to material interests.
 Donetsk and Luhansk are dominated by Soviet-era industry, mining, metallurgy, and machine building .
 Many of these industries sell their products to Russia and are not competitive with western firms . Many of them sell their product to Russia .
 In the estimations of ordinary people, joining the Customs Union would maintain trade ties with Russia and other post-Soviet states .
 Pavel Gubarev's rhetoric glorifies the ethnic and historical elements of NovoRossiya . The DNR founder of the DNR understands this .
 When asked directly about the reasons for the 'pro-Russian mood, he shifts to discussing material interests .
 If Zaporizhia is not pro-Russian then they will be out of jobs and that’s thousands of employees . Of course people understand that if Zaporizehia isn't pro- Russian then they would be out.
 Novorossiya is a former South-East of Ukraine. It is the same thing with other enterprises in the former South East of the country .
 Many workers in the Donbas opposed what they perceived to directly threaten their livelihood and future . The post-Maidan government made joining the EU a priority .
 Identification with the USSR is apparent in the behavior of anti-Maidan protesters across east and south Ukraine who formed human chains to prevent the new government from demolishing statues of Vladimir Lenin .
An important question is whether nostalgia for the Soviet Union is a static feeling . It originated at the moment of Soviet collapse and has not changed over time, or whether it has emerged in response to political developments .
 If it is the former, if nostalgia is stronger among the older generation who grew up in the USSR, then we may expect support for separatism to wane over time .
 If Soviet nostalgia has developed in response to changing political developments, it may grow over time . But if Soviet nostalgia is developing, it could grow over the next few years .
 After the Orange Revolution, President Yushchenko and other Ukrainian leaders and intellectuals advocated an ethnic, rather than civic, conception of the nation, emphasizing Ukrainian ethnicity .
 Ukraine is a victim of the imperialist Soviet Union which perpetrated genocide and destroyed Ukrainian language and culture . In this view, Ukraine's language, culture and culture are destroyed .
 Advocates of these ideas identify post-Soviet Russia and ethnic Russians with the Soviet Union . Advocates say the idea is a way to identify the two countries .
 The Ukrainian nationalist far right, led by the parties Svoboda and Right Sector, began to exert outsize influence at the Maidan . Many citizens resented the negative image of the Soviet Union that they articulated .
 Their ideology fit in with a strand of ultranationalist discourse that, over the years, had scapegoated ethnic Russians for the country's problems .
 Andriy Parubiy is a former leader of a neo-fascist party . He is now head of Ukraine’s National Security and Defense Council .
 The elections took place in fall 2014, months after the Maidan and post-Maidan developments had contributed to the political alienation of many Donbas residents . Even though subsequent parliamentary elections showed the popularity of the far right to be quite low in Ukraine.
 The Ukrainian far right is trying to reify ethnic boundaries by imputing negative political meanings to ethnic and linguistic identities . The Russian government is in the same way as the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine’s government fails to distance itself from such categorizations of Russians and Russian-speakers . It may reproduce feelings of Soviet nostalgia and exclusion that drove support for separatism .
 It is critical for Kiev to figure out how to eventually re-integrate Donetsk and Luhansk into Ukraine . Since one year into the conflict, it appears that Russia does not plan to annex parts of East Ukraine .
 The case of Ukraine suggests that the formation of a community that supports secession is not a reflexive process . The case is not the case of the Ukraine, says the author .
 Ethnic and linguistic identities do not translate directly into political alienation from the central state when politicians initiate campaigns for secession . Ethnic and linguist identities don't translate directly to political alienation .
 In Ukraine, before the war began in spring 2014, popular support for separatism developed in Donetsk and Luhansk . But only among a minority of the population was behind separatism .
 I do not stipulate that separatism must be on behalf of an ethnic group . However, I don't stipulate separatism should be on the behalf of a group .
 Separatism and secessionism are dynamic and political processes in which the goals, intentions, and actions of regional actors shift and evolve along with changing political conditions . The goal, intentions and intentions of the regional actors are to change and evolve .
 Motor Sich is a large manufacturer of airplane and helicopter engines that sells mainly to Russia and China . The company is based in Moscow, Russia and Beijing .
 Russian resistance to linguistic Uukrainization in central and Eastern Ukraine . Russia has been trying to change the language of Ukraine for years .
 Interview with Center for Scientific Political Thought and Ideology . Interview with the Center for scientific Political Thought .
 Protesters in Eastern Ukraine are changing ‘New Russia’ An old term that’s back in vogue.
 Interview on program ‘Vesti v subbotu s Sergeem Brilyovim’, Moscow .
AllUkrainian population census’ 2001 data. About number and composition of UKRAINE by data AllUkrainia population census .