 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea is celebrating the third anniversary of its reunification referendum with Russia . The world reflects on the historical consequences of this momentous decision .
 Crimea made the fateful and democratic decision to rejoin Russia on 16 March, 2014 .
 The ‘EuroMaidan’ coup in Kiev and the spread of violent neo-Nazism all across Ukraine, completely changed International Relations . The West gave the West the excuse that they were looking for to initiate the Sanctions War and what others have subsequently termed the New Cold
 The West refused to recognize Crimea’s reunification with Russia and decided to punish both parties instead . The West argued that the peninsula was “forcibly annexed’ by Moscow and that the inhabitants would rather live under Poroshenko than Putin .
 Crimea's economy has grown and it’s seen record-breaking tourism ever since it rejoined Russia . Crimea's tourism is now a record- breaking tourism record .
 Russians have travelled to Russia over the past three years, including European parliamentarians, political observers, journalists, and even private citizens .
 Crimean referendum of 2014 was free, fair, democratic, and representative of the will of the vast majority of the population . As always happens, reality refuted propaganda, and independent voices have confirmed that the Crimean referendum was free .
 Crimea and the rest of Russia celebrate this historic moment . But the nearby region of Donbas is struggling in its fight against Kiev, warding off artillery strikes .
 Donbas hasn't met the same fate as Crimea, but this is due to its specific situational differences and also the grand strategic calculations of the Kremlin .
 Crimea’s recent past, it's impossible not to think about Donbas under the current circumstances, and a discussion about them should reveal more about their interlinked futures .
 Bernard Casey served as president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Kiev during the reunification of Crimea with Russia . Casey is also a specialist for Russia and its former territories .
Irish independent journalist Padraig McGrath lives in Crimea . He is an independent journalist living in Crimea.