 The EU must stay the course by maintaining a strong and united Russia policy. To prevent any of these doomsday scenarios from unfolding, the EU must keep the course .
 The U.S. can do this by automating the sanctions renewal process and stepping in where the United States is stepping out in Ukraine . It can also do this.
 Russia has a long history of dividing the European Union – sometimes bitterly so . The question of what to do about Russia has been asked by the EU .
There is a broad consensus on the challenge that Russia poses, along with an acceptance . But grudging in some quarters – of the measures that Europe should take to contain it .
 This consensus has survived the refugee crisis, the election of Donald Trump, and a host of other elections and political upsets, as well as the differing views on sanctions among Europeans, and Russia’s best efforts to split Europe .
 It has defied the pundits’ predictions that European unity would collapse . It has also defied the predictions that the EU would collapse.
 In the end, Europe's unity has proven stronger and more resilient than many believed it could be . Europe’s unity has proved stronger than many thought it was .
 It does so not by describing the past or the present but by considering possible futures . But it does not by describe the past but rather by considering potential futures .
 European policy towards Russia and Ukraine could come crashing down. These scenarios show different ways in which European policy could come down .
 Europe's political dynamics and forces could undermine the current policy as well as demonstrate the strengths and weaknesses of Europe’s stance . Their purpose is to highlight the political dynamics.
 The U.S. and Russia have a 'great power bargain' on European security . They also show the consequences of Europe not staying the course .
 The purpose is not to predict the future but to consider the possible worst-case scenarios in order to reveal what is at stake . Europe's vulnerabilities are, and, hopefully, to spark debate about the future of Europe’s policy towards Russia and Ukraine .
Only a few months earlier, Chancellor Angela Merkel’s chances of clinching yet another term seemed like a forgone conclusion . The German Chancellor's chances of winning another term were slim .
 The prospect of Donald Trump, Marine Le Pen and the Five Star Movement governing the planet had made many Germans uneasy and led them to opt for stability .
 Tired of watching the same chancellor on television for over a decade, vast numbers of Germans complained about 'Merkel fatigue' and decided to vote for fringe parties .
 A terrorist attack carried out a week before the elections by a refugee under surveillance by the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution . The attack caused a crisis of confidence in the government .
 TV viewers slowly came to the realisation that support for Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union party and Christian Social Union had collapsed .
 Merkel told the nation she was stepping down after 12 years as chancellor . That same evening, Merkel told a stunned nation that she had stepped down .
 SPD leader Martin Schulz declared that there had been an agreement to form a coalition government . The next day, Schulz announced that the Social Democrats, Die Linke, and Greens had agreed to form an agreement .
 The shift in Germany’s policy towards Russia was not immediate, but it took only a week .
 Key staff in Chancellery were replaced by newcomers who lacked understanding of the tactical obstacles faced in Normandy Format negotiations or the Trilateral Contact Group in Minsk .
 New Chancellery staff adopted a 'Neuanfang mit Russland' policy – a 'new beginning with Russia' policy . The policy was a hasty policy review .
 Kyiv was primarily to blame for non-implementation of the Minsk agreements. They concluded Russia had been treated unfairly and that Kyiv had been unfairly .
 Anonymous sources in the Chancellery vehemently denied that the review had anything to do with the detrimental effects of the sanctions .
 Berlin's first step consisted of pressurising Kyiv into accepting Russia’s demands for local elections in Donetsk and Lugansk . Kyiv's law conferring special status on territories without any sustained ceasefire or troop withdrawals .
 This new approach to Minsk was opposed by the Baltic states, Scandinavians, the United Kingdom, and several eastern European states . The new approach was opposed to the new approach by Baltic states and Scandinavians .
 Trump administration had come out – for once – in support of Berlin . But they were unable to mount a meaningful coalition to counter Berlin’s might .
 Emmanuel Macron was instinctively firm on Russia, especially after its meddling in his country’s presidential election .
 Berlin's priority was to build a working relationship with Berlin to push through his economic agenda . But he shied away from picking a fight with Berlin over Russia and Ukraine over Russia .
 Italy, Hungary, and Austria were delighted with the new winds blowing down from Berlin . Member states that had long been interested in lifting sanctions have lined up to support the new approach .
 Europe needed to be tougher on Ukraine and impose more conditions to ensure that Kyiv implemented its obligations under Minsk . Ukraine's leaders were tactful enough to avoid calling for the immediate lifting of sanctions .
 The European Council meeting in December 2017 was something of a turning point . The meeting was held in December 2016 .
 Chancellor Martin Schulz cornered a clutch of north European leaders huddling in a corridor . He strong-armed them into supporting his new beginning with Russia and his plan to revise the sanctions policy .
 The EU's new approach was met with heavy resistance in Kyiv and caused an outcry within Ukrainian civil society . The EU’s new approach to the EU was met by heavy resistance.
 Ukrainian government had little choice but to accept this new reality . But the Ukrainian government has little choice.
 Petro Poroshenko feared that confronting Europe might put three years' worth of reform in jeopardy . He was mindful that Ukraine could barely survive without European support .
 Poroshenko agreed to the EU's demands in order to avoid criticism from his European colleagues . But he secretly hoped that the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights would, in the end, not recognise the elections as legitimate .
 ODIHR caved in to Wagenknecht’s demand that the organisation accept the ‘new reality’ The organisation devised a statement on the elections that amounted to rubber-stamping them as free and fair .
Machine gun fire could be heard in the distance as voters head to the polls .
 Ukrainian political parties barred from running and Ukrainian media banned from visiting the Donbas to cover the elections .
 Local ‘separatist’ media ran the show, reporting a misleading blend of fact and fiction .
 Special detachments of officers sent by the Russian Armed Forces’ Main Intelligence Directorate sought to intimidate and even eliminate candidates who did not support the Russian occupation .
 Kyiv-controlled side of Ukraine has been fighting separatist ‘borders’ The presence of landmines has deterred internally displaced persons from making the treacherous journey to polling stations .
 The few ODIHR election observers symbolically deployed to the DNR and LNR were escorted by separatist militias . Only taken to designated polling stations .
 The outcome was a given and the elections were merely a spectacle to legitimise the separatists . The elections were just a spectacle for the separatists, says the writer .
 Nearly half of the population of DNR and LNR packed up their belongings and crossed into Kyiv-controlled parts of the Donbas .
 Those who remained were mostly pensioners who were too old to leave, or war veterans who would be arrested if they ever crossed the line . Those who remain were mostly retired and war veterans .
 New authorities demanded additional funds from Kyiv to finance the people’s republics .
 In particular, they demanded social payments, arguing that the Minsk agreements required this . They argued that the agreement required this.
 Berlin and other European capitals seemed to confirm this interpretation of Minsk . Minsk is enraging the Ukrainians .
 Budgetary sessions of the Ukrainian Rada ended in fist-fights because lawmakers did not want to be associated with amendments to funnel more money into Russian proxy states .
 The Kremlin ordered the DNR and LNR forces to increase their military pressure on Ukraine . The Kremlin is trying to bring Ukraine into its orbit .
 Russian intelligence personnel based in the DNR and LNR used their newly won immunity to liaise with pro-Russian activists across Ukraine .
 In Odessa, Kharkiv, Dnipro and other cities, members of subversive hooligan clubs began exerting pressure on local reformists, investigative journalists, and politicians .
 Corrupt local security services did little to stop their expansion and collusion with organised crime. Corrupt security services were not able to stop the expansion of organised crime .
 These helped to create pro-Russian front organisations in preparation for a wider insurgency and to portray Ukraine as a failing state in Europe . They helped to make Ukraine a failed state, they say .
 In an increasingly destabilised Ukraine, the prospects for economic growth diminished . Investors began to leave the country, leaving the country .
 separatists tried to claim their seats in the Rada. But the tipping point came when the separatists were trying to claim the seats .
 separatist politicians took part in the 2019 elections. Under the pretext of ‘reintegrating’ the Donbas, as ultimately foreseen in the Minsk agreements, separatist politicians take part in 2019 elections .
 The Donbas candidates were mostly Russian-backed separatists who had fought in the war there . The candidates were mainly Russian- backed separatists who fought in Russia's Donbas .
 Most candidates were easily elected, which meant the end of normal political life in Kyiv . Most of the candidates were easy elected, and most of them were elected .
Ukrainian civil society organised massive demonstrations against members of parliament who were seen as Russian Trojan horses .
 The outbreak of violence was the signal for the titushki clubs across Ukraine to stage major anti-government protests .
 Ukrainians felt deep frustration with the government in Kyiv and anger at the economic downturn, the corruption, and the war in the east . These orchestrated protests managed to attract Ukrainians who felt angry at the government .
 In several cities, protests and counter-protests ended in rioting and clashes with the police . In some cities, protesters and police clashed with police .
 The Kremlin watched closely to see whether the ongoing revolts presented an opportunity for them to stage a takeover in Kyiv . The Kremlin also watched closely.
 Separatist forces, many of which were composed of regular Russian soldiers, were transformed into ‘people’s militia units’ as the footnote in the second Minsk agreement called them .
 Moscow claimed it was all in line with Minsk. They continued to receive material support from Russia . But they could now do so legally as part of the cross-border cooperation framework .
 Russia had refused to relinquish its control of the border to Ukraine . It said it would only do so once Ukraine had fully lived up to its Minsk-related obligations .
 As the anti-government protests grew, units were sent across the line of contact to provide protection for demonstrators .
 Separatist putsches were launched in Odessa and Dnipro, but ultimately failed . Separatists were launched on the streets of the city of Odessa .
 Policymaking in Kyiv ground to a complete halt under such circumstances . Under such circumstances, policymaking in the country is under complete halt .
 Poroshenko declared a nationwide state of emergency and began ruling by decree . Poroshenko declares a nationwideState of emergency . The decree was signed by decree.
 A new government was formed with prime minister Arsen Avakov at the helm .
 Ukraine’s new patriotic strongman has already built up his own ‘deep state’ during his stint as interior minister .
 He relied on the Ukrainian Intelligence Service to rule the country, using the intel it gathered for political purposes .
 The international outcry over Russia’s actions began all over again, but Europe was divided on how to react this time . Europe is divided over how to respond to Russia's actions .
 Several member states have refused to go along with any further measures against Russia . Russia has a “new beginning with Russia’s” policy, according to the Russian government .
 European Council calls on all sides to show restraint and seek a peaceful solution . The best that the European Council could come up with was to issue carefully worded conclusions .
 Those who could, from the young innovative generation, left Ukraine for Europe for Europe . Those who left Ukraine could also leave the country for Europe.
 The decision to force the Minsk agreements upon Kyiv made central and eastern European countries in the EU weary of western European leadership .
 The distrust within Europe and subsequent conflicts brought EU policymaking to a standstill, impeding reform of the EU and the eurozone . The distrust in Europe has led to a lack of reform in the EU.
 The formation of issue-specific coalitions or permanent structured cooperation, as outlined in the treaties, was blocked by northern and eastern European member states due to their distrust of old members .
 The credibility of the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy was dealt a serious blow, especially its ability to deliver stability and reform in the eastern neighbourhood . The European Union's credibility of its common foreign and security policy was hit by the blow .
 The Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area agreement and visa liberalisation had been delivered . There were no new flagship projects to promote the Europeanisation of Ukraine or incentivise further reforms .
 Europe, preoccupied with domestic crises and political squabbles, lost interest in Ukraine by late 2017 . By late 2017, Europe's focus had been on Ukraine .
 Some member states still considered Ukraine important, but they could not muster the political will in Europe to push for further deepening of relations .
18 was a year of muddling through. Germany and a few other member states had even tried to roll back European Union commitments acknowledging Ukraine's European aspirations .
 In Ukraine, the lack of attention from Europe led to stagnation and then backsliding on reforms . The lack of new deliverables led first to stagnation, then to backslide on reforms, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Petro Poroshenko reached out to oligarchs from the era of Viktor Yanukovych to redistribute their economic gains in exchange for political loyalty .
 The 2019 elections pitted Poroshenko against the oligarch Victor Pinchuk – an easy win for the latter . Poroshenko is expected to win the election by a landslide .
 Brussels was not unhappy about the outcome, but this ‘victory’ had come at the cost of delegitimising and isolating alternative pro-European candidates, like Serhiy Leshchenko .
 Selective investigations, politically motivated trials, and biased television coverage, were again part of Ukraine’s domestic politics .
 Soon 'new Ukraine' looked much like 'old Ukraine' and traditional supporters of Kyiv in Brussels were less and less tempted to raise their voices on the country's behalf .
 By 2019, the two people's republics in the Donbas had become de facto military dictatorships run from the Kremlin .
 The local economies – beyond organised crime – had effectively collapsed . The local economy – beyond organized crime – has effectively collapsed, according to experts .
 Once most of the oligarch Rinat Akhmetov’s factories had been nationalised and re-located to Russia . separatist armed forces became the main employer .
 The Rada passed a short constitutional amendment to give increased autonomy to the Donbas . It would only enter into force when Russia withdrew its forces and handed back control of the border .
 Moscow rejected this condition and maintained its control of the entities through its military and intelligence presence . Moscow rejected the condition and maintains its control.
 The security situation along the line of contact remained unchanged, with daily exchanges of artillery and gunfire . The security situations along the lines of contact remain unchanged .
 Russia still enjoyed a wide range of military options in the region . Kyiv diverted a sizeable part of its budget and government attention to keeping up its military presence in the East .
 The continuous tension in the Donbas region deterred investors and businesses, creating economic imbalances within the country and increasing latent tensions within the rest of Ukraine .
 Thomas de Maizière was not sympathetic to Russia but had little experience of dealing with Putin . He was the former German minister of the interior .
 Many observers in Europe concluded that the Minsk agreements would only ever be partially implemented . With a special status law in place for the DNR and LNR – albeit an unimplementable one due to the Russian military presence – many observers concluded that it would only be partially implementation .
 Full implementation, they argued, was unrealistic and they should accept what they could achieve . Full implementation was unrealistic, they said, and they argued .
In the autumn of 2020, after another banking crisis in Italy, southern Europe was hit by a recession . In the autumn 2020, the recession was in the middle of the year .
For Emmanuel Macron, this recession was especially bitter, as the effects of his economic reforms were about to be felt . Macron's economic reforms are about to have the effect of the recession .
 Pro-Russian populists from the left and the right accused him of being a ‘tool of international capitalism’ When he tried to save the French financial sector, he was accused of being 'tool of global capitalism'
 Once hawkish towards Russia, Macron found himself needing to appease the country for domestic reasons . Macron has been seen to be more cautious with Russia .
Not wanting to undermine Macron, de Maizière became more disposed towards ‘flexibility’ on Russia and Ukraine . Not wanting to undermined Macron was more disposed to 'flexibility' on Russia.
 The EU decided that since Russia had made “some progress’ towards implementing them, sanctions should be partially lifted . France and Germany had a half-hearted push to inject new life into the process .
 The Kremlin says it would encourage further implementation of the system . This, it was argued, would encourage the Kremlin to pursue further implementation .
 Sanctions lifted on arms and dual-use goods, and financial restrictions on state-owned enterprises were also lifted .
 Europe had given up on the eastern neighbourhood, and prioritised relations with Russia once again . The lifting of these sanctions – incidentally the ones that mattered most to Russia – signalled to Moscow.
 Russia did not fully reciprocate, only lifting its counter-sanctions towards individuals . To the dismay of Italian and French businesses, Russian businesses have not reciprocated .
 Russia's restrictive measures on trade had become a permanent – and for some a lucrative – feature of its economy .
 The Kremlin perceived the gradual retreat of Europe as de facto acquiescence to its interests and ambitions in the eastern neighbourhood . The Kremlin saw the retreat as a de facto acceptance of its interests in the east .
 Europe's actions lent credence to Moscow’s belief that, as long as it stuck to its position, Europeans would always give in to pressure .
 Europe held on in Ukraine for longer than it did in Georgia, but in the end it gave up there as well . In Ukraine, Ukraine held on for more than a decade .
 Moscow increased its active measures in Ukraine soon after the partial lifting of sanctions .
 Orders sent out to connect organised crime networks, anti-government opposition, and titushki hooligan clubs . Russian intelligence services operating from Donbas .
 The people's republics became sanctuaries for drug smuggling and human trafficking networks, money laundering, forgery, and cyber-crime .
 The spread of organised crime has destabilised Ukraine, but also gave birth to tension between Brussels and Kyiv . The former demanding that the latter block the spread of organized crime from Donbas .
 Corruption among some political actors, oligarchs, and domestic security services was the second stage of destabilisation . Corruption among political actors and oligarchs was a second stage.
 The stalemate in reforms hindered the diversification of trade relations . Ukraine remained dependent on the Russian market, which provided an opening for Moscow to exert influence on key oligarchs .
 European businesses lost interest in the Ukrainian market due to high levels of corruption and an inefficient judiciary . European businesses lose interest in Ukraine due to corruption and inefficient judiciary.
 Ukraine suffered from extensive brain-drain, under-investment, unemployment, and economic stagnation . Ukraine's economic stagnation was blamed for the country's economic woes .
 Russia did not have the resources to replace the investment of departing European businesses . The status quo meant Kyiv was unable to move towards the West .
 Ukraine's instability served the Kremlin well because it neither had to directly manage Ukraine, nor to expose itself to Western criticism for subduing the country . This kind of controlled and ambiguous instability served.
 Still, it could delegitimise the EU as a stabilising force in the neighbourhood and beyond . It could dissuade Europeans from trying to further engage in other countries on Russia’s periphery .
 The Kremlin concluded that controlled instability was an ideal tool for controlling the neighbourhood and by extension, containing Europe and the West .
 The chaos it created prevented Euro-Atlantic institutions from enlarging further and made European stabilisation of the immediate neighbourhood a costly affair . The chaos prevented the West from applying its tools elsewhere .
 Accepting the Donbas as a frozen conflict was the optimal result for Russia in the short term . Accepting it was an optimal result in Russia in a short term, Russia says .
 Trump team’s ties to Russia were something of a distraction for the president during 2017 . His government still managed to win its battle with Congress over cuts to foreign assistance budgets .
 The administration's general goal of retreating from the business of “giving out free lunches to ungrateful allies’s. This was just one strand of the administration's goal of retreating from ‘giving outFree lunches’ Trump tweeted .
 The administration's push reflected its intention to stop supporting Ukraine and lift sanctions against Russia .
 Leaked transcripts of phone calls between the Trump team and Russian officials during the election campaign . This intention had become clear in leaked transcripts of calls between Trump and Russia .
 EU member states initially reacted to the U.S. cuts by calling for the EU to “double down’s support efforts in Ukraine . The EU's support for Ukraine has been cut by the United States .
 Trump’s antics during his first six months in office had made him politically toxic in Europe . He actually contributed to a strengthening of European unity, according to European leaders .
 European politicians quickly realised that taking on Trump and pushing policies that ran counter to whatever Trump said or did had immediate and broad appeal among voters . European politicians took on the President's policies and pushed them back .
Anti-Trumpism became a real unifying force in European politics . At one point, anti- Trumpism became an unifying factor in European political politics .
 The balance of power within the EU shifted to the southern members who were largely dubious about EU engagement in Ukraine . The U.S. has lost interest in Ukraine.
 Italy, Austria, Greece, and Hungary seized the opportunity presented by Washington’s slashing of aid to push for the EU to do the same . Washington has slashed aid to help the EU.
 There was some resistance from Germany, which, together with Sweden and a few eastern European states, increased humanitarian assistance to Ukraine .
 The United Kingdom increased its bilateral support for Ukraine too, but only discreetly, so as not to appear too out of sync with the U.S. The United States increased its support for the Ukraine in the past .
 Poland and several others were reluctant to follow Berlin since they did not want to take sides in the growing transatlantic rift . But Poland and other countries were reluctant about following Berlin since it was not clear if they wanted to follow it .
 Other states, particularly France, which were still focusing on domestic reforms, remained ominously silent . Other states – particularly France – remained ominous silent .
 Transatlantic coordination had been essential for upholding the strategic Western response towards Russian action in Ukraine .
 It was the glue that kept Europeans together and firm in their backing for Ukraine . It was also the glue to keep Europeans in their backs for Ukraine.
 A lack of commitment from Trump towards NATO’s Article 5 had also made many Europeans nervous about being over-exposed in Ukraine and too hawkish on Russia .
 The family photo from the summit showed a handful of sulky European leaders struggling to put on a brave face . European newspapers spilled much ink speculating about the meaning of limp handshakes at the summit .
 European leaders were only able to agree on a strategic review of the current support effort . The EU was split on how to progress in Ukraine .
 In early 2018, assistance programmes for Ukraine were put on hold until the review was concluded and a new policy approach was agreed . In late 2018, the review of Ukraine's assistance programmes was concluded .
 Germany, Poland, the UK, and the Baltic countries were too small to fill the gap created by this freeze .
 Support for Ukraine was also attacked in the domestic debate in several European states . populist parties turned the issue into a cause célèbre as populist parties turn the issue.
 In mid-2018, Federica Mogherini tried to reconcile the different positions of member states . This effort was ultimately in vain .
 European heads of government failed to agree on a common policy . The freeze in assistance became permanent when the issue was finally discussed .
 The end of assistance to Ukraine reignited an intra-European discussion on the Minsk process and the Normandy Format . The Normandy Format was the subject of a debate in the European Union .
 Leaders of Italy, Greece, and Austria became louder in demanding that local elections in the Donbas should be held regardless of the security situation . Kyiv wants to continue receiving European support if Kyiv wanted to continue getting European support .
 Merkel and a few other leaders pushed back on this, favouring the ‘security first’ approach .
 Washington became vocal in supporting Italy, largely in order to gain leverage over Germany on trade . But as the European consensus fell apart again, it fell apart.
 The demand for elections without preconditions on security infuriated Kyiv and Ukrainian society . The demand has infuriated the Ukrainian society and Kyiv's government .
 Minsk was considered by a majority of Ukrainians to be a betrayal of the Ukrainian soldiers fighting on the frontline . It legitimised the presence of Russia's proxy separatists .
Having to hold elections without a ceasefire was seen as a double betrayal . But now, having to hold election without ceasefire is seen as an double betrayal.
 Domestic pressure increasing on Poroshenko to stand up to Europe and protect Ukraine’s interests .
 The Republican party won a landslide victory in the November 2018 mid-term elections in the U.S. The real shock came just days after the midterm elections in November .
 President Trump signed an executive order cancelling all sanctions on Russia with immediate effect. Minutes before midnight on 15 November, the president signed the order .
 Despite efforts by both houses to tie the administration down on Russia, binding legislation was vetoed by the president .
 European leaders began calling each other to figure out a common position after learning of the news via Twitter .
 Angela Merkel gained some support from colleagues in northern Europe . This was another example of why Europe needed to stand firm and united given that the United States could no longer be trusted .
 southern Europe pushed back, arguing that it was pointless for the EU to continue its sanctions regime without United States sanctions in place . But southern Europe argued that it would be pointless to continue sanctions without the U.S. in place.
In the end, the divide within the EU grew too wide and no common position could be agreed upon . In the end the divide between the EU and the EU grows too wide .
 At the 20th EU-Ukraine summit in December 2018 the split in vision and policies was clear for all to see . The split was clear at the summit in Kiev, Ukraine .
 The breakdown of the sanctions policy and the end of assistance to Ukraine had sapped the EU’s credibility and any leverage it had in Ukraine .
 The summit ended early as entrenched positions on both sides could not be reconciled . The summit ends early as the entrenched positions are not reconciled.
 Leading European newspapers speculated about the meaning of missing handshakes .
 Some heads of government from northern Europe pledged to continue their sanctions on Russia . The summit was held in Moscow, Russia's capital, on Monday .
Pundits were quick to point out that this only highlighted the divisions in Europe and the collapse of consensus . But pundits are quick to say this only highlights the division in Europe . The collapse of the consensus in Europe is the only reason for this .
 The leaders of Poland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and the UK also promised Poroshenko that Ukraine would receive support in the form of military trainers and advisers, along with lethal weapons .
 The end of EU sanctions against Russia dealt a devastating blow to Ukraine . But despite these scattered efforts to compensate for the breakdown of policy, the end of the sanctions was a blow for Ukraine .
 The perception in Ukraine was that first the U.S. and now the EU had given up on the country and left it to deal with Russia alone . The perception was first the United States and now it has left the country alone .
 An isolated but pugilistic Poroshenko declared the Normandy Format and Minsk process dead . Poroshenko declares the Normandy format and M Belarus process dead.
 Yulia Tymoshenko's language turned increasingly anti-EU and nationalistic . She is the main challenger in the presidential election .
 Many Ukrainians felt betrayed by the EU after the sacrifices made in Maidan square and in the Donbas . This message found deep resonance among the Ukrainians, many of whom felt betrayed .
 Historians would later use biblical terms to describe the significance of ending sanctions to Ukraine’s European aspirations .
 Large parts of Ukrainian political elite quickly resorted to ‘old habits’ and abandoned the harsh transparency and anti-corruption rules put in place thanks to international pressure .
 The 2019 parliamentary election resulted in an even more fragmented Rada, with populist parties gaining major shares of the vote .
 In the years that followed, Ukraine entered a period of domestic political turbulence, changing governments more than twice a year . Ukraine's political turbulence has changed the country more than two years in a year.
 In Moscow, the narrative that its policy on Ukraine had been a great success was accepted as gospel truth . Meanwhile, in Moscow, Russia, the story of Ukraine's success is accepted as Gospel truth .
 Moscow stepped up its activity in the Donbas and used political unrest to instigate further uprisings around the country . As Ukraine dived deeper into crisis, Moscow stepped down its activity .
 The aim of these actions was not only to destabilise Ukraine but to discredit it as a 'failed state' and deter Brussels from ever restarting support programmes in Ukraine .
 France's Front National and Germany's Alternative für Deutschland demanded sanctions on Ukraine . Pro-Russian parties in Europe, notably France’s Front National, embraced this narrative .
 Moscow ultimately aimed to bring Ukraine into its sphere of influence, it could accept – as second best – a weak and dysfunctional Ukraine that had no prospects of moving further towards West .
In Ukraine, a paralysed Rada could neither deliver on reforms nor on stable support for the government . In Ukraine, the government has been unable to deliver on reform or stable support .
After Ukraine lost international support, some civil society actors turned towards the army with their demands for reform .
 Despite progress made on reforms, the Ukraine eventually resembled a Kemalist republic . The armed forces are the true guardian of the political order, rather than a European-style democracy .
 Moscow was still set on renegotiating the post-cold war security order on Russian terms . The end of sanctions had provided a boost to the economy, especially since the end of the sanctions .
 Russia's costs for instigating new conflicts in its immediate neighbourhood were perceived to be too high in Moscow . But costs for Russia of instigating conflict in its own neighbourhood were too high.
 The refugee crisis has stirred up nationalist tension and sparked calls for revising the territorial status quo once more . It found fertile ground in the western Balkans, where dissatisfaction with the EU, local corruption, political mismanagement, and the refugee crisis had again stirred up tensions .
 Russia's close contact with Serb nationalists and ultra-conservative Orthodox forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, Macedonia, and Kosovo .
 The unravelling of the political order in the Balkans was seen in Moscow as vengeance for the ‘decade of humiliation’ it faced in the 1990s .
 Russia used Ukraine as a ‘test case’ to generate more ‘controlled instability’ in a region much closer to home for EU member states .
 To Trump, US-Russia antagonism had always been a bothersome obstacle to the overarching goal of uniting white Christian powers to fight radical Islam . Trump: Russia has always been an obstacle to U.S. efforts to uniting Christian powers .
 The U.S. and Russia should divide the Middle East and Europe into different “areas of special responsibility’ and “cooperate’ under the umbrella of the war against terror. The two-page document spells out, in short sentences, how the U
 Trump immediately signed the treaty with Russia . The treaty was signed by his aide, Steve Bannon .
President Obama signed executive orders to withdraw all U.S. military personnel from the region, end sanctions on Russia, and cancel all US-funded programmes relating to Ukraine and Georgia .
 The current European security order with one based on delineated spheres of influence was far more important to Moscow than actual territorial acquisitions in the immediate neighbourhood .
 When word of the treaty leaked, the reaction from the Washington establishment was as loud as it was predictable and ineffectual . The reaction from Washington was as loudly as it were predictable andIneffectual.
 Efforts by Senators John McCain and Joe Lieberman to set up a bipartisan caucus to veto the deal failed . Most Republicans feared they would be punished by Trump’s support base in the 2018 midterm elections .
 left-wing Democrats supported Trump on Russia in return for more protectionist foreign trade policy and restrictions on political lobbying in Washington .
 Trump's failure to mention NATO’s mutual defence clause at NATO summit in May had already rattled Europeans and their assumptions about the European security order .
 Trump's willingness to cut a deal over the heads of Europeans caused reverberations around the continent . Now, Trump’s willingness to deal with Europeans has caused reverberation around the world .
 Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron held a joint press conference . They told the world that the West, as we had known it, was no more and that Europe had to fend for itself .
 Opinion leaders wrote op-eds declaring the end of the post-war order . Think-tankers wrote think-pieces arguing that we now needed to rethink a new model for European security .
 The argument that the U.S. could not be trusted and that Europe was now on its own resonated throughout a shell-shocked Europe .
 The concept was quickly endorsed by other EU foreign ministers – even by sceptics who did not want EU defence integration to compete with NATO or wanted to protect their defence industries .
 There were also pledges to increase support for Ukraine to offset the consequences of it being thrown under the bus by Washington .
 The need to stick together in the face of U.S. abandonment of the neighbourhood was seen as paramount . At least for a couple of months, the need to stay together is seen as crucial .
 The Trump-Putin Pact had divided Europe into spheres of influence . It had also undercut the basic assumptions of NATO as an alliance .
 Several allies calculated that since collective defence was no longer reliable, they had to gain bilateral security assurances . Several allies calculate that, since collective defense was no more reliable, it had to get bilateral assurances .
 Poland and Baltic states entered into secret negotiations with the United States to secure bilateral defence guarantees . Poland and the Baltic states enter into secret talks with the U.S. to secure defence guarantees.
 Hungary and Austria also started secret negotiations, but with Moscow on non-aggression pacts . Russia also started talks with Hungary, Austria, and Austria .
 Merkel and Macron recognised the historic challenge that Europe was facing and did what they could to hold Europeans together .
 No European leader was willing to leave his or her country without reliable security guarantees or risk the security of his own country for that of Ukraine or Georgia . But despite outrage over the Trump-Putin Pact, no European leader would be willing to left his country .
 To formally recognise Crimea as Russian territory and accept an amnesty for the personnel engaged in the Donbas conflict . To formally recognise Crimea as Russia's territory, to formally recognise the Crimea as Crimea .
 Putin believed Ukraine’s western orientation to be a problem at the level of elites, rather than the people . Putin believed that these goals were within reach, as the Kremlin considered Ukraine's western orientation.
 Once the current ruling elites were replaced by other elites, Ukrainians would go along with Moscow’s demands, remembering their fraternal ties with Russia .
 As the Maidan revolution had shown, the situation was rather the opposite . The Maidan Revolution had shown.
 Revolutionary feelings were primarily directed against the ruling class in Ukraine who were leaning towards Russia . Russia's support for the corrupt old elites became all too obvious .
 The Kremlin misread the anti-government sentiment as pro-Russian support . Large parts of the Ukrainian population had grown weary of their president and government over the last few years .
 Ukraine was never part of any negotiations on a ‘grand bargain’ and no foreign power had the right to decide Ukraine’s future .
 Despite threats of ‘grave consequences’, Surkov left the presidential administration empty-handed and flew back to Moscow to brief Putin .
 Putin ordered staff to initiate Operation Ukrainian Fall, a plan to depose Poroshenko . It would appear to be a palace coup and install pro-Russian politician Viktor Medvedchuk as president .
 Putin also ordered the mobilisation of the western and southern military districts . The mobilisation is part of Putin's plan to mobilise the military districts.
 This build-up gained little international attention as the world’s media was more focused on the unfolding coup attempt in Kyiv .
 The increased military infrastructure on the border to Ukraine since 2014 also helped to conceal the Russian build-up .
 Trump had not understood that the US-Russia pact gave Putin the right to intervene militarily in Ukraine . Putin ordered a full-scale invasion of Ukraine on 1 January 2018 .
 The first phase of the attack began with one amphibious group landing on the shores of Odessa from the Black Sea . One operative manoeuvre group moved from Rostov-on-Don towards Dnipro, and another from Voronezh to Kharkiv .
 Russian air force overwhelmed the Ukrainian air force in the first 24 hours of the conflict .
 Russian paratroopers landed west of Kyiv. To cut the capital off from Western support, they landed in Kyiv .
 The leaders of the EU met following news of Russia's renewed aggression in Ukraine . Tusk told a packed hall of journalists that the leaders had met .
 EU condemned Russia's actions and called for Moscow to pull back its forces . He said that the EU condemns Russia’s actions.
 Tusk said there was no agreement on measures against Russia at the time . He said new bilateral security arrangements had been pursuing .
 Russia has called a high-readiness manoeuvre of its nuclear forces . It deployed land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles into firing positions .
 Merkel and Macron called Trump to convince him of the danger and need to push back against this nuclear posturing .
 Europe would not risk a nuclear confrontation with Russia over Ukraine. On its own, Europe would also not risk nuclear confrontation over Ukraine .
 The initial military operation in Ukraine went smoothly for the Kremlin . The first military operation went smoothly.
 Ukrainian forces managed to destroy all bridges across the Dnieper river, halting the Russian advance .
 Some Ukrainian units deployed to the Anti-Terrorist Operation zone in Donetsk . Some units in Luhansk managed to delay the advance of Russian forces towards the Dnieper river .
 Former Ukrainian volunteer formations and dispersed Ukrainian army personnel set up resistance units attacking land-bound supply lines used by Russian armed forces .
 Ukrainian forces effectively isolated the Russian paratroopers in the west of the country . With the cooperation of the local population, Ukrainian forces also isolated the paratrooper .
Heavy losses during the first months of the conflict caused Russia to change its modus operandi . Russia changed itsmodus after heavy losses from the conflict .
 The Russian armed forces shifted to their long game, resting on the superior firepower of their artillery and air force to slowly break through any resistance .
 Ukrainian forces gradually moved westwards towards Kyiv . Despite Ukrainian attempts to subdue them, Russian forces gradually move westwards .
 The number of internally displaced persons was in the millions, with the majority trying to reach Poland and Slovakia . The majority are in Poland, Slovakia and Poland .
 Much of western Ukraine held out against Russian forces because its mountainous terrain posed a challenge for Russian military hardware . The Kremlin expected even stiffer resistance there .
 Ukraine’s already-poor western provinces had to deal with the stream of refugees coming from the east . Russian military advances have led to the influx of refugees .
 Western humanitarian assistance could only prevent the worst of this humanitarian catastrophe . Western aid is needed to prevent this humanitarian crisis, says the UN .
European civil society engaged in humanitarian aid efforts for refugees in western Ukraine and in Europe . European civil society is engaged in assistance efforts for refugee refugees in Ukraine and Europe .
 Moscow perceived by Moscow as illegal meddling in its sphere of influence . This led to negative reactions from Moscow, as even engaging in Ukraine for humanitarian reasons was perceived as illegal .
 Some refugees turned back to join the Ukrainian resistance after they had brought their families to shelter in the West .
European volunteer troops from Poland, Baltic states, and Scandinavian countries. They were accompanied by European volunteer troops, particularly from Poland .
 Russia stepped up military provocations on NATO’s eastern flank . To dissuade Europe from any further engagement in Ukraine, Russia steps up provocations .
Anti-war protests sprang up in Russia after reports of dead soldiers returning from Ukraine . Russian society began to mobilise, hearing constant news reports about the number of dead troops .
 Eastern European states felt directly threatened by Russian provocations and began to react to them . Eastern European countries felt directly threats by Russia .
 The most salient argument from the ‘No’ camp was that joining was now pointless since NATO had become obsolete . NATO has become obsolete, according to the U.S.
 Russia's move towards membership caused Russia to further escalate its attempts to intimidate them . But the move caused the move to further escalation of attempts to intimidation them .
 Poland openly considered leaving the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons and developing indigenous nuclear capability to guarantee its own security . The United States retreat from its role as guarantor of European security .
 The EU agreed to co-finance French nuclear weapons and signed a nuclear-sharing agreement with France . France also signed anuclear-sharing deal .
 Moscow took this step as a pretext to exit the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty . The treaty was signed at the end of the cold war to ban all long-range nuclear missiles .
 Europe's unity is more resilient and its capacity to navigate treacherous waters is greater than that which is set out here . Europe’s unity is. more resilient than that of other nations .
 Some of the events described are unfolding in the real world right now . But some of the things described are happening right now, according to experts .
 The evaporation of U.S. interest and influence in Ukraine since Donald Trump took office has led to a partial roll-back of reform legislation, an increase in police abuse, and selective investigations against critical politicians in Ukraine .
 Trump’s stated intention to strike a deal with Russia, suggestions that the United States would drop sanctions, and his ambiguity over United States security guarantees for Europe have pushed Europeans closer together and made them more committed to looking after their own security .
 European leaders have little choice but to try to compensate for the absence of United States leadership on Ukraine . U.S. leadership has been missing in Ukraine for months .
 It seems increasingly likely that Berlin will need to carry the stick that the Obama administration wielded in Ukraine .
 The nitty-gritty detail of reform implementation and reform assistance is the actual battleground that matters . Much of the attention has been on the implementation of the Minsk agreements .
 Berlin needs to assert itself in a much more prominent, visible, and intrusive way . This is where Berlin needs more prominent and intrusive ways to show its presence . Berlin is a city that needs to be more visible and visible .
 The Minsk process is important as a way to manage and contain the conflict and give Ukraine the time it needs for reforms . The EU's priority should be to press for further reforms, the EU’s priority should also be to push for more reforms .
 The problem with the Minsk agreements is that if they are implemented the wrong way, they would make Ukraine a dysfunctional state, destroy its democracy, and send Ukraine back several steps on its shaky path towards modernisation .
 Moscow recognises the potentially debilitating power of the Minsk agreements for Ukraine . Kyiv continues to implement its obligations while doing nothing to live up to its own obligations .
 Minsk sees Minsk as a useful tool for pressuring Kyiv to legitimise the separatists and formally bring them into Ukraine’s body politic .
 Minsk is not a reason to give up on Minsk. But the low likelihood of it ever actually being implemented is not to give it up . Minsk has been criticised for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Russia is pushing Russia even harder to implement its own side of the bargain in Ukraine . It is not a reason to push Russia even more hard to implement a way that does not undermine Ukraine .
 The sanctions regime is one of the primary sources of pressure that the EU has on Russia . The EU has been putting pressure on Russia for years .
 Europe not accepting Russia’s actions in Ukraine as legitimate as legitimate . But this pressure is not so much about the negative impact on the Russian economy as it is about the symbolic value of Europe .
 The sanctions represent Europe's commitment to protecting Ukraine’s territorial integrity and to resolving the conflict in the Donbas .
 Lifting the sanctions without Minsk having been implemented would send the signal that Europe has given up on Ukraine – which is exactly what Moscow is aiming for . Lifting sanctions would send a signal that European countries have given up.
 Criticism that the sanctions are not working because Russia is still fighting the war in the East misses the point. Criticism is not working.
 If anything, sanctions should be increased rather than lifted, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says sanctions should not be lifted .
 EU should consider extending its renewal period from every six months to once a year or automating the renewal process . Political conditions for increasing sanctions are probably not in place .
 It would allow for a healthier and more strategic discussion within the EU about what to do with Russia . It would also allow for more strategic discussions within the European Union .
 The constant focus on sanctions means that there is little space for broader discussion about Europe’s strategy towards Russia .
 A firmer commitment to the conditionality around sanctions would also make it easier for more hawkish member states to discuss forms of selective engagement with Russia . A stronger commitment to sanctions would make it harder for members of the world to discuss selective engagement .
 The EU will face bigger issues if Washington decides to lift its sanctions if it lifts its sanctions . But the EU will also face bigger problems if the EU decides to Lift its sanctions.
 It could lead to the EU’s unity on sanctions collapsing and, consequently, its overall policy towards Russia collapsing, as set out in scenario three . The EU's overall policy on Russia could also be set to collapse .
 Europe needs to resist the Russian narrative of Ukraine being a failed state, Europe says . Europe must resist Russia's narrative of Ukrainian state being a failing state, it says .
 Kyiv's political class is still corrupt, but the country has progressed against the odds . Kyiv has a reputation for being corrupt .
 Ukraine’s struggle will be even more difficult without sustained European support . Without sustained support, Ukraine's struggles will be more difficult and the negative fallout of this struggle will also be bigger .
 Russia will understand what is possible in other parts of the world. Emboldened by its success in Ukraine, Russia will be able to understand what's possible.
 Given this situation, it is the West, ironically, that is the most liable to turn Ukraine into a failed state . The West is likely to be the most responsible for Ukraine's failure, according to a report .
 All scenarios outlined in this paper are based on extrapolations of mistakes the West makes . All scenarios are based upon extrapolation of mistakes made by the West .
 Europe could stay the course and remain vigilant on Russia and Ukraine . Europe could be vigilant on both countries .
 There is no reason to believe the transformation of Ukraine and other eastern neighbourhood states cannot succeed in the long run .
 In April 2017, the U.S. government cut development aid by 68 percent . In April 2016, the United States government cut aid by 66 percent .
 Francisco de Borja Lasheras, Vessela Tcherneva, and Fredrik Wesslau. The European Council on Foreign Relations, 21 March 2016, is available here .
 The European Council on Foreign Relations, 26 May 2017, available here . Steven Pifer, “The growing Russian military threat in Europe, Assessing and addressing the challenge: The case of Ukraine’s Ukraine.
 Susan B Glasser, “Trump National Security Team Blindsided by NATO Speech’s’.