 Donald Trump has turned out to be “same as the old boss,’s old boss. After three weeks as president, he has turned to be 'same as old boss'
 The short explanation is every U.S. president merely plays a puppet figurehead role, taking his orders directly from the New World Order elite and their neocon surrogates, fast moving us towards one world government tyranny that will be the ultimate outcome of a simultaneous collapse of the global economy
 President Trump is now marching quickstep down that same seamless path towards world war as did Obama . There was no difference between the same neocon interventionist aggression displayed under Obama and the Bush-Cheney administration .
 The one constant is an aggressive foreign policy delivered by deep state neocons entrenched in Washington power for decades now .
 Trump the candidate promised a major shift in U.S. foreign policy towards a far more sensible, even planet-saving, non-interventionist, “America first’s’ approach, avoiding the constant meddling in other nations’ internal affairs .
 The U.S. is now free of the near four decade long neo-conned control bent on maintaining the United States Empire at all cost . The United States insists on the status quo of unipolar sole world superpower hegemony .
 The neocons refuse to live in a world where power is shared with emerging regional players Russia and China . The neocons are not happy with the shared power between the two countries .
 The Bush-Obama-Trump regime seems hell bent on world destruction . Be it through escalating existing wars in Syria and Ukraine that lead to bigger wars with Iran, China and Russia .
 Washington's ever-rising authoritarian control and the violent anti-Trump mania are creating conditions ripe for even a domestic civil war to break out . Even at home, Washington’s ever- rising authoritarian control is creating conditions for a civil war .
 Evidence of this disastrous road we’re already traveling at breakneck speed on is overwhelming .
 Elliot Abrams, a neocon from way back to the Reagan-Bush senior-Iran Contra days, is currently up for consideration as deputy secretary of state . Abrams: We're about to be pushed off the doomsday cliff .
 This presentation will focus on specific actions that the Trump administration has already completed that provide more than enough proof that we’re perhaps just weeks if not months away from escalating yet more catastrophic war .
 This analysis addresses the likelihood of imminent global war based on the three year old violent conflict in Ukraine . The hotspot is being used to undermine, neutralize and effectively reverse promises that Trump the candidate made to cooperate with Putin .
 The bottom line is neocon forces greater than the president still hold the agenda to continue to demonize Putin in their race to global war .
 The renewed volley of Russian ‘aggression’ came just one day after Trump and Putin agreed to work peaceably together as partners fighting the common ISIS/al Qaeda enemy as well as forging a plan to diminish hostilities.
 Foreign Policy conspicuously plants the notion that Putin launching artillery strikes in Ukraine has already proven he is betraying Trump’s trust .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe contends that Russia unilaterally stepped up its shelling against Kiev forces to the extent that after 2600 counted rounds fired on January 29th, so many came later that OSCE lost track .
 Putin exposed OSCE as a propaganda front for Western aggression in Ukraine as well as throughout Eastern Europe to further its own imperialistic and geopolitical interests to encircle and weaken Russia .
 U.S. foreign policy all along with both Russia and China. Of course that has been the United States foreign policyAll along with Russia.
 This is all very calculated to have this open, bleeding sore on Ukraine’s body politic. This will allow to manipulate the situation and the politics of the country, and thereby keep Ukraine in this post-Soviet kleptocratic orbit .
 Reports from on the ground indicate that the real aggressor on January 28th was the Ukrainian army that began shelling DPR forces .
 The Kiev military moved on the offensive south of Donetsk, only to encounter minefields . A couple dozen fatalities are reported in large part .
 Accusing DPR of a false flag attack was mainly to recruit Western sympathy, material support and more mercenaries for the unstable Poroshenko regime . The regime is steeped in political corruption and economic upheaval .
 McCain-Graham envoy promised additional support for another campaign into Donbass despite never having any legal authority . Obama at least officially did not send them abroad .
 The bobsy twins may have in effect violated the Logan Act of 1799 . The act prohibits Americans in foreign countries operating outside presidential authority to interfere with foreign policy .
 Trump has made statements during his campaign indicating that he would be open to normalizing relations with Moscow, lifting sanctions and advocates disbanding NATO . The two treasonous senators and their nucleus of neocon policymakers have been aiming to provoke war against Russia for over three years .
 Kiev then waited till after Trump’s inauguration before unleashing its greenlighted invasion further into Donbass . While Obama was still president and the chicken hawk senators snuck over to Ukraine .
 The Kiev military incursion has far more to do with testing what Western backed Ukraine can get away with on both Trump and Putin’s watch than any Putin testing of Trump waters .
 The offensive was solely executed so Empire neocons could sabotage the Trump-Putin relationship and prevent peace from breaking out . Empire neocons may have been trying to sabotage the relationship .
 Only war is permitted by the Washington evildoers . Petro Poroshenko has to make the best deal with Russia, which of course would destroy him politically .
 Former CIA director General David Petraeus testified before the House Armed Services Committee .
 Congress seeks the “expert’ testimony from a top U.S. spy who lied to the FBI after violating the Espionage Act . The spy gave highly classified material to his mistress .
 Prior to that crime, the war criminal was a military war commander on two fronts . He was a war criminal on both fronts .
 Petraeus was singularly the most responsible general for causing the sectarian civil war in Iraq that eventually led to the ISIS Sunni invasion . He also contributed to the United States still ongoing military defeat in Afghanistan .
 Petraeus reporting that Russia, China, Iran as well as the terrorists all pose an “unprecedented threat” is part of the staged war prepping narrative, he says .
 The Washington political war machine is in full swing, ensuring that an alliance with Russia can never happen, despite whatever Trump the candidate may have uttered . The Washington Political War Machine is inFull swing .
 War in Ukraine once again becomes the bogus rallying cry to ensure the US-EU-NATO glue sticks together against those ‘imperialistic, warring’ Russians bent on splintering centuries’ old allies .
 The elite and their neocons will not allow Brexit, strained Washington-Brussels relations or Trump nationalism ever get in their way . The elite will not let the neocons get into their way, they say .
 The Russians would see that as a bonanza that they would try and exploit by convincing countries like Bulgaria and the Czech Republic that the U.S. couldn't be counted on . Russia would see it as an opportunity to exploit the United States .
 Russia-U.S. relations are on lockdown over Crimea and Donbass . Another lockdown is the rigid adherence to extending economic sanctions against Russia over Crimea .
 GOP faithful like McCain threatened to pass laws to codify the sanctions should Trump let up . Trump has said he will not let up.
 The anti-Putin vilification and cold war still rage on with the latest lying rhetoric and external threats brought to bear against the U.S. president .
 Unites States continues to condemn and call for an immediate end to the Russian occupation of Crimea . It is unfortunate because it is a replay of far too many instances over many years in which U.S. representatives have needed to do that .
 Crimea-related sanctions will remain in place until Russia returns control over the peninsula to Ukraine . Our Crimea- related sanctions will continue in place.
 The new U.S. representative at the UN came with remarks that were written by Power .
 Nikki Haley received her orders from above to slam Russia despite the US-Kiev collusion to recently renew aggression towards the citizens of Donbass .
 She also showed ignorance in failing to know that Crimea’s Ukrainian history was short .
 Black Sea peninsula was forcibly part of Ukraine for less than a quarter century . It was illegally annexed by Ukraine in 1990, thus the Black Sea Peninsula was forcibly parts of Ukraine .
 The entire pretext for U.S. condemning Russia over Ukraine is based upon a lie, says the author . "The whole pretext for United States condemning Russia is based on a lie," he says .
 This entire anti-Russian false narrative is such a nauseatingly tiresome United States theme, says CNN's John Sutter .
 American exceptionalism means the murderous world bully can continue operating with total impunity . The Empire perpetrates the exact same sinful crimes that Empire perpetates every single day of the year .
 Empire’s European vassals and smaller intimidated countries must silently toe the line or else they too will be unjustly targeted with lies and punishment . Inhumane economic sanctions, trade embargoes, regime change coups and assassinations are among those targeted .
 The only guilty nation that remains judge, jury and executioner in this world of other countries is the U.S. The United States is the United States .
 Trump has already demonstrated as a White House figurehead that he is not in control but follows his globalist marching orders .
 Trump is powerless to change rigid foreign policy still being dictated by the neocons . Thus Trump is unable to change the foreign policy of the United States .
 Nothing will change in Ukraine except more death and violence will escalate to the larger arena . The Ukrainian government has said it will not change anything in Ukraine .
 Russia is still the West’s scapegoat as is every other nation that asserts its own will and independence free of the killing Empire . Russia is the West's scapegoat.
 Only the U.S. has invaded dozens of sovereign nations, initiated more wars and maintained the most aggressive foreign policy of any nation on earth over the last century .
 Russia is the falsely accused aggressor that Washington and its corporate media endlessly hype in order to further justify Empire aggression and violence . But it's always Russia that’s the falsely accusing aggressor, Washington says .