 Former guard of Putin Alexey Dyumin received 'Chepiga-Boshirov took part in the evacuation of Yanukovych to Russia'
 In the late 1940s and early 1950s, research and development at Porton Down was aimed at providing Britain with the means to arm itself with a modern nerve agent .
 The decision to abandon any sort of British chemical warfare capability in favour of nuclear weapons came to nothing on the offensive side . In the end these aims came toNothing on theoffensive side because of the decision to abandoned any sort.
 On the defensive side there were years of difficult work to develop the means of prophylaxis, therapy, rapid detection and identification, decontamination, and more effective protection against nerve agents .
 Tests carried out on servicemen to determine the effects of nerve agents on human subjects . One recorded death due to a nerve gas experiment .
 There have been persistent allegations of unethical human experimentation at Porton Down . The death of Leading Aircraftman Ronald Maddison, aged 20, in 1953.
 Maddison was taking part in sarin nerve agent toxicity tests . Sarin was dripped onto his arm and he died shortly afterwards .
 In the 1950s, the station became involved with the development of CS, a riot-control agent, and took an increasing role in trauma and wound ballistics work . The station, now renamed the Chemical Defence Experimental Establishment, became involved in developing CS .
Porton Down's work had become more important because of the unrest and increasing violence in Northern Ireland . Both these facets of Porton Down’s work had became more important.
 Geoffrey Bacon, a scientist at the Microbiological Research Establishment, died from an accidental infection of the plague bacterium Yersinia pestis .
 Porton Down was renamed the Chemical Defence Establishment for the next 21 years . In 1970, the senior establishment at Porton down was named the Chemical Defense Establishment .
 Establishment was also concerned with reported chemical warfare by Iraq against Iran and against its own Kurdish population .
 Porton Down was the laboratory where initial samples of the Ebola virus were sent in 1976 . It was the first confirmed outbreak of the disease in Africa .
 The laboratory now contains samples of some of the world's most aggressive pathogens, including Ebola, anthrax and the plague . It is leading the UK’s current research into viral inoculations .
 Porton Down opened in 1916 as the War Department Experimental Station, shortly renamed to the Royal Engineers Experimental Station . The station tested chemical weapons in response to German use of this means of war in 1915 .
 The laboratory’s remit was to conduct research and development regarding chemical weapons agents used by the British armed forces in the First World War .
 At the time, only a few cottages and farm buildings were scattered on the downs at Porton and Idmiston .
 By 1917, the focus for anti-gas defence and respirator development had moved from London to Porton Down . By 1918, the original two huts had become a large hutted camp with 50 officers and 1,100 other ranks .
 After the Armistice in 1918, Porton Down was reduced to a skeleton staff .
 Porton Down is a science park just northeast of the village of Porton, near Salisbury in Wiltshire, England .
 It is also home to other private and commercial science organisations . It is expanding to attract other companies and is also expanding to other companies .
 Alexander Petrov visited Salisbury to attend a nutrition seminar, according to a bizarre new account in Russia .
 The Novichok attack is claimed to have been linked to a brand of sports supplements . It is claimed that he is a supplier to “elite’s” Russian brand of supplements .
 University professor says she has known Petrov, 40, as a teacher and a friend . Petrov is a former teacher and friend, according to the professor .
 Alexander Petrov is suspected to be an alias used by a GRU military intelligence staffer to obtain a UK visa and travel to Wiltshire at the time when Sergei and Yulia Skripal were poisoned . Petrov was believed to have been using the alias to get a visa and
 Professor insists he was in Salisbury for a seminar at Porton Down science park . But the professor says he was at the park for the seminar .
 New account comes from Russian newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda at a time when Russia has been put on back foot by mounting evidence that Petrov and his companion Ruslan Boshirov are military spies .
 The university professor calls him Sasha, the fond name for Alexander in Russia . The professor is a Russian university professor .
 The professor says she taught English to the man claiming to be Petrov . She now lives in Germany .
 She refused to state which university Petrov had attended but said she gave him extra tuition at home after classes . She said she did not know which university she had attended .
 Petrov claimed he was a mid-ranking businessman involved in sports nutrition . He did not mention a seminar as the reason he travelled twice in two days from London to Salisbury .
 The professor said that he was always into a "healthy lifestyle" and regularly went to the gym and took nutritional supplements .
 She did not identify which elite circles he moved in but she implied the price was beyond the means of ordinary Russians . She said he moved into elite circles but did not reveal which circles he was in .
 pro-Kremlin media interviewed a former teacher of Anatoliy Chepiga, unmasked as the real identity of Boshirov .
 Alexander Borzhko, his commander at the Far Eastern Military Command Academy in Blagoveshchensk, insisted Chepiga was “not trained for secret-service operations’ such as that allegedly carried out in Salisbury .