 Many residents and combatants were skeptical that the ceasefire could last long or provide the basis for a durable peace settlement . But many residents were skeptical about the ceasefire.
 The ceasefire agreement was reached in September . The ceasefire was reached after a dispute between the rebels and the Ukrainian government . The Ukrainian government has agreed to a ceasefire .
 We sent a strong message to Russia that actions have consequences . We also sent astrong message to the country that actions had consequences .
 The U.S. and Europe are finalizing measures to deepen and broaden our sanctions against Russia, Obama says . The agreement includes measures related to access to capital markets, defense, dual-use goods and sensitive technology .
 The EU also expanded the list of people under an asset freeze to include the new leadership in Ukraine’s Donbass region . Ukraine is ready to grant a significant decentralization of power and economic freedom to the regions, Poroshenko says .
 Lesya, 30, carrying her newborn boy in Mariupol, Russia, is a huge relief, she says . "We went out for a walk after three days of hiding," she says.
Moscow denies arming the rebels or sending in Russian troops . Poroshenko appears worried he cannot now defeat the rebels and needs time to tackle a growing economic crisis .
Putin for the first time this week put his name to a concrete peace plan . He proposed seven steps which would leave rebels in control of territory that is home to about one-tenth of Ukraine’s population .
Public support for Putin is high because of the seizure of Crimea, a Russian territory until Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev gave it to Ukraine 70 years ago .
Putin's key goals are to ensure that Ukraine does not join NATO and that the eastern regions of Ukraine win much more autonomy . But this could change if the conflict drags on and many Russians are killed .
 Moscow can also hope to maintain influence in eastern Ukraine if a peace deal seals the rebels’ territorial gains . Ukraine is hard to govern, Moscow says .
“We also sent a strong message to Russia that actions have consequences. So it has to be tested,’ Obama told a news conference .
 The United States and Europe are finalizing measures to deepen and broaden sanctions against Russia, Obama says . The agreement includes measures related to access to capital markets, defense, dual-use goods and sensitive technology, an EU diplomat says .
Three blasts were heard north of Donetsk, followed by scattered mortar and artillery fire, but this later fell quiet .
 The ceasefire allowed people to emerge from cellars where they have been taking shelter . “We went out for a walk after three days of hiding, and this is a huge relief,’ said Lesya, 30, carrying her newborn boy in Mariupol .
 The Kremlin leader may not have secured all his goals, he had reason to secure a settlement because of the growing impact of sanctions on Russia’s stuttering economy . It would also require Ukraine to remain unaligned .
Thousands of people gather to watch military aircraft from nine countries fly over Newport and Cardiff on second day of NATO summit .