 On 13 March 2015, the Council adopted Decision 2015/432, which renews the measures for a further six months . The Council adopted the decision on March 13, 2015 .
 Decision 2014/145/CFSP should be amended and those measures renewed for a further six months . In view of the continued undermining or threatening of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, the measures should be updated .
 The Annex is amended as set out in the Annex to this Decision . The entry for one deceased person should be deleted .
 Aksyonov was elected ‘Prime Minister of Crimea’ in the Crimean Verkhovna Rada on 27 February 2014 in the presence of pro-Russian gunmen .
 Oleksandr Turchynov's 'election' was decreed unconstitutional on 1 March 2014 . His ‘election’ was decreeed unconstitutional by Olekandr Tuppynov on 1March 2014 .
 Konstantinov played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada . He called on voters to cast their votes in favour of Crimean Independence .
 Temirgaliev played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the ‘referendum’ against territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 He lobbied actively for the integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation . He lobbied for integration in Crimea .
 He was appointed Deputy Commander of the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Federation . He was then appointed Deputy commander of the Black Sea Fleet.
 He actively campaigned for Sevastopol to become a separate entity of the Russian Federation following a referendum on 16 March 2014 . He actively campaigns for Sevstopol to be a separate entities of the Russia Federation .
 He signed the Treaty on the adoption of the Republic of Crimea by Russia . He also signed the treaty on the adoptions of the Crimea .
 Zima was appointed as the new head of the Crimean Security Service on 3 March 2014 . ‘Prime Minister’ Aksyonov accepted this appointment.
 This includes information on Euro-Maidan activists and human rights defenders of Crimea . This included information on European Union activists, human rights activists .
 He played a relevant role in preventing Ukraine's authorities from controlling the territory of Crimea . He was also involved in preventing Ukrainian authorities from taking Crimea .
 Former SBU officers proclaimed the formation of an independent Security Service of Crimea in March 2014 .
 Counsellor of the Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea is one of the leading organisers of the 16 March 2014 ‘referendum’ against Ukraine’s territorial integrity .
 Vladimir Konstantinov threatened him with dismissal with dismissal . He drew him into this endeavour, threatening to be dismissed .
 Crimea MPs were the initiators of inviting Russian soldiers to take over the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea . He publicly recognised that the MPs from Crimea were the organisers of the move .
 He was one of the first Crimean Leaders to ask in public for the annexation of Crimea to Russia . He was a Crimean leader who asked for Crimea to be annexed .
 Chairman of the Security and Defence Committee of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation . He is also the chairman of the security and defence committee .
 Ozerov, on behalf of the Security and Defence Committee of the Federation Council, publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . On 1 March 2014, he was publicly supported, in the Council, by the Russian Federation Council .
First Deputy-Chairman of the International Affairs Committee of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation . First Deputy-chairman of International Affairs committee of the federation Council of Russian Federation.
 Dzhabarov, on behalf of the International Affairs Committee of the Federation Council, publicly supported Russia's deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine .
 Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Law of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation . He is the chairman of the Council on Constitutional law of the Russia Federation .
 Member of the Committee for federal issues, regional politics and regional politics . North of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation .
 Ryzhkov publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . On 1 March 2014, he publicly supported in the Federation Council .
 Bushmin publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . On 1 March 2014 Bushmin was publicly supported by Federation Council .
 Committee on culture, science, and information of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation .
 Panteleev publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine in March 2014 . On 1 March 2014 Panteleeva publicly supported, in the Federation Council, the deployment.
Member of the Council of the State Duma; Leader of Fair Russia faction in the Duma of the Russian Federation . Member of the council of the state Duma .
 Russian Federation to admit in its composition, under the pretext of protection of Russian citizens, without consent of that country or an international treaty .
 Actively supporting use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea . Actively supports use of Russia's armed forces in Ukraine .
 He led a demonstration in support of the use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine . He led personally the demonstration .
 Actively supporting use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea . Actively supports use of Russia's armed forces in Ukraine .
 Commander, Russia's Western Military District, units of which are deployed in Crimea . The district is based in Crimea, Crimea .
 He is responsible for part of the Russian military presence in Crimea which is undermining the sovereignty of the Ukraine . He assisted the Crimean authorities in preventing public demonstrations against moves towards a referendum and incorporation into Russia .
Much of the force movement into Crimea has come through the Southern Military District . The Black Sea Fleet comes under Galkin's command .
 Russian forces in Ukraine have been deployed in Ukraine since March 2014 . Russian forces have been in Ukraine for more than a year .
Publicly supported the Russia-Crimea reunification treaty and the related federal constitutional law . Publicly supported Russia- Crimea reunification Treaty and related federal law .
 Central figure of the government propaganda supporting the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine .
 He was an organiser of the process in Crimea by which local Crimean communities were mobilised to stage actions undermining the Ukrainian authorities in Crimea .
 Originator and co-sponsor of recent legislative proposals in Russia . Would have allowed regions of other countries to join Russia without their central authorities' prior agreement .
 Plenipotentiary Representative of the President of the Russian Federation into the so-called ‘Crimean Federal District’ Non-permanent member of Russian Security Council .
 Russian Head of State on the territory of the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea . Responsible for the implementation of the constitutional prerogatives of the Russian head of state .
 Took part in the seizure of the building of the Lugansk regional office of the Security Service .
 Former Head of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ and organiser of separatist actions . Organiser of actions of 'Russian tourists' in Donetsk .
 One of the leaders of ideologically radical organisation People's Militia of Donbas . The group is based in Donbas, near Donbas in the south of the city .
 He took active part in the seizure of a number of state buildings in Donetsk region .
 He is an assistant on security issues to Sergey Aksionov, self-proclaimed prime minister of Crimea . He is also an assistant to the self- proclaimed PM of Crimea.
 First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Administration of Russia . Russia's first deputy chief of Staff is Russian President Vladimir Putin's first official .
 Russian Federation is responsible for the political integration of the annexed Crimea region of Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 In his senior position, he holds responsibility for the deployment of Russian airborne forces in Crimea .
 Crimea and Sevastopol into the Russian Federation. Responsible for facilitating the adoption of legislation on the annexation of Crimea .
 Russian passports for Crimea residents were issued for the residents of Crimea . Russian passports were issued to residents of the Crimea .
 Responsible for the systematic and expedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Sevastopol . The Russian city is home to the Russian city of Sevstopol .
 Ponomariov called on Vladimir Putin to send in Russian troops to protect the city . He later asked him to supply weapons and asked him for help with weapons .
 He took control of the Security Service of Ukraine's Office in Donetsk region building . He also seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs' district station in the town of Horlivka .
 Former Member of the Rada called for creation of so-called ‘Federal Republic of Novorossiya’ Former member of Rada, as such publicly called for the creation of the so- called ‘ federal republic’ of south-eastern Ukraine .
 Former so-called ‘Prime Minister of the Council of Ministers of the Lugansk People's Republic’ confirmed on 8 July 2014 .
 The Army of the Southeast said the Ukrainian presidential elections in the 'Lugansk People's Republic' cannot take place due to the 'new' status of the region .
 The Russian Federation is a member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation . It is also the Director of the Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russia Federation .
 He was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He was a member of the Security Council which provides advice on national security affairs .
 The Russian Federation is a member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation . It is the first time the Russian government has been in charge of the council .
 The Russian Federation is a member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation . It is also a deputy secretary to the Russian Security Council .
 As a senior FSB officer, he heads a service responsible for overseeing intelligence operations and international activity . He heads the FSB's intelligence service.
On 23.5.2014 he announced the inauguration of the ‘de facto embassy’ of the unrecognised ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ in Moscow . He contributes to undermining or threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Kadyrov made statements in support of the illegal annexation of Crimea and support of an armed insurgency in Ukraine . Kadyro made statements.
 He was awarded the medal for ‘the liberation of Crimea’ by the Acting Head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea for the support he provided to the unlawful annexation of Crimea .
 He requested Russian intervention in eastern Ukraine, including through the deployment of Russian peacekeeping forces . He asked for Russian intervention, including deployment of peacekeepers .
 He is associated with Igor Strelkov/Girkin who is responsible for actions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He is also responsible for the actions which threaten or threaten Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 Gubarev is responsible for recruiting people for armed forces of separatists . The separatists are also recruiting people to join the armed forces .
Ukrainian separatist leader has been arrested for threatening the territorial integrity of Ukraine . He has continued to play a prominent role in separatist activities .
Former 'Minister of Foreign Affairs' was responsible for defending the so-called 'Donetsk People's Republic' In her capacity of former 'minister of foreign affairs' she defended the 'donetsk People’s Republic'
 Her bank account is used to finance illegal separatist groups . In addition, her bank account has been used to fund illegal separatist group .
 In taking on and acting in this capacity she has supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Berezin has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 The self-described ‘president’ of the so-called ‘Republic of Novorossiya’ has called on Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine .
 In taking on and acting in this capacity he has supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Senior aid to Igor Strelkov/Girkin who is responsible for actions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Zdriliuk has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Former ‘Minister of State Security’ in the separatist region of Transnistria .
 Former vice-prime minister of Donetsk People's Republic is responsible for security and law enforcement . Former president of Donetsk people's Republic was also vice- prime minister .
 Former chairman of so-called ‘People's Council’ and former chairman of the ‘Supreme Council' of the 'Donetsk People's Republic' He was at the source of policies and the organisation of the illegal ‘referendum’ leading to the proclamation
 His level of economic success is attributable to the influence of key decision makers favouring him . He was awarded the award of public contracts in 2010 .
 He has benefited from his close personal relationship with Russian decision-makers . He was awarded important contracts by the Russian State or by State-owned enterprises .
 His companies were awarded several highly lucrative contracts for the preparations for the Sochi Games . His companies had been awarded several lucrative contracts .
 Stroygazmontazh has been awarded a State contract for the construction of a bridge from Russia to the illegally annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea . He is also the owner of the company which has been given a State Contract for the bridge .
 Crimea’s public relations campaign was designed to persuade Crimean children that they are now Russian citizens living in Russia .
 Mr Malofeev is closely linked to Ukrainian separatists in Eastern Ulkraine and Crimea .
 Mr Aksyonov is a former employer of Mr Borodai, so-called Prime Minister of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ He met with the Prime Minister during the period of the Crimean annexation process .
 The Ukrainian Government has opened a criminal investigation into his alleged material and financial support to separatists .
 He gave a number of public statements supporting the annexation of Crimea and the incorporation of Ukraine into Russia . He notably stated in June 2014 that ‘You can't incorporate the whole of Ukraine in Russia’
 Mr Malofeev is acting in support of the destabilisation of Eastern Ukraine, he says . He says he is acting to support the destabilising of Ukraine .
 He is a co-founder of the so-called Ozero Dacha, a cooperative society bringing together an influential group of individuals around President Putin . He is also a founder of a cooperative group of people around Putin .
 Bank Rossiya has important stakes in the National Media Group . It controls television stations which actively support the Russian government's policies of destabilisation of Ukraine .
 Zakharchenko has supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has supported policies that undermine the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine.
 He has reportedly commanded a division of separatist fighters in Donetsk since April . He has promised to solve the strategic task of repelling Ukraine's military aggression .
 Konokov has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . Konokova has also supported actions which undermine Ukraine's sovereignty and sovereignty .
 He has, inter alia, stated that they will continue their fighting in the rest of the country . He has also said that he will continue fighting in other parts of the world .
 Rudenko has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Tsyplakov has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He has also supported actions which undermine Ukraine's territorial integrity and sovereignty .
 He has supported actions which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He has also supported policies which undermine Ukraine's sovereignty and sovereignty .
In his statements he has, inter alia, talked about the militias' readiness to conduct a guerrilla war and their seizure of weapon systems from the Ukrainian armed forces . In his statements, he said he has spoken of the militia's willingness to conduct guerrilla war .
 So-called ‘Deputy Prime Minister’ of Crimea and Plenipotentiary Representative of Crimea to Putin .
 Muradov has played an important role in consolidating Russian institutional control over Crimea since the illegal annexation of Crimea . He has played a key role in consolidation of Russia's power over Crimea .
 Sheremet played a key role in the organisation and implementation of the 16 March referendum in Crimea on unification with Russia . The referendum was held in Crimea in March .
 At the time of the referendum, Sheremet reportedly commanded the pro-Moscow ‘selfdefense forces’ in Crimea .
 Vorobiov publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . The Russian forces were deployed in Ukraine on 1 March 2014 .
 He actively supported the use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea . He also supported the annexation of the Crimea .
 Chairman of the Union of the Russian and Foreign Cossack Forces, and deputy of the State Duma .
 Russian Cossacks were actively engaged in the Ukrainian conflict on the side of the Moscow-backed separatists, he said . He supported the annexation of Crimea and admitted that Russia was actively involved in the Ukraine conflict .
 First deputy Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the State Duma . First deputy chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee .
 Former First Deputy Chairman of the Committee on Relations with CIS Countries, Eurasian Integration and Links with Compatriots of the State Duma . Former First deputy Chairman of Committee on relations with CIS countries .
 First Deputy Chairman of Committee on Relations with CIS Countries, Eurasian Integration and Links with Compatriots of the State Duma . First Deputy chairman of the Committee on relations with CIS countries .
 He is the commander of the 76th airborne division which has been involved in the Russian military presence on the territory of Ukraine . He is also the head of the Russian airborne division .
 He is benefiting from his links with the Russian President by being promoted to senior positions in State-controlled firms .
 He chairs the Rostec conglomerate, the leading Russian state-controlled defence and industrial manufacturing corporation .
 Russian government plans to build energy plants in Crimea . Technopromexport, a subsidiary of Rostec, is planning to build power plants in the Crimea .
 Rosoboronexport, a subsidiary of Rostec, has supported the integration of Crimean defence companies into Russia's defence industry . The annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation has consolidated the illegal annexation.
State Duma Deputy, Chair of the State Duma Commission on Legislative Provisions for Development of the Military-Industrial Complex of the Russian Federation . He is the chair of the state Duma commission on legislative Provisions.
 He is a prominent member of ‘United Russia’ and a businessman with heavy investments in Ukraine and Crimea . He is also a member of 'United Russia' and is a businessman.
 These ‘elections’ are in breach of Ukrainian law and therefore illegal, says Ukrainian authorities . The 'elections' are in violation of the Ukrainian law.
 In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine .
 In taking on and acting in this capacity, she has actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine .
 Member of the ‘Parliament’ of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ and works in the Union of veterans of the Donbass Berkut .
 In taking part and acting in this capacity, he has actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine .
 Commander of the ‘First Cossack Regiment’, an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine .
 In this capacity, he has actively supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine, says the author .
 Commander of the ‘Somali’ battalion, an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine .
 He has actively supported actions and policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine . He has also supported actions which undermine the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, he says .
 Deputy Minister of Defence and in that capacity, involved in supporting the deployment of Russian troops.
 Russian Ministry of Defence structure says he participates in shaping and implementing the policy of the Russian Government .
 These policies threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, says Ukraine's president .
 First Deputy Minister of Defence and in that capacity, involved in supporting the deployment of Russian troops.
 Director of the Main Operations Department and deputy chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is the largest military force in the world .
 In both capacities he is actively involved in shaping and implementing the military campaign of the Russian forces in Ukraine . He is also involved in helping shape and implement the Russian military campaign .
 The general staff is actively involved in shaping and implementing the Russian government policy threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 He visited the so-called Donetsk People's Republic and during his visit made statements supporting separatists . He also made statements support separatists .
 He was Honorary Consul of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ in the Russian Federation . He was also appointed Honorary consul of 'Donetsk people's Republic'
 He is the founder of the civil movement ‘Krassnaya Moskva — Red Moscow — Patriotic Front Aid’ The movement organised public demonstrations supporting separatists . It supported policies which undermine territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Armed separatist which has actively supported actions which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine . Armed separatist actions have undermined territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine .