 The Ukrainian parliament approved a new pro-Western government in February . The new government was approved by the Ukrainian parliament .
 Armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in Donetsk and Luhansk . More than a dozen other towns in the Donbas region were targeted .
 The leaders of the ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ and the “Luhansk People's Republic” declared their entities to be sovereign states after the vote . The vote was held in the 'Donetsk people's Republic'
 Acting President Turchynov said the real turnout for the vote was 32% in Donetsk region and 24% in Luhansk . The real turnout in the Donetsk region is 32%.
 Poroshenko is a pro-Western billionaire whose holdings include Roshen . Roshen is a leading chocolate brand in the region .
 lowest turnout was in Donetsk region and Luhansk region . Russian-backed separatist gunmen seized polling places and used threats, kidnappings, and other forms of intimidation to stop the vote .
 A preliminary statement from the mission said the vote was “largely in line with international commitments and with a respect for fundamental freedoms in the vast majority of the country” Despite the “hostile security environment’ in Donetsk and Luhansk, the vote is in line
 President Poroshenko ordered his military to prepare for a cease-fire on September 4 . The two sides will meet in Minsk, Belarus, on the 5th .
 The Alliance agreed to set up four trust funds to help Ukraine’s military in such areas as logistics, command and control, military personnel issues, and cyberdefense .
 NATO is leaving issue of supplying weapons and other possible lethal and non-lethal aid to Ukraine’s armed forces to individual member countries .
 Russia reacted to the emergence of a new, more pro-Western leadership in Ukraine in February 2014 . Russia reacted with hostility to the rise of the pro-West leadership in the Ukraine .
 Russia’s federalization proposal appears to be an effort to cripple the central government in Kyiv, analysts say . Ukraine's current pro-Western orientation.
 Russian official statements maintain that Moscow is asserting that the “people's republics’s” are a legitimate expression of the public will in the Donbas . However, Russian officials say their ‘leaders’ are legitimate interlocutors for Kyiv .
 Ukraine's government announced on November 21 that it would not sign the agreement . It was the first in a series of events that led to the regime’s demise .
 The measures barred buying or selling debt, equity, or other financial instruments issued by five Russian state-owned banks . The measures also banned future arms sales and imports from Russia .
 President Obama called upon Putin to “press the separatists to recognize and abide by the ceasefire’s ceasefire and to halt the flow of weapons and materiel across its border .
 Press reports claim that U.S. business groups with interests in Russia have lobbied heavily against unilateral sanctions . European competitors could take advantage of them to squeeze out United States firms .
After the Malaysian airlines tragedy on the 17th, the EU largely matched and even in some cases went beyond these sanctions . After the Malaysian Airlines tragedy on 17th.
 The United States plans to extend the validity of visas for businesspeople and tourists to 10 years from the current 5.16 . Ukraine requested military aid from the United States in March 2014 .
 On June 4, the Administration announced an additional $5 million in security assistance .
 The Administration also noted that senior U.S. defense officials met with their Ukrainian counterparts in April and early June . They discussed support for Ukraine's defense reform and military-to-military cooperation .
 On June 7, the Administration announced an additional $48 million in aid for Ukraine . It is pending consultation with Congress .
 The United States is providing over $184 million in aid to Ukraine this year, not including the $1 billion loan guarantee . In June, the Administration said that, added together with previously budgeted funds, the U.S. is providing $184million in aid .
 The FY2015 foreign operations appropriations bill was approved by the House Appropriations Committee on June 24 . It contains $215 million above the President’s pre-crisis request for Ukraine and other former Soviet countries facing Russian aggression .