 In less than five years, a peace agreement negotiated between Russia, Ukraine, and Western Europe has become the object of acrimonious opposition and anti-Putin conspiracy theories .
 All pro-Western Ukrainian presidential candidates criticize the Minsk Agreements . The Ukrainian government has agreed to a deal with Russia and Ukraine .
 Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014 to stop Ukraine’s Western realignment and consolidation of its century-old movement . Ukrainian activists deem internal occupation .
 The long-simmering crisis in Donbas is made up of Ukraine’s two south-easternmost regions, Luhansk and Donetsk . Russia intensified and then dubbed a civil war still threatens to mushroom into conflict .
 The mechanism intended to bring about peace in Donbas, the 2014–15 Minsk Agreements, is unlikely to succeed . The mechanism is expected to fail .
 Ukraine, Russia, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and two deposed separatist leaders signed these documents . The documents stopped heavy fighting and eased suffering, but also provoked nationalists who quickly cast it as favoring defiant rebels .
 Minsk calls for nationwide government decentralization as an olive branch to remaining pro-Russian federalists in Ukraine’s restive southeast . Minsk also calls for equal constitutional rights for all citizens .
 Minsk is broadly perceived as a bad agreement that Ukraine has little incentive to implement . But its essence runs directly counter to Ukrainian interests of Euro-Atlantic integration, national unity, social cohesion, and true equal rights for all .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin was the only one smiling when it was finalized in February 2015 .
 Russia's looming regional presence has left Kyiv with Minsk as its only option . U.S. reluctance to ever fight that army has left the country with the only option, Minsk .
 The agreement has been a useful tool to keep all parties at the table and kinetic activity low . Russia has not stopped Russia’s intervention, but it has not been stopped .
 Moscow remains poised to invade; Russian forces have been arrayed along the border ever since it was created in 1991 . But as usual, Moscow remains ready to invade .
 There is little political space for de-escalation in Ukraine, but also little likelihood of escalation . There is no political space to de- escalate in Ukraine .
 No Ukrainian senior officials really believe they can win a war against Russia . No Ukrainian officials really think they can beat Russia .
 The problem is that some don't think Russia can win either, generating false hope that Ukraine can somehow prevail in the stalemate .
 From 2015–18, I interviewed hundreds of Ukrainians and international experts about conflict scenarios in Donbas . I used those insights to map outcomes for government, humanitarian, and peacebuilding organization crisis management .
 The problematic nature of Minsk is just one of many control mechanisms that give Putin's Russia the upper hand in its tug of war with the West over the future of Ukraine .
 The Minsk format was created by the “Normandy Quartet,’ which consists of Ukraine, Russia, Germany, and France at heads of state level, and the Trilateral Contact Group, comprising Ukraine, Russian, and OSCE .
 Ukraine and its Western allies have attempted to exclude separatists from official negotiations . To assuage Ukraine's nationalists and delegitimize the Kremlin’s narrative of the conflict as a civil war instead of an act of Russian aggression, Ukraine and the West have tried to exclude separatist separatists from
 They have signed key documents; are identified in them as “representatives of certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions;” and work in the four political, security, humanitarian, and economic subgroups . They are identified as ‘representatives’
 Trilateral Contact Group negotiators signed a ceasefire agreement in Minsk in September 2014 . After Ukraine’s retreat from Donbas following the Ilovaisk encirclement six months into the crisis.
 The Ukraine ceasefire collapsed when separatists, with Russian help, dealt Kyiv two strategic defeats at Donetsk airport and the Debaltseve rail hub . None of the leaders themselves signed the agreements, but left it to other representatives of the antagonists .
 Minsk lays out conditions necessary for ceasefire and peaceful reintegration of occupied Donbas back into Ukraine . Minsk also presumes separatists should have a voice .
 Ukraine, Russia, the European Union, and the U.S. called for negotiations including the rebels . Initially, all sides called for talks with the rebels, including Russia, Ukraine .
 Western demands for a change in separatist leadership have at the same time been a chief obstacle to talks . However, Western demands have been a top obstacle.
 Russia can absurdly claim to have met this longstanding precondition, following the overthrow of Luhansk proxy Igor Plotnitsky, assassination of his Donetsk counterpart Alexander Zakharchenko, and unrecognized elections in the LuHansk and Donetsk People's Republics last year .
 LDPR first held elections in November 2014, but only Russia recognized them . Only Russia recognizes them .
 One of the original authors is now backing away from his achievement . In a sign of the accords’ diminished credibility, one of the authors is backing away .
 Minsk accords hails from Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko’s June 2014 peace plan . He campaigned and won election at a time when peace was still popular and not yet perceived as another tool for Moscow to destabilize Kyiv .
 In early 2019, Poroshenko again sided with ultra-nationalists, agreeing that Donbas should never get constitutional special status . Poroshenko has spent four years leading parliament to extend that same status .
 interior minister Arsen Avakov says “Minsk is dead,’s interior minister says . Ukraine will meet its Minsk obligations, he says . The official state position is that Ukraine would meet its obligations .
 People's Front is home to several MPs aligned with paramilitarism and social-nationalism . The party's moderate reformer image and close relationships with Western diplomats .
 Ukraine's parliament passed Ukraine's reintegration/de-occupation law in 2013 . The law was passed by the parliament in Ukraine's first year in the country . Russia is an occupier and aggressor in Donbas and Crimea .
 People’s Front also worked closely with pro-Western independent MP and Maidan fire-starter Mustafa Nayem . People's Front worked closely to prevent Minsk under constitutional law .
 nationalists adopt the separatist speculation that the real author is Putin minion Vladislav Surkov . The real author of the Kremlin's long-term plot to dismantle Ukraine into successor states .
 The Surkov theory convinces many Ukrainians that Minsk cements separatist and Russian gains more than it affords just resolution of a conflict . They say Russia started in their country and then rebranded as a civil war to mislead outsiders .
 At this point, only pro-Russian Ukrainians support Minsk, putting Western allies like France and Germany in the strange position of advocating a peace deal that they negotiated . Many think it is a boon to Putin and the separatists .
 A broad understanding has developed that settlement per Minsk makes unwanted concessions to Russia . The settlement is a result of a broad understanding of the agreement .
 Minsk’s ultimate goal is peaceful political reintegration and social reconciliation of Donbas back into a unitary state . According to this prevalent view, Minsk is not in Ukraine's national interest .
 Minsk also essentially gives Donbas autonomy like Crimea had, cultivating perceptions of a double standard . Donetsk and Luhansk get special privileges not enjoyed by other regions of Ukraine that have remained loyal since Maidan .
 Ukraine scholar Alexander Motyl says reintegrating pro-Russian voters into a democracy is a bad idea . Motyl: Reintegrating millions of pro- Russian voters into democracy also aspires to NATO and E.U. membership is bad idea.
 Resumed representation of occupied Donbas in parliament is not an element of Minsk . But it remains a widely understood end result of reintegration .
 Ukraine might even violently oppose the idea of pro-Russian separatists back in the national parliament . Any election leading to peace in Donbas could destabilize the rest of the country .
 Minsk serves Russia’s interest by forcing Ukraine to amnesty anti-government militants, welcome them back into Ukrainian democracy, and reward them with increased sovereignty .
 Crimea or Donbas in Ukrainian elections could jeopardize the country's Euro-Atlantic ambitions and social cohesion .
Ex-KGB wrote Minsk’s special status and amnesty elements specifically to provoke Ukrainian patriotic pride . For these reasons, suspicions of the agreements run deep .
 Negotiations loaded with charged names only fuel such speculation . These include controversial ex-president Leonid Kuchma and oligarchs who are allegedly also close Putin confidants .
 Minsk is the only official format for brokering peace in the Donbas conflict . Despite Ukraine’s many good reasons to be skeptical of Minsk, it remains the only option for peace in Ukraine .
 Neither Kyiv nor Washington wants to implement it, but they just say so publicly to neutralize criticism . It is diplomatic theater because neither Kyiv or Washington wants it to be implemented .
 Kyiv rightly suspects every outcome is to Moscow’s benefit and hence recoils . Kyiv believes every outcome in Moscow is to the city's benefit .
 Fully implementing Minsk could push Ukraine toward another revolution or civil war by strong-arming Kyiv into enacting controversial political provisions on an unsustainable timeline .
Ukraine will also lack territorial integrity so long as it disputes Russia’s Crimea claim and Donbas narrative . Ukraine will also have to deal with Russia's Crimea claim, Donbas narratives .
 Similar to Cyprus, this may not keep Ukraine out of the European Union but will keep it out of NATO . The alliance’s enlargement study of 1995 was the key Russian goal .
 The first obstacle to implementing Minsk is that there is no plausible way to reintegrate Donbas into Ukraine . Donbas is in Ukraine's territory.
 Two MPs have now publicly referred to Donbas as gangrene that must be severed before it infects the rest of Ukraine .
 Ukraine's Orange Revolution resulted in constitutional changes benefiting Ukraine’s pro-Russian fifth column, laying the basis for renewed conflict 10 years later in 2014 .
 It is not in the national interest of a stable, coherent democracy reorienting West to reintegrate Donbas again. It's not in a stable and coherent democracy. It is in the West's interest of reintegrating Donbas.
 Nationalist opposition to Minsk also contributes to its unimplementability . Minsk has a history of having a strong relationship with Russia .
 Only far-right extremists are still armed to the teeth and full of disgruntled military-aged males deeply invested in blocking Russia .
Anti-Ukrainian press holds torch marches against Minsk that also evoke Third Reich imagery . Kremlin propaganda about creeping ethnic nationalism.
 Ukraine has a rich tradition of underground, right-wing paramilitarism . Many today argue that Russia has a hand in stoking the fringe far right to make this young democracy look bad .
 The consensus is largely that Ukraine’s radicals are a Kremlin-amplified phenomenon . That conspiratorial view also predominates among Western officials, where the consensus is mostly that Ukraine's radicals are.
 Victory by pro-Russian revanchists in Ukraine’s 2019 elections could lead to this outcome . Russia should ever create conditions in Donbas that oblige Ukraine to implement the agreements .
 In either case, radicals at both extremes might be emboldened, potentially leading to protests or renewed violence outside the conflict zone . Russian propaganda could use to further slander Ukraine as illiberal and ungovernable, according to Russian media .
 It seems likely that the conflict will freeze further. Barring that, however, it seems that it seems likely the conflict would freeze further .
 Ukrainians are prone to revolutionary rhetoric a mere five years after their last unfinished revolution . Ukrainians care a lot about the damage they claim Minsk could inflict on their country .
 Only a pro-Russian government would ever dare to implement Minsk as currently written . That might spark a real civil war, says the author .
Jonathan Brunson investigates asymmetric warfare, its influence on perennial Ukrainian instability, and how much of the post-Soviet democratic grassroots is actually astro-turfing . Brunson is now an independent consultant.