 Starbucks workers announced their intent to unionize in August . New locations across the country are filing for union elections . The spark that started in this city last August has turned into a wildfire of righteous working-class ambition .
 Stores in Mesa, Arizona, Boston, Seattle, Knoxville, Tennessee, and Bloomfield, Colorado, have joined the fight . The fight is widening the scope of the struggle across the country .
 Two of the first three stores that voted in Buffalo voted for a union . The second is still being contested in court in Buffalo .
 COVID-19, especially cases caused by the omicron variant, is tearing through the U.S. with record-breaking infection rates . This tidal wave of new union petitions being filed comes at a time when COV-19 is being filed .
 Starbucks locations in Buffalo, Buffalo, and other cities, are facing a spike in infections . Other cities, including New York and Chicago, are also facing infections .
 Starbucks has flooded the district with new hires in an attempt to dilute a union vote . The vote took place Dec. for three stores in Buffalo .
 No health insurance or paid sick leave time for new hires . The new hires face the recent wave of infections head-on .
 Many of Starbucks’ benefits do not kick in on day one, leaving many workers without resources and medical care they need . Many of the Starbucks' benefits don't kick in.
Workers exposed to COVID-19 for extended periods of time, while vaccinated and asymptomatic, are not being offered paid isolation time to get tested .
 Baristas who are fully vaccinated test positive for COVID-19 . This leaves many workers feeling unsafe on the job .
 Starbucks management asserts that its policy is in line with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines . Starbucks management says its policies are in line to CDC guidelines .
 The CDC guidelines have been decidedly insufficient up to this point, says the author . Over three-quarters of a million people are already killed by the disease .
 This public health catastrophe, combined with the deteriorating capitalist economy and rising cost of living, has left workers with little choice other than to organize for their own collective interests .
 A nightmare scenario for workers is the perfect storm to ignite a militant revival of the labor movement, says Dr. Dr. John Sutter . "What is a nightmare scenario" is a perfect storm for workers, he says .
 The rally, co-organized by ALU and Workers Assembly Against Racism, completed a consequential day for both the workers' struggle and the Amazon union fight .
 Amazonians United Chicagoland walked off the job in Cicero, Illinois, and Gage Park, Chicago . They cited punishing hours and unsafe COVID-19 conditions .
 TONY MURPHY with the National Labor Relations Board conducted a targeted walkout at the Staten Island warehouse . Tony MurPHY conducted a target walkout.
 Two workers at Amazon's warehouse in Bessemer, Alabama, had died within six hours of each other during their shifts . The deaths were reported in November .
 At least one of them was told to keep working or he’d lose his job, even though he said he needed to go home .
 Amazon has been trying to cover up the fact that at least six workers at the Alabama warehouse have died in the last year .
 Migrant abuse exposed 7 Ukraine, Russia and NATO workers . Migrant Abuse exposed 7 Ukrainian, Russiaand NATO workers.org Page 2 January 6, 2022 workers .
 In the more than 30 years that I knew Chuck, what I most valued was that he always looked for concrete ways he could help. In the past 30 years, he said he was most valued by Chuck .
 He fit very diverse, complicated people into tasks, where they would succeed, he said . He said he was a very successful man .
 Chuck excelled in projects that built revolutionary enthusiasm, like picking coffee, one bean at a time . But at the end of the day, it was measurable .
 Chuck was a key part of the #SanctionsKill Campaign for the past two years . He was on most of the biweekly calls, even two weeks ago, even though he was on many calls .
 Each time he took on at least one task, he made good suggestions on next steps . He helped shape a webinar, publishing a report, a book and helping shape a Webinar .
 Chuck’s early work focused on Nicaragua under full United States attack . Chuck's early work focuses on Nicaragua.
 It included support for projects and participation in delegations to Cuba, Venezuela, El] Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, then to China . But it kept expanding to other countries targeted by U.S. imperialism .
 At the same time, he was part of the militant border actions to defend migrants . He was always in solidarity with Palestine and in defense of the Black Lives Matter movement .
 Chuck Kaufman kept Chuck Kaufman in Honduras outside of the United States Palmerola Air Base in 2011 . Kaufman kept Kaufman in Honduran outside of U.S. in 2011.
 He and others were tear gassed on the two year anniversary of the U.S-backed coup . The big picture in the forefront, linking struggles, linking countries, linking people .
 Chuck really went out of his way to help political activists whose projects and efforts were facing hard times . Chuck really helped political activists who were facing tough times .
 Building solidarity doesn't happen naturally in this viciously competitive capitalist country. Building solidarity isn't naturally in the country, says the author .
 Capitalism and imperialism threaten the peoples of the world and the planet itself in the neverending quest for ever-greater profits, says author .
 Capitalism means war and austerity, racism and repression, attacks on im/migrants, misogyny and misogyny, LGBTQ2S+ oppression and mistreatment of people with disabilities . capitalism means war, austerity and racism, racism, repression and repression .
 It means joblessness, increasing homelessness and impoverishment and lack of hope for the future . It means Joblessness and increasing homelessness, it means jobless, increasing unemployment .
 The U.S. is the richest country in the world, but no one has a guaranteed right to shelter, food, water, health care, education or anything else .
 Youth are saddled with seemingly insurmountable student debt, if they even make it to college . Wages are lower than ever, and youth are less than ever .
 Black, Brown and Indigenous youth and trans people are gunned down by cops and bigots on a regular basis .
 The ruthless ruling class today seeks to wipe out decades of gains and benefits won by people’s movements .
 The super-rich and their political representatives have intensified their attacks on the multinational, multigender and multigenerational working class .
 It is time to point the blame at — and challenge — the capitalist system . It's time to blame the system for the problems of capitalism .
 If you’re interested in Marxism, socialism and fighting for a socialist future, please contact a WWP branch near you .
Workers.org produces all wealth in society, and this wealth should remain in their hands, not in the form of capitalist profits .
 The wealth workers create should be socially owned and its distribution planned to satisfy and guarantee basic human needs . The wealth worker's distribution should be social owned, according to experts .
 Queer people and the U.S. communist movement.
Verbatim copying and distribution of articles is permitted in any medium without royalty provided this notice is preserved . Verbatim copy and distribution is allowed in anymedium without royalty .
 The prices of all basic goods and services necessary for human survival have been going up . In some cases, way up, over the past six months or so .
 The November 2021 Consumer Price Index, which tracks annual and monthly increases in prices, rose by 6.8% this year . It is the highest jump in nearly 40 years .
 There is no major city where a person working 40 hours a week at the federal minimum wage of $7.25 can afford a one-bedroom apartment .
 This comes in the midst of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, a profound crisis of public health made far worse by the for-profit health care system in this country . This is the latest in a long line of health problems that have been made worse by for
Global capitalism has exacerbated the deepening crisis of global capitalism . It has ushering in a wave of job losses, evictions and more suffering for workers and the oppressed .
 The mainstream press is filled with a range of supposed explanations to diagnose why inflation has set in so rapidly in the U.S. and similar economies around the globe .
 The reality is that none of these explain the root causes of what is driving down the standard of living for millions of workers in this country .
 Since the 2008 financial crisis, the global capitalist system has been on life support . Central banks funneled unprecedented infusions of money to the commercial banks and financial institutions .
 The Federal Reserve has pumped upwards of $10 trillion into the financial system . It has maintained very low interest rates throughout this past decade .
 From 2008 to 2014 alone, the Federal Reserve printed $3. trillion in new money . It was nearly three times the amount the bank had created since its founding 95 years earlier .
 The Fed has kept interest rates near zero for a longer period of time than ever before . During this entire last decade, the Fed has been keeping interest rates low .
 When the bank in 2018 tried to begin raising interest rates and scaling back its printing of new money, capital revolted . In 2018, the bank tried to raise interest rates, scaling back the printing of the new money .
Several phenomena happened as a result. This sent stocks sharply lower and forced the Fed to abandon its plans and return to the regime of near-zero interest rates .
 The amount of money hoarded by the banks and borrowed to speculate in financial markets is at a record high . The amount is upwards of $918 billion at the end of November 2021, according to the IMF .
 This is more than double the nearly $400 billion in so-called “margin debt’s” incurred prior to the financial crisis of 2008 . This is over double the $400billion in ‘margin Debt’ incurred before the crisis .
Just above two-thirds of global net worth is now stored in real estate . Only around 20% is stored in other fixed assets or means of production .
 Since 2010, the stock market has doubled in value, according to CNN.com . The rise of the so-called gig economy, austerity measures and more suffering imposed on the working class and the oppressed .
 The superrich have seen their wealth balloon during this period, intensifying the antagonisms between labor and capital . The contradictions inherent in the capitalist system have been brought into sharper relief .
 At the same time, the number of so-called “zombie companies’s’ debt relative to profit has continued to rise .
 The proliferation of zombie companies has been driven in large part by the Federal Reserve’s policy of making money extremely cheap for banks and large corporations to borrow .
 For the owners of these companies and financial institutions, some inflation is a desirable thing . For the owner of these firms and financial institution, someflation is a wanted thing .
Bosses are raising prices to protect and grow their profits. Faced with access to easy money to borrow and invest, they are trying to grow profits . High costs for raw materials based on supply chain issues impacting the global economy .
 corporations are investing in robots and other technology that enable each worker to produce more commodities . This access to easy money has given corporations the ability to automate production to a higher degree .
 productivity of labor has increased substantially over the past several decades . But the real wages of workers have stayed relatively flat or, in many cases, fallen .
 There is a general tendency for the value of commodities to decline over time, as the supply of those goods rises, based on less human labor being needed to produce them .
 The argument by many mainstream economists and CEOs that workers for higher wages is categorically false . The argument that growing demands from workers are driving or at least contributing to inflation is false .
 Out-of-control inflation can become undesirable for the capitalist class . But it can also become undesirable.
 It can lead to ballooning costs of raw materials, and even more dangerous, to the tightening of monetary policy . It can make access to borrowed money more expensive, making borrowing more expensive .
 If this were to happen, it could usher in a wave of defaults and bankruptcies . It could trigger another January 6, 2022 Page 3 financial crisis and an economic decline that would affect the global economy .
 It would be managed by trying to extract even more concessions from the working class and the oppressed . It would also be managed to extract more concessions.
 It is the preferred policy of the federal government and central banks to use various monetary policy tools at their disposal to control rampant inflation . It is preferred policy for the Federal government and Central banks.
 After the end of World War II, the U.S. experienced a similar period of high inflation . The United States experienced similar periods of inflation after the war .
 At that time, there was a militant and growing workers’ movement in the streets . The movement was fighting for various social reforms and building unions .
 Rather than utilize monetary policy tools to deal with inflation, the federal government enacted price controls .
 In the early 1970s, similar measures were again implemented to deal with rising inflation . Similar measures were also implemented in the late 1970s .
Starting in the late 1970s, roughly coinciding with capital’s renewed offensive against labor, there was a shift toward the monetary policy route . That has been the case ever since .
 The Federal Reserve at that time raised interest rates through the roof, exacerbating a punishing recession in the economy . The Fed has since increased interest rates in recent years .
 Things are different now, both in terms of subjective factors like the level of worker organization and consciousness, as well as objective factors regarding development in the global capitalist economy .
 It’s too early to say where inflationary trends will head and with what method the federal government and central banks will choose to respond to it .
 The newly combative attitude of workers, forced to stay on the job throughout the pandemic, will play a decisive role going forward . Workers will be forced to pay small change compared to the billions raked in by the companies they work for .
 This growing workers’ movement could raise demands for a price freeze, higher wages, an end to evictions, free health care, and end to the war on migrant workers . The movement could also raise demands of higher wages and higher wages .
 The Federal Reserve and the federal government have bent over backwards to hand out tens of trillions of dollars to the banks and large corporations .
 Each year, the Pentagon spends upwards of $1 trillion on the Pentagon, funding wars abroad in the interests of capital .
 During the pandemic, the federal government imposed pauses on, or altogether forgave, various debts held by workers . The government also implemented an eviction moratorium, gave stimulus payments directly to workers .
 This demonstrates that money is there to implement programs and policies that benefit the vast majority of society versus the interests of the rich .
 What's missing is a mobilized and militant workers’ movement to fight for it. What’s missing is an organized and militant movement to support it .
 Amazon's vicious union busting has come under widespread scrutiny by the world's working class . Some elements of the ruling class have also been involved in the busting .
 The National Labor Relations Board has ordered a new election at the Bessemer, Alabama, Amazon warehouse . It was created in 1935 to regulate sharp battles between labor and capital .
 The Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union lost a representation election there by a wide margin . Dozens of courageous Bessemer workers testified before the NLRB about Amazon’s campaign of fear, lies and intimidation .
 The latest NLRB ruling against Amazon, issued Dec., 2021, will have a more far-reaching impact than the order specific to Bessemer . The latest ruling will have more impact than that specific to the order .
 The rule used to limit union organizing on its premises is no longer in effect . The company must notify every one of the 750,000 Amazon workers in the United States by email .
 The pandemic has killed hundreds of thousands of U.S. workers so far and left many more in a very precarious financial predicament . 12 million workers fell behind on their rent in 2021, like the 12 million who fell behind.
 The response of the ruling class to the plight of the worker during the pandemic has ranged from ineptitude to callous disregard .
 Shareholders and CEOs protected their profit margins rather than the workers who risked their lives to keep the capitalist machine running .
 Workers reach a breaking point during contract negotiations, demand their labor leaders be more militant . Workers push for better pay and benefits .
 Nurses and other essential hospital personnel walked off the job because of poor staffing . Poor staffing increased the risk of harm to patients.
 Major manufacturing strikes happened at Kellogg's, John Deere, Nabisco and Frito-Lay . advances against union-busting twotier systems did not go far enough .
 Teamster truckers walked off the job and demonstrated the fragility of the just-in-time supply chain model .
 Gig workers from GoPuff, Uber and Lyft flexed their muscles to win concessions regarding safety and wages . Gig workers were flexing their muscles, as workers who provide essential services.
 Starbucks workers won a historic union election, and grassroots efforts to unionize the coffee chain are spreading . The coffee chain has been in the news for more than 30 years .
 That was one of the few times they could talk to workers in the break areas . That's one of a few times that they were able to talk to each other .
 Unions and class-conscious organizers could organize around enforcing the ruling .
 Many forces are in the mix — ALU, Amazonians United Chicagoland, the Teamsters, RWDSU and iD Oe AT WARRIOR MET COAL Voss .
 In Brookwood, Alabama, United Mine Workers coal miners ‘hold the line’ and continue the strike they began in April 2021 . The miners won safety concessions and their largest pay raise in decades .
 The new year begins with a pandemic surge sweeping across the U.S. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention downgraded safety protocols, forcing more workers to stay on the job, despite the risk of spreading disease .
For U.S. government leaders, the capitalist economy and corporate profits are the top priority . Workers are disposable in the effort to keep business in business, they say .
 Amazon must inform its 750,000 U.S. employees that they have a right to organize . A National Labor Relations Board ruling mandates that Amazon must tell its employees they can organize . Amazon is facing a legal battle after the ruling .
 The International Longshore and Warehouse Union represents 20,000 dock workers at 29 ports on the West Coast . The union's contract with Pacific Maritime Association expires in July .
 The Teamsters’ Carhaul Division, representing 4,000 car haulers, will negotiate a new contract in May .
 The United Steelworkers will be in negotiations representing 30,000 Marathon Petroleum workers and 5,700 workers at Goodyear Tires . The United steelworkers will work for Marathon Petroleum and Good year Tires.
 The more they get to know each other and build a united front of solidarity against the epitome of capitalist exploitation . Amazon is the greater likelihood of the first union victory against this megamonopoly and the centibillionaire at its helm .
Jeff Bezos is celebrating his birthday on Jan. 25 . Jeff Bezos' birthday is his first birthday since he was born .
 Amazon.org.org is a nonprofit that supports workers in the U.S. and around the world . For more information, go to supportamazon.org .
 The institution made a profit in 2021, following two rounds of layoffs, which left hospital wards dangerously understaffed . The hospital made a Profit in 2021 after making a profit.
 Safe staffing-to-patient ratios will be on the table when the nurses’ contract expires in June .
 PASNAP President and Temple Hospital RN Maureen May recently told Fox29 News, ‘We are in crisis,’ May said .
 If the pandemic has one lesson, it is that the worker, not the CEO, is essential . If the worker is essential, it should be the CEO .
 That has been demonstrated time and time again in industry after industry afterindustry after industry . That's been demonstrated. That's shown time and times again in the industry.
 2022 will be the year we build a workers’ world. Let’s resolve that 2022 is the year that we will build a world of workers .
 Starbucks workers are unionizing and not simply as a result of the failure of the company to address any particular problem . Despite these desperate circumstances for many, Starbucks workers have unionized .
 Workers across the board are no longer content with acting as passive observers to their own exploitation . Class-conscious workers push for real change .
 Starbucks are seeing workers become of their own locality or actually part of a larger vision to make their more aware of their role as agents of change worksites .
 This shows that workers are beginning to country, but as part of an international working class . This shows how workers are starting to work in an international class .
 Companies like Starbucks, Amazon, Walmart and others are global imperialist see unions as a tool to react against force that can bring workers at home .
 We are seeing workers become more collectively aware of our role as agents of change in society, says John Sutter . Sutter: Conditions of the workers are tied intrinsically to the conditions of workers in other countries .
 Workers within the U.S. are directly competing for jobs with workers of other countries, says Marxist analysis .
Technology has made it easier to send jobs overseas to countries where huge corporations pay only a fraction of what it costs in the U.S. to pay union workers with full benefits to do the same job .
This direct competition with low-wage jobs around the world in turn drives down wages for workers in the United States . This direct competition is limiting how much can be won strictly through bargaining with union contracts .
 A labor movement in the U.S. does not take on an internationalist perspective to match the international nature of the working class . In other words, a labor movement will shoot itself in the foot .
 Working class of one country is more powerful when it unites with other workers across national boundaries against their shared capitalist exploiters . Workers are always more powerful in the workplace when they unite against their boss .
 Developments within the labor movement in the U.S. open up new possibilities for workers on a global scale .
After decades of the labor movement being gutted, workers are making a comeback . The labor movement has been gutted in recent years .
 The victory in Buffalo is the first of many to come, for baristas as well as the whole working class .
 The author ts a contributor to Workers World newspaper and a union committee organizer with Starbucks Workers United in Buffalo .
 ALU leader Brett Daniels spoke at the rally about being handcuffed of Amazon workers in Edwardsville, Illinois . Six were killed when the Dec. tornado demolished the warehouse .
 The Intercept revealed that Amazon’s profit-before-people mission means lifesaving emergency drills are frequently sacrificed for production . Amazon has plenty of time for anti-union captive-audience meetings, The Intercept said .
 Many in the corporate media falsely pronounced the Staten Island union campaign dead . The workers had withdrawn their NLRB petition in mid-November to get more challenge-proof signatures .
 The Dec. rally showed the Staten Island campaign is alive and kicking and the ALU is solidifying its leadership of workers in the warehouse . The December rally was held in Staten Island .
 In late November, two workers at Amazon's warehouse in Bessemer, Alabama, had died within six hours of each other . This undoubtedly explains why ALU organizers have been subject to only hours before the Times Square rally .
 At least one of them was told to keep working or he'd lose his job, even though he said he needed to go home . Smalls on trumped-up charges from the NYPD, which were later dropped .
 The ALU's growing base in the Staten Island warehouse was dramatized by the union’s intervention in a sexual harassment case there .
 Amazon bosses had been protecting a serial abuser but were forced to take action . The union held a series of protests demanding he be removed .
 Maddy, the target of the abuse, spoke at the rally and later told Workers World that while much firmer action is still needed by management, nothing would have been done without the union .
 WAAR leader Larry Holmes addressed the de facto union leadership at the rally . He celebrated the fact the ALU had filed its petition for a union vote .
 You’re a union because you're fighting the sexism that the women workers are subjected to. You're fighting sexism that women workers have been subjected to, the union says .
 You're a union because you organize to be a voice for the workers, to fight for better conditions, says union leader . You're also a voice of the workers. You're the voice of a union.
Hol Holmes’ remarks captured the spirit of the action’s main demand that Amazon recognize the union now and negotiate directly with the workers .
This would bypass the long NLRB-supervised process which bosses use to lie to and intimidate workers . This would bypass a longNLRB- supervised process that bosses use.
 Starbucks Workers United won union elections in Buffalo, Buffalo . New worker campaigns announced in Boston and Seattle .
 Unvaccinated staff spread COVID-19 in California prisons . California state prisoners are experiencing a dangerous surge of COV-19 infections .
 Gavin Newsom refused to order mass releases during the first surge of COVID-19 in the state prisons . He has taken a position against ordering mandatory vaccinations for prison staff .
 Workers World was recently contacted by family members concerned about the rising COVID-19 infections at the California Medical Facility at Vacaville . The facility incarcerates perhaps the largest elderly and medically at-risk prisoners in the state .
 Approximately one-quarter of CMF prison staff are private contractors, and only 37% have been vaccinated .
 A recent legal brief filed by the Prison Law Office and other attorneys in the class action lawsuit, Plata Newsom . Nearly 2. million people are incarcerated every day in prisons, jails and detention centers in the United States, face possible death sentences .
 Despite facing inhumane and unsanitary conditions, they have shown great solidarity with one another and resistance to their brutal oppression .
 Since the start of the pandemic, prisons and ICE detention centers across the U.S. have reported at least 460,918 total cumulative cases among incarcerated people . 2,933 total cumulative deaths, according to UCLA Law COVID Behind Bars Data Project .
 This project is sure to note that true case and mortality counts are likely higher, and may be significantly higher, than reported . The project is also sure to say that true cases and mortality count are likely to be higher .
 Many carceral agencies have stopped reporting COVID-19 data . This undercount is due to the data available being self-reported by many agencies .
 Perilous Chronicle has kept a running list with news sources detailing the uprisings, hunger strikes, escapes and other acts of resistance available .
 PC has been tracking these acts of resistance by incarcerated people in the U.S. and Canada since the end of 2010 .
Prisoners' rights activists demonstrate in front of the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, Sacramento .
 The California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation has not been forthcoming with accurate information about the pandemic . The number of recorded acts of resistance has increased .
 The COVID-19 crisis behind bars has elicited a number of lackluster and dangerous responses from the various carceral agencies at the federal, state and local levels . Pandemic exacerbates suffering.
 Isolation, already extreme while incarcerated, is made worse when the rapid spread of the virus is on the rise . Isolation of imprisoned people to their cells is not needed to sustain bodily health .
 Many facilities suspended in-person visits with loved ones are one of the few places for human connection with their larger communities they were kidnapped from . Many facilities suspend in- person visits.
 Quality physical health care behind bars is already hard to come by, if imprisoned people can even gain access to it .
 Mental health care is largely nonexistent in a setting that has often driven people to take their own lives because conditions are so brutal . Mental health services are largely nonexistent, according to experts .
Suicides in U.S. jails and prisons rose sharply from 2000 to 2019, according to staff vaccinations or testing . Suicides in United States jails, prisons rose from 2000- 2019 .
Nearly one-third of prison staff has not been complying with court-ordered, twice weekly testing requirements . In fact, nearly one- third of staff hasn't been complying, according to prison officials .
 CDCR has reported AOO new infections, a number that has doubled over the last week . The number of infections has doubled in the past week .
 Attorneys, family members and prisoner advocates are deeply concerned that low vaccination rates among CDCR employees are causing this new wave of dangerous COVID-19 infections .
 Campbell has been trying to alert state legislators and others about this crisis . Campbell has tried to alert legislators and other state legislators about the crisis .
 Campbell is concerned about the outbreak of COVID-19 in the prison hospitals . Campbell is particularly concerned about a number of prison hospitals in the UK .
 CMF just announced that it was canceling all visiting due to the spread of the highly contagious omicron variant .
 Several of the housing units are on lockdown . Concern for the safety of these highly vulnerable prisoners is mounting . A study will be released in October 2021 by the Bureau of Justice Statistics .
 The spread of the virus through transfers of incarcerated people, from processing facilities and other units, without testing and/or quarantine protocols .
 Even prior to the pandemic, prisons, jails and detention centers were a public health crisis. Build toward abolition even prior to pandemic .
To imprison this many people, most of whom are historically and disproportionately oppressed in this country, is to make them vulnerable to premature death, says John Sutter . Sutter: The organized violence and organized abandonment by the capitalist state.
 The organized violence of cops, courts and cages on stolen Indigenous lands is a handful of examples that exemplify inequality . The organized Violence of cops and courts and prisons are a few examples of inequality .
Long-term inequality on this continent since colonizers first arrived is the cause of long-term inequalities .
 Colonizers have imposed class war from their ruling positions since landing from across the Atlantic Ocean . They have forced and otherwise exploited labor for the profit of a few .
 CMF has a long history of activism and involvement stemming back from the early days of the HIV/AIDS epidemic . CMF is a nonprofit that has been involved in the fight against HIV and AIDS .
 This prison had a segregated unit housing prisoners with HIV/AIDS and transgender prisoners . The prison also had a unit housing inmates with HIV and Transgender prisoners .
 CMF now has the only prison hospice in the state . The unit no longer exists, CMF is now the only jail hospice.
 Last year before there was a vaccine, frequent transfers of prisoners fueled the spread of COVID-19 in California prisons .
 Prison abolition groups organized frequent large and militant demonstrations outside the prison . They demanded the immediate release of thousands of elderly and immunocompromised prisoners .
 There were no mass releases, but due to prisoner access to vaccines, the pandemic slowed down for a bit in the prisons .
 The biggest outbreak now is at Wasco State Prison, one of the state’s reception centers .
 Wasco has been closed to new prison admissions due to the rising infection rate . Wasco was closed to the new admissions because of the rise in infection rates .
 The second surge of COVID-19 in the prisons will need a new resurgence of activism by outside organizations .
 Campbell hopes that the movement to support the lives of people inside the walls will return . Campbell is hoping that the campaign to support people in the walls is successful .
 Prisons, jails and detention centers are one of the most effective tools the ruling class has to impose social control and drive wages down for the entire working class .
Texas is fighting for abolition like our lives depend on it, says Texas abolitionists . Governor Greg Abbott’s Operation Lonestar has led the state to reject the war on migrants .
 The United States empire has a violent history of institutionalizing and codifying white supremacy . The U.S. empire has been institutionalized and codified white supremacy.
 They are concentration camps for the poor, oppressed nationalities and dissenters . They are Concentration Camps for the Poor, oppressed Nationalities and Dissers .
 Emil Czeczko was serving on the border under orders to prevent migrants from crossing from Belarus into Poland . He fled through a barbed wire fence on Dec. and appealed for asylum in Belarus .
 Czeczko said he fled because Polish troops had shot and killed some of the migrants . In a television interview, he said Polish troops killed some migrants .
 Czeczko said that special border troops forced him and other regular Polish soldiers to take part in the executions .
 Two Polish volunteers, who had come to aid the migrants, were killed when they tried to intervene . He also told BelTa TV that two Polish volunteers were killed .
 The migrants fly to Minsk, Belarus, mainly from Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq and Yemen . Their families cannot survive at home at home .
 Scenes of Polish troops setting up barbed wire and firing water cannons to stop them were broadcast on television worldwide starting in mid-November .
 Czeczko’s accusation that Polish forces used lethal force against the migrants sparked demands from Belarusian and Russian government representatives for an international investigation .
 Polish border officials accuse Polish government of refusing to answer questions about border incidents . They accuse the government of not answering questions.
 U.S. and NATO-led or supported wars in the migrants’ origin countries have created an unlivable situation for millions of people .
 U.S.-imposed sanctions continue to squeeze the economies of these countries . The United States has imposed sanctions on countries such as Russia and China .
 She was one of the first women who starred in her own sitcom TV show, "Life With Elizabeth" from 1953-1955 . For one, she was the first woman to star in the show .
 She produced and starred in her own variety show at the same time . She was so popular that she produced and appeared on her own show .
 Arthur Duncan is a 21-year-old Black dancer . She promoted on her variety show, on her show, not just once but several times .
White was interviewed by White before and after his performances . Not only did he dance but was also interviewed by him.
 This was an unprecedented action since Black performers were rarely seen on TV, unless in racist stereotypical and We need prison abolition, not reform . This is exemplified in this moment of global pandemic, where the rapidly accelerating and completely preventable deaths of people inside and outside prisons are an act
 The EU has erected barriers to migrants trying to survive. We're not building toward reform of the EU. We are not building towards reform of The EU, we're not trying to create barriers .
 Hundreds of migrants die each year attempting to cross the Mediterranean Sea when their overloaded boats sink .
 Poland is a NATO member, beholden to U.S. and EU imperialism, and serving them by obstructing migration and providing military bases that threaten Belarus and Russia . Poland's military bases threaten Belarus, Russia, and Belarus .
 Poland's reactionary government represses opponents and persecutes anyone who defends communism . Poland’s reactionary government Represses opponents, persecute anyone who supports communism .
 Czeczko speaks out in an interview with Belarus's BelTa TV .
 Emil Czeczko was asked how those people behaved before the execution . He was asked whether they said anything at that moment .
 Another question related to whether they had to “finish off the wounded’s wounded. Another question relates to whether the wounded had to finish their lives .
 Emil Czeczko: "I heard that there were people who had to be finished off. I hear that there are people who were finished off"
 White’s variety show appeared in 1954, an historic year for the pre-Civil Rights Movement . The Supreme Court ruled on the Brown Board of Education case, outlawing segregated schools .
 Nat King Cole became the first Black man in history to host a nationally televised variety show . Two years later in 1956, the legendary jazz pianist and singer, Nat KingCole, was the first African-American to host the show .
 CBS affiliates in the Deep South threatened to ban the showing of White’s show if Duncan continued to be featured on it .
 She refused to take him off her show, but any of these institutions did . Not only did she refuse to remove him from the show, she also refused to leave her show .
 Soldiers were given a huge amount of alcohol every time they were forced to take part in it . Soldiers were also given huge amounts of alcohol.
 U.S.-led sanctions continue to squeeze the economies of these countries . y Arthur Duncan, in 1954, and Betty White, in 2017, gave him even more airtime .
 She stated, ‘They were going to take our show off the air if we didn’t get rid of Arthur, because he was Black.’ She said, “They wereGoing to take their show off. If we didn't get rid.
 We support diversity of tactics and the right of the oppressed to self-defense and self-determination by any means . We support Diversity of tactics, and we support self-defence by any way .
 Polish serviceman said cars with border guards began to arrive at his place of service and take his fellow soldiers with them .
When we asked what for, they told us to reload our weapons and pointed their guns at our heads to force us to shoot . When we asked to reload their weapons, they said to reload them and pointed guns at us .
 The border guards shot him in the head, Czeczko said . "We caught some man who was by himself, took him to the forest," he said .
Volunteers and migrants were among those who were killed by Polish border guards .
 Polish border guards shot a volunteer for asking them where they were taking refugees to, he said . He said he witnessed at least two situations when Polish border officers shot him .
Mutinies, Soldier Revolts and Revolutions about rank-and-file GI opposition to the U.S. role in Vietnam .
Just 14 episodes of punitive duties against civilians have been recorded in Poland . We do not know at present if there is widespread opposition among Polish soldiers .
 White’s personal anti-racist stance should be admired and appreciated along with her unique, comedic genius, now and by future generations to come .
 Betty White will always remain a beloved ‘Golden Girl’ 0 suffering and violence. This is another reason why Betty White is still a beloved 'Golden Girl'
 What we build together, in the wake of tearing down the walls of capitalist cages, will make all the difference, says David Frum .
 The U.S. has come to our home with its missiles and is already standing at our doorstep . It is the United States that has been standing at the doorstep of our home .
 This statement makes it clear who the aggressor is in the latest and continuing confrontation between Russia and U.S. imperialism . This statement is the latest in a series of confrontations between the two countries .
 U.S. corporate media reported it as bellicose, threatening, unreasonable, an ominous warning of a Russian invasion of Ukraine . Yet the United States corporate media said it was a warning of an invasion .
 As U.S. policy grows more reckless, corporate media perceives threats everywhere, says John Sutter .
 U.S. Secretary of State James Baker pledged this to former president Mikhail Gorbachev in 1990 . Baker promised that a reunified German state in the heart of Europe would present no threat to the Soviet Union .
 U.S. corporate media reports Russia’s troops within Russia as a buildup on the border with Ukraine .
 President Putin is addressing the further expansion of NATO through Ukraine’s absorption into an aggressive, U.S.-dominated military alliance .
 They aimed to consolidate capitalist property relations under Western economic domination . They wanted to consolidate capitalism under Western domination .
 For this to succeed they began organizing the state itself, its police and military, under the U.S. military command . For this, they started organizing its police, military, and police .
 To lock in place this transfer of property, they insisted on NATO membership for each country . NATO membership is required for every country .
 Beyond the imperialist reconquest of Eastern Europe was the effort to totally dominate and loot Russia . The effort to completely dominate and Loot Russia was a major effort to dominate the region .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union and the separation of former Soviet republics into small, dysfunctional ‘independent’ countries whetted U.S. imperialist appetites . The collapse.
 During the years Boris Yeltsin was president of Russia, 1991-99, the corrupt bureaucrats and criminals took control of the formerly nationalized industries .
 These new rulers sold entire industries for scrap metal to curry favor in the West and enrich themselves .
 What Putin has attempted, especially in the past decade, is to stabilize and NATO ACCESSION Year Hi Founding NATO Member MB 1952 MB 1955 M1982 M1999 (Czech Republic, Poland & Hungary) 2004 (Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia & Slovenia
 He has not sought to reestablish socialist property relations but to defend Russian nationalist interests . He is not seeking to re establish socialist property ties but to defending Russian nationalists .
 Putin government provided air cover and vital military aid to Syria that halted the imperialist attempt to overthrow the Syrian government .
 Russian missiles shipped to Venezuela have provided that government with some needed air cover . Russian missiles have been sent to the country .
 imperialist forces determined to reassert their domination of oil-rich Western Asia and control all of South America . These steps outraged imperialist forces .
 The U.S. is supplying $450 million additional funding in weapons to Ukraine . The United States is supplying the money to Ukraine.
 Together with U.S. aid to bring about the February 2014 coup in Kiev, Ukraine’s capital, that adds up to $2. billion .
 Britain, NATO member and U.S. junior partner is constructing two naval ports for the pro-imperialist Ukraine regime on that country's Black Sea shoreline .
 One is between the Russian naval base on the Crimean Peninsula and the rest of Russia . One is in the Sea of Azov, that is between Russia's naval base.
 London is lending the U.S.-installed government in Kiev $1. billion to pay for British-made naval vessels . London is also lending the United States $1 billion to Kiev .
 Western military officials are discussing deploying new technology, including nuclear-capable missiles, in Poland and Latvia and along Ukraine’s Russia-facing eastern front .
 Gorbachev allowed the annexation of the German Democratic Republic . The Soviet Union had a legal right to veto the annexation .
 Gorbachev had received assurances that NATO would not expand after he withdrew all Soviet forces from Eastern Europe . He had also received assurances.
 The absorption of the German Democratic Republic into the imperialist bloc left NATO as a totally unopposed, aggressive military alliance . The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact left NATO a totallyUnopposed alliance .
 NATO first asserted its military capacity through bombing campaigns and troop deployments to carry out the breakup of the Yugoslav Socialist Federation through the 1990s .
 The U.S. military has led the NATO military alliance in a series of wars, invasions, bombing campaigns and occupations, including in Iraq, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Libya and Syria . The United States military has been involved in subversive regime-change operations throughout Eastern Europe, Western Asia
 In every former socialist country in Eastern Europe, regime changes reinstated capitalism . In every ex-socialist country, changes are made to restore capitalism .
 With Washington’s assistance, reactionary monarchists, religious clerics, former Nazi collaborators and Wall Street economists flooded into the entire region .
 Hundreds of social organizations, NGOs, schools and publications received billions of dollars in U.S. funding . USAID programs helped reorganize society on a capitalist basis .
 They aggressively rewrote constitutions along with banking and new ownership laws, privatized and sold off major industries, dismembered social services and looted pensions . The new owners of banks, banks, social services, and social services were among the worst offenders .
 The imperialists turned to the NATO military alliance. To consolidate and protect these brutal thefts of socialized property, the alliance .
 The collaborators in each capitalist-reorganized country had to join NATO . They borrowed to pay for U.S.-made military equipment and pledged thousands of their soldiers to fight in United States wars .
 New right-wing governments in Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic applied for and were quickly accepted into the NATO alliance in 1999 .
 The former Soviet Republics of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, all bordering Russia, were admitted to NATO in 2004 . The right-wing governments in Bulgaria, Romania, Slovakia, Slovakia and Slovenia were also admitted .
 Albania and Croatia were admitted into the military alliance in 2009, Montenegro in 2017 and North Macedonia in 2020 . Albania, Croatia and Montenegro were admitted in 2009 and Croatia in 2017 . North Macedonia was admitted in 2020 and Albania in 2017.
 United States coup in Ukraine led to aggressive U.S.-orchestrated coup in 2014 . Fierce political struggle over Ukraine joining NATO led to the coup .
 The United States government pumped $5. billion into the country to carry out an enormous social engineering campaign and regime-change operation against the elected government .
 U.S.-funded nongovernmental agency has cost $1.5 million for Ukrainian operation . Nuland gave speech to U. S.-Ukraine Foundation .
 The EuroMaidan Uprising, in Kiev, was led by Right Sektor and neo-Nazi militias . But it was also led by right-wing groups .
After months of street protests, Viktor Yanukovych and many of his officials were forced to flee for their lives . After months of protests, these forces literally overran government buildings on Feb., 2014, forcing Yanukovych to flee .
Mass movements in the more industrialized Donbass in Eastern Ukraine and in Crimea held referendums . Protesting the illegitimate overthrow of their elected president, mass movements in more industrialized donbass in eastern Ukraine and Crimea held referendum .
 Russian forces move into Crimea to secure Russia’s only warm water port on the Black Sea . Russian forces moved into Crimea in order to secure the port .
 The United States and European Union imposed harsh sanctions on Russia for resisting NATO’s military expansion . The U.S. and EU impose harsh sanctions.
 The economic sanctions are especially focused on rupturing Russia’s ability to sell oil and gas to Germany by blocking the Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline .
 Tying Europe’s energy needs to fracked natural gas from the United States increases U.S. imperialist leverage against EU allies, which are also capitalist competitors .
 The U.S. government violates treaties at will . The United States always violates agreements .
 Washington violated two publicly signed international agreements of great importance . This is imperialist diplomacy, confirmed by hundreds of broken treaties with Indigenous nations within the United States .
 The United States broke the nuclear agreement signed in 2015 along with Iran and Britain, France, Germany, China and Russia . The United Nations Security Council signed the nuclear deal in 2015 .
 Washington is now flagrantly violating the 1979 agreement recognizing the People’s Republic of China as the sole legitimate government of all China including Taiwan . The People's Republic ofChina is the only legitimate government in China .
 Breaking treaties may have unforeseen consequences, causing U.S. targets to forge alliances . Breaking treaties could have unintended consequences .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski warned: ‘Potentially, the most dangerous scenario would be a grand coalition of China, Russia, and perhaps Iran, an ‘antihegemonic’ coalition united not by ideology but by complementary grievances.’
 The Occupational Safety and Health Administration announced it was rescinding an emergency standard adopted in June . The standard had mandated protections for health care workers .
 CDC guidelines lack a provision for testing at the end of the isolation period . The new CDC guidelines don't include testing at end of isolation period.
 The CDC claims the change “is motivated by science,” many workers are calling the changes reckless and a further risk to public health .
 NNU is calling a National Day of Action Jan. to demand more protection for workers . The group is calling for more protection from workers .
 A Yiestic ea ce Airline CEOs requested guideline change . CDC officials claim that the change was primarily driven by worries that the increasing volume of omicron infections would sideline thousands of police officers, firefighters and other essential workers needed to keep the system functioning .
 This hasn't reached the level of economic catastrophe it did in 2020, but it is still very serious . This hasn’t reached the levels of economic disaster it did on the same day .
 Hospitals, ambulance and EMT services and fire departments in various parts of the country don’t have enough workers .
 The CDC has never suggested that fan attendance at these events be limited, as it did in 2020 when the number of daily cases was considerably lower .
Delta Airlines CEO Ed Bastian and other company officials sent a Dec. letter to the director of the CDC requesting the change . Confirmed that the change was implemented to serve the bosses’ goal to force workers back to hazardous jobs .
 A trade group representing Delta, Southwest and United Airlines argued in favor of the new guidelines . And Airlines for America, a trade group, wrote to the CDC Dec.
High rate of transmission of omicron variant would make it impossible to keep businesses running . Airline officials and bosses from other industries are concerned .
 Three subway lines in the city suspended services due to worker shortage . The city's subway service was suspended due to a worker shortage.
 In 2020, the airlines were given $54 million in federal aid to keep employees on their payroll during the pandemic .
 Company bosses laid off hundreds of thousands of workers, creating a labor shortage in the industry . But those company bosses laid out hundreds of thousand of workers .
 Access to testing has been limited from Day One of the pandemic in the U.S., along with failure to provide adequate protective equipment for staff and patients .
 A corporate-controlled media that hides and distorts facts about the coronavirus has made matters worse, says the author .
 Gothamist, 70% of the school was in partial quarantine, and there were nine confirmed cases . Gothamist was in full quarantine, with 70% in partialarantine .
 The administration found out that the teachers were planning a sick-out day, they put the school on remote .
 Some teachers believed that students should only be allowed to return in person with a negative PCR test . Some teachers believe that students must only return with negative PCR tests .
 Only 180,000 students out of 1 mildeaths and long-term impairment of the workers involved are generally disregarded .
 The bourgeois politicians and their public health advisers firmly insist that the generally available vaccines along with widespread testing will control this pandemic .
 President Joe Biden's speech Dec. reflected his administration's belief that COVID-19 is here to stay . The disruptions caused by social distancing and shutdowns aren't necessary, he says .
 More than 7. million COVID-19 infections of children have been reported . Biden's ‘test-to-stay’ for schools has been called out .
 Biden raised the adoption of ‘test-tostay’ which would allow kids who have been exposed to COVID-19 to come back to school, as long as they test negative .
 There was some amount of testing of all students on page 11 Page 10 Page 10 .
 The third Monday in January has been the official King holiday for many workers since January 1986 . The King holiday has been in place since 1986 after mass pressure put on the United States government .
 King’s historic role, mainly as the leading nonviolent symbol of the massive Civil Rights Movement, does have a ring of truth . King's historic role as the leader of the Civil Rights movement has been widely recognized .
 His legacy was so much more, especially where workers’ rights are concerned . His legacy, however, was more important to workers' rights .
 The speech was made at the Lincoln Memorial following the 1963 March on Washington of 250,000 people . His message should not be confined to his famous ‘I Have a Dream’ speech .
 Many signs were carried on that march by workers representing international unions, state federations and central labor councils . The march was led by A Philip Randolph, a major financial backer of the march .
 Dr. John Sutter was assassinated April 4, 1968, just a few months before his assassination . Dr. Sutter's death was the first time he had been shot dead .
 King came out in support of the 1,300-strong sanitation workers’ strike in Memphis . A tribute to Archbishop Desmond Tutu, friend of Palestine, was a tribute to the archbishop .
 Tutu was integral to the liberation of South Africa from the racist clutches of the minority white apartheid rule . The Nobel Laureate was a moral giant and practitioner of radical love .
 His moral authority has been foundational to international solidarity with the Palestinian struggle . He has been a key figure in the Palestinian movement .
 Tutu is one of the last of that generation of South African warriors who bequeathed to their people a new nation without a “color bar,’s systematic racism .
 Nelson Mandela became the first elected Black president of South Africa in 1994 . He selected Desmond Tutu to lead the Truth and Reconciliation Commission . The commission attempted to heal the deep trauma inflicted on nonwhite South Africans .
 Desmond Tutu traveled from one town to the next . He traveled from Beit Hanun in northern Gaza Strip.
 Echol Cole and Robert Walker had been crushed on the job by a malfunctioning truck .
 The city of Memphis paid these workers slave wages of 65 cents an hour! The city refused to pay any compensation to their families . The city paid the workers 65 cents per hour .
 In a speech given at a rally of 25,000 sanitation workers, their families and supporters on March 18, 1968, in Memphis, Dr. Dr. John Sutter gave the speech .
 If one Black person suffers, if one Blackperson is down, we are all down. You are demonstrating that we can stick together, and you are showing that we're all tied in a single garment of destiny .
Whenever you are engaged in work that serves humanity and is for the building of humanity, it has dignity, and it has worth. But let me say to you tonight, that whenever you're engaged in working that serves humans, it's worth .
 All labor has dignity, says one of the world's most powerful women .
 At times, Tutu himself crumbled into tears under the weight of stories of such inhumanity .
 He hoped the TRC would be the requisite catharsis before forgiveness, but instead it was criticized ferociously from all sides . The TRC was criticized by all sides.
 Survivors relived their pain without restorative justice, while perpetrators were pardoned . The real masterminds of apartheid were never confronted, according to experts .
 The TRC was the first of its kind in the world, a way to address the grave injustices without further bloodshed .
 He refused to look away from or deny oppression, and he never shied away from confronting oppressors . He never looked away from oppression or denied oppression .
 He sought to arrive at justice without further sacrifice from the oppressed . But he sought to reach justice without more sacrifice from his oppressed .
 Archbishop Tutu visited Mumia AbuJamal in 2007, when he was still on death row . He was still in prison at the time .
 A little African boy was born to a small family in a small town where gold mining was the chief industry . Almost a century ago, a little African child was born in the small town.
 Father was a teacher, and a young boy wanted to follow in his father’s footsteps .
 The politics of white supremacy, known by the term “apartheid, prevented him from making that choice .
 Desmond Mpilo Tutu was forced to change from teacher to preacher . His spirit reflected a giant forced him to change. That state decision reflected his spirit.
 Desmond Tutu studied, graduated and was ordained an Anglican priest . He was named its archbishop in 1986, the Archbishop of Cape Town .
 As the anti-apartheid movement swelled in South Africa, too, did repression by the state .
 The archbishop presided over funeral after funeral and gave voice to the Black oppressed majority of the nation .
 He played a pivotal role in speaking out against the racist system of government . He suffered arrest and attacks by police, tear gas at protests .
 A committed Christian who saw all life as valuable. Throughout it all, he stayed true to his religious beliefs .
 He spoke out firmly against violence, whether by the government or the freedom movement . He said he would not tolerate violence by government or freedom movement.
 Martin Luther King Jr. at a march with striking Memphis sanitation workers, March 28, 1968 .
 King's goal was to merge the civil rights and economic rights struggles, especially for lowpaid workers, as well as the unemployed . King’s goal of building toward the Poor People’'s March in the summer of 1968 was to build on the March .
 King’s unifying call that “all labor has dignity’ is today being carried forth, especially by young workers exploited by the likes of Starbucks and Amazon .
 These workers are leading the way for all workers classwide, demanding better working conditions, pay and benefits through union organizing, like the Amazon Labor Union .
 King remained a fighter on the front lines for all forms of social justice until the end, when bullets cut short his life .
 The world is remembering him, but across mainstream western media outlets, there are convenient omissions . There are convenient Omissions .
 Israeli occupation was “far worse’ than anything Black South Africans faced under apartheid, he says .
 Zionists labeled him an “anti-Semite,’ and today they are, along with other white supremacists, celebrating his passing .
 Desmond Tutu spoke vehemently against the invasion of Iraq . He pleaded with governments and the masses to oppose the war .
 He advocated passionately for the release of Mumia AbuJamal and for the closing of Guantanamo Bay, a torture chamber for those accused of terrorism .
 Desmond Tutu endeavored to be on the side of the oppressed, the weak and wretched, no matter the risk or cost to himself . On every issue, Tutu tried to help the oppressed .
 The world is a little dimmer without the magnificent brightness of his being . He shined light into the dark corners of power .
 The writer is an award-winning Palestinian novelist . He has concerns for justice and freedom, even beyond the borders of South Africa .
 The archbishop, lovingly called “The Arch, called the government violence, repression and separation against the Palestinian people a new form of apartheid . He called government violence and repression against the Palestinians a new forms of apartheid.
 He called for freedom for the Puerto Rican people from the U.S. government .
 He critiqued the suffering and state violence against the Muslim minority in Myanmar .
 The little priest even visited a man on death row, where he wondered why a man had to be shackled in a little room divided by a glass window . The door was closed, shut, locked and didn't even have door handles .
 The Arch was quiet, serious, a ray of spiritual light in dark places and a joy to meet . The Arch is quiet,serious, and a light indark places .
 Archbishop Tutu heightened his critique of the new Black government when apartheid fell in the 90s . He said it was getting rich as the people got poorer and poorer .
 His passage on this planet was a message of love for the world’s oppressed, no matter where they were .
 He struggled with his prophetic voice, his sweet humor, his deep love and a boundless sense of compassion . He struggled for change with his prophet's prophetic voice .
 Desmond Mpilo Tutu, born October 7, 1931, returned to his fathers after 90 summers . Tutu's father, Desmond, was born in 1931, and he returned to him in 1931 .
 L] workers.org January 6, 2022 Page 11 Queer people and the U.S. Communist movement . The world over fight for the liberation of the working class and the oppressed .
 From the very start, scientific socialism has also fought for the liberation of women from sexist and misogynistic worldviews and actions . The right to equal treatment under the law to access to abortion and more has also been fought .
 After World War II ended in 1945, by 1947, the U.S. government had opened a campaign to rid its State Department of all LGBTQ+ people and suspected communists .
 In the eyes of reactionaries, these two groups were one, based on the idea that queer people were susceptible to communist propaganda . The two groups are based on a belief that the queer people are susceptible to Communist propaganda .
 The government developed security guidelines that removed many from their jobs and positions of responsibility . The guidelines were developed to remove many jobs and roles from their positions .
 The groups targeted were LGBTQ+ people, communist and socialist sympathizers, as well as alcoholics and others deemed "dangerous" and a threat to the U.S. government and society .
 In the late 1940s and early 1950s, the U.S. government began a witch hunt against queer people and communists .
 He worked with other comrades organizing among the working class in California .
 LGBTQ+ people were not accepted in the CPUSA at the time, following a 1934 rightist decision by Stalin to deny rights to queer people in the Soviet Union .
 Stalin's position was that queer people were the end result of decadent capitalist ideology . Stalin’s position is that gay people are the end to decadent capitalism .
 Previously the Bolshevik government had removed all anti-gay and what are now known as anti-trans laws which had been in place under the tsarist regime .
 Harry Hay, Rudi Gernreich, Dale Jennings, Bob Hull and Chuck Rowland oversaw weekly meetings in Hay’s home . This unfortunate line didn’t stop queer communist organizing in the U.S.
 The others were fellow travelers — members of the movement who were nonparty members .
 Its stated goals were to unify gay people, educate society and to get socially aware gay people into leadership in their community . The group also wanted to educate society, educate people and get them into leadership .
 Questionnaires were created to study the impact of bigotry on their community . In the service of that mission, they created questionnaires .
 In many instances, it was the first time queer people, in this case gay men, had been asked about their experiences .
 They did acknowledge his timeless and important contributions by saying he would always be a friend of the people . They said he would be a good friend of people .
Left-led Mattachine Society faced intense scrutiny and red-baiting . Meanwhile, the left-ledMattachine Society faces intense scrutiny .
 Members joining the society were scattered across the political spectrum . Members joined the society from all over the world .
 Some were left-wing, but many others were to the right to the point of anti-communism . Some were also to the left, but others to theright to the points of anti.
 The organization essentially lost its revolutionary spirit and ended up damaging the movement . The movement was damaged by the loss of the revolutionary spirit .
 In the mid-1960s the Mattachine Society and the Daughters of Bilitis (a lesbian organization that was not communist-led) took a rightist position that acting according to heterosexual norms would make people be more accepting .
 Two early gay-rights groups explicitly rejected gender-nonconformity by dissuading people from expressing themselves in that way in their meetings and demonstrations .
Gender-nonconforming people would find revolution in their own way soon enough. But gender-non-conformers would find change soon enough, they say .
 Trans women, queer hustlers and others took up cups of hot coffee and glass sugar shakers as weapons against the police . The Tenderloin neighborhood is home to many trans women and trans people .
Police redoubled their efforts to crush the rebellion. They were winning until the police redoubling their efforts.
 While not communist-led, they were supported by revolutionaries in the area . They were not communists-led .
 Compton's Cafeteria Riot went without much notice from the rest of the country . Little did anyone know that the Compton’s Cafeteria riot was a portent of revolutionary things to come .
 The pandemic economy continues from page 9 of page 9 who came into the building .
Narrow requirements limited the amount of COVID-19 infections detected . These narrow requirements only limited the number of infections detected.
 I feel limiting the amount detected was most likely to be the purpose of the system they established . The amount detected is most likely the reason the system was established .
 Second change is testing vaccinated as well as unvaccinated students . They have upped the number tested to 20%, presumably of the total kids in the building .
 Consent suggests that this is intrusive, rather than for public safety, than public safety . Consent suggests this is more intrusive than for safety .
 The city is refusing to flip the consent issue, meaning all parents must fill out a form to withdraw consent . The city could assume all parents consent, unless the parents fill out the form .
 The city is assuming the parents do not consent, unless the parents fill out a form agreeing to consent . But no, the city is assumed the parents don't consent, and no, it is assuming they do .
 Six feet was considered safe at the beginning of this pandemic but not possible in schools. Six feet is considered safe in schools but not in schools .
 Three feet distance became the compromise, but even that was more suggestion than enforced policy . Three feet away was more suggested than enforced.
 The transmission rate of this variant seems to make distance a factor, not being raised at this time .
 The basic problem with keeping the schools open is that testing has to be coordinated with treatment and prevention . In-person learning for many reasons is the best way to teach .
There are different types of tests, each with their own limitations and restrictions, each potentially providing different information . There are different kinds of tests.
 The governor and the president can order 5 million, half a billion tests . The tests have to go to people, but then they have to be distributed .
 People have to be instructed on how to use them, how to report the results . People must use them to report their results .
 The teachers and the Parent Teachers Associations need to be involved in any decision-making around how schools respond to COVID-19 .
 Our pages report on people’s movements here and abroad . We want to promote those struggles and show solidarity with them .
 The WW Supporter Program was launched 44 years ago to help build this unique socialist newspaper . It was launched to help help build the newspaper .
Members receive a year’s subscription, letters about timely issues and gift subscriptions . For annual donations of $60, $120 or $300, members receive an annual subscription .
 The "juez" del Tribunal Supremo of Estados Unidos, Brett Kavanaugh, form6o part of the mayoria del tribunal . The tribunal is the first to vote a favor of dejar in the case of Brett Kavanaugh .
 La ley permite a particular en Manifestacion a favor del aborto ante el SCOTUS, Washington, DC, 1 de diciembre . The decision was made by the Supreme Court in 2009 .
Cualquier estado demandar a cualquiera that busque un aborto o ayude a las personas embarazadas a obtenerlo . cobrar una recompensa of 10.000 dolares si gana in el tribunal .
 En la reciente sentencia, se permite a los proveedores of abortos. 8 (proyecto of ley 8) en un tribunal federal, pero no pueden demandar a los jueces y secretarios of Texas .
 Florida y Ohio, Florida and Ohio, for example, have a similar legislation .
 El alto tribunal habia permitido anteriormente that la ley S.B. 8 entrara in vigor mientras se tramitaban los casos contra ella . El al to tribunal haia permitido priormente que la le
 La draconiana ley of Texas ha tenido, y seguira teniendo, and el mayor impacto in las personas pobres y de color, aquellas carecen of los fondos .
 El] SCOTUS (Tribunal Supremo of Estados Unidos) se pronunciara el ano that viene sobre una ley antiabortista of Misisipi .
 $1 La revolucién entré en La Habana, 1959, was the first in the world's history .
Pone in peligro toda una serie of sentencias a estructura of gobierno y del Estado . “The decisiones that son tan contrarias a la mayoria del favor of los derechos pueblo’
 The Tribunal Zz ismos no democratiinvita efectivamente a fiable para ellos, mas cos . The tribunal is no democratinvitae efectIVamente.
 De hecho, es ese mismo sistema el otorga a los misoginos descarados el poder constitucional of poner sus sucias manos in los derechos . De hechos are manos y cuerpos of
 Los trabajadores tienen protecciones in los contratos sindicales and in la legislacion . The trabajo infantil, las normas of seguridad and el derecho a organizarse .
 Aunque los propietarios of the fabrica of velas Mayfield Consumer Products de Mayfield no pusieron in peligro sus propias vidas . No tuvieron escrupulos for arriesgar las de sus empleados .
 Al menos 15 trabajadores of the fabrica querian volver a casa para ponerse a salvo fueron amenazados con el despido .
 El] tornado arraso el edificio, matando a ocho e hiriendo gravemente a muchos mas. El] Tornado arrasa el edifyingio,matando aOcho ehiriendo Gravemente.
 The empresa of mostrar una “indiferencia flagrante” hacia su seguridad . En una demanda in the que solicitan danos compensatorios y punitivos .
 Muchos of the trabajadores of the fabrica estan encarcelados o han estado encarceados .
 Mayfield Consumer Products contrata a personas como ayuda temporal, despidiéndolas antes of that termine su periodo of prueba . Mayfield consumer products. MayfieldConsumer Products .
 Se ha despedido a trabajadores por ser epilépticos, tener sobrepeso o estar embarazadas . Se has been described as a "tener soverepeso"
 La compania Mayfield fue multada anteriormente por violaciones of the seguridad in el trabajo . La company Mayfield was the subject of a series of lawsuits against the company .
 Ningun crimen es demasiado grande in the busqueda of ganancias La critica de Dunning al capitalismo se dirigia a empresas of tamano similar a Mayfield .
 The climatica is a key part of the disaster that occurs in the world's most severe weather conditions .
 Yaeshaga del sistema asesino, explotador e impulsor of ganancias llamado capitalismo, is a través of the lucha revolucionariase .
 Los valores patriarcales sirven a la clase capitalista, para la que la maternidad es un servicio mas . Proporciona la siguiente generacion de trabajadores explotables .
 Despojar a la clase trabajadora and a los oprimidos del poder de decidir cuando cuando y si quieren tener hijos constituye un abominable ataque a los derechos humanos basicos
 La resistencia ya esta adoptando muchas formas, como desafiar al Estado formando redes para ayudar a las personas embarazadas .
 podria ser un punto de inflexion en la lucha de clases en general. La negacion de la justicia reproductiva a millones of personas, especialmente a los jOvenes .
 Lo que se necesita son tacticas audaces, militantes, creativas y anticapitalistas. Lo that se necedita son tacticsas audace, militante audaces and militantes . Lo que necesititas son tactica audaces.
 The mayor huelga general of the history of the laboral laboral of Estados Unidos.