Fighting in Ukraine had been escalating sharply over the last week . Anti-government forces carried out a successful counter-attack, gaining territory in the south and east .
 The Kiev regime and its western backers reacted furiously to the government forces’ losses . The government forces lost control of the Kiev regime .
 President Poroshenko, facing nationalist parties in parliamentary elections in October, threatened more brutal military action against the east .
 The U.S. and Britain accuse President Putin of making a “land grab’ in Ukraine . Without a hint of irony, the United States and Britain say Putin is making a land grab .
 Israeli regime's announcement this week that it will annex more Palestinian land. These same imperialist powers invaded and occupied Afghanistan and Iraq and have no word of criticism .
 Putin was pummelled by Russian forces under his rule in Chechnya, Grozny .
 Western powers accuse President Putin of sending regular Russian army units over the border to bolster the rebels . The rebels are facing defeat, they claim .
 The Russian regime strongly denies its forces are in Ukraine and claims only volunteers and soldiers “on holidays’ are joining the rebels .
 Ukrainian army offensive is now under threat from rebel forces, Russia says . Earlier gains made by the Ukrainian army are under threat by Russia .
 There are also reports of poor morale amongst soldiers, many of whom may well be reluctant to fight a section of their country's population .
 The Kiev regime has conducted a brutal offensive in the east of Ukraine for months, shelling residential areas indiscriminately, destroying infrastructure and killing many civilians .
 This has only deepened opposition to the Kiev regime amongst the majority Russian-speaking population . This has been only deepening opposition to Kiev regime among the majority of the Russian population .
 The majority of Russian speakers strongly oppose the Kiev regime . Despite the reactionary nationalist character of much of the rebel leadership, the majority of Russia's speakers oppose the regime .
 protests against Viktor Yanukovich were successfully channelled by anti-Russian right-wing forces, including ultra-Ukrainian nationalists and outright fascists, with western support . This is no surprise given that protests against the former authoritarian president, Viktor Yanukovic, during late 2013
Pro-western regime over the heads of the population quickly alienated the country’s minority speakers . They installed a new pro-Western regime.
 The self-declared ‘People’s Republic of Donesk’ was met with a brutal military operation by Kiev . The formation of the self- Declared “People” followed the breaking away of majority Russian-speaking Crimea .
 The European Union threatens to step up its sanctions against Russia . In response to the recent rebel advances in Ukraine, the European Union will step up sanctions .
 Some governments fear it will badly hit western companies and worsen Europe’s already gloomy economic situation .
 Putin could squeeze Russia's gas supplies to Ukraine and parts of western Europe . As winter approaches, Putin could, in retaliation, squeeze Russia’s gas supplies .
 Nato summit taking place this week in Wales will discuss stepping up its material aid to the Kiev regime . The summit will also speed up the process of enlarging Nato eastwards .
 The idea of establishing a ‘rapid reaction force’ to ‘guard against Russian aggression’ is planned . The idea is planned to establish a 'rapid response force'
 Since the collapse of the former Soviet Union and East European Stalinist regimes, U.S. imperialism has sought to increase its power and influence in the region .
 US President Obama rules out direct confrontation between Nato and Russia . US President says there will be no direct confrontation .
 A new ‘Cold War’ is developing, albeit on the basis of opposing capitalist regimes this time . There are limits to Nato’s ability to respond, but a new 'Cold War' is developing .
 Putin calls for a ceasefire and rebel leaders put forward a series of demands on regional self-determination and Russian language status .
 Putin may be compelled to annex parts of eastern Ukraine in the future . But it is not his intention to do so now .
 Putin may want a negotiated solution that would see Russia holding sway over large parts of Ukraine . Putin may also want to thwart Nato plans for Ukraine .
 If the fighting is to continue, another ‘frozen conflict’ is also a possible eventuality . The de-facto partition of Ukraine into pro-Western and pro-Russian territories is possible .
Ukrainian authorities say there is no solution whatsoever for the working people of Ukraine . Ukraine has been accused of failing to provide a solution to the problems of the country's economy .
 Competing right-wing nationalist forces and their outside power backers can only bring destruction and misery . Competing nationalist forces can only brought destruction, misery and destruction .
 The Donbas region accounts for 16% of GDP and 27% of industrial production . The war in the east has had a devastating effect on the economy .
 The IMF is still discussing when to make a second loan of $1. billion to Kiev, part of a $17 billion loan . That will see more attacks on workers’ living standards .
 Only a workers’ alternative can achieve a long lasting solution to Ukraine’s ethnic divisions and chronic economic problems .
 This requires building an independent political alternative in the interests of all working people in opposition to right wing nationalist and pro-capitalist forces and outside powers .
 A socialist alternative would guarantee full rights for all minorities, including language rights and the right of self-determination . The alternative would include language rights, the right to self- determination and self-control .
 It would strive for the utmost unity of the working class in Ukraine and across the region in the struggle for a socialist society where the needs of the vast majority are satisfied .