 New laws to strengthen Ukraine's control over Donbas and pave the way for conflict resolution . New laws will help Ukraine to strengthen its control of Donbas .
 Both laws are expected to direct Ukrainian foreign and security policies on Russian and separatist-controlled territories of Donbas .
 A close analysis of the draft laws reveals that they result from the need to strengthen defence against Russia and to reflect the interests of Ukrainian power players . The draft laws were designed to reflect Ukraine's interests.
 Ukraine and Russia have been fighting in Ukraine for more than a decade . Ukraine's conflict between Russia and Ukraine has been a source of tension in recent years . The conflict has been blamed on Russia's actions in the past .
Authors: Poroshenko was an excellent example of a post-Soviet opportunist politician facing the challenge of limited presidential powers . They say Poroshenko's landslide victory in 2014 was a good example of post- Soviet opportunist politicians .
 Poroshenko has faced new threats to his power from within his coalition government and from the opposition . Poroshenko's chances for the next elections in 2019 seem less certain .
 Ukrainian oligarchs profited from Ukrainian separatists . They demanded the release of POWs and a stop to trade with separatists .
 Poroshenko established an official trade blockade of occupied territories . Poroshenko subsequently established a trade blockade.
 This blockade did not restrict movement of people and humanitarian supplies across the contact line . However, this blockade didn't restrict movement from people to humanitarian supplies .
 Poroshenko has acted to prevent the growth of popular dissatisfaction and alliances among his opponents . Poroshenko's actions have been seen as an attempt to prevent public dissatisfaction with his government .
 The blockade gave him a reason to take a harsh public stance toward Russia and its agents inside Ukraine .
 He championed many initiatives previously lobbied by the so-called ‘hawks’ from the rival political party ‘People’s Front’ on various initiatives which lead to prohibiting Russian social media and establishing stricter border control .
 New legal tools are intended to further strengthen Poroshenko’s political position by giving him greater control over military and security structures . The new legal tools will be used to further strengthening Poroshenko's political position .
 makes JOC a top decision making body, which also governs civil-military administrations in the conflict zone . JOC also governs the military in the region .
Local self-government in certain districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts for one year . Prolong the validity period of the law .
 The former draft law passed its first reading in parliament on October 6 . If adopted into law in its current form, it will help Poroshenko to withstand pressure from the radicals .
 The two laws will make it possible to terminate the legally questionable ‘Anti-terrorist operation’ and establish a legal framework for a comprehensive defensive military operation .
President of Kyiv-controlled parts of Donbas makes it easier for president to dissolve inefficient local councils to improve administration and provision of basic needs in conflict zone .
 There is a political risk that the extension of power may be abused to suppress political opposition . Poroshenko’s actions uphold the image of a democratic-minded leader as he wishes to be seen by the West .
 Since 2014, the Ukrainian government has been reluctant to recognize the direct involvement of Russian political and military efforts to destabilize Ukraine . The West has been wary of Russia's involvement in Ukraine since 2014 .
 US, Germany, Germany and France have to accept the Kremlin's “plausible denial’s ‘plausible deny’ about the absence of Russian regular troops in Donbas .
 negotiations in Normandy and Minsk formats have shown Putin has no inclination to change his behaviour and opt for a face-saving solution .
 Ukrainian authorities have repeatedly asked for Russia to be treated as a belligerent rather than a mediator in the conflict . Ukrainian authorities say they want to see Russia as a belligerent rather than a mediator .
 In the absence of this, Poroshenko needed to demonstrate the nation’s willingness to confront Russia . In spite of political or economic pressures from European powers interested in de-escalating tensions.
 This will place legally binding limits on Ukrainian negotiators and diplomats on the kind of compromises or deals possible in the course of international negotiations . This will also place legallybinding limits on Ukraine's negotiators .
 It means that to be acceptable for Ukraine, a peace plan will have to include verification mechanisms for the ceasefire, withdrawal of occupation troops and disarmament of irregular separatist groups .
 Ukrainian authorities are unlikely to risk signing any peace agreement unless it is backed by a commitment from the West to reintroduce punitive measures on Moscow if Russia quits the peace process .
 The UN peacekeeping force could be set up under the auspices of a UN peacekeepers force . This is suggested by the provisions of law #6174 .
 The law extends the law “On special order of local self-government in certain districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions’ for one year .
 This prescribes the terms of the transitional administration of the occupied territories once they are liberated from Russian troops and illegal armed formations .
 Ukraine clearly indicates that a UN peacekeeping mission should have a mandate under chapter VII of the UN Charter to observe disarmament, conduct policing missions, and monitor the Ukrainian-Russian border .
 IDPs would be able to return and participate in free and open elections of representatives who would start negotiations about terms of coexistence . It practically means executing some functions of the state .
 This is currently a burning political issue in Ukraine, which leaves Poroshenko with little room for manoeuvre . This is the current political issue, which is currently being debated by Poroshenko .
 Poroshenko had to delete all provisions mentioning Minsk agreements from the draft laws . Due to pressure from both coalition partners and opposition factions, Poroshenko deleted all provisions .
 American, French and German representatives have praised the decision . Still he is attacked from all sides for extending the possibility of special self-government in Donbas by one year .
 Putin might agree to such a UN mission on the eve of presidential elections in Russia . However, it is difficult to imagine that in the given international situation, on the Given international situation .
 It would provide Russia with an exit strategy but would also be tantamount to admitting his failure to gain veto power over Kyiv with the help of institutionalized separatist autonomy within Ukraine .
 Putin's reading of Minsk is buried, he is likely to continue to destabilize Ukraine through low scale clashes, special operations, and artillery bombardments across the frontline .
 There is no reason for Poroshenko to continue his diplomatic game with Putin as it could destroy his chances for re-election in May 2019 .
 Viktor Muzhenko, chief of General Staff of the Armed forces of Ukraine, endorsed president’s vision . In case of a hypothetical Ukrainian offensive operation in the Donbas, Kyiv could succeed but at a high cost of dozens of thousand casualties within the first ten days.
Both Ukrainian and Russian leaders are concerned about their own political fate . They may independently come to the conclusion that Minsk agreements do not serve their interests .
 Russia may sound reasonable to agree with the idea of the “finlandization’ of Ukraine, proposed by former American diplomats Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski .
 The confluence of radical pro-Russian nationalists and criminal networks could pose a security risk to Putin’s regime .
 Ukrainian authorities have to decide whether reunification of Donbas is worth giving up NATO and/or EU membership perspective . Donbas may be gradual and dependent on international trusteeship .
 Ukrainian politicians will decide whether they want to liberate Donbas from Russia or leave part of it under separatist rule . It will also force Ukrainian politicians to decide whether to leave Donbas .
 The law on the policy toward the occupied territories will prohibit the idea of “exchanging’s annexation for peace resolution in Donbas . Also, the law will prohibit any form of recognition of Crimea's annexation.
 Ukrainian diplomats also protect them from Russian diplomatic pressure or European wobbliness on Crimea .
 A way out of the Crimean deadlock could be to initiate negotiations with Russia about demilitarization of the peninsula . The peninsula has been in a deadlock for years .
 Crimea has been transformed into a military base with huge offensive capabilities that cannot be put down to the probable threat from Ukraine . Crimea has a huge offensive capability that can't be placed down to Ukraine .
 It is more likely there to intimidate not just Ukraine but other states in the Black Sea region and Mediterranean states .
 The international sanctions imposed for the annexation of Crimea must be reinterpreted as a tool against security threats in the region . The sanctions must be augmented proportionally to the Russian military build-up, especially possible stationing of nuclear weapons, says the author .
 Certainly, they should be subjected to review and relaxing if the situation changes .
 The law will be prepared for its final reading in parliament in the next two weeks . The law is aimed at ensuring state sovereignty of Ukraine over temporarily occupied territories .
 The opposition and "People's Front" will try to diminish Poroshenko’s right to control military and law enforcement agencies . It will have to do so carefully to avoid appearing to side with the Kremlin .
 New provisions about the occupation of Crimea can be inserted to attract international attention to the annexed peninsula and Russian military preparations . Also, the new provisions about Crimea can also attract attention to Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 The laws introduce a legal framework for Ukraine’s defence if Russia decides to continue confrontation . Ultimately, the laws will be used to help Ukraine's defence .
 Minsk agreements are to be altered. They also set coherent directives for powers to forge a soundtrack toward peace, even if Minsk agreement is altered .