 Russia is steadily taking control of the Sea of Azov, which shares both Russian and Ukrainian shores . It provides vital access to the Black Sea and the Mediterranean .
 Russia rammed and fired on Ukrainian ships making their way from the Kerch Strait into the Sea of Azov last week .
 Russia is doing this while NATO and the EU look on, according to Russian media reports . Russia is trying to compound the crisis, while NATO is looking on, it says .
 Russian state is innocent of all the accusations flung its way. Not because it is innocent, it's not because the state is guilty of all its accusations .
 It is seeking to consolidate its control of a significant part of Ukraine . It is also trying to consolidate control of some of the country's most significant parts .
 It is not afraid to use ruthless military means to achieve these ends . And it is not fear of using ruthless military methods to achieve this ends .
 The 10,000 Ukrainians estimated to have been killed during the conflict so far is testament to that . The 10.000 Ukrainians are estimated to be killed in the conflict .
 The latest maritime skirmish is not just another example of Russian aggression, says Peter Bergen . NATO to the EU have been far from inactive, both in fomenting the Russia-Ukraine conflict and in perpetuating it .
 Russian border guards were far quicker and ruthless in response. The only difference was that Russian border officers were far faster and ruthless .
There is substance to the Kremlin’s claim that Poroshenko launched this ill-fated naval exercise for political reasons .
 He is polling at just nine per cent, and faces a presidential election early next year . Many expect him to lose to former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko .
 She is saying something given she herself is tarnished by her past association with a discredited political class .
 Poroshenko leads a regime that is even more mired in allegations of corruption . But then Poroshenko, ‘the chocolate billionaire’, leads the regime .
 He has banned various dissenting media, and is ironically ruling in as oligarchical a way as the Russian regime that the West so loves to loathe . He has also banned various dissenters and banned many dissenting media .
 The one card Poroshenko still has to play is that of ‘pseudo-patriotism’ as one critical Ukrainian MP put it .
 He is trying to rally Ukrainians behind just about the only institution in Ukraine that still commands a degree of respect and authority . The army may unite Ukraine in the spirit of animosity – namely, the evil Russian empire .
 Poroshenko's declaration of martial law is not practical so much as symbolic . It was not invoked when Russia actually annexed Crimea, or when it actually invaded eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine is now on a war footing, says Ukraine's president . It tells his people that democracy, liberty and the rule of law are for another time, he says . Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin says his country is on war footing .
 Poroshenko has declared martial law and presented this seaborne skirmish as 'a new stage of aggression'
 He is confirming the all-too-eagerly believed supposition that Russia continues to be a clear and present danger . Ukraine needs NATO's protection and the EU's and the IMF’s political and financial support, he says .
 The West has been too passive, too inactive, in its recent relationship with Russia . It is a myth that the West is too passive in its relationship with the Russian state .
 Poroshenko's appeals to the West for more support indicate more support is needed . Poroshenko has called on the West to support him.
 The conflict is already a low-level, war-gaming one between NATO members and the EU on one side and Russia on the other . The conflict has already been low- level, but it is already high-level .
 The West has already been too active in the Ukraine conflict, according to reports . That is to say, the West is already too active.
 Russia has already engaged in a decades-long, half-baked provocation of Russia . It has taken in once Soviet territories such as Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, and even more uncomfortably, the Baltic states .
 NATO is increasingly focusing its energy on combating the perceived threat from Russia . Now, NATO is more focused on combating Russia .
 This summer it approved plans to increase the NATO rapid-reaction force to 30,000 troops . It has bolstered its forces in the Baltics over the past two years .
 Many Western commentators point to Trump's reluctance to criticise Putin as evidence of US's conciliatory approach to Russia .
 The EU has continued to pull Ukraine into its political and financial orbit . The latest disbursement of its Macro-Financial Assistance package is the largest amount of financial assistance directed at any non-EU country .
 Russia has increasingly confronted Ukraine as a potential threat on its border . In the years before and since the so-called Euromaidan Revolution of 2014, Russia has become an anti-Russian outpost .
 Russia has sowed the seeds of a conflict they now wilfully and myopically blame on Russia . In doing so, they have sowed their seeds of the conflict they have now sowed.