"Resolving current crisis will show whether OSCE can deal w/conflicts&deliver on security or not," Klimkin tweeted after the Informal Meeting of OSCE Foreign Ministers in Potsdam, Germany, on September 1, 2016 .
 OSCE needs an effective judicial mechanism to guarantee respect of core values and principles . Ukraine's foreign minister says it needs a judicial mechanism .
 Russia wouldn't have brought 'Buk' to Donbas&shot down #MH17, says Klimkin . If existing ones had worked, "Buk" would have worked, he says .
 He underlined that all sides must fully guarantee the security and safety of the SMM monitors and equipment . All sides must ensure their unfettered access throughout the country .
 Tu-154 crash near Smolensk was Moscow's aim, Polish Defense Ministry says . 96 people including Polish President Lech Kaczynski were killed in the 2010 crash .
"We have horrific confessions by members of this commission," Macierewicz noted . "We have ... horrific confessions," he said .
 Polish president Lech Kaczynski, along with 96 others, crashed while landing at Severniy airfield in Smolensk . Heavy fog and low visibility caused the crash .
 Polish and Russian aviation experts committee earlier concluded that the main reason for the accident was pilot error . The accident occurred on a Russian-owned aircraft .
Supporters of the largest Polish opposition party, "Law and Justice" claim the crash was the result of a deliberately organized attempt on the life of the Polish president . Polish and Russian authorities had repeatedly tried to conceal this.
 The letter was signed by the Parliament Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Head of Parliament's Committee on Foreign Affairs, members of various fractions of the Ukrainian Parliament .
 The letter also asks the G20 members to strongly condemn Russia's prosecution of pro-Ukrainian activists . G20 also asks for the release of all imprisoned activists from Russia .
 The letter focuses on Deputy Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People Mr Ilmi Umerov . He was arrested in Crimea in May 2014 on charges for calls to change the territorial composition of the Russian Federation .
 Ukraine, the EU, the U.K. and the United States have all called on Russia to release Crimean Tatar leader Ilmi Umerov . The U.S. and Ukraine have called for the release of the Crimean leader .
 G20 summit is taking place on 4-5 September in n the city of Hangzhou, China .
 On February 26, 2014, Umerov along with other Crimean Tatars organised a demonstration against the occupation of the peninsula .
 Russian Federal Security Service initiated a criminal case against him . Later Russian federal security service initiated a case against the man .
 Umerov felt sick during a court session, but much later was taken to hospital .
 The judge announced Umerov must undergo forensic psychiatric evaluation . The judge said the judge would have to decide whether to order the evaluation .
 Umerov was forcibly placed into a mental ward for forensic medical assessment . He was forced to undergo a mental assessment .
 Umerov's lawyers say conditions in the hospital are harmful for him . The hospital's conditions are also harmful for his patients .
 Lawyers say without urgent medical treatment their client could die . The lawyers say without immediate medical treatment they could die.
 The first time was in 2007 during a lunch at Morosani Hotel in Davos, Switzerland . Viktor Yanukovych came to speak in 2007 .
 The second time was at a solemn reception in honor of Yanukovych’s 2010 inauguration . Manfort arrived with oligarch Rinat Akhmetov .
 The ledger recorded the illegal cash Yanukovych and his entourage spent on politics . The ledger was recorded by Yanukovych's entourage .
Manafort’s name appears in the explanatory notes of twenty-two transactions over five years, for an estimated total of $12 million .
 The rights of Russian speakers that became a major controversy during the 2010 presidential election did not actually exist . For example, the infringement on the rights of Russia's speakers did not exist .
 Yanukovych was recommended to Yanukovych by Akhmetov, Yanukovych’s lifelong business and political partner .
Manafort became a consultant to Yanukovych after his electoral defeat in 2004 . He organized four election campaigns, including one presidential and three parliamentary races .
 Yulia Tymoshenko's conviction began to tarnish Yanukovych's image in the West . The strategy became to clean up his reputation by denying political motivation in her case .
Skadden law firm called in influential American lawyers from the Clinton administration . Gregory B Craig, former counsel to President Bill Clinton, was among them .
Former Minister of Justice Oleksandr Lavrynovych is accused of a criminal case against him . The case has formed the basis of the case against the former minister of justice .
 The name Paul mentioned in the note is Paul; and the initials SV refers to the former head of the Yanukovych administration, Serhiy V Lyovochkin .
 Yanukovych was in contact with U.S. ambassadors, trying to convey Yanukovych's vision to them . Yanukovych had not registered as a foreign lobbyist with the United States Department of Justice .
After Yanukovych’s collapse, Yanukovych lost popularity, although he tried to stay in Ukraine a little longer .
 Dmytro Firtash was arrested on a U.S. warrant in Austria and prosecuted for bribery . He helped the oligarch get off scot-free .
 In recent weeks, Kyiv has been surrounded by journalists who came to traceafort’s history .
 The exposure of Yanukovych's corrupt ties to Yanukovych has become a key topic in the U.S. presidential election . Yanukovych's corruption is a key issue in the United States presidential election.
Manafort's presence on Donald Trump's campaign staff was hurting the candidate’s ratings, the political technologist was let go .
Manafort ostensibly resigned, but was thanked by the Republican presidential nominee for his work .
Ukrainian politician's name appears next to payments to politicians, judges and journalists .
 Many of those who were in opposition to Yanukovych are among the recipients of those funds . Many of the funds were given to those who had been in opposition.
 Sergii Leshchenko is a member of parliament in Ukraine and former deputy editor of Ukrayinska Pravda . He is a former member of the Ukrainian parliament .
 In 2015, Chinese and Russian intelligence services were the most active in the Czech Republic . The Czech Republic was the most-active in 2015 .
 Chinese diplomatic, intelligence, intelligence and economic entities focused on drawing on their success from 2014 . They actively worked on extending and maintaining Chinese influence in Czech politics and economy .
 In 2015, BIS did not identify any significant activities of intelligence services of other former Soviet Union countries or of partner intelligence services .
 Russian intelligence services were the most active foreign intelligence services in the Czech Republic . As in previous years, Russian intelligence service was most active in Czech Republic.
 A large number of Russian intelligence officers were active under diplomatic cover of the Russian Embassy . The embassy is located in Russia's capital Moscow .
 Intelligence officers under diplomatic cover were active at the Embassies of other states . However, the number of Russian intelligence officials was much higher .
 Such clandestine behavior clearly signals activities threatening the security and other interests of the Czech Republic . Such clandestine activity could be a threat to the security of the country.
 Russia focused on activities aimed at maintaining and strengthening Russian positions and outlooks in Czech power engineering . Russia also focused on the ongoing Ukrainian crisis.
 Russian economic, scientific and technological espionage continued in 2015 in the Czech Republic . Russian economic and scientific espionage continued to continue in 2015 .
 The above-mentioned activities pose a threat to the Czech Republic, EU and NATO not only in relation to the Ukrainian and Syrian conflicts .
 The infrastructure created for achieving these goals will not disappear with the end of the two conflicts . The infrastructure built for achieving the goals will continue to be used for the future .
 It can be used to destabilize or manipulate Czech society or political environment at any time, if Russia wishes to do so . Russia can use it to manipulate and destabilize Czech society and political environment .
 The central European country has a “disproportionate number of Russian spies on its territory, the Prague-based BIS says . The central Europe has a "dispro proportionate" number of spies, the report says .
 The agents are focusing on spreading false information about armed conflicts in Ukraine and Syria . They are also trying to erode relationships among European countries .
 The tactics included relativization of truth and objectivity, the report said . The tactics include promoting the view that all sides lie .
 EU, Kremlin lobbyists, America-haters, and those the Germans call Putinversteher disseminate justifications and apologies for Russia’s absorption of the Black Sea peninsula and its hybrid war in the Donets Basin .
 Most citizens of the West are not particularly interested in Crimea, the Donbas, or Ukraine as a whole . Such ‘explanations’ partly succeed because most citizens of West are, in fact, not particularlyinterested in Crimea .
 Ukraine inherited the world’s third-largest arsenal of nuclear warheads when it gained its independence in 1991 .
 Most of the nuclear weapons left behind by the Soviet regime in Ukraine were not deployable . The launch codes remained in Moscow, and Ukraine had no technology to guide its inherited rockets .
 Kyiv could have reset the fire-control systems, and built or acquired additional technology to make its nuclear arsenal at least partially operational . But in theory Kyiv may have reset fire- control systems and built additional technology .
 In 1991, the Ukrainian armed forces possessed numerous intercontinental ballistic missiles, long-range bombers and their payloads . The U.S. Natural Resources Defense Council estimates 4,025 units, or 15 percent of the former Soviet nuclear arsenal .
 Ukraine had far more atomic weapons than the United Kingdom, France, and China combined . At this point, the UK, France and China had more nuclear weapons than Ukraine .
 Even if Ukraine had retained and made operational only a fraction of these weapons, today it would be a much-feared nuclear power .
 Ukraine turned over all of its nuclear weapons to Russia after signing the Lisbon Protocol in 1992 . The Lisbon Protocol obligated ex-Soviet countries to surrender their arsenals .
 In Kyiv, there was already then suspicion that the northeastern neighbor could one day seek to exploit the defenselessness of “Little Russia’s” as Russian nationalists often refer to Ukraine .
 Three of the five did so in a multilateral document signed with Ukraine . Two issued unilateral declarations of their governments . Three did so. Two of the 5 did so .
 Moscow has trampled the 1994 memorandum and numerous other multilateral agreements on the inviolability of European borders . The 1994 memorandum was signed by Moscow and Kyiv .
 Crimea went so far as officially declaring an annexation and executing it by military force . A type of violent border-shift has become rare since 1945 .
 The West remains, even after introduction of its much-praised sanctions, Russia’s most important trade and investment partner .
 Russia's energy imports from Russia have made the EU an involuntary and indirect, but significant financial co-sponsor of Moscow's foreign policy adventures in Ukraine, Georgia, Moldova, and Syria .
 The situation appears even more curious in light of the fact that oil is fungible . The situation seems more curious than that of oil.
EU countries could replace most imports from Russia through contracts with other oil exporters . EU countries could, without substantial difficulty, replace most imported Russian imports through contracts .
 The EU has not taken this step because of a mundane combination of obliviousness and venality . The EU is not taking this step as a result of the mundane combination.
 So far the international community has punished Russia with only moderate export and individual sanctions . The other BRICS countries have actually courted rather than condemned the Kremlin .
 Ukraine is receiving significant political and economic assistance, but up to this point little direct and official military support . Ukraine is getting significant political, economic assistance.
 Many observers see a permanently frozen conflict in the Donbas as the most likely ultimate outcome . Ukrainian state would thus lose additional territory the five powers assured in 1994 would remain inviolable .
 The NPT seems to be in as much jeopardy as Ukrainian territory as a result of Russian aggression .
 Three atomic Security Council members grant a disarming country explicit and written security assurances in exchange for dismantling its nuclear weapons .
 One of the great powers unilaterally declares them invalid 20 years later . The others react with pathetic declarations and minor sanctions . One of these great powers, however, declared them invalid .
 If a member of the Security Council is allowed to expand into the territory of a neighboring country, then the international nonproliferation regime becomes hollow . It is a vehicle for the official atomic powers to advance their own agendas .
 The West's lack of military support for Ukraine lies in Russia’s overkill capacity and the fear of a third world war acutely felt by many Europeans . A key reason for the West”s lack of support for the Ukraine is in Russia.
Ukraine's nonproliferation regime has, in the Ukrainian case, caused the opposite of its intended aim . This means that implementation of the nonproLiferation regime in Ukraine has caused a problem . This is in the Ukraine case, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Nonproliferation stipulations specified in the NPT and the special privileges Russia enjoys as an official nuclear weapon state ratifier combine to become instruments of a coldly calculated utilization of weapons of mass destruction to achieve an illegal military occupation and secure a scandalous territorial expansion .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and its “hybrid war’ in the Donbas, the present-day nonproliferation regime, could in the future, paradoxically, encourage rather than stem the construction or acquisition of weapons of mass destruction .
 France reasserts its commitment to respect the independence and sovereignty of Ukraine in its current borders . France also agrees with principles of the final Helsinki Act and the Paris Charter for a New Europe .
 France reminds its attachment to the principles of the CSCE . The participating States refrain from using threats or force either against the territorial integrity or the political independence of a State .
 China is amplifying the corrosion of the international security system in what amounts to a Euro-Asian side game it has played since the beginning of the Ukrainian crisis . China has been playing a European side game since the start of the Ukraine crisis .
 Beijing has avoided taking a clear position on Russia’s conduct, and abstained from the spring 2014 UN General Assembly vote condemning the annexation of Crimea .
 Behind the scenes, the Chinese are trying to extract the greatest possible political and economic benefit from the discord between Moscow and the West .
 Beijing purposefully ignores the fact that Ukraine possessed nuclear potential that exceeded China’s arsenal many times over . It was handed a Chinese governmental declaration in support of Ukrainian territorial integrity and political sovereignty, similar to the French one .
 China has strengthened the perception that the NPT will be ignored by the official atomic powers when it comes to asserting their national interests at the expense of non-nuclear states .
 Andreas Umland is a senior research fellow at the Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation, in Kyiv . He is general editor of the book series “Soviet and Post-Soviet Politics and Society’s’ book series .
 U.S. President Barack Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin had a longer-than-expected discussion on Monday, an official says . They could agree on a ceasefire deal in war-torn Syria, the official said .
 Ukraine has arrested a man driving into territory held by pro-Russian separatists with thousands of U.S. dollars and millions of Russian rubles in cash . Ukraine's defence forces announced on Facebook on Sunday.
 Separatist militant groups in the regions are considered Russian-backed terrorist groups by Ukraine . Moscow has repeatedly dismissed evidence that they are arming or deploying Russian forces in their ranks .
 The driver, a Ukrainian national, was stopped in a black Chevrolet Lacetti near the military checkpoint of Zaytsevo, Donetsk region .
 Search of gas-powered vehicle found stacks of cash stuffed in the fuel tank . He was allegedly heading towards the rebel-held town of Horlivka .
 Bills of 10 million Russian rubles and $100,000 dollars, strapped together with elastic bands, were found in the car . The man was taken into custody .
 This was declared by the USA State Department’s Coordinator for Sanctions Policy Daniel Fried in an interview with Delfi . Fried was interviewed by Delfi.
 The U.S. will never recognize the Crimea accession, says John Sutter . Sutter: "I can confirm that the United States will not recognize the accession"
 "I remember this very well, I was there together with President Clinton," Fried stressed . "I was there with President Bill Clinton," she said .
 The U.S. is determined to insist on compliance with the Minsk agreements . But their implementation still remains under question . The United States is determined on compliance.
 He agrees with Ukraine’s position that Russia has not been fulfilling its part of the arrangements . He also agrees with the Ukraine's position.
 The FBI released a list of IP-addresses that were used for cyber-attacks . Security staff were directed to monitor for signs of hacking into systems using the same pattern .
 NABU detectives are limited in their ability to intercept communications during their investigations . They have to work through the Security Service of Ukraine, which significantly increases the risk of leaked information .
Anti-corruption courts. Providing a legal basis for the creation of specialized anti- corruption courts . The courts will be based on the findings of an anti-corruption court .
 The establishment of a Supreme Anti-Corruption Court is provided for by a new law . The law was adopted together with constitutional amendments regarding the judiciary on June 2, 2016 .
 The effectiveness of NABU and the Specialized Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office in prosecuting corrupt officials depends on the courts .
 The creation of special anti-corruption courts for top corruption cases is crucial . Judges should be selected transparently through open competition with the participation of international organizations .
 Special security measures should be put into place to protect anti-corruption judges’ lives and families . In addition, special security measures will be put in place to prevent corruption .
 The new law is "On the High Council of Justice, without shortcomings," says the judge .
 The version discussed on July 27 contains a number of significant drawbacks that would allow current problems to continue for years . However, the version discussed in the July 27 version contains some significant drawbacks .
 Any candidate for the High Council of Justice has ten years of experience as a judge . The requirement makes it impossible for new blood to enter the council .
 The bill jeopardizes the HCJ’s transparency, fairness, and efficiency when considering disciplinary cases against judges . It also provides no mechanism for responding to judges’ complaints about undue interference with their duties .
 The bill should be adopted only after these shortcomings are corrected . The bill is expected to be adopted in the coming weeks .
 The terms of office for twelve of the fifteen CEC members expired on June 1, 2014 . They remain in their positions, but they remain in the positions .
 The reboot of the CEC is the first step in comprehensive electoral reform . It also includes the introduction of an open list proportional electoral system .
 The bill aims to define the formation, organization, and legal status of the National Commission for State Regulation of Energy and Public Utilities . It will provide it with the powers necessary to implement its agenda in accordance with EU standards .
 Activists demand that the bill be amended for the second reading to include provisions on a full reboot of the commission and introduction of market-level salaries .
 This package of bills will simplify the process for establishing capable decentralized communities . It will increase their number of communities, and increase their numbers .
Local self-governing bodies to implement urban planning and develop the necessary documentation . The bills will ensure adequate funding of the communities considered capable by the government .
 The bill establishes transparent, comprehensible, and predictable approaches to the calculation of fines by the Antimonopoly Committee for violations of economic competition . It also eliminates discrimination, protects businesses' interests, and increases Ukraine’s investment attractiveness .
 Ukraine committed to implement reforms through EU-Ukraine Association Agreement . Ukraine is committed to implementing these reforms through the EU- Ukraine Agreement .
 This bill provides for comprehensive healthcare reform by creating a network of autonomous state and municipal healthcare establishments . The bill would create an autonomous state.
 This bill creates a fair pension system by moving to a single principle of pension calculation . The bill is expected to be introduced in the coming weeks .
 It improves the pay-as-you-go system by abolishing non-relevant payments . It also introduces a defined contribution system of pension insurance . It reduces the Pension Fund deficit financed from the state budget .
 The bill received a negative review by the Rada’s Scientific Experts Office . It was approved on July 7 with a gross procedural violation .
 The Ukrainian issue is repeatedly being raised on the sidelines of the G20 Summit . But in 2016, the Ukrainian issue has been raised again . The G20 summit will take place in Ukraine in 2016 .
 The meeting of leaders of the world’s top 20 economies opened in Sunday, September 4, in the Chinese city of Guangzhou . G20 will discuss matters of building an innovative, healthy, coherent and inclusive economy .
 The annual G20 summit is traditionally devoted to the global economic challenges . The G20 Summit is traditionally dedicated to the world's economic challenges.
 heads of G20 states will most likely use this site to discuss geopolitical issues . But it is no secret that G20 leaders will also most certainly use it to discuss geopolitics .
 In 2016, Ukraine is not part of G20, but the "Ukraine issue" is being actively discussed at the summit . In 2016 the issue is expected to be discussed at G20 summit .
 Ukraine's Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin has already said that the G20 Summit is to deal with the issues of global and financial stability . Ukraine, albeit not officially, will take its share of the summit's agenda .
 Moscow claimed that the summit in China could bring closer the removal of anti-Russian sanctions and lead to concessions on Ukraine on part of the EU and U.S. leaders .
 Russian president, French president and German Chancellor to hold a joint meeting in Guangzhou to discuss Ukraine situation .
 On August 29, Putin's spox Dmitry Peskov said there was no final confirmation that such meeting was scheduled .
 A few days later, Russian president's aide Yuriy Ushakov said that there would actually be no meeting between the leaders of Germany, France and Russia in Normandy format on the summit’s sidelines .
 Merkel and Hollande offered to limit the meetings to a bilateral format, he says .
 Putin will confront the Ukrainian question at all bilateral meetings, says first vice-speaker of the Verkhovna Rada .
Ukrainian diplomat Oleksandr Khara is director of the department of international relations at Maidan of Foreign Affairs Foundation . Khara shares his opinion on the situation in Ukraine .
 He says that they are so ‘great’ that they choose to only speak with the powers that be . He said that they're so “great” that they only speak to the powers they are .
 Putin sees Ukraine as some under-state, the Kremlin’s pocket media could not cover the Ukrainian issue . It is actually being raised at the meetings in China, any other way than at an angle of the Ukrainian president not being invited to the dialogue .
 Ukraine’s Western partners of Ukraine would have never allowed for the meeting in Russia-announced format because their standing values and policies differ hugely from those of Vladimir Putin .
 Special attention should be paid to bilateral meetings with the Russian leader, says Russian leader .
 One of these extremely important meetings was one between Putin and Obama . One of the meetings was between Obama and Putin .
 The meeting mainly covered the situation in Syria, according to Dmitry Peskov . Ukraine was discussed as well as Syria .
 The Obama-Putin meeting is already "good," according to the Center for Civil Society Studies CEO Vitaly Kulik . The Russian leader is still a no-handshake man, Kulik says .
 The political scientist believes that during Obama's meeting with Putin such topics were discussed as the treats of escalation in Donbas, the scientist says . Obama also discussed implementation of the Minsk agreements by Russia, the situation in Syria, and deterring terrorism .
 Kulik is convinced that Obama has sent a clear signal to Putin . The State Department will not change even after a new president takes over the White House, whoever it is .
 Ukrainian issues are not a priority at the G20 Summit, according to Kulik . At the same time, the Ukrainian issues aren't a priority, he says .
 Oleksiy Haran’ also believes that the Kremlin's statements about ""a good meeting"" should not be exaggerated . Haran also believes the Kremlin’s statements about a good meeting should be exaggerated.
 Ukraine managed not to weaken its position with regard to Russia, he says . He says the important thing now is that Ukraine managed to avoid being weakened by Russia .
 The U.S. Treasury has put another 17 individuals and 20 companies into the sanctions lists drawn up in connection with the Crimea annexation and Russian aggression against Ukraine . It should be recalled on September 1, the Treasury has said .
 The Kerch bridge was planned to connect mainland Russia with the occupied peninsula . In particular, those were contractors of the construction of the bridge .
 Also there were officials and representatives of the law enforcement agencies in the temporarily occupied Crimea . Also there are representatives of law enforcement agents in the Crimea .
 Ukraine was also discussed in other formats on the sidelines of the summit . By the way, Ukraine was discussed in a different format .
 Issue was raised during the meeting of Barack Obama with German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Francois Hollande .
Both France and Germany have already started talking about the primacy of security issues . This might be related to the Ukrainian position, says Haran’s Haran .
 Vitaly Kulik believes that this meeting could have on its agenda the issue of dynamics of the implementation of the Minsk agreements .
 The existing format of Minsk does not satisfy the parties, while the Normandy format is moving ahead too rough . It is possible that there is an ongoing search of the third format .
 This could also be the subject of talks at the G20 Summit," the expert said .
 Angela Merkel and Vladimir Putin discussed the implementation of the Minsk agreements during the bilateral meeting .
 Putin's attempt to show signs of "courtesy" failed to amuse Frau Merkel . Also, journalists also took note of Putin's attempts to show a sign of courtesy .
 President of the Russian Federation wondered whether Chancellor was tired .
 Ukraine's male chess team won a victory over the Russians getting closer to the medal stand . The Russian team won the game by a narrow margin .
 Ukraine, China, Azerbaijan, the Netherlands, Belarus, and India are currently leading . India is currently leading in the world .
 French team are among the four leaders in the standings . The French team defeated the French team in their first game of the season .