 Russia is currently unable to achieve a friendly and stable regime in Kyiv and state failure . Russia hedges against the consolidation of an unfriendly pro-Western and international conflict stable regime by maintaining its control over parts of eastern Ukraine and management . conflict solidifying the dependence of local regimes
 This settlement gives Russia the opportunity to maintain the current status quo or settle for re-integration terms . Russia can sustain long-term influence over Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy .
 The crisis in Ukraine since 2013 and its local, regional, and global ramifications indicates a return to the dynamics of violent state fragmentation prevalent in the 1990s .
 Russia is using violent civil conflict in countries in its so-called Near Abroad as a means to extend its own influence in the post-Soviet space . Russia is also trying to reduce that of the West.
 The conflict in the Donbas area of Ukraine, from this perspective, potentially foreshadows a more fundamental transformation of Russia’s strategic behavior . Russia may use different tactics of societal destabilization and covert occupation as a part of its military and security doctrine to manage a regional security complex
 conflicts exist within a broader regional and global geopolitical context that is not always or entirely under Moscow’s control .
 Russia has become a regional power with an ambition to play a dominant role in its Near Abroad and beyond . Russia is increasingly with the military capabilities and political will to do so, says the author .
 The emerging and re-emerging violent conflicts in what the EU and NATO consider their eastern neighborhood are a major challenge to the West and its policies in the region . The emerging, re-Emerging conflicts in the eastern region represent a major challenges to the EU, NATO.
 Approaches designed to promote stability and peace through comprehensive social, economic, and political transformation of the countries in this now severely contested space towards the EU and NATO . Russia’s promotion of its own version of influence-seeking qua supporting and establishing pro-Russian regimes .
 Our focus is on understanding what drives Russian policy in eastern Ukraine . Our focus in the following analysis is on what drives Russia's policy in the region .
 At the same time, Ukraine suffers from systemic social, political, and economic crises, institutional weaknesses, and internal divisions . The country's political, social, economic, and political crises are enabled by competing vectors of linkages between different parts of Ukrainian society and their respective eastern and western counterparts
Draws on existing literature on Russian policy in the near abroad .
Two new Russian-backed de facto states in the post-Soviet space. This has resulted in the creation of two new Russian de facto state . This provides Russia with leverage over Ukraine and its Western partners and simultaneously serves as a “placeholder’s�
 Russia's destabilization policies are aimed at the temporary dispersion of power in Donbas, says the authors . They say Russia is trying to replace incumbent local elites with new, pro-Russian elites relying on a support base .
 Russia has established a firm hold on parts of Donbas that it has used to prevent the establishment of a stable, legitimate, and pro-Western regime in Kyiv . This, in turn, has been implemented along with the gradual and strategic escalation of covert forms of occupation in eastern Ukraine
 First, we develop a theoretical framework for understanding Russian strategy in the neighborhood . Then, we identify a suitable methodology for applying it to the single case study of the Ukrainian conflict .
 The Russian strategy is based on the evolution and implementation of Russian strategy and its results on the ground . We then carry out our case study using a chronological approach .
We conclude with a summary of our findings and offer some cautious reflections on policy implications . We conclude with an assessment of the results and offer a cautious reflection on the issue .
 Bader, Grävingholt, and Kästner argue that authoritarian regional powers have an interest in being surrounded by other autocratic regimes .
 autocratic regimes have an overarching interest in stability . Yet, equally, autocratic regime has an overarchinginterest in stability.
 There is a clear causal link between the rise of authoritarian powers, such as Russia, and the slowing down of democratization . As long as a stable domestic environment prevails, high incentives exist for presumptive regional or global hegemons to favor the continuation of the status quo, regardless of
 Instability, especially in a contested neighborhood, threatens this goal, says the author .
 Russian policies should prioritize influence over stability,e. seek the establishment, restoration, and/or maintenance of a regime in Ukraine that is aligned to Moscow, rather than the West .
 The stability and "friendliness" of Russia can be achieved by “soft” or “hard” power, or a combination of both . Russia needs to be achieved either by ‘soft’ or ‘hard’ power, says
 Ukraine is an important part of the neighborhood for Russia . Like other post-Soviet countries, Ukraine is a key part of Russia's post- Soviet region .
 Russia is interested in a predictable, stable, and manageable Ukraine . Russia is also interested in the Ukraine .
 This goal can be achieved through promoting the rise and stability of a friendly,e. pro-Russian political regime . The goal is to promote the rise of the pro- Russian political regime.
 Ukraine and elsewhere in the post-Soviet space have demonstrated that friendly stability is not always achievable . Yet, developments in Ukraine and other countries have demonstrated friendly stability.
 Russian approach is aimed at creating a situation in which the sustainable realization of its interests remains a viable future option . At the same time, we would expect a Russian approach to creating a future situation in Ukraine .
 The current situation in Ukraine would appear the logical outcome of a strategy that, while not immediately achieving the preferred outcome, “settles for a temporary second-best result of preventing the worst-case scenario of a stable and hostile pro-Western country in the neighborhood.
 This is a critical issue that connects our research question about the drivers of Russian policy in eastern Ukraine and our theory to our methodological approach . This is the first time we have been able to draw credible inferences from our analysis .
 Reflecting on these expected observations also enables us to determine likely observations that we would make if our hypothesized logic of competitive influence-seeking were not true .
 When determining our data requirements, we need to consider the research context in which we gather our data . When determining data requirements in line with observations, we can assume would confirm or disconfirm our hypothesized logic of competitive influence-seeking .
 We now consider these issues in turn as we specify our methodology and, in particular, justify our methods of data collection and analysis . We are now considering these issues as we consider our methodology .
 The Kremlin would have perceived events as events and processes detrimental to its objectives . We should be able to identify key moments in the development of the crisis in Ukraine .
 At each of these key moments, we should be able to see a change in policies, in particular, says David Cameron . It became clear that the preferred goal of a stable and friendly regime in Kyiv became unattainable .
 There should be an observable shift in policies towards achieving the second-best outcome of preventing a stable but unfriendly regime in Ukraine, says the author .
 Russian policies should have shifted more and more towards creating a situation in which Kyiv is denied full sovereignty over its territory, while strengthening Moscow’s hold over separatist-controlled territories and/or using the possibility of some form of partial conflict settlement .
 Moscow is prepared to defend what it perceived as its vital security interests, says the author . Russia and Ukraine are at risk of escalating civil war and major armed conflict between them .
 Russian approach would seek to achieve maximum possible influence in and over Ukraine, both directly and indirectly . Throughout this process, we should simultaneously be able to observe a Russian approach that would seek the same influence .
 Direct influence could be secured through the use of military and economic tools . indirect influence might be sought through securing representation of Russian proxies in Ukrainian politics .
 Russian policies can be presumed to seek the prevention of a stable and unfriendly regime in Kyiv in the absence of any possibility to achieve stable and friendly neighbor . The most obvious disconfirmation of the way in which we have conceptualized our logic of competitive influence-seeking would be
We rely on textual analysis of relevant documents11, official statements,12 and participant observation13 and key informant interviews14 as our primary sources for data collection . These allow us to utilize co-variation and process tracing as our main methods of data analysis .
 This enables us to establish a thick analytical narrative that maximizes data reliability through triangulation and minimizes risks to interlocutors . This enables we to establish an analytical narrative which maximizesData reliability through Triangulation .
 Using multiple sources also allowed us to compensate for limited access to policymakers in Donbas and in Russia, as did the use of experts in universities and think tanks elsewhere in Russia and Ukraine .
 Interviews with internally displaced persons from Donbas who were evacuated with local government institutions, universities, and other organizations formerly based in now rebel-controlled territories .
 We have not privileged any individual source or type of source in terms of weighing the evidence they provide . We use the mix of sources to offer a well-substantiated argument in which our claims are corroborated by more than one source.
 Ukrainian case and of Russia-West relations in the contested neighborhood more generally, this is clearly of importance for policy-making in terms of developing scenarios .
 The Kyiv Agreement of February 2014, the Geneva Agreement of April 2014, and the two Minsk Agreements of September 2014 and February 2015 are the key moments in the Ukrainian crisis . The negotiations of the four agreements have been concluded in the context of the Ukraine crisis .
 Each agreement saw a marked increase in provisions that would have strengthened Russian influence in Ukraine . Each period following the signing and partial or non-implementation of the political agreements concluded was characterized by gradual escalation of Russian destabilization of Ukraine .
 "Russia’s strategic goal is to maintain control over its Near Abroad," says one of our interlocutors .
 The provisions in each agreement represent an increasingly pro-Russian set of provisions . Russia would have been able to exert influence in Ukraine, the authors say .
 This confirms in some empirical detail our prima facie observation of the existence of key moments in the Ukraine crisis and the qualitative differences between them . The Ukraine crisis has been the biggest crisis in the country's history . The crisis is now the biggest in the world,
 Russian policies towards Ukraine in response to each failed agreement. Second, we offer a more detailed analytical narrative that traces the escalation of Russian policies to Ukraine .
 This provides the detailed evidence of Russia’s policy of destabilization,e.e. denying the government in Kyiv any opportunity to consolidate its power and authority . This provides a detailed evidence. of Russia's policy of instability .
Policy escalation and “improved terms in each agreement go hand-in-hand. Our analytical narrative also illustrates how policy escalation and 'improved' terms go hand in hand .
 Russia's escalation tactics forced Kyiv to offer ever more concessions that were politically extremely controversial and undermined the government’s legitimacy . The concessions were made, and internationally due to its inability and unwillingness to implement them .
 The purpose of the following section is to establish, by way of a textual analysis, why we think that they each represent a distinct step in Russia’s approach to the Ukrainian crisis . It illustrates an increasingly more hard-line approach by Russia to securing its influence in Ukraine .
 The Kyiv Agreement was concluded on 21 February 2014 between then Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych and three leaders of the parliamentary opposition . Vitaliy Klichko, Oleh Tyahnibok, and Arsenij Yatseniuk were witnessed by foreign ministers of France, Poland, and
 The agreement establishes a period of transition until the end of 2014 . It includes a government of national unity formed by the signatory parties . It also includes a better balance of powers between parliament and president .
 Russia's main ally at the time, President Yanukovych, would have shared power with the parliamentary opposition . This would have provided for a managed transition during which Russia’s main ally, Yanukovych, was in power .
 The outcome of the transition would have been open ended in terms of both the constitutional nature of Ukraine and its next president . The outcome would be open ended, however, in both terms of Ukraine's constitutional nature and its future president .
 Russia’s limited enthusiasm for the agreement is not difficult to understand, but in the actual course of events, the fatal blow was dealt by the extra-parliamentary Maidan opposition who rejected the agreement .
17 Yanukovych found himself in an unsustainable situation and fled to Russia . He also lost the support of his own power base and lost his own support .
 Moscow was left without a major source of influence in Kyiv and with no clear pathway to regain any either . The timeline initially envisaged would have kept open a path for Moscow to have at least some indirect influence over Ukrainian politics .
Several European politicians have already sprung to support the announcement of presidential elections in Ukraine this May . The agreement envisages that these elections should take place only after the completion of the constitutional reform .
 All Ukrainian political forces and all regions of the country must become its part . It is clear that for this reform to succeed all the political forces must be part of the Ukrainian government .
 Russia is pushing for direct negotiations between the government in Kyiv and the de facto authorities in Donbas . The latter is also a recurring theme in official statements .
 Russian Foreign Ministry says need to “immediately start a true, national dialogue with equal participation of all the regions in the interests of the organization of swift and radical constitutional reform,’20 .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and committing of US, EU, and Russian monitors ensures a continuing “legal” Russian foothold in Ukraine . The OSCE is leading role for the OSCE special Monitoring Mission .
 Russia laid the foundations for a potentially emerging de facto state in Donbas before this appeared as a seriously pursued option in the next stage of the conflict . The disarmament requirements for ‘all illegal armed groups’ included Ukrainian “volunteers’ who had
With militias in the Donbas region refusing to disarm and to end their occupation of government facilities, there was no progress on constitutional reform . OSCE mission became the only element of real implementation .
 The first Minsk Agreement of 5 September 2014, concluded under the auspices of the so-called Trilateral Contact Group . The group includes representatives of the OSCE, Russia, Ukraine, and the separatists .
 Minsk I, compared to previous agreements, is the specific stipulation to “implement decentralization of power, including by means of enacting the ‘Law of Ukraine’
 If implemented, this so-called temporary status of the separatist-controlled areas would have fundamentally altered the situation in Ukraine and established a de facto state in all but name .
 This was again an indication of an approach aimed at strengthening the representation of pro-Russian interests . The agreement reiterates the “inclusive national dialogue’s” that the deal reiterates .
 Aleksandr Zakharchenko and Igor Plotnitsky have signed a number of the Group’s documents . Their representatives have signed the Minsk agreements of 5 and 19 September .
 This confirms our initial assumption of the existence of these key moments and the qualitative differences between them . It provides a plausible basis for further investigation of our theory of competitive influence-seeking, says the author .
 The Kyiv Agreement was dead in the water within three days of its conclusion . As noted above, the Kyiv agreement was dead within 3 days of it .
 The anti-Western and anti-new regime sentiments that they expressed coincided with Russian security interests and Russia’s interpretation of the Maidan as a coup d’etat .
Donbas did not agree with the Euromaidan and subsequent decisions by the newly appointed Ukrainian government . The former governor of Donetsk Oblast, Sergei Taruta, noted in a newspaper interview, didn't agree with Ukraine's decision .
 Russia began to start nomadic occupation in Donbas . But this counter-Maidan failed to get sufficient traction outside Donbas, and Russia escalated its tactics .
 "facilitated the Geneva negotiations and the agreement achieved there in April. This, in turn, “facilitate the Geneva talks,’s agreement was achieved in April, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Joint Statement that resulted from the Joint Statement also proved to be impossible to implement .
 Russia has increased its support for the rebels, especially in terms of equipment . This, in turn, prompted Russia to increase its support to the rebels . This has prompted Russian support to support the rebels in the past .
 fighting between Russian-backed rebels and Ukrainian security forces and pro-Ukrainian militias continued over the following months . The downing by rebel forces of a Malaysian Airlines passenger jet killed all people on board .
 One participant noted that Russia invaded in Donbas gradually, pushing as far as Ukraine allowed . One participant said Russia invaded Ukraine gradually, but Ukraine allowed.
 Kyiv did not want to accept Russia’s demand for federalization . On the one hand, Kyiv didn't want to accepted Russia”s demand.
 Russia faced significant challenges in achieving their objectives. These objectives were highly interdependent in their realization and Russia faced major challenges . Russia faced challenges in realizing these objectives .
Local and Kyiv-based Donbas elites were not given a chance to re-align with the new regime in Kyiv .
 Russian-backed creeping occupation in Kyiv posed a potentially considerable threat to their own interests . They had few incentives to mobilize local resources in support of the government, but this did not automatically turn them into supporters of Russian- backed occupation .
 anarchy triggered by the anti-Maidan protests in Donbas had led to the establishment of two other types of politico-territorial arrangements in eastern Ukraine .
 The first was informally coordinated by local Ukrainian oligarchs . They challenged the new government in Kyiv for control at the local level .
 Local oligarchs, such as Rinat Akhmetov, used the remaining structures of Ukrainian local authorities, which continued operating until mid-November 2014 . They owned and/or controlled significant assets, including critical transport and communication infrastructure .
 Donetsk and Yenakievo before Strelkov's occupation in July 2014 and in Mariupol before the Ukrainian army retook the city in May 2014 .
Ukrainian elites were not interested in waging a real war against Kyiv, which would have resulted in the destruction of the very assets they were keen to control . These local Ukrainian elites weren't interested in war against the country .
 associates of Rinat Akhmetov took control of Mariupol in the wake of anti-Maidan protests . Local authorities were more cautious and generally reluctant to challenge the central government in this way .
 Aleksandr Borodai, the prime minister in the Russia-controlled wing of the DPR at the time, signaled his intention to expand territorial control towards Mariupol . This bargaining process accelerated as soon as the prime Minister in the DPR signaled his intentions .
 Akhmetov and other Ukrainian Donetsk elites quickly reached an agreement with Kyiv . It allowed them to keep hold of their assets and the Ukrainian army, in the form of the “Azov battalion, to restore full Ukrainian government control over Mariupol .
 These events in Mariupol illustrate some of the key dynamics in the conflict . The fluidity of alliances on the ground between various state and non-state actors.
Local elites competing over control of economic assets in post-Yanukovych Donbas were not the only local “players,” and the multitude of other actors seriously complicated the situation . Kyiv’s eventual loss of control over significant parts of the regions of Donetsk and Lu
 The system of rule that they established was significantly different from what was going on in areas controlled by Kremlin-sponsored groups .
During the spring and summer of 2014, three different types of politico-territorial arrangements emerged in eastern Ukraine . The new government in Kyiv exhibited different degrees of Russian control and influence .
 This anarchical situation bore several risks for Russia and its strategy to use the conflict in eastern Ukraine as leverage over the government in Kyiv . Russia is trying to leverage the conflict as leverage in the Ukraine conflict .
 There was a danger that an agreement might be achieved between the ‘Donetskie’ and Kyiv that would facilitate the consensual return of Donbas under the Ukrainian Government’s control .36 A second potential threat was declining local public support for any new arrangement and instead a
 Russian destabilization tactics escalated from nomadic to creeping occupation in Donbas . The first objective was the physical removal from power of the local elite, including public servants, intellectuals, urban professionals .
 This was achieved through the use of instrumental violence, including widely publicized intimidation, torture, and executions of local leaders . The use of torture, including torture, was used by local leaders, according to reports .
 The report highlighted “that certain categories of civilian are specifically targeted by separatist armed groups.’s report highlights “certain categories of civilian cities targeted by separatist armed groups .
 Empowering socially excluded groups in an ideational sense by providing them with the means and at times leadership to pursue such promising new perspectives . Also created the manpower necessary to achieve the first objective, the physical removal from power of local elites .
 A pool of willing “executioners’ became readily available to escalate conflict locally, displace local elites, and prepare the ground for their replacement .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko unable to make decisive gains or inflict significant losses on self-proclaimed People’s Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Kyiv agreed to a further round of negotiations in the Belarusian capital of Minsk . The first of two Minsk Agreements on 5 September 2014, followed by an additional protocol two weeks later .
 Yet again, implementation was at best selective and eventually stalled completely . The problem continues to be a problem .
 Ukraine's parliamentary elections in October saw a strong showing of the pro-Western, anti-Russian bloc . But a high degree of apathy among the population, with a national turnout of just over half of eligible voters .
 Moscow began to capitalize on the successful deployment of its earlier destabilization tactics during the periods of nomadic and creeping occupation . It was only in this period after Minsk I that Moscow started to capitalise on its success .
 The second Minsk Agreement was concluded, almost a year to the date of the 2014 Kyiv Agreement . It was not before a 16 hours negotiation marathon on 11 and 12 February .
 Each failed agreement implementation, thus, went hand-in-hand with an escalation of destabilization efforts . Each failed deal went hand in hand with a destabilization effort, thus.
 Russia supported and funded anti-Maidan protests in mainland eastern Ukraine . In the period between late February and mid-April 2014, Russia supported the protests in Ukraine .
 From mid-April 2014, Russia began supporting the rebels initially with money and weapons . Russia began support the rebels from mid- April 2014 .
 Russia strengthened the rebels first through supplying more and more equipment, including heavier weapons, advisers, and eventually through a clandestine invasion of “vacationers’s’ in mid-August .
 rebels began to regain territory they had lost in May and June . This led to a period of “creeping’s occupation by the rebels, which led to ‘creeping occupation’
 The first Minsk Agreement was reached on 5 September 2014 . The first agreement was reached after a major escalation of fighting in Ukraine .
 An immediate failure of this agreement was averted by an additional protocol two weeks later . But eventually the volatile ceasefire broke down and fighting resumed .
 Russia began to focus on consolidating the rebels’ territorial gains in Ukraine in October .
 The period of “entrenching’s occupation began, accompanied by more pronounced and comprehensive efforts at state-building in Donbas . Thus, the period of "entrenchings" began, along with more pronounced efforts at State-building .
 A simultaneous escalation of fighting to create militarily and strategically more viable rebel territories pressured Ukraine into another round of negotiations that produced the second Minsk Agreement . The second round of talks produced the Second Minsk agreement .
 Following the rebel capture of Debaltsevo, a more or less stable line of control was established between the sides . Despite its volatility, the two sides have settled, at least temporarily, for the existing status quo .
 Ukraine is too strategically important a prize to allow the country to drift out of a self-proclaimed Russian zone of influence. From a Russian geopolitical perspective, Ukraine is a prize for Russia .
 Ukraine has become a new battleground on which Russia and the West are locked in a competition for influence over that country’s domestic and foreign policy orientation . Ukraine is similar to other countries in the post-Soviet space such as Moldova and Georgia .
 Germany, France, and other countries will also be ready to offer such guarantees . I am convinced that Germany, French, and others will also offer such assurances .
 Russian confidence in Ukraine's willingness and ability to implement agreements diminished . Russia shifted its position towards including more implementation mechanisms and guarantees in each agreement . Russia and the West equally to abide by its outcome .
 Russia pushed for more specific requirements for constitutional changes to secure long-term influence in Ukraine through its proxy regimes in Donbas . With the simultaneous realization that a stable and friendly pro-Russian regime in Kyiv was unlikely to materialize in the near future.
 Russia consolidated its client regimes in Donbas . Russia faced even greater obstacles to implementation, as these more elaborate agreements faced greater obstacles .
 Russian policies in the Ukraine crisis serve as an initial plausibility test of a typological theory of competitive influence-seeking .
 We have established Russian motivations for its policies and noted their outcomes in this specific case . We have also noted the outcomes of Russian policies in this case .
 Russia employed a spectrum of destabilization tactics in Ukraine, including diplomatic and economic pressure, propaganda campaigns, and low-intensity proxy warfare, including military occupation .
 Russia sought to use, expand, and consolidate its influence across all spheres of Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policies . Russia started with non-violent methods in late 2013 and early 2014, and progressed towards more and more openly used violent tools .
 Russia has sought to manage the level of instability in Ukraine in a way that does not preclude the emergence of an overall stable and friendly regime in Kyiv . That prevents the consolidation of a stable and unfriendly regime, Russia says .
 The evolution of Russia’s tactics from nomadic, to creeping, to entrenching occupation, is consistent with our view that Russia's neighborhood strategy in Ukraine is driven by the logic of competitive influence-seeking .
 Russia is hedging against the consolidation of an unfriendly and stable regime in Kyiv . Russia is consolidating its control over parts of eastern Ukraine and solidifying the dependence of local regimes there on Russian support .
 Russia can assert and sustain its long-term influence over Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy orientation . This gives Russia the opportunity to either maintain the current status quo or settle for favorable re-integration terms .
 Russian policy in the so-called Near Abroad in mind . Three more general conclusions can be offered about likely future developments in Russia .
 The EU, NATO, and their respective member states similarly consider their eastern neighborhood as strategically important for their security . First, confrontation between Russia and West in and over this area is unavoidable .
 There is a possibility of escalation around other de facto states, such as Transnistria in Moldova and Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia . Such confrontation need not necessarily involve direct military hostilities .
 It is also conceivable that new “battlegrounds’ might be opened up by Russia, such as in the Baltic states . Estonia and Latvia both have significant Russian minorities .
 There is little likelihood of restoring the full sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries affected in the near future . Taking this logic of competitive influence-seeking through to its natural conclusion means accepting that, short of the “withdrawal of one side or an agreed simultaneous withdrawal
 Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia may face further consolidation of territorial divisions in Ukraine and Moldova . In turn, this will increase social and political obstacles to any conflict settlement short of legalizing the current state of affairs .
 Recognition/annexation is unlikely for as long as the continued existence of de facto states in eastern Ukraine gives Moscow leverage over Kyiv . Russia has long-term influence in the country .
 Russia and the West should remain a priority for policy-makers in Russia and West, says the authors .
 In the absence of other institutionalized forms of dialog, this means that there is a place and a role for the OSCE in this process . The OSCE has a role in the process.
 It remains the only transatlantic security actor that offers an established forum for negotiations for all parties to these conflicts . Abkhazia and South Ossetia are the only two countries to offer a forum .
At present, security management is perhaps not the most thrilling prospect for effective security management . It might be time to invest more resources in reinvigorating this organization, says author .
 We also acknowledge the existence of a growing critical geopolitical strand in the literature on Russia’s foreign policy . We cannot engage with it in detail for reasons of space .
 Russia’s interpretation of the failed 2003 settlement for Transnistria is that “once the parties have agreed upon something, external support should gently keep them at the negotiating table, as happened in 2003 .
 The four political agreements concluded constitute such key moments. While this is relevant for further tests of our theory in other cases in the future, it is clearly not relevant here .
In order to balance the protection of our interlocutors with the need to keep referenced information meaningful and credible for our analysis, we refer to an interlocutor’s affiliation but not to his or her rank or the date or location of the interview .
We have randomly assigned short references in order to obscure dates . In addition, we have randomly assign short references . We also randomly assigned locations for increasing anonymity .
 Public opinion poll conducted in the period between February 8-18, 2014 . 2032 respondents were interviewed .
 Russia pursued a very distinct approach, solely focused on the annexation of the peninsula . It was driven by military-strategic and political considerations . It addressed a particularly critical Russian security concern, namely securing its naval base in Sevastopol .
 The authors also thank the anonymous reviewers of this article, as well as numerous colleagues who have provided invaluable feedback on earlier drafts of the article .
 Arbitrary Detentions, Enforced Disappearances, and Torture in Eastern Ukraine are among the topics .
16.16. Gushchin, Alexander W., Artem G Dankov, Sergey M Markedonov, and Sergey W Rekeda. 16.16 are all Russian .
 The International Federation for Human Rights and Center for Civil Liberties. 15.15.15 is the world's most important human rights group .
 In Strategiï Transformatsiï I Preventsiï Prikordonnikh Konfliktiv V Ukraïni, 9–49 . In StrategIï Transformatatsi. I Preventediï.
 The U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor are among the agencies involved . The United States is the United States.