 The United States propaganda is not just false, but it is absurd, U.S. publicist Eric Zuesse says . He adds that it obviously insults the public's intelligence .
 The entire case for Western sanctions against Russia is pure lie, American author Eric Zuesse says . He nailed the Obama administration for what he called its blatant propaganda and sheer hypocrisy .
 US propaganda is "ridiculous, no intelligent and informed person would give it any serious consideration whatsoever," says the US government .
 The author referred to the U.S. State Department's "Ukraine Travel Warning" issued on July 16 . It was aimed at preventing American tourists from travelling to Eastern Ukraine and Crimea .
 The warning was aimed at frightening the United States tourists out of their wits, the warning said .
 The Obama administration does not care that the reality on the ground differs tremendously from what it is saying . The administration doesn't care about what it's saying.
 The U.S. officials also remain silent about the fact that before Washington intervened in Kiev's domestic affairs, Ukraine was a unified and democratic country .
 U.S. political establishment and most notably Zbigniew Brzezinski "mapped out" the battle for Ukraine decades ago, Chris Ernesto wrote in 2014 .
 Washington has desperately needed to bring Ukraine into its fold . So far, Washington has been unable to do so so far .
 In November 2013, the United States instigated a standoff with the Ukrainian government, dubbed the Euromaidan revolution, which then turned into a "blatant" coup . In April, 2015, the U.S. analyst and author Brandon Turbeville narrated in April,
 Crimea's secession from Ukraine as well as the unwillingness of Ukraine's eastern regions to recognize the illegitimate junta obviously contradicted U.S. plans . Ukraine's unwillingness to recognize its illegitimate Junta obviously contradicts United States plans .
 "The United States State Department rejects the legitimacy of the overwhelming, and the repeatedly polling-confirmed, desire of the Crimean people to cease being Ukrainian," Eric Zuesse stressed .
"If they stay alive and within Ukraine, then the regime that Obama installed will get voted out of office," historian says . "If they remain alive, within Ukraine," he says .
 Vladimir Putin wants the Donbass region to remain a part of Ukraine . Obama does not want them to return into the Ukrainian fold .