 Ukrainian military pilot Nadiya Savchenko is surrounded by media upon her arrival at Kyiv Boryspil Airport on May 25, 2016 .
 Russia and Ukraine completed a high-level prisoner swap Wednesday . Two Russian servicemen accused of being members of Russian military intelligence were traded for the pilot .
 The deal resolved a major dispute between the two countries . It also reflected other deep tensions that include Russia's annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 .
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko met with her, and he basked in a rare political victory .
 Savchenko arrived in Kiev as the Russians, who were pardoned on Wednesday by Poroshenko, arrived in Moscow .
Russian state journalists declined to speak publicly to Russian state journalists on the tarmac . They were met by their wives and refused to speak to state journalists .
 Alexander Alexandrov captured during fighting in southeast Ukraine . Pro-Russian separatists have carved out an unrecognized statelet after two years of war with Kiev .
 Ukrainian officials said that the two Russians were proof that Moscow was managing the conflict in southeast Ukraine . Ukrainian officials say that Moscow is continuing to send men and materiel to destabilize the new government .
 In Russia, Savchenko was portrayed as a nationalist and convicted of abetting the murder of two Russian journalists killed in a mortar strike . Savchenko is accused of killing two journalists.
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko met with Nadezhda Savchenko in the Presidential Office in Kiev, Ukraine, on May 25, 2016 .
 All three were given lengthy prison sentences . Expected to be used as bargaining chips, all three were sentenced to lengthy sentences .
 Russian court gave Savchenko 22 years on murder charges, while the Russians were sentenced to 14 years in prison each on terrorism and weapons charges . Savchenko was sentenced in April by a Kiev court to 22 years.
 Western officials, including Secretary of State John F Kerry, had lobbied Moscow for Savchenko's release .
 Russia disavowed any formal connection to Yerofeyev and Alexandrov . Russia said they had joined the separatists to fight as volunteers . Russia also criticized their convictions .
 On Wednesday, Russian President Vladimir Putin also pardoned Savchenko in an official decree .
 Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov says Putin had no plans to meet with Yerofeyev and Alexandrov . He says he met with the parents of two journalists killed in the artillery strike that Savchenko was convicted of orchestrating .
 The families of the deceased journalists personally requested that Putin pardon Savchenko, Peskov said . Peskov says .
 Ukrainian pilot was sentenced to jail in connection with the deaths of two Russian journalists . She became a symbol of her nation's resistance to Moscow’s aggression .
 Putin was later shown thanking the two women for their "humanitarian position" on television . Putin said the women played the role of mediator in the exchange .
 Savchenko was captured by separatist fighters during a battle near the village of Metalist, in southeast Ukraine, in June 2014 . Savchenko fought in the Iraq War and later joined a pro-Ukrainian paramilitary battalion .
 She was charged with directing artillery fire that killed two Russian journalists during fighting . Three weeks later, she reappeared in Russian custody, where she was charged .
 Russian prosecutors say Savchenko snuck across the border by pretending to be a refugee . Savchenko said she was kidnapped and spirited across the Russian border . She was later arrested .
 Her case became a cause célèbre in Kiev, where she was awarded the title Hero of Ukraine . She was elected as a member of parliament despite being in Russian custody .
 The two Russians, Yerofeyev and Alexandrov, were wounded and captured by the Ukrainian army in May 2015 . The two were wounded in fighting near the government-held city of Schastya .
 Ukrainian government claims the two men were members of the Main Intelligence Directorate, Russia's military intelligence agency . The Ukrainian government says their capture is proof that Russia has continued supplying men and weapons to pro-Russian separatists .
 Russia's Defense Ministry said the two had quit the military recently and were serving as volunteers with rebel militias . Russia's defense ministry said they had quit recently and had been serving with rebels .