 Obama's people hired to carry out the coup in Kiev under the cover of ‘democratic’ demonstrations against the democratically elected President of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych . This terrorizing of Crimeans during the coup, simply added insult to their injury .
 On February 20th, Right Sector forces massacred Crimeans who were escaping from Ukraine’s capital, Kiev .
 Right Sector caught up with them at the town of Korsun, burned some of their buses, and murdered some of the escaping Crimeans . Most survived, but some of them were severely injured .
 A Crimean who had served in Kiev as a prosecutor in the democratically elected Ukrainian government had escaped from Kiev . He was now safely back home in Crimea and did a Crimean TV interview .
 Former prosecutor Natalya Poklonskaya took questions from the live TV audience . The former prosecutor was a former prosecutor .
 The interview was posted to YouTube on 12 April 2014, and as I described it, linking to the YouTube, she proceeded to inform her fellow Crimeans what she had seen happen during the overthrow, and why she couldn't, in good conscience, remain as a Ukrainian official in
 She had heard the chants of the Maidan protesters and smelled their piles of burning tires . She didn’t want to become any part of that .
 The Obama Administration had polling done throughout Ukraine . The Sebastopol naval base was of particular concern to Obama .
 The first stage of preparation for the upcoming coup was already active inside the United States Embassy in Kiev on 1 March 2013 . This was a very coordinated Obama Administration operation .
 On 27 December 2014, I compared the results of a Crimean poll with a poll covering all areas of the former Ukraine, which was taken, also, for the U.S. government, but, to Obama’s inevitable disappointment, neither poll found a US-friendly, Ukraine
 Crimean people overwhelmingly wanted to secede from Ukraine, especially after the President for whom they had overwhelmingly voted, Viktor Yanukovych, had been overthrown in February 2014 coup .
 The bulk of humanity living on the Black Sea peninsula believe the referendum to secede from Ukraine was legit, says Kenneth Rapoza .
If he were to accept it, then he would have to terminate the anti-Russia economic sanctions he initiated on the basis of Russia’s ‘seizure’ of Crimea, and he would also have to acknowledge that the massive US-led military buildup of NATO forces
 Obama doesn't accept any of this; to do that would negate the whole purpose of his coup, and even his anti-Russian policy . He doesn't cooperate with Russian forces that are trying to stamp out jihadist groups in Syria .
 The United States is initiating a quadrupling of U.S. troops and weaponry on Russia’s northwestern borders .
 NATO summit to be held in Warsaw on July 8-9. Plans Fraught with Great Risks.
 The Alliance is moving to the east, it is clear . It is clear that the Alliance will move to the East .
 Sedov closed by saying that Ukraine’s President Petro Poroshenko ‘is impatiently waiting for the July NATO summit’
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry told Poroshenko to stop saying Ukraine would restart its war against the separatist Donbass region . Kerry's subordinate, Hillary Clinton’s friend Victoria Nuland, told her to ignore her boss on that, and then President Obama sided with
 The Minsk peace process for Ukraine had been initiated by Angela Merkel and Francois Hollande . Obama had no intention of its being anything more than a pause in the war . NATO itself would become engaged in facing-down Russia over its ‘aggressive invasion’ and ‘seizure
 Game's on for World War III, is Obama's message to Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 At some point, either the American side or the Russian-NATO-EU side will have to back down on the Crimea matter, or else the bombs will be released against the other .
16 could turn out to be a very fateful election in the US, and not only for the United States but for the entire world . There is every indication that, if Hillary Clinton, a super-hawk against Russia, becomes the next U.S. President, then the policies that