 It argues that strategic dynamics among these four nuclear powers cannot be understood or effectively addressed on a strictly bilateral basis .
 The 76-page document is the first Broonkings publication articulating the Pakistani perspective on its nuclear doctrine .
 India will be very reluctant to limit its programmes unilaterally or engage in bilateral controls with Pakistan . Without Chinese restraint, India would limit its options vis-a-vis China .
 Beijing may continue to resist curbing its strategic modernisation efforts, it argues . Without U.S. constraints on capabilities of concern to China, Beijing may still resist curling its strategicModernisation efforts .
 The study notes how India and the U.S. have expressed concern about longstanding Pakistan-China cooperation in important areas . Pakistan has expressed concerns about India-US cooperation in key areas, the study says .
 The report also explores the influence of other major powers on South Asia’s strategic dynamics .
 The report warns that as the nuclear gap between China and India narrows, China may increase its interest in India-Pakistan nuclear competition .
 China “fears that the widening nuclear and conventional military gaps between India and Pakistan may threaten regional stability,’ the study adds . This is because China ‘fears’ that the widened nuclear and military gaps may threaten region stability .
 The paper includes a paper on Pakistan’s strategic environment and doctrine authored by Syed Muhammad Ali .
 The paper summarises Pakistan’s threat perceptions and the steps it is taking to deal with those perceptions .
 Kashmir dispute lies at the heart of tensions between the two neighbours . It argues that ‘Pakistan’s security threat comes from India’
 India’s political elite is pursuing an ambitious and destabilising military build-up, says author . India's political elite, with its growing economy, is pursuing a global power and regional hegemon .
 Kashmiri people continue to struggle for their UN-recognised right to self-determination . New Delhi, emboldened by a Western-supported military build-up, is less willing to pursue a negotiated and peaceful resolution .
 New Delhi spends almost seven times more on its military than Islamabad, he says . 42 years after its first nuclear test, New Delhi has spent almost 7 times more than Islamabad .
 The author believes that India’s growing conventional and strategic capabilities are overwhelmingly poised against Pakistan .
 The author points out that the large-scale Indian development of highly-mobile and armoured mechanised formations, artillery, rapid airlift capabilities and rapid air lift capabilities provide compelling evidence of operationalisation of the “Cold Start’ doctrine, despite Indian official reluctance to formally accept it .
 The nearly six-decade-old Indus Waters Treaty has proved to be a remarkably durable document . It survived fully fledged wars, bilateral exchanges of verbal vitriol and periods of uneasy peace .
 Both sides have played politics with water, with hawks in Delhi threatening to block the waters flowing into Pakistan . The IWT has governed the way the rivers of this region are to be shared .
 Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has threatened to unilaterally scrap the treaty . India-held Kashmir has been tense over recent tensions over the Kashmir water accord .
 It would be premature to hail this move as a return to ‘business as usual’ in the subcontinent . It should be seen within its limited context, says the writer .
 The atmosphere in South Asia is still very much one of suspicion and distrust . Many of the outstanding bilateral issues between Pakistan and India remain frozen .
 Pakistan and India do recognise the need to discuss their issues in a civil, frank and practical manner, says the author .
 The water issue is an incredibly sensitive one, both within nations and in the bilateral context . The issue is a very sensitive issue, both in the nations and within nations .
 It cannot be left to the demagogues to use as a plank to forward their antagonistic agendas, says the author .
 The treaty is one of the few bright spots in the mostly morbid Pakistan-India relationship . It must, therefore, be built on and taken forward .
 Shisheng said that while he had no doubts that the Chinese dream of CPEC was fast becoming a reality, he said that he has no doubts about the future of the Chinese government .
 Transparency as well as expectation management must be induced as an integral part of all CPEC projects to ensure smooth progress, he added .
 He believed China’s stance and policy over Pakistan was certain to remain equally amiable in distant future as well . He believed that China's stance and policies over Pakistan would remain equallyAmiable .
 Pakistan, China and Russia will be yet another important outcome of CPEC along with many others . Du Yanjun, the special assistant to CICIR President, viewed that the emerging nexus of Pakistan, Chinese and Russian will be an important outcome .
 She maintained that the Chinese were eagerly looking ahead for this trilateral collaboration and its possible outgrowths . The Chinese are looking ahead to the possible out Growths .
 The United States approach was to involve all major regions and countries that were vital to its global strategy in military pacts such as CENTO, SEATO and NATO, and bilateral military relationships .
 Iran and Chile toppled their governments through military coups . The only crime was that they had nationalized essential industries like oil and copper respectively .
 The United States continued with its policy imposing its version of democracy in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and other developing countries in the Middle East on one pretext or another . The U.S. continued to impose democracy in Iraq, Iraq and Libya .
 The crisis of Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran also owed its origin to U.S. interference in Afghanistan . Firstly in 1979 when it started a proxy war after Soviet Union’s invasion in Afghanistan.
 After 9/11 events the United States and NATO forces invaded Afghanistan . The U.S. and NATO troops invaded Afghanistan in November 2011 .
 In both of the above cases, millions of Afghan nationals crossed over to Iran and Pakistan .
 Pakistani refugees have been living in Tribal area and throughout Pakistan for more than 37 years . International community should realize that for over 37 years, they have been accommodated .
Hundreds of thousands of refugees have returned to Afghanistan . Some 1. million Afghans are legally residing in Pakistan, having been granted proof of registration .
 UNHCR should make arrangements to repatriate Afghan refugees by the end of 2017 to address Pakistan’s security concerns .
 Last month, the federal cabinet at a meeting presided over by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif approved an extension in Afghan refugees’ stay till December 31, 2017 .
 Pakistan has been continuously extending their stay since 2007 . The government has this time round decided to strictly implement immigration laws along the border with Afghanistan .
 It requires registered refugees to provide their Proof of Registration cards before going to their country . It also requires them to obtain visas to enter Pakistan again .
 A few post-terrorist attack investigations have found the involvement of Afghan refugees in housing or helping the terrorists . Refugees’ camps also have been used by the criminals as well as the terrorists.
 The state decided to take measures vis-a-vis management of the borders, verification of the identity documents of refugees, their mobile phone SIM cards as well as implementation of visa regime .
 The Afghan refugees cooperated with the government for the security of the host nation .
 The Afghan refugees have been occasionally harassed and subjected to other abuses . Their difficulties have been highlighted by the world Human Rights Watch report 2017 . The report says that the refugees are sometimes harassed or subjected to abuses .
 Pakistan’s own security has been adversely impacted by Pakistan's own security . But there is no denying that Pakistan's security has also been adversely affected .
 After 9/11 events and ensuing war, Pakistan faced spectre of terrorism . Pakistan had over 60,000 causalities as a result of the terror-related activities .
 Confirmed intelligence reports have indicated the involvement of some of the refugees hosted in the camps as well as from those settled outside the camps .
 Pakistan has the right to take necessary measures if some criminals in the guise of refugees become a source of instability . Pakistan has been accused of using refugees to create instability .
 International institutions must understand the threat to Pakistan’s economy and security . Pakistan's economy, security and economy are at risk .
 Proper documentation and Proof of Registration implementation together with better border management will helo UNCHR as well as Government of Pakistan to better manage and regulate the Afghan refugees’ issue .
 Most Afghan refugees avoid documentation due to cultural egalitarianism and consider it as their insult . However, most Afghans avoid documentation because of their cultural egalitarianistism .
 Process of repatriation, which is going on snail’s pace, has not been very transparent and fool proof .
 Most refugees going back to Afghanistan have a revolving door approach to come back to Pakistan . Security and economic concerns are among the reasons for returning to Pakistan.
 Growing influence of India in Afghanistan in Afghanistan is also causing strains on Pak-Afghan relations . India's influence in Afghanistan also causing strain on the country's relations .
 Pakistan has proved its sincerity as a brotherly neighboring country by hosting record number of refugees . Pakistan has also hosted record numbers of refugees in recent years .
 Pakistan expects Afghan government to take action against TTP elements and Daesh . Pakistan expects of Afghan government not to blame Pakistan for all the wrongs in Afghanistan .
 Defence Secretary James Mattis stated that 50 per cent of Afghanistan is controlled by the Taliban . The Taliban is in control of 50% of Afghanistan .
 Afghan Government, dominated by Northern Alliance elements, does not wish to see peace in Afghanistan . Afghan Government will have to share power with the Taliban .
 The UN and its subsidiary organizations like UNHCR must come forward to take up the matter with the US, NATO and EU member countries to arrange repatriation of Afghan refugees .
 In 2015 UNHCR country operations profile Afghanistan, it was expected that the newly-formed national unity Government would create an enabling environment for sustainable return of Afghan refugees .
 The Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees remains the main policy framework for sustainable reintegration of those returning to Afghanistan . The Solutions strategy for Afghan refugees remains the key policy framework.
 The year 2015 was said to mark the end of the agreement that Pakistan had with Afghanistan and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees allowed Afghan refugees to stay in Pakistan .
 Many a time, Pakistan Foreign Office has 12 CSSMENTOR.COM said it would like the UNHCR and international community to help the Afghan government to create a necessary environment inside Afghanistan .
 Brussels-based International Crisis Group had advised Pakistan to ease the uncertain and insecure lives of millions of Afghan refugees on its territory . But instead of taking action, the group had advised Pakistani authorities to ease their lives .
 In the wake of Syrian crisis, the refugees are facing hardships and many European countries are not willing to accommodate them .
 Pakistan has accused Pakistan of not looking after Afghan refugees . But they say they are not willing to address the problems faced by Pakistan .
 Tackling gender-based inequalities in economic opportunities as well as in access to land, financial instruments and ICT tools would both improve economic growth and support the broader 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development .
Annual global output could be boosted by $28. trillion by 2025 through increasing women's participation in the economy . For instance, annual global output would be boosted. By 2025, annual world output could increase by $27 trillion .
This year's International Women's Day shines the spotlight on women in the world of work . Closing gender gaps in hours worked, participation and productivity could result in GDP gains of up to 48 percent in South Asia .
 Since adopting the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action in 1995, some progress in gender equality has been made in Asia and the Pacific on several fronts .
Gender parity has been achieved in primary education and maternal mortality rates have dropped by 64 percent in the region . Gender parity has also been achieved.
 54 million enterprises now owned and operated by women in Asia-Pacific . At the same time, the number of women-owned businesses has steadily increased .
 progress has been slow and uneven in advancing women's economic empowerment in the region . Despite enormous gains in closing education and health gaps, progress has not been slow .
 Women are more likely to find themselves in vulnerable employment with low wages, no formal contracts or labour rights and minimal social protection . Compared to their male counterparts, women are systematically paid less and are more often paid less .
In 2015, the gender pay gap in the region as a whole reached an astounding 20 percent . In 2015, there was a 20 percent gap between the two regions .
 The percentage of women trapped in vulnerable employment remains worryingly high across the sub-regions of Asia-Pacific . 68 percent in South Asia, 47 percent in North and Central Asia, 42 percent in East Asia, 31 percent inEast Asia . 21 percent in the Pacific and 21 percent
 Gender-based inequalities in ownership of productive assets and access to productive technologies also continue to be pervasive in the region . Gender- based inequalities in the ownership ofproductive assets are still pervasive in region .
 Fewer women than men are agricultural landholders, with less than 10 percent of women 14 CSSMENTOR.COM holding land in Bangladesh, Fiji, the Islamic Republic of lran and Nepal. Significantly, fewer women than male landholders .
 Women are 14 percent less likely to own a mobile phone than men in Asia-Pacific . The gap is most pronounced in South Asia .
 Internet penetration rates in the region are only 39. percent for females compared to 47.% for males . There is also a marked gender divide in internet usage across the region .
 Strategic action and transformative measures will be critical to advancing gender equality and women's economic empowerment in the Asia-Pacific region .
 Such measures include fostering enabling macroeconomic environments for job creation and access to decent work for all as well as harnessing technological innovations to accelerate progress towards greater financial and digital inclusion of women and girls .
 Effective laws and frameworks are also essential to integrating gender equality perspectives in national institutions, policies and programmes .
 The mobilisation of sustained financing, including through gender-responsive budgeting, is imperative for the full implementation of initiatives to empower women economically .
 Improved disaggregated data will also be invaluable in informing decision-making and monitoring the impact of policies and programmes .
 ESCAP has consistently advocated and will continue to make the case to governments that it is in our collective best interest to create meaningful opportunities and decent work .
 ESCAP has been working with governments to encourage the adoption of legal and regulatory measures that remove barriers to women's entrepreneurship and foster the creation of more SMEs by women .
 We actively engage financial institutions to increase women's access to credit and financial services . We also actively engage banks and financial institutions. We also assist in developing standards for fair and equal treatment of women job applicants .
 Several countries in the region are now well-placed to make innovative uses of technological advances to accelerate progress towards greater financial and digital inclusion of women.
Women's economic empowerment initiatives are imperative for the full implementation of women's economic initiatives . Beyond the political commitment, mobilisation of sustained financing, including through gender-responsive budgeting, is imperative for full implementation .
 All women and girls in Asia and the Pacific will be able to reach their full potential. It is appropriate for us to reflect on these opportunities and to recommit ourselves to the goal of achieving gender equality .
 The biggest military power in the world fought the longest war in its history in Afghanistan . It failed to end insurgency and eradicate the virus of terrorism .
 Pakistan army led by most determined general managed to clear North Waziristan and Fata agencies from terrorists . But audacious attacks by terrorists still continue to rock the country .
 Bad relations between the two neighbouring countries have helped terrorists set up sanctuaries on both sides . Bad relations have helped the terrorists to set up Sanctuaries.
 There is no hope of the elimination of terrorism unless the two countries decide to conduct coordinated operations .
 55,000 Afghans and Pakistanis crossed the border in the two-day long respite . Both the gravity of the crisis and the level of dependence between the two countries are shown .
 President Ashraf Ghani has congratulated the PSL final’s wining team and invited it to Kabul . Despite the prevailing bitterness not all the goodwill is lost.
 Pakistan needs to reciprocate by opening the closed borders to allow the trade between the two countries . Pakistan has been accused of not reciprocating with the U.S. by opening its borders .
 Being the larger country it needs to go an extra mile to remove Afghan grievances in a bid to restart mutual dialogue to bring peace.
 There is a need to realise that unless the two develop mutual confidence and work jointly to ensure peace militaries alone cannot suppress terrorists who are creating havoc on both sides of the Pak-Afghan border .
 Both countries can resolve issues like Durand Line through soft borders that allow free movement once the issue of terrorism is dealt with . In a world wary of border restrictions, both countries can resolved issues like that of Durand line .
 Mr Modi has reaffirmed his general election victory of 2014 . He has established the BJP as India's pre-eminent political party .
 Mr Modi and his ultranationalist party resorted to familiar Pakistan-bashing in the run-up to the election .
 Mr Modi and his allies have sought an edge by deploying harsh rhetoric against Pakistan . The prime minister has faced tough electoral battles with his allies .
 It may just be a domestic campaign tactic, but it causes ripples across the border . It further complicates the bilateral relationship .
 Mr Modi now has an opportunity to pivot and put behind him, says Mr Modi . He says he now has a chance to put behind his recent anti-Pakistan acrimony .
 Both India and Pakistan have an opportunity in the months ahead that may not appear again for several years .
 Pakistan has renewed its commitment to combating terrorism and extremism . Operation Raddul Fasaad to Punjab takes the country one step closer to fulfilling that pledge .
 Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and his government have consistently offered talks without preconditions to India .
 Mr Sharif once again emphasised that Pakistan wants good neighbourly relations with India . Most recently, during his visit to Turkey last month, Mr Sharif said Pakistan wants a good neighborly relationship .
 Mr Modi turned his back on his own recognition that dialogue with Pakistan is the only way ahead .
 Mr Modi and his government returned to the path of dialogue that had so publicly been embraced in late 2015 . It is time Mr Modi's government returned.
When Mr Modi re-engaged Pakistan, the possibility of spoilers attempting to prevent or disrupt bilateral dialogue was real . Mr Modi's visit to the country was a sign that the situation was changing .
 Mr Sharif has manoeuvred a crackdown against the LeT/JuD leadership . He has been unable to deliver any meaningful progress on the Mumbai attacks-related trials or the Pathankot investigation .
 leaderships in both countries will need to demonstrate sustained statesmanship . But to realise that destiny, both countries need to show sustained statemanship .
 Gen Votel is the first U.S. general to publicly acknowledge Pakistan’s actions against the Haqqani network and the Afghan Taliban operating from inside its borders .
 CENTCOM chiefopted to view Indian posturing through the Afghan prism, going as far to include subsequent security realities for Pakistan .
 Islamabad has long been calling for on this front, the state apparatus ought to think twice before dismissing them entirely out of hand . But his assertions fell short of what Islamabad has called for .
 Delhi would do well not to overplay its designation as Washington's strategic partner for the 21st century . Delhi would not be overplaying its designation for Washington as a strategic partner .
 If Islamabad is sufficiently smart it will regard this as a small step towards rebuilding the relationship . Islamabad is likely to consider this as an important step to rebuilding its relationship with Pakistan .
 If not, we return to the drawing board of mutual recriminations and distrust . The drawing board is a source of distrust .
 Seven of the 20 US-designated terrorist outfits in the Af-Pak region are Pakistan-based . Pakistan's response will prompt the usual if not invalid knee-jerk response .
 It is the U.S. that unleashed instability within Pakistan’s borders when it chose military intervention in Afghanistan over having the Taliban hand over Bin Laden to a third country .
 The U.S. stood by and watched while members of Bin Laden’s network sought refuge in the very country whose nuclear blueprints the Al Qaeda chief had been actively seeking since 1998 .
In post-9/11 terms, U.S. manoeuvring against the socalled Talibanisation of Pakistan’s nuclear weapons . In post- 9/11 term, this translated into United States manoeuvring.
 Forengaging in endless rounds of the blame game renders everyone a loser . The blame game has been used to make people feel like they are losers .
 This was apparently due to a fall in distribution losses, increase in billing recovery and reduction in energy subsidies . This was due to the fall in power distribution losses .
 The last few days have witnessed contrary statements from different sources that the power sector remains beleaguered with serious problems .
 German state-owned development bank, KfW, questioned the power ministry's claim of turning around the power sector through effective generation and management .
 KfW says the improvement in generation of over 25% since 2012-13 is due primarily to new plants initiated before the present government came into power in 2013 .
Major public sector power plants have cumulatively underperformed since 2013 . Conversely, major public sectorPower plants have been underperforming since 2013.
 The Council has headlined that circular debt is soaring again .
 This is contrary to the statement earlier by the Ministry of Water and Power, that the level of circular debt had effectively been capped .
 IPPAC members have called the GOP Guarantees for a portion of these due amounts . Most of the members of IPPAC have called for the Republican Guarantees .
 Repeated requests by IPPAC to the GoP to discuss these issues have gone unanswered . IPPAC has been unable to respond to these requests .
 Pakistan State Oil is the major importer of petroleum products . Another SOS has come from the Pakistan state oil company .
 The National Transmission and Distribution Company is not getting sufficient subsidy from the Government of Pakistan to reduce the build-up of receivables along the value chain of the power sector . The roots of the current problem are that the National transmission and distribution company is not receiving sufficient subsidy .
 The worst hit is PSO, which is at the beginning of this chain, and cannot buildup payables with suppliers, as bulk of the supply is imported .
 Such a crisis must not happen again and PSO needs to be injected urgently with liquidity . PSO must not be injected with liquidity. PSO should not be allowed to go into crisis again .
 Almost two-thirds of the reduction in the fiscal deficit since 2013-14 is due to cuts in the power subsidy .
 It appears that there has been major under provisioning of the subsidy to meet the fiscal deficit target .
The basic question relates to the quality of services provided and whether they are able to generate reasonable profits . The basic question is whether they can generatereasonable profits .
 The two largest IPPs, Hubco and Kapco, are publicly quoted companies and detailed financial information on them is available . The two biggest IPPs are the two largest in the world .
 Their return on equity is substantially higher than the average of all companies . The average return on Equity is significantly higher than all companies' .
 The extremely liberal 1994 Power Policy gave lifetime income tax exemption to all IPP projects . The very liberal 1994 power policy gave lifetime tax exemption for all projects .
Post-tax rate of return is relatively high and over twice the national average. Therefore, the post-tax rates are relatively high .
 annual revenue foregone from IPPs was Rs 50 billion in 2015-16, according to FBR .
 The answer lies, first, in the significant margin between the tariff for supply to NTDC and the cost of generation per kwh .
 IPPs have managed their liquidity problem of large receivables by building up large payables with fuel suppliers like PSO and the gas companies . Second, IPPs has managed their problem of big receivable payables.
 At the end of 2015, payables of HUBCO were equivalent to 80% of receivables . For example, at the end Of 2015, the payables were equal to 80 per cent of payables .
 The circular debt problem has primarily affected much more entities like PSO and much less the IPPs .
 The IPPAC has tended to somewhat exaggerate the problems faced by IPPs . The IPP has, however, tended to slightly exaggerate problems faced with IPPs.
 The situation must be avoided where sovereign guarantees are invoked. Nevertheless, a situation must not be avoided .
 The Council has expressed concern that this will further increase the circular debt, unless GOP takes corrective measures today . GOP is commending the GoP for its efforts to add 7OOOMW of capacity by 2018 .
 The State of Industry Report for 2015-16 by the regulating agency, Nepra. Finally, we await the State of industry Report for2015-16 .
 This has been a report of exceptionally high quality with a clear and objective assessment of developments in the power sector . The report has been published by the International Commission of Energy .
 Nepra will have sufficient autonomy in the finalisation of this report for 2015-16 to be able to present the true picture . Hopefully, Nepra has sufficient autonomy.
 The CNIC needs to be reconsidered because it will result in a large number of people not being counted at all, or being counted as foreigners . The requirement to present a CNIC must be reconsiderated .
Trying to count foreigners is itself a tricky task if it relies on self-designation as the criterion .
Internal migration is not being targeted for data collection, but it is still possible to use the figures for mother tongues .
 Both Sindh and Punjab have difficulty in acknowledging the number of migrants settled in their respective areas of jurisdiction . In previous census exercises, this had been a particularly strong sticking point .
 The last census was held in 1998. It is crucial that the census reflect a realistic picture of how the demographic balance has changed in each province .
 The data gathered by the enumerators will be used for a wide variety of purposes that go far beyond seat shares in parliament and the NFC award .
 This is a chance to get a clearer picture of the demographic balance, as well as urbanisation trends in the country . This is our chance to see how the population is changing .
 The data can be used by law enforcement as well as local governments . It can also be used when deciding shares in district finance commission awards .
 The quality of the data must stand above reproach and suspicion . The burden of ensuring that the data rests more than ever on the shoulders of those tasked with overseeing the operation .
Transparency is the biggest support they will have in ensuring a credible outcome . Transparency is the largest support they'll have in ensure a credible outcomes .
In the past, suspicions have been raised as a result of the quality of analyses done on census information . It would be an idea for the authorities to release the data quickly and make it accessible to multiple research communities simultaneously .
 The turnaround will go a long way towards dispelling any suspicions of possible tinkering . The speed of the turnaround will be long way toward dispelling suspicions of potential tinkering.
 The process to collate the data into a spreadsheet format is well thought through . Just making the entries in a useful format will be an 24 CSSMENTOR.COM .
 The results are eagerly awaited because this is the first time we will be getting data on a number of fronts, such as the transgender community or the number of households with a functioning toilet .
 In the next verse, it specifies further that those who foment fasad should be “killed or crucified’s” as a suitable punishment . The next verse says those who have a fasador should be killed and crucified .
 Pakistan is one of the conspicuous nation of the world which is seriously affected by terrorism . Pakistan is the most seriously affected nation by terrorism.
 Pakistan confronted such a variety of issues amid psychological oppressor attack . Education,tourism,industries and other fields are particularly affected by fear mongering .
 Operation Zarb-e-Azb was begun in 2014 in the wake of restored wave of psychological oppression by fear based oppressor outfits . There was a relative decrease in dread exercises.
Late days have seen upsurge in fear exercises, for example two most dangerous assaults . The Mazar of Lal Shahbaz Qalandar has turned out to be important to stem psychological warfare .
 The Army Chief met the corps authorities and heads of security organizations at the Army Headquarters in Lahore . With this foundation the Army Chief meets the corps officials at the army Headquarters .
 Another Operation named "Raad-ul-Fasaa" to wipe out each sort of fear mongering from its foundations . He pronounced to lunch another Operation named "Raad -ul fasaa to wipe out fear mongering 
 Armed force, Air Force, Navy and all other security and insight organizations would take an interest in this hard and fast operation . Armed force and Air Force would take a interest in the hard andfast operation .
 Zarb-e-Azb is to solidify the additions of operation Zarb. Azb's fundamental target is tosolidify the operation .
 The proceeding with exercises of the psychological oppressors would fall inside its ambit . The proceeding would fall into the ambit of the oppressors .
 The military of Pakistan propelled a nation-wide crackdown code named 'Raad-ul Fasad' against psychological militants and fanatics . The code was designed to combat psychological militants .
 The operation, started in the background of most recent rush of fear mongering, visualizes inclusion of all wings of military, paramilitary associations, non military personnel law requirement organizations and knowledge offices .
 It has four fundamental components operation in Punjab by Rangers . Rangers continuation of operations in different parts of the nation . fringe administration and de-weaponisation and unbalanced control .
 The operation is being driven by military, which have track record of conveying . There are motivations to trust that the operation would turn out to be an amazing achievement .
 There ought to be no benevolence against those related, in any capacity, with psychological oppression and 26 CSSMENTOR.COM genuine violations . There should be no mercy for such components .
 The general population of Pakistan have no sensitivities for such components . Pakistan's naughtiness mongers should be managed an iron hand .
It is good that the latest phase of operation includes use of land, air and naval forces to take care of threats from all directions . But it must be borne at the top of the priority list.
Pak-Afghan fringe is as of now shut and an extraordinary operation is going on . Navy would, ideally, guarantee that there are no breaks or interruption from seaside belts of the nation .
 Rangers in Punjab and Pakistan Army and different organizations in the length and broadness of the nation could mean psychological oppressors and lawbreakers would have no place to cover up or look for shelter .
 Those caught on charges of fear based oppression and offensive wrongdoings ought to meet their foe without loss of time . In any case, we would suggest that the operation ought to be quick .
We should also remember that delayed contribution of the three administrations in an inside operation would not be to our greatest advantage . We should likewise remember that delays in the administration's work would not have been the greatest advantage.
 Population Census is based on population data from the U.S. Census . The Census is held on the basis of population census data . The census is conducted by the United States.
 Author Tehmina Maqbool Khattak is Research Analyst on Special Field International Relations . She is also Research Analyst for Special Field international Relations .
 Pakistan's Foreign Policy in Light of Quaid-e-Azam's Words: ‘Our Foreign Policy is one of friendliness and good-will towards all the nations of the world.’
 We believe in the policy of honesty and fair play in national and international dealings . We are prepared to make our utmost contribution to the promotion of peace and prosperity among the nations of the world .
 Each nation needs to create relations with different nations to meet its necessities in efficient, modern and innovative fields .
 It is important for each nation to figure a sound remote approach. It is also important to figure out how to get to a remote location .
 It has formulated her foreign policy keeping in mind its geography, politics and economics . It also has formulated its foreign policyKeeping in mind the country's geography and politics .
 The foreign policy of a country is in a sense a protrusion of its internal, social, political, political and economic policies . It is in the sense of a protruding of the country's internal and social policies .
 Pakistan’s Foreign Policy is dictated by the inevitable actualities of history and of geology and by exceptional impacts which might be of fleeting nature .
Foreign policy is the plan of moves made by differing areas of the legislature of a state in its relations with different bodies . The end goal is to propel the national interests to propel national interests .
 Foreign Policy consists of the external actions taken by decision makers with the purpose of achieving long-range goals and short-term objectives . Foreign Policy aims to achieve long-term goals and objectives .
 Action is repressed by the apparent conditions of the state, which incorporates its geology, its economy, its demography, its political structure, culture and custom .
 The move is made with reference to other comparably following up on the global stage, and is in like manner protected by their activity .
 There are some determinants of Pakistan’s foreign policy . Security, Ideology, National Interests, Diplomacy, Public Opinion and Decision making are some of the determinants .
 Pakistan's foreign policy aims to achieve goals that policy seeks to accomplish . Pakistan's policy is based on the goals it seeks to achieve . Pakistan has a history of trying to achieve the goals of foreign policy .
 These are generally security, welfare, and preservation or promotion of ethics . They are generallySecurity, Welfare, and Preservation of ethics.
 All foreign policies of all states 23 CSSMENTOR.COM are basically influenced by it . All foreign policy of all countries are influenced by the U.S.
 One of the basic goals is the aspiration to maintain or promote values . The aim is to maintain and promote values.
 Pakistan had come into existence in the name of Islam hence promotion of genial and close relationships with the Muslim states has shaped the cardinal principle of Pakistan's foreign policy .
 Pakistan’s membership of OIC and unshakable support for the just cause of Palestinians speak volumes about our efforts in this connection . Pakistan”s membership. Pakistan's membership of the OIC speaks volumes about its support for Palestinians .
 A country must deal with other states not on the basis of religion or language but for peace, prosperity and harmony in the world . A country should deal with others not on basis of Religion or language.
 Our nation's history inclines us to harp on the strains of the common and military relationship and the resultant effect on our legislative issues .
 The military is often mocking or acting autonomously of regular citizen arrangement's course and mandates . It's a mistake of common government being subservient to military diktat, or the military conspicuously mocking.
 Civil failure is drummed home in terms of government orientation and performance . Civil failure has been cited as the reason for the failure of the government .
 There is a notion that each segment tries to use the distressingly powerful propaganda tools of information and disinformation to vindicate itself and vilify the other .
 On the off chance that this is true, it reflects a flightiness and immaturity that is shockingly impulsive of the effect on national issues .
 A stunning nonchalance of a worldwide lessening of the national character and the state's organizations. Be that as it may, it is similarly genuine that any thoughtlessly rash ""introduction"" of the disorder in the quest for investigative reporting and the privilege to free remark demonstrates a stunning
 Gratefully, we have not achieved the outlook where we can coolly credit the chose common government and foundations that are imperative to national presence and cherished of the general population .
 conspiracy theorists are prime instigators and purveyors of ‘alternative fact’ and spine-tingling disclosures . That leaves conspiracy theorists’ saboteurs.
 A perception endures among Pakistani audiences that media houses or handpicked media work force are just excessively prepared . Pakistani media houses and handpicked journalists are not prepared, making it impossible to suit, encourage, or let pass incognito plans .
 It would be foolish to carelessly acquit or ignore external hostile elements in evaluating national events and happenstance .
 The media tends to carelessness and sensationalism, says John Sutter . Sutter: We are not focusing on the accompanying loss of the credibility of the media and the consequences of the subsequent vacuum of verified information .
 In the past, a civilian PM like Mr Bhutto or a military dictator like Ayubthe Press was clearly identifiable as a government propagandist or maverick .
 The platform is wide open; but working familiarity with press freedom is breeding an unhealthy contempt in the junk food menu . The platform's platform is open, but it's also open to press freedom .
 Pakistan's atmosphere is one of troubled instability . Pakistan is not politically charged and laden, where it is not political . Pakistan has a history of instability .
 Individuals are given to contemplate, without knowing how the page or pages may read . The common and the military in agreement, individuals are given the common .
Around two years prior Parliament consensually moved against sending in troops for Yemen to strengthen a Saudi military join, with partisan undercurrents and also interventionist suggestions .
 The media and lawmakers sermonize over the gravity of the PM's not having a "fulltime" Foreign Minister . The PM has not had a full-time foreign minister .
Before spoon-feeding us natives the counter-narrative, clear up the narrative . Before spoon-feeding us natives, spoon- feeding us natives is counter- narrative .
 The foreign policy of Pakistan looks to advance the universally perceived standards of interstate relations,e. regard for sway and regional uprightness of all States, nonobstruction in the inward issues of other State, non-hostility and serene settlement of question .
 Pakistan has tried to grow neighborly and friendly relations with all nations of the world . Pakistan has along these lines constantly tried to improve relations with other nations .
 It has solid relations with every one of the nations of the world to keep up peace on the planet . It has good relations with all of the countries to keep peace on Earth .
 Pakistan has been guarding all the unreasonable and youthful demonstrations of viciousness the nation over yet it didn't give the brutal components a chance to try and shake its structure in view of Pakistan's solid pillars .
 The year 2012-2013 saw continuous difficulties for our quick neighborhood and past . The year 2013 saw continuous problems for ourquick neighborhood .
 The circumstance in Afghanistan stayed uneven having a negative overflow on Pakistan's household security condition . Pakistan's house security condition remained uneven, despite the situation .
 The nation additionally supported to think about some boundless difficulties including the proceeding with dangers of fear based oppression and fanaticism . The nation also supported the country's efforts to fight fanaticism.
 In any case, we stayed conferred in our resolve and yielded a dynamic outside strategy that looked for engagement and collaboration with the universal group .
 Pakistan is looking for commonly valuable relations with Iran . The high point is the finish of the Iran-Pakistan Gas Pipeline deal .
 Turkey's relationship with Turkey is being converted into a political and financial association . Turkey's relations with Turkey are also being converted to a political, financial association.
 The previous year saw assist combination of our key organization with China . This year saw assistance combination of China and the U.S.
 It touched another stature of agreeableness and collaboration, encapsulated by the trading of various abnormal state visits and ending up of respective understandings . It touched a stature of agreementableness, and collaboration .
 With the United States, our relations are being redesigned from valuebased to joint effort .
 The United States stays a standout amongst the most imperative improvement and speculation accomplices of Pakistan . Pakistan is one of the most important countries in the world .
 The aggravations in the relationship were additionally overseen in a tactful and valid approach . The aggravation in the relationships were also overseen by a tacty and valid approaches .
 Pakistan kept on acting with balance and duty and fortified its fare control design . Pakistan is now in line with the best worldwide models and practices .
 South Asia is strong of all non-discriminatory measures for non-proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction and their methods for delivery . South Asia was strong on the issue of territorial soundness and level playing field .
 We are in reality innocuous to the world and wish to make a tranquil world where there must not slaughter, plundering, savageness, radicalism, contempt, and so forth . But rather shockingly close to every one of these affirmations the world doesn't know about our spirit status
 Pakistan will soon thrive in the variety of the prosperous and developed nations . Pakistan is becoming a more developed nation .
We don't harbor any forceful or hegemonic outline and wish to live in peace and concordance with all countries of the world . We don't harbour any forceful and hegemon outline and want to live with all nations of the World .
 Financial advancement in a tranquil and secure neighborhood remains our top generally need . Financial advancement is a key need for a tranquil, secure neighborhood, says author .
 The direct of our outside approach in the years to come will keep on being founded on these goals to make Pakistan an embodiment of the world's serene and prosperous nation . TheDirect of the outside approach to Pakistan will continue to be founded on this goals .
 FATA Reforms has failed in the past six decades to introduce meaningful reforms or undertake substantial development efforts . At its first meeting on 21 November 2015, the Committee decided to carry out an indepth study of all previous attempts to introduce reforms .
 FATA would also involve legal, administrative and security mainstreaming . FATA's political mainstreaming would be a very complex process . It soon became clear that it would be very complex .
 Equally important would be the sequencing of these reforms and their complementarity in terms of timing and scale . The sequencing of reforms would be key to the success of the reforms .
 Different attempts at reforms in the past 40 years, though useful, did not bring about a fundamental mainstreaming of FATA . These elements were missing .
 A brief history of FATA Reforms has been included in Chapter 2 of the Committee report . The report is part of the committee's report on FATA reform .
 The first serious attempt was made when Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto formed a Committee under General Naseerullah Babar which included Hafeez Pirzada and Rafi Raza .
 The aim of the committee was to create a framework so that FATA could become a part of NWFP for general elections in March 1977 . FATA was to become part of the NWFP.
 The second attempt came twenty years later when the government extended the adult franchise system to FATA . In 1996, FATA was extended to the National Assembly, so that representatives from FATA could be elected .
 Efforts to introduce the system of local bodies in FATA have totally failed . Efforts have also failed to introduce a new system of bodies in the city .
 In 2002, the Government extended Local Government Regulation to FATA . In 2004, some Agency Councillors were nominated by the Political Agents .
 The system did not take off because general public had no confidence in the nominated office bearers who had no powers . However, the system didn't take off as general public did not have confidence in them .
In absence of major legal reforms and concentration of all powers in the hands of political agents, there is no visible improvement in governance or development indicators .
 The security situation in FATA was also very fragile at that time . A few development projects undertaken by the government during that period could not be restored by the Government .
 The amended FCR removed some of its shortcomings but more fundamental changes were needed to bring the judicial system in line with the rest of Pakistan and restore the fundamental rights of the people of FATA as equal citizens .
 This was an important step, but in the absence of provincial elections, its impact was limited . This was a important step. This was the first time this year's elections were held in the province .
 FATA has also intensified the demand for fundamental reforms. This step did, however, generate greater political awareness in FATA . FATA is in the midst of a crisis in the region .
 Many other studies, conferences and seminars on different aspects of FATA Reforms during the past 10 years . The Committee's work has provided useful inputs for the Committee’s work .
 FATA Agencies met not only jirgas of tribal elders and maliks but also representatives of political parties, civil society, traders and journalists . The Way Forward met all the seven Agencies .
 It must be fully integrated with Pakistan and basic legal reforms introduced to restore peoples’ fundamental rights . It must also be fullyintegrated with Pakistan .
 FATA would be required to accelerate development of FATA to bring it at par with the rest of Pakistan . At the same time, extraordinary efforts would be needed to accelerate FATA development .
Agencies are closely connected with the adjoining districts but not with each other . The Agencies are close to each other.
 The economic and cultural links between the Agencies and districts are fully strong but not among the FATA agencies . FATA is the largest agency in the country .
 FATA does not have the financial resources or the administrative capacity to manage a separate province . In addition, FATA doesn't have thefinancial resources or administrative capacity.
 As a minimum, rehabilitation and reconstruction in North Waziristan had to be completed . The reconstruction and rehabilitation in South Waziraistan and Orakzai were completed .
 The task of extending the provincial boundary right up to the international border with Afghanistan would be a major strategic undertaking . It would require a careful realignment of the security infrastructure and recruitment and training of additional FC personnel for the Frontier Corps .
 The merger of FATA with KPK will require a transition period of about 5 years, the Committee says . The merger will require the merger of the two companies to take place .
Local bodies elections can be held in FATA and the possibility of enabling the people of FATA to elect their representatives to the KPK Assembly in 2018 could be examined .
 The demand for abolishing the FCR, a legacy of the colonial era, was widespread and virtually unanimous .
 The Committee tried to balance these viewpoints by proposing a blended judicial system . The Committee also proposed a blend judicial system.
Traditional Rewaj System retained as a local dispute resolution mechanism . But the traditional Rewaj system was retained as an alternative to the local dispute mechanism .
 The Rewaj Act would continue the FCR in another forum is not correct because FCR would be abolished and the jurisdiction of courts will be extended . The criticism that the proposed Rewaj act would continue to continue theFCR in a another forum.
 The Act will allow parties to ask the Agency Judge (not the political agent) to appoint a jirga, whose decision will be appealable .
 New law will also ensure that the Rewaj System is consistent with fundamental rights laid down in the Constitution .
 The Committee has fulfilled this requirement by holding jirgas in all the 7 Agencies . It consulted about 3000 tribal maliks and elders . The Committee also consulted about 3,000 tribal Maliks.
 Pakistan’s unpleasant experience with referendums in the past was not considered politically advisable . Pakistan has had a history of unpleasant experiences.
 FATA would not have become “the most dangerous area in the world’s, as former U.S. President George Bush called it . If the recommendations of the Committee chaired by Gen Naseerullah Babar had been implemented in 1976, FATA wouldn't have
 There are strong vested interests, which would like the status quo in FATA to continue . In conclusion, it must be emphasised that the implementation of these reforms may not be smooth or easy .
 UN secretary general says water is a need that connects all aspects of human life . The quote reflects the critical importance of water as a need for human life.
 People’s well-being and their economic development are profoundly linked to water availability and usability . Water availability and use of water are key to people's well- being and economic development .
Too little water at a time when it is needed most can result in droughts and food insecurity . Too little water can lead to food insecurity.
 Too much water, in the form of floods or storms, can devastate an entire population . Conversely, too much water — in the forms of floods and storms — can devastates an entire community .
 Contaminated water, whether from human or industrial sources, affects the lives of children and adults alike . It affects the health of communities worldwide and has far-reaching consequences .
 The SDGs place emphasis on ensuring sustainable water availability and management . The SDG places emphasis on ensure sustainable water available and management.
 This includes achieving universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water, sanitation and hygiene for all, and ending open defecation with a particular emphasis on women and girls . This includes ensuring safe and equitable drinking water and sanitation for all .
Water's place in the SDGs goes well beyond access to water in Pakistan . But while that is crucial, especially in Pakistan, water’s place on the SDG goes beyond access .
 It must also account for critical issues such as integrated water resources management, water quality, transboundary cooperation, and issues related to water ecosystems and water disasters .
 Problems associated with water are perhaps amongst the most important in Pakistan .
 The country’s water profile has changed drastically in that it went from being a waterabundant country to a water-stressed country .
 Per capita water availability during the period 1990-2015 fell from 2,172 to 1,306 cubic metres per inhabitant .
 Pakistan extracts 75 per cent of its “freshwater annually, thereby exerting tremendous pressure on renewable water resources . Pakistan extracts almost 75 per percent of its freshwater annually .
Approximately 39,000 children under the age of five die every year from diarrhoea caused by unsafe water and poor sanitation . Over 27 million Pakistanis still do not have access to safe water and almost 53m do not.
 The increasing demand for and erratic supply of water in Pakistan is resulting in severe shortages . Pakistan is facing severe shortages of water .
Population growth, rapid urbanisation, water-intensive farming practices and industrialisation are all playing a role in increasing the country’s demand for water .
 The supply side is simultaneously affected by climate change, which, in turn, has made rainfall more erratic and led to both floods and droughts .
 Excessive groundwater pumping has raised major sustainability concerns . Ex excessive groundwater pumping raises major concerns about sustainability .
Poor water infrastructure, including limited storage capacity and inadequate canal lining, compounds water availability issues . Poor water infrastructure includes limited storage Capacity and inadequate Canal lining . Poor canal lining compounds water Availability issues .
37 CSSMENTOR.COM agricultural run-off, untreated industrial effluent, and household waste that makes its way into water bodies and canals . Another factor of concern is contaminated 37 CSSMENTor.com agricultural run off, untreated Industrial effluent .
 There were several attempts at the federal and provincial level to delineate the government’s commitment to combating water issues .
 The national climate change policy, for example, listed appropriate action plans for enhancing water storage and infrastructure . The National Climate Change Policy, for instance, listedappropriate action plans.
 It spoke in detail of better water-resource management, enhancing institutional capacities and creating awareness about water issues . It spoke out in detail about better water resource management and enhancing institutional capacity .
 Clean Drinking Water for All project laun-ched in Punjab, which provided clean drinking water through new water filtration plants . Successful initiatives do exist, such as the Clean Drinking Drinking Water For All project .
 Addressing issues of demand and supply requires interventions at both the individual and state level . Addressing problems of supply and demand require interventions at the individual or state level.
 Examples would include strict regulations on the plantation of water-intensive crops and on flood irrigation . Examples would also include strict rules on water- intensive crops and flood irrigation.
Public education campaigns focusing on enhancing water usage awareness will help. Here public education campaigns focus on water usage .
 At the broader level, an integrated water management system is needed . An integrated water distribution system that promises efficient water distribution to all sub-sectors is needed, says the Water Authority .
 Such an initiative must be formally entrenched and supported by an effective institutional and legal system . Such a system must be formalized and supported. Such an idea must be supported by a effective institutional system .
 A more holistic national water policy is required, according to the U.S. State Department . Water issues have been discussed at the policy level, for example, in the national climate change policy .
 This would include measures to promote efficient use through water pricing, increasing water storage infrastructure, enforcing strict water quality management systems to curb water pollution, controlling population growth and adopting sustainable urbanisation patterns .
Immediate attention to these proposals will help ensure that Pakistanis have adequate water . Immediate attention will be needed to ensure that the country has adequate water.
 FATA Reforms are a belated step to come to grips with our imperial inheritance that led to the creation of Pakistan, says FATA . FATA reforms are an attempt to make Pakistan a more powerful nation .
 Pakistan inherited a double liability wnen by evasion of responsibility by Britain . Britain retained defence responsibilities in 1947-48, while Pakistan inherited double liability .
 Pakistan did not receive its share of military and financial assets . It may also be noted that as decided by the Defence Committee of the Indian Cabinet Pakistan didn't get its share .
 Pakistan was mired into another set of issues, when the irrigation headworks of Pakistani Punjab were at the last minute given by Lord Mountbatten to India by amending the Radcliffe award . Pakistan was at the end of the award.
 If in 1947, Pakistan had abolished all the Princely states and special areas it would have reduced the nascent state's subsequent security problems that followed in later years .
Despite indemnities, it is indeed miraculous that we have survived into our 77th year . Despite these indemnities. Despite this indemnity, it's indeed miraculous to have survived .
 FATA's mainstreaming of FATA is one of the final national consolidatory steps, says author . If the current government takes credit for it, it is richly deserved indeed, he says .
 26 decisions approved by the cabinet. However, now comes the difficult part of implementing the 26 decisions .
 The Fata Reform Committee is expected to reconfigure itself into the cabinet level implementation committee by inviting the CM and CS of KP and the Corp Commander XI Corp as its new members .
 All three represent some critical aspects of the Reform agenda and their inclusion is essential . All three represents some critical parts of the reform agenda .
 One of the cabinet decisions is that FATA will participate in the 2018 provincial elections . FATA has been in charge of the federal government since 2010 .
About 23 new members are expected to be included into the provincial assembly and many will get ministerial and other powers as a result . CM KP is of the opinion that since it is his province that has to accommodate new members, the federal government should not be in the driving seat .
 Mr Nawaz Sharif, the Prime Minister and Mr Imran Khan, the Chairman of the PTI, would need to be resolved . It is an issue that both Mr Sharif and Mr Khan, both of the PM and the chairman of thePTI, should be resolved.
 If reforms are transformed into a zero-sum game then both tribesmen and consolidation of Pakistan would suffer . If these reforms are turned into azero-sum games then both the tribesmen would suffer.
An ideal solution will be an agreement between the center and the province to share the responsibilities and the advantages that come out of this reform. An ideal solution would be an Agreement between the centers and the provinces .
 The Corp Commander is very important because after the clear, hold and build phase the military has to return the region to the legitimate local authorities and return to the military’s peace-time role .
 The shift to this phase of military control will require a planned approach . This will require planning and enunciation of security policy . Under no circumstance any opportunity is given to terrorism and chaos to re-emerge .
 KP Provincial Assembly will present a bill authorizing the change in provincial boundary because of the implementation of FATA Reforms . The bill is expected to be presented in the KP provincial Assembly .
 The provincial assembly must pass this bill by a 2/3rd majority of the total membership of its members . It is the constitutional requirement that the provincial assembly is to pass the bill . The bill is a constitutional requirement .
 The following are the other Constitutional anendments that will be needed . The following is the other constitutional an endments that are needed .
 Art 1 would need to be amended by excluding tribal areas from the definition of being a part of Pakistan . After their incorporation into KP they will not remain .
 Art 106 will need to be amended as the strength of the KP assembly will increase .
 There is a dire need for cross-party agreement and support for this mammoth reform agenda to succeed, says John Sutter . Sutter says there is a need for a cross- party agreement and a mammoth reform plan .
 The new Implementation Committee for FATA Reforms will require Oceans of good-will and hard work to make it happen . This appears to be the most crucial task facing the new Implementation committee .
 Its non-implementation could threaten national solidarity, that will be the price of failure . It could be the cost of failure.
 This is what you will hear from most of the civil servants in any candid and informal discussion . This is how you will see what you'll hear from the civil service .
Citizens blame civil servants for inefficiency, callousness, corruption and arrogance . Citizens blame public services for corruption, arrogance and inefficiency . The tax paying clients of public services blame the public for the inefficiency.
 What it implies is that something has been pathologically wrong with the civil service in Pakistan is wrong with Pakistan's civil service .
 In the books of rules, the definition of a civil servant is very broad and all-encompassing . But only those who represent a widely-known misnomere are known .
 The issue of civil service reforms has practically remained an unfinished agenda in Pakistan during different regimes . It could never make a headway beyond the stage of policy drafts or if past governments took practical steps .
 In future, prior to any reforms, it will be important to understand the underlying causes of the decay of civil service .
 Without proper diagnosis, even the most well-trained physician would do more harm than curing an illness, says Dr. John Sutter .
 The diagnostic framework for civil service reforms will require seeing the problem from the perspectives of civil service, politics, politics and global political economy .
 Pakistan inherited the institution of civil service which was created by the British Indian Empire . Like all other major institutions of state, Pakistan inherited its civil service .
 During the heydays of the empire, the civil service as an institution was acknowledged and glorified as ‘the steel frame of the Raj’ due to institutional ability to maintain law and order and collect taxes .
 The structure of civil services was based on Weberian notions of political neutrality, merit based recruitment, guaranteed tenure and decent salary .
After independence, civil servants ushered into a culture of Faustian bargains which promised immediate gains . After independence, a gradual decay started and with changing circumstances the survival-instinct of civil servants began .
 The result was a new trend of collusive partnerships both with dictatorial regimes and political governments . The result is a new way of colluding between dictators and political leaders .
 The temptation of dividends accruing from a culture of patronage is too strong to resist, like cardinal sins, says David Frum .
 This is detrimental to the collective public interest as it robs the civil servants of their required ability to speak truth to power when it is required in matters of public policy importance . This is bad news for the public as it is not required to speaktruth to power .
 The political-bureaucratic relationship has become quite deep rooted due to nature of social power relations which manifest themselves in terms of power and patronage based politics at constituency level .
 In this perspective, it would be naive to expect a total detachment of civil service from politics .
In future if governments want to reform the civil service the process must begin with a dialogue to determine the contours of rules of engagement between politicians and civil servants . This implies that in future if government wants to reform civil service, it must begin a dialogue .
 For the prevailing state of affairs of civil service it would be unfair to place entire blame on politicians . For the current civil service, it is unfair to blame politicians for civil service .
 Corruption, inertia, rent-seeking and turf wars between civil service cadres speak volumes about the contribution of civil servants themselves .
 None of the civil service cadres have ever proposed any structural reforms themselves apart from tug of wars for vested interests . Astonishingly, none of the Civil Service cadres has ever proposed a structural reforms .
The government has shown a determination to go even to the extent of blackmailing a government by threats of collective resignations or strikes . The government has threatened to take action against the government .
 Even the upright among the civil servants often lose moral ground when they extend the favours on the requests of close aides .
 The ascendance of neoliberal philosophy, since Thatcher and Reagan eras, to create favorable investment conditions for global capital requiresderegulation, privatisation and minimalist states .
 IMF sponsored ‘Structural Adjustment Programs’ demanding withdrawal of subsidies and implementation of global ‘good governance’ agenda . This was relatively easier to be implemented in debt-ridden countries such as Pakistan by coercively imposing the IMF .
 The reforms in tax structure or administrative decentralisation during Musharraf era could not prove successful under external pressure . Under such pressures, the reforms could not be successful as imposition of such structural transformation under External pressure lacked basic ingredients of will and determination .
 The most sophisticated form of power is an ability to control thoughts and ideas, Foucault says . The French philosopher says that power can be used to control thought and ideas .
 The IFls and donors have successfully made our elites believe in what they want them to believe . This is what the IFls have successfully done by making them believe, says David Cameron .
Private sector always epitomise efficiency and therefore companies should do the work of government . For example, the idea that private sectoralways epitomises efficiency.
 For every domestic problem there exist some one-sizefits-all type ‘international best practices’ which if simply copied can solve all domestic policy riddles .
Our peculiar history, culture, values and evolution of society demands home grown policies and practices . Our peculiar history and culture, culture and values are demanded by our society .
 If foreign ideas seem indispensable, their adoption should precede an exhaustive evaluation of adaptability to indigenous circumstances . If some foreign ideas appear indispensable, they should be considered as indispensable .
 The genuine grievances of civil servants such as poor correlation between their qualifications and responsibilities vis-a-vis their meagre salaries or issues like absence of tenure protection too merit substantial consideration .
 A renegotiation of balance between exigencies of politics and requirements of meritocracy is important to ensure a fair and just social order while catering to the requirements of political system .
 The ability to critically analyse the prescriptions of donor institutions and to suggest indigenous solutions can pave the way for effective civil service reforms, says the author .
 If the maladies of civil service are not properly identified any future reforms initiative would be meaningless. If any reforms are not identified, any future reform initiatives would be pointless .
 Eight heads of state or government out of ten member countries have confirmed their participation in today's Islamabad summit .
 Afghanistan has directed its ambassador in Pakistan to attend the moot . Afghanistan however has directed the ambassador to attend .
 This could add to the already considerable stock of mutual doubts and suspicions between the two neighbours . This could be the first time the neighbours have been in contact for years .
Both will suffer if they fail to resolve these through talks at the earliest . Both will suffer however if they do not resolve these issues through talks .
Afghanistan would deprive itself of the benefits of the CPEC by remaining aloof . Afghanistan would deprive its own country of the benefit of theCPEC .
 Pakistan needs to realise that its neighbour offers it the shortest route for trade with Central Asia and onward . Pakistan has a long way to go from Pakistan to Pakistan .
 Afghanistan is the only economic and sustainable way to get gas and power supplies from Central Asia . Afghanistan is one of the few countries in the region to get power and gas supplies through Afghanistan .
 The safety of the CPEC and other trade routes depends on peace and security in the region which requires good relations between Islamabad and Kabul . The security of the Pakistan-Afghanistan region depends on good relations .
 Afghanistan is a smaller country compared to Pakistan but rightly expects to be treated as an equal sovereign state .
 Pakistan being a bigger country can afford to go an extra mile in pursuit of peace and amity . Pakistan is a bigger nation than Pakistan is. Pakistan is one of the largest countries in the world .
Afghanistan has a history of defiance of hegemony and diktat and needs to be handled with sensitivity and care . Afghanistan has been criticized for its lack of respect for its people .
 What is required is to avoid recourse to non-conciliatory measures that can be interpreted as arm twisting .
 There is a need to reopen the borders between the two countries at the earliest as this is likely to be seen as an economic blockade of a landlocked country . This is counterproductive as it is injurious for Pakistani traders as well as being injurious as well .
 It has already set forth a massive upheaval in the dynamics of the Af-Pak and South Central Asian regions and portends even starker ramifications for the Indian Ocean/Arabian Sea region as well .
 Whether it prolongs its stay or egresses, either way it will have a profound impact on the region, it's unclear whether it will .
 China, Russia, Iran, Daesh/IS have since become perceptibly more proactive and assertive there . However, newer players like China and Russia have since been more proactive .
 The CPEC too will have far reaching implications for the entire region and beyond . In addition, the CPEC also will have long-reaching implications.
 China is investing scores of billions of dollars in Pakistan and Iran . It will undertake all the measures necessary, in collaboration with both countries, to secure its interests in this region .
 Russia has proactively engaged Iran, Pakistan and other regional players including reportedly the Afghan Taliban to counter and defeat the evolving Daesh/IS threat in Afghanistan .
 Russia has also shown a desire to connect its Eurasian Economic Union project to the CPEC . Russia also has shown its ingress into the region and its drive to the Makran Coast/Arabian Sea .
 ChinaRussia-lran-Pakistan combine on the other. This sets the scene then for a titanic clash of national interests between the U.S. and India .
 Pakistan's coast line stretches from Jiwani in the West to Keti Bandar and beyond in the East . Pakistan’s coast line provides any force that develops it for military purposes with strategic advantages .
 It provides an exceptional strategic reach to cover the SLOCs to and from the Persian Gulf, including the Hormuz Straits and the Greater Middle East Region at large .
 The Makran Coast is a critical oversight on the Bab el Mandab choke point . The Mediterranean 46 CSSMENTOR.COM Sea-Suez CanalRed Sea to the Far East and the Pacific Ocean .
 China has acquired a strategically sited “logistics’ base in Djibouti as well as a ‘logistics base’ in the region .
 It seems to be securing the western extremities of the IOR/Arabian Sea complex . The IOR and Arabian Sea Complex is in the west of the region .
 The United States too has acquired a “military logistics’ base on the western coast of India . The U.S. has also acquired a military logistics base in India .
 It has outsourced the maintenance of the ships of the United States 7th Fleet to Reliance Defense in India . It has also outsourced maintenance of U.S. ships to the Indian city of Pipavav .
 China has manoeuvred itself into a position of immense strategic advantages . By moving on to Pakistan’s coast line, China has a deep strategic master stroke in its own right .
 For the U.S. this Chinese manoeuvre has multiple strategic connotations . For the United States, this manoeuvre is a strategic move .
 Were it to egress from the region it would end up ceding critical space and influence to them, it would be critical to them .
 If China were to develop military capabilities along the Makran Coast it would greatly neutralize the impact of the Malacca Straits bottleneck . It would also act as a pull on the U.S. military in the Asia Pacific by threatening its SLOCs .
 This would somewhat limit U.S. engagement in the East & South China Seas and thereabouts . This would probably limit United States engagement in East &South China Seas .
 The US has to confront the Chinese in the East & South China Seas/Pacific Ocean as well as in the IOR/Arabian Sea theatres of war at the same time . Third, it will put a lot of pressure on the US to ensure its ability to
 At the least the U.S. military effort will be divided between the two theatres of war .
 India could possibly be given the major responsibility of the Indian Ocean . South Korea, Japan and Australia could be assisting the United States in the East & South China Seas/Pacific Ocean region .
 Fifth, the Chinese could possibly block the Hormuz Straits and Bab el Mandab thus sealing off both theatres of war from the ME, Europe and Mediterranean .
 The IOR is now likely to get further nuclearised too at an increasingly hectic pace . The IO is now more likely to be nuclearised than ever before .
 It already has the Indian and United States navies with their phenomenal arsenals (nuclear including) present in the region .
 China will eventually show its presence in the IOR/Arabian Sea with 47 CSSMENTOR.COM . China will soon show its military prowess in the sea .
 All this promises to make the overall strategic mix in the region even more potent, ominous and complex .
Battle lines continue to be relentlessly drawn in the Pacific Ocean and IOR/Arabian Sea complexin what could possibly be the next two most likely theatres of war .
 Trump promised to bring back jobs by adopting an “America First’s economic nationalism .
 His solutions won’t work, and his supporters will soon realize that they've been had . His solution won't work .
 He wants to ensure that American firms remain competitive and that the country’s trade partners do not discriminate against United States producers .
 Trump's trade policies won't help reestablish America's once-commanding positions in such industries as steel, textiles, coal, or automotives . But no matter how fervently he and his supporters believe it, Trump’s policies won’t help.
 protectionist moves will invite countermeasures, such as slapping a 45 percent tariff on Chinese goods or penalizing China, Japan, and Germany for supposedly manipulating their currencies .
 border tax on components that American firms import from their overseas subsidiaries will increase prices for consumers . The tax will effectively impose a tax on consumers .
 The rich can better absorb the added costs, but not the working-class, Trump claims to champion . That will not hurt the rich, but rather the working class, he says .
 Trump’s far-reaching attack on multilateral trade agreements is the latest in a long line of attacks .
 He insists that they are stacked against American firms, favor big exporters such as China . He says they are also encouraging the flight of jobs to other countries .
 The U.S. largely wrote the international trade laws, beginning with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . The current WTO, that Trump savages, is the one that he savages .
 The United States, along with the EU, sequenced negotiations on trade liberalization to benefit economic sectors . The U.S. has enjoyed a comparative 49 CSSMENTOR.COM advantage .
 The Doha Round of WTO negotiations has been stalled for more than a decade in part because the U.S. refused to dismantle agricultural subsidies .
 The U.S. remains the world’s leading user of non-tariff barriers to protect domestic producers .
 The agricultural sector alone receives $20 billion in subsidies . It also spends vast sums on subsidies for the agricultural sector .
 The U.S. isn't haplessly playing the global economic game by someone else’s rules. So the United States isn’t haplessily playing the economic game.
 Trump is certainly right that in spite of America’s role in designing the game, United States firms sometimes lose matches .
 The country sued more than any other is under the WTO’s Dispute Settlement Understanding . It also loses a great many cases .
 The U.S. gets sued a lot because it protects its interests aggressively, often using means that violate WTO rules .
 Washington has been willing to risk sanctions when shirking its commitments. It’s that Washington is willing to Risk sanctions whenshirking commitments .
 The United States itself uses the system to sue trade partners it believes are violating the agreement . The U.S. believes that they are violating it .
 95 percent of all complainants lose whether they are taking action against big or small countries, rich or poor . Washington doesn't lose at a higher rate than other WTO members do, according to the WTO .
 The right to sue when the rules are breached pushes countries to cooperate more than one might expect . Still, the right to sued is still a matter of whether countries cooperate .
 During the 22 years since its creation, the WTO has helped clarify and enforce international trade law for all the major market economies .
 The Dispute Settlement Understanding is held up as an example from which other organizations can learn .
 If Trump wants to renegotiate the WTO, he might be surprised to learn about the number of countries that line up to redress their grievances against America .
 Just ask Southeast Asian fishers and textiles manufacturers, Indian drug and energy companies, or African raw materials exporters .
 They are about devising rules that lend stability to what would otherwise be a chaotic, volatile global economy . They are also about devise rules that lending stability to the global economy.
 The U.S. has a vested interest in shaping global regulations in crucial areas such as labor rights, environmental standards, and intellectual property laws .
 These and other rules serve the economic interests of American firms and workers . They help ensure that countries comply with standards that make doing business easier .
 WTO rules favor Big Pharma in advanced industrialized countries . In areas such as intellectual property rights, it has been criticized for favoring Big Pharma .
 In Trump’s world, abandoning or revamping multilateral trade agreements will benefit the American workers .
 The plight of the Rust Belt and other economically distressed parts of the country can't be chalked up to unfair trade agreements or the machinations of foreign governments engaged in currency manipulation and other shenanigans .
 Making these problems part of the conversation would complicate Trump's tidy narrative, he says .
 It would put on the table a host of issues about the distribution of power and wealth in the U.S. and the policies that underpin those asymmetries .
Politicians are loath to shift the focus from the foreign to the domestic . In short, it would mean shifting the focus of the domestic to the foreign .
 He presents himself as the consummate outsider who will fight for the country’s workers .
 President's Strategic and Policy Forum dominates the President’s Strategic and policy Forum .
 Better, then, to continue bashing other countries for supposedly killing U.S. jobs . Better, than to keep bashing other nations for killing American jobs .
 Pakistan’s trade with neighbours constitutes 26% of its international trade . 18% of $21 billion exports and 30% of the $45 billion imports .
 The gravity model of international trade regards trade between two countries inversely proportional to their distance and the size of their economies . The gravity models are based on trade between the two countries .
 The trade naturally gravitates towards the neighbours . Thus, distance being zero, the trade naturally Gravitates towards neighbours .
 The cultural overlap and consequent similarity of consumption patterns make the neighbouring markets a natural extension of domestic market . Low delivery costs and short lead times make the neighbour markets anatural extension of Domestic market .
 proximity generates a bilateral monopoly between the neighbours . In turn facilitates an economic integration with deep reciprocation .
 The richer economy provides wider variety of goods and the poorer one provides a cost-effective location for production . The poorer economy provides a cheaper location for producing goods .
Thirdly the cross-border market is more conveniently accessible, in many cases, than the distant inland markets . Thirdly theCross-border markets are more convenient than the inland markets.
 Jalalabad offers a more convenient market for Peshawar-based floor mills than Lahore . Peshawar offers a better market for Jalalababad’s naranji.
 The marginalised border communities thrive from the proximity trade as the SMEs find it simpler to trade with the nearby cross-border markets than the complex procedures of exporting to the distant destinations .
Short lead time minimises post-production losses especially of perishables . Low transportation expense reduces transaction costs and creates distributional efficiencies . Short lead time reduces post- production losses .
 Consumer benefits due to downward shift in price equilibrium and availability of more choices . Consumer benefits also due to lower prices and more choices. Consumer benefits are due to a decrease in prices .
 Pakistan and India open Wagah as the first step to stabilise the prices for consumer. For instance, despite troubled political environment, in the times of price escalation of a commodity, Wagah is a first step .
 China's share of neighbouring markets has increased from 5.4% in 2006 to 9.1% in 2015 . Chinese exports have nearly swayed the entire globe during the last decade .
 share of CIIA in Pakistan’s global exports also increased from 11.8% in 2006 to 18.1% in 2015 . Similarly, the share ofCIIA in the global exports in Pakistan also increased to 11.7% in 2014 .
 Exports to China have increased four times since signing of much-criticised China-Pakistan Free Trade Agreement in 2006 . exports to Afghanistan have nearly doubled during the same period .
 CIIA in Pakistan’s global exports has been increasing, but there still remains a huge untapped potential in the neighbouring markets .
 An import market of $2.15 trillion is available on Pakistan’s borders, of which we currently claim a meagre 0.19% share .
 A penetrating push in the high potential markets in the immediate neighbourhood is thwarted by peculiar impediments in each neighbouring market .
 Pakistan can barely manage a 0.08% share in $391 billion Indian imports, while India, without MFN, claims 4% share of $44 billion Pakistani imports .
 Afghanistan has been on a continuous downward slope since 2011 due to security situation in Afghanistan and shrinking demand in the wake of reduction in international troops . The recent ebb in bilateral political relations has further complicated an already complex environment .
 The international sanctions on Iran during the last decade have smothered Pak-lran trade . The recent optimism kindled by the lifting of UN sanctions has been dampened by the re-escalation of rhetoric in the wake of Trump’s presidency .
 The Himalayas have always made the uphill land route to China costlier than marine shipment . The improved infrastructure under CPEC provides an optimism for enhanced exports to the Chinese market .
 China and India jointly constitute one-sixth of the world GDP . Trading patterns in the oil-rich lran, distorted during the sanctions era, are being redefined with Pakistan having the proximity advantage .
 Afghanistan, as a landlocked country, with strong cultural and ethnic ties with Pakistan, is a natural extension of domestic market . Afghanistan is landlocked, but has strong cultural, ethnic ties.
 The immediate neighbourhood offers Pakistan huge growth potential for exports, reducing dependence on the distant EU and U.S. markets . The immediate area offers Pakistanhuge growth potential.
 Unlocking of potential depends on de-escalation of political tensions with India . India has a history of defining trade relations, improvement in security situation in and bilateral political environment .
 The entire country is bound to reap benefits from this massive investment . Gwadar particularly has prosperous days ahead, according to CNN.
Small town by the sea will soon be a significant player in the world of sea trade . The town will connect economic powers more quickly and in less expensive way .
 The city economy, which has largely been based on fishing, will undergo major transformation . The city will diversify to move from being a small fishing village to an important port city .
 The Gwadar Port is just one part of the story which is located near key oil shipping lanes from the Persian Gulf .
 The port also provides closest access to sea to Central Asian Republics as well as Afghanistan . The port is located in the eastern part of the country .
 The arrival of foreign investors in Gwadar means the arrival of new technology and expertise . Also, the arrival.
 This will make Gwadar an advanced city but also an urban leader in the country with infrastructure on a par with international standards . This will not only make the city an advanced City but also a city with infrastructure.
Road constructions within Gwadar are connecting the once isolated city to the rest of Pakistan . Also, road constructions have made it easier to get to other parts of the country .
 This, as a result, will increase opportunities for the people of Gwadar manifold . This will increase opportunity for the Gwadars, according to the local government .
 There are serious concerns that grip residents of this beautiful town. Despite all of these benefits, there is no denying that there is serious concerns about residents .
 Lack of civic amenities such as drinking water, electricity and hospitals as well as loss of traditional livelinoods are worrisome byproducts of the ongoing ‘economic revolution’ and no stone must be left unturned to address these issues to the people of Gwadar .
In the end, no development is worth having if it hurts the very people it is done for, says the author . In the end. Because, in the end,. no development has been worth having, he says .
 A spate of recent articles in the Western media has heralded the country's significant progress, finally giving Pakistan some good press . Pakistan's progress has been praised by some of the world's media .
 Three of the world’s four largest economies by 2050 will be in Asia, with China and India neighbouring Pakistan and the third Muslim-majority Indonesia . The move is a civilisational shift of economic activity, a return to the pre-colonial historical and natural economic order .
 Beijing seeks to project its economic dominance towards the growing markets of Africa and the Arab world . Pakistani geography is indispensable, says Beijing .
 Any Pakistani prosperity is dependent on the favourable fates of geography being coupled by a domestic reform process . However, any Pakistani prosperity can be dependent on a favourable geography .
 Pakistan must ultimately see itself as the destination of the next economic miracle, not just a conduit of others’ prosperity . If the latter isn’t the objective, it certainly should be .
As growth slows in China, as India struggles with a lack of federal-state cohesion, and as Mexico wrestles with the Trump Administration, there is an opportunity for 56 CSSMENTOR.COM Pakistan to seize the moment and grind its way into becoming a major industrial power .
 Pakistan needs to have a genuine belief in its people and enable them to be the drivers of the nation’s prosperity . Pakistani people need to believe in their people, not merely vassals of foreign companies planting sweatshops .
 Awakening a nascent Pakistani industry ought to be the country’s pathway into the future . It will provide goods for both a growing domestic market and tapping into the markets of Central Asia and the Middle East .
 Pakistan's automotive and truck industries are growing, but nowhere near their potential, considering Pakistan's size and strategic location . For example, the country’s automotive and trucks industries are still growing .
 They must be willing to compete by innovating and ramping up quality if they are to survive the competition . They must also be prepared to compete and ramp up quality .
 The Auto Industry Development Policy’s early fruits of bringing Hyundai, Kia, Renault and MAN SE are a sign that industry is responsive to bold Pakistani reform when it happens .
 Pakistan will have a productive ecosystem that can splinter off broader and deeper gains across the industrial economy . If supported by further competition and innovation, more efficient production lines and favourable policy conditions, Pakistan will be more successful .
 Brazil did in the 70s, Brazil did the 80s, China in the 90s and Turkey in the 2000s . Such ‘miracles’ necessitate bold moves to align the country’s standards with global expectations .
 The first place where Pakistan needs to lift its game is skilled labour and education . Pakistan needs skilled labour, education and education, says Pakistan's government .
Without them, the requisite know-how for innovation and development is limited and rapid industrialisation is impossible . Without them, there is a lack of know- how to develop and develop in the future .
 Indonesia has 16 pupils per teacher while Sri Lanka is at 23.6 . For comparison, Indonesia is at 16.6.6, Sri Lanka has 16.5 .
 With such poor outcomes and indicators, the upside is that low-hanging fruits abound, says John Sutter . Sutter: "Low-Hanging fruits" abound .
 Pakistan’s current infrastructure ‘obsession’ also needs to be pushed even further . Pakistan's current infrastructure 'obsession' must be pushed further further .
 Pakistan's energy woes have been the country's biggest drag on growth over the past decade . CPEC is adding up to 12,000 megawatts towards rectifying Pakistan’s energy woes . Pakistan has added up to 10,000 Megawatts to its energy woes.
 In particular, the country’s massive gaps in digital infrastructure need immediate prioritisation . The UK's digital infrastructure needs urgent prioritisation.
 With an internet penetration rate of just 18%, and an average internet speed of 2.2, internet penetration rates are just 18% . The average speed of the internet is 2.3% .
 Facilitating e-commerce and online education would go a long way to dealing with Pakistan’s legacy problems .
 If the country is to witness an industrial surge and nimble entrepreneurial business activity, quality internet access must be a top priority . The UK has seen a surge in entrepreneurial activity and an increase in internet access .
 The country cannot afford reckless politics if it wants to put itself on the global economic map . The country can't afford reckless political politics, says CNN's John Sutter .
Shambolic political stunts and personalised dog-whistle politics only compound the challenge . If terrorism and security concerns are not enough of an economic obstacle, then shambolic stunts and political stunts only compound it .
 Voters and media need to prioritise national development as the primary issue and punish elected officials who show neither economic competence nor interest .
 Pakistan's electorate should develop a hawkish fixation with economic data and outcomes, says author . Instead of fostering a loyalty to a party and leader, the Pakistani electorate should focus on economic data, he says .
 Pakistan must develop a culture of accountability and reward for economic performance . China puts targets for its provinces and local governments . Pakistan must set a reference standard by which success and failure is measured .
 The State Bank says that the nascent growth in the economy has pushed imports higher . But the deficit has risen to $5.5bn .
 The current account deficit may be contained in the coming months, but it has been some time since these measures were announced . We are told that with recent policies designed to boost exports and curb non-essential imports, “the current accounts deficit may have been contained in
 The State Bank deserves stronger attention, particularly from the State Bank . The absence of any other policy interventions could undermine the nascent growth achieved since 2013 .
 It would be easier to buy the State Bank’s assessment that the difficulties on the current account are only temporary, if we had not heard this story before .
 The State Bank was saying much the same thing from 2004 onwards, when the current account deficit began to balloon . It is worth remembering that the State Bank had promised a boost in exports to balance the deficit .
 Large-scale outflows are set to begin once the Chinese projects start commercial operations . This time the vulnerabilities are larger because the growth impetus given to the economy is meagre .
 The declining reserves need to be taken more seriously by the State Bank . The State Bank is the largest bank in the world .
 In the closing months of the fiscal year, if the current account deficit continues to show deterioration, we will know . This is the fiscalyear when the tide began to turn, we say .
 External difficulties have engulfed growth spurts in the past, and we need to know why this time round things will be different . We need to find out why we are going to see a change in the future .
 The state has failed to fulfill its promise of universal education . Despite the constitutional mandate, the state has not fulfilled its promise .
 The situation is also a sad reflection on the dysfunctional state of public education system in Pakistan . Pakistan's education system is in a dysfunctional state.
 The crisis is a grave crisis that will affect our future generations. Needless to say, declaring this is agrave crisis .
 As many as 44 percent children between the ages of five and 16 are still out of school in a country where over a quarter of its population is less than 16 years old .
 The report indicates a glaring dearth of infrastructural facilities as well as staff members in a majority of public sector primary schools .
 The situation is worse in the poorer regions such as the Balochistan province and tribal regions . As many as 70 and 58 percent children are out of school,respectively .
 The education sector is one of the most important sectors in the world . It is expected to be a major focus for policy makers to make concrete interventions .
 The federal and provincial governments have not yet succeeded in upholding their commitment to bring a lasting change in the education sector .
 Some improvements took place in the recent years especially the increase in spending since the devolution of powers under the 18th amendment in 2010 .
 Pakistan only spends 2% of its GDP on education compared to India’s 3.5% on education . India's 3.3% of the GDP is on education, compared to Nepal's 4.4% .
 This fact alone tells us that provision of quality education is not the top priority of the State . This is a fact alone. This is not a top priority for the State.
 A broken system of governance will not yield results even if education budgets are further increased . However, given the broken system, especially centralized control of the sector at provincial level will yield results .
Decentralization of education services and involvement of communities and parents would be vital to achieve the target of universal primary education . Decentralized education services would be key to achieving the target.
 Policy interventions need to focus on improving quality of education being imparted and address issues related to faculty absenteeism, ghost schools, cronyism, corruption and corruption . 61 CSSMENTOR.COM widespread corporal punishment .
 At the same time, we need to modernize our curricula to achieve better learning outcomes . We need toModernize our curriculum to achieve a better learning outcome .
Teacher training is another crucial area, which has not received proper attention by policymakers .
 International donors have invested billions into the provincial budgets . But the results are tentative at best .
 Pakistan’s governance system is not reformed at the national and subnational levels . Investments in education will not achieve intended objectives, according to the government .
 We need accountable and responsive local governments with adequate powers and resources to deliver the constitutional obligation of the state. We need accountability and responsiveLocal governments withadequate powers, resources, says the author .
 The ruling party needs to review its skewed priority of investing in megaprojects at the expense of millions of children that should be in school .
For the youth to excel, the education system and educators must provide a suitable platform and latest approaches to knowledge . For the youth, the Education system and the educators need to provide the best way to learn .
 An educator's approach to learning is critical in the intellectual growth and development of students, says teacher .
 An imperative aspect of an education programme is its bottom-up approach . It identifies age-appropriate goals for its students .
Cambridge Primary and Secondary programmes. For instance, if a child is growing and moving through the Cambridge Primary and secondary programmes, their goals keep changing .
Teacher is to first understand children as individuals, and recognise that learning activities must be tailored to suit each student according to their needs and abilities .
 The teacher’s primary responsibility is to be a facilitator for the students . Students should be encouraged to formulate strategies and understand concepts.
 The intellectual growth of a child is a complex process. The teacher's job is to ensure that the trend continues upwards .
 Setting the foundation for a student’s development is the task assigned to all teachers that are responsible for children during their primary years .
Alpha School will be following the Cambridge Primary Programme . This is exactly why the Alpha School will follow the programme .
 It is a broad-based and balanced approach to education, enabling students to appreciate specific subjects through the topics studied, and a better understanding of the world at large .
Early Years Foundation Stage Programme and Cambridge Primary Curriculum introduced into schools in an international setting . Pupils and parents delighted with positive reactions from pupils and parents .
 It was wonderful to hear the children animatedly talking to each other and the adults in the classroom about what they were doing and how they expressed themselves .
Over the first term, we noticed a blossoming of children’s use and understanding of English directly as a result of the EYFS and the way in which this was delivered by the staff .
 The hands-on style of learning enabled the children to physically explore the 63 CSSMENTOR.COM learning process in a safe way .
 The focus is upon allowing children to find their own pathways to learning in a structured and child-friendly manner . Every institution must strive to achieve since every child represents the future of the country .
 The co-curricular aspect of school life is fully integrated into the timetable so that children discover their artistic, musical, rhythmical and sporting talents .
 Children must be assured to have fun while they are learning. With the latest equipment and resources, children must have fun .
 Teachers play a pivotal role in shaping students and a curriculum must provide a clear pathway to progress and the freedom to create amazing opportunities for the children .
 Comsats is listed in the 601st position . It is the highest ranking in the world .
 We can’t put the blame for this miserable state of affairs on successive governments. We can't put the blames for this misery on successive Governments .
 Vice-chancellors, principals, rectors and professors are all equally responsible . Vice-Chancellors and principals, principals and rectors are also responsible for their actions .
Public sector officials are least concerned about the state of affairs . They show little interest in improving the situation while public sector officials aren't concerned .
 Most of them don’t come to university on time and seldom give the students guidance they are supposed to give and which students require and deserve . Most of the students don't come to University on time.
 They are safe in their positions and nobody can touch them or terminate their services . Nobody can touch or terminate them or end their services, they are safe.
 The overall result is that our students are neither competent nor do they have adequate knowledge to handle and solve problems . Our students are not competent or have enough knowledge to solve problems.
 They simply rote learn and lack the ability to apply what they know to practical situations . They simply learn and don't know what to do, they say .
 ‘sub kam chalta hai’ is the norm. This problem is not so conspicuous here as ‘ sub kamchalt a hai' is the usual norm .
 The real discrepancy becomes apparent when our students go abroad for higher education and find themselves totally clueless in their new environment .
 They have not been trained to handle/use/use scientific apparatus/instruments and therefore lack self-confidence . They are not trained to use scientific apparatus or scientific apparatus .
 Pakistani students have managed to get their degrees thanks to sympathetic professors, assistants and technicians .
 professors who have gone through postgraduate problems while studying abroad don't prepare their students at all for the challenges of higher studies .
 When MS or MPhil students go abroad, their lack of training or expertise in handling equipment as compared to other students is obvious .
 Most students who study abroad handle equipment quite early on in their undergraduate studies . Most students develop confidence by the time they reach postgraduate level .
 Since starting studies there at the undergraduate level, I never felt inadequate at handling various instruments . I went through the whole exercise and never felt that . was inadequate.
 Owing to a solid undergraduate background, he was able to publish many scientific papers in American, British, German and Japanese professional journals .
 Dr Owen appreciated his PhD work and asked for copies of his scientific papers . Dr Owen asked for copy of his papers .
 He wrote about an incident that occurred just after World War . He was travelling from Berlin to Moscow by train to attend a conference .
 The first chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission was Homi J Bhabha . He asked Otto Frisch to teach him how to use a Geiger counter from his briefcase .
 Bhabha had a PhD from Cambridge. Frisch showed him but was surprised at his lack of knowledge .
First experiment at Berlin at undergraduate level was about characteristics of a Geiger counter .
Indian students are well equipped to handle Ph.D. studies abroad . Nowadays, Indian students are better equipped to deal with foreign studies .
 The daughter of a friend from Lahore received an offer from the Erasmus Mundus Programme for a PhD in Sustainable Industrial Chemistry to study in Italy and France . The daughter is studying in Italy, France and Italy .
 Until she did her MS, she did not have the opportunity to handle any equipment independently . She did not know she could handle any of the equipment independently.
 Dr Shahzad Alam worked at the PCSIR Laboratories Complex for two months to learn how to operate various equipment .
Dr Alam is now the chairman of PCSIR and has his office at the head office in Islamabad . Dr Alam is also the head of the Islamabad-based PCSir .
 He has a PhD from Japan and is a competent and knowledgeable scientist . He is also a competent scientist and a knowledgeable scientist.
Students who plan to go abroad should make every effort to learn to handle the equipment that they will be expected to use . The two months of training proved to be extremely useful to my friend's daughter and 66 CSSMENTOR.COM .
After selecting universities that teach the subjects of their choice, they should get in touch with the relevant professors .
 They will also need to get their certificates attested by the school boards, the HEC and the Foreign Office . The process can be a lengthy process .
 PhD degrees are not handed on a platter; they require hard work and perseverance . Remember, PhD degrees aren't handed on the platter .
 My own studies and work experience in Europe helped me forge many long-lasting relationships with colleagues and industrialists, not to mention the invaluable experiences .
 It is a mind-broadening experience that every student going abroad should make the most of it . It is an experience that students should make most of the experience .
 A division bench headed by LHC Chief Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah dismissed an earlier decision by a single bench of the court . Earlier decision by the court directed authorities to ensure holding of CSS exam 2018 in Urdu language .
 During the hearing, CJ Shah remarked that it is not the court's job to change languages .
 Federal Public Service Commission had challenged the decision of the single bench stating that it is not possible to hold the exam in Urdu as there is no syllabus in the language .
 The petitioner added that Urdu is not a compulsory course for graduation . The petitioner said Urdu was not a mandatory course .
 Justice Atir Mahmood passed the order on a petition filed by Advocate Saifur Rehman . He had objected to an FPSC advertisement that he said was silent about the language in which the examination would be held .
Petitioner asked the court to order the FPSC to conduct CSS examination in Urdu language as directed by the Supreme Court .
 The judge turned down the plea on the implementation of Urdu language in current year CSS examination due to paucity of time . The judge also turned down a plea on implementation of the language in the current year .
 The commission’s counsel informed the court that arrangements were being made for transfer from English to Urdu . A committee for the purpose had also been formed to make recommendations in this regard in due course of time .
 He said the matter had also been taken up with the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan .
 Unesco first declared Feb 21 International Mother Language Day in 1999 . Since then, this issue has received much attention throughout the world .
 In Pakistan, where the language issue has always had a complexity of its own, educators, linguists and activists are now more vocal than ever . The language issue is now more complex than ever.
 The courts have given two major language-related verdicts in the past two years . The court has also given two language- related verdicts .
 Supreme Court's directive of 2015 asked government to use Urdu as the official language of administration .
 The Lahore High Court is asking the Federal Public Commission to conduct CSS examinations in Urdu . The second is the recent order of the Lahore high court asking the federal public commission to conduct the examinations in the city .
 A person who is to conduct the affairs of governance in one language should be fluent enough in it to pass an exam to qualify as an administrator .
 CSS candidates should have studied Urdu in school as well as college to be able to take examinations in that language .
 indigenous languages have leapfrogged to English in an effort to make it the medium of instruction . We are still ambiguous about the status of our indigenous languages .
 Even the sensible proposal of introducing mother tongue-based multilingualism has failed to win supporters . It is universally recognised as the most feasible approach, but has not won supporters .
 One misconception is that English is considered a superior language . If we wish to keep up with the world, our children must study in English .
 The idea of teaching English as a second language subject is rejected out of hand . Even the idea of learning English is rejected.
We are driving a wedge through our already fragmented society, says author . "This quixotic approach is also destroying our education system," he says . "We are also destroying the education system"
 English is promoted as the language of the political elite, as Dr Tariq Rahman, our leading linguist, says .
 Being dubbed as inferior, native languages are neglected and their speakers become the underprivileged of society . Being dubbed 'inferior' and 'underprivileged' is a problem for the poor .
 Given our limited resources, it has not been possible to teach English well to all people, says the author .
 A small minority, which has the resources to learn good English from highly qualified teachers, becomes the empowered elite . A 69 CSSMENTOR.COM small minority is a small minority.
 The British Council commissioned a world-renowned linguist, Hywel Coleman, to make suggestions related to this matter . In 2011, Coleman made suggestions to the council .
 Coleman proposed a three-language policy starting with the mother tongue, followed by Urdu and finally the global language in vogue, English . Coleman proposed the policy in a bid to make it easier for people to understand English .
 He wants advocacy to be directed at parents so that they appreciate the risks involved in not using the mother tongue in the early years of primary school .
 The tragedy is that language myths persist and are destroying education in Pakistan . Language myths persist, are destroying the education of Pakistan .
 There are many reasons for this failure, but the main one is our inability to produce competent and committed teachers .
 The teachers are the products of a system that collapsed several decades ago . This is not surprising given the fact that the teachers are a product of a collapsed system .
 An attempt to revitalise teaching will be a major task, but it has to be done, says the author .
 Teachers can be taught pedagogy quite quickly. Subject knowledge is a bigger challenge but not impossible to cultivate .
 Teachers could be selected for more long-term training to teach English as a second language . It would be easier for teachers to learn a subject in the language that they are fluent in .
 The Academy of Educational Planning and Management report provides data about technical education and vocational training institutes, non-formal education, deeni madaris and even teacher training institutions . What is badly missing in the report is data about special education centres, students and teachers .
 Disability rights activist Nadir Khan sees this as discrimination and says data is really important to initiate an informed debate .
 AEPAM's report was really important for all the stakeholders, he said . He said the provincial bodies didn’t make data public .
 The federal government was not counting persons with disabilities in the ongoing census . It is pertinent to mention that the federal government is not counting people with disabilities .
 The directions of the Supreme Court disabled persons are now being counted . However, now on the directions of a disabled person are not counted .
 Punjab tops the list of all the four provinces and federating units as well as Islamabad Capital Territory in terms of provision of basic facilities, according to the report .
 Less than one percent of public schools in Punjab don't have water facility . In Sindh, almost 50 percent schools don’t have this basic facility .
 In Balochistan, 43 percent of schools don't have water facilities for students and teachers . In Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, 26 percent schools don’t have a water facility .
 Balochistan has 73 percent, Sindh 46 percent, and KP 12 percent such schools . Balochistani has 73% of the population .
 The schools without boundary walls have gained more attention in the wake of prevailing law and order and Punjab, the report claims . Balochistan has 55 percent, Sindh 41 percent and KP 13 percent .
 7 percent of schools in Punjab don't have electricity in the province . The non-availability of electricity in government schools is higher than above-mentioned facilities .
 Balochistan has 77 percent such schools, Sindh 63 percent and KP 38 percent . Balochistani has 77% such schools .
 The overall stats show poor condition of schools in Balochistan and Sindh, followed by KP and Punjab . The overall statistics show poor conditions of schools.
 The measure would have imposed sanctions on 21 Syrians, organizations and companies that were allegedly involved in chemical attacks in 2014 and 2015 . The measure, backed by the Western powers of Britain, France and the United States, would have been backed by Western powers .
 Nine council members voted in favour of the resolution, drafted by France and Britain .
 Bolivia voted against the text, while Ethiopia, Egypt, Egypt and Kazakhstan abstained . Bolivia voted for the text. Egypt, Kazakhstan and Ethiopia voted against it .
 A resolution needs nine votes in favour and no vetoes by permanent members of the United States, France, Russia, Britain or China to be adopted . A resolution would need nine votes to be voted in favour .
 The resolution would have also banned all countries from supplying the Syrian government with helicopters, which were used in attacks .
 The measure was drafted after a joint investigation by the UN and a global chemical weapons watchdog determined the Syrian government carried out at least three attacks involving chlorine gas .
 The Islamic State extremist group was behind at least one attack involving the use of mustard gas . The groups also found that the Islamic State extremists were behind the attack .
 The vote was one of the first confrontations between Russia and the United States since Donald Trump took office in January . U.S. President Donald Trump pledged to build closer ties with Moscow .
 The resolution would have put 11 Syrians, mainly military commanders, and 10 entities linked to chemical attacks in 2014 and 2015 on a UN sanctions blacklist . It would have placed 11 Syrians and 10 others on the blacklist .
 The joint panel of the U.N. and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons also found that Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant fighters used mustard gas in an attack in 2015 . The United Nations and the OPCW also found the Islamic state of Iraq
 Syrian government has repeatedly denied using chemical weapons in the war that has killed nearly 400,000 people . Nearly half the country's population has been displaced since 2011 .
 Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan says Ankara wants to capture Islamic State bastion of Raga in Syria . He says he wants to work with its allies to capture Raga, but without involvement of Syrian Kurdish militia .
 Raga is being cleansed from Daesh and given back to its original owners, Erdogan says .
 Turkish army launched unilateral military campaign inside Syria last August . It backs opposition fighters to clean its border from IS jihadists as well as Syrian Kurdish militia .
 The Turkish army sustained increasing casualties to capture Al-Bab . Compared to the lightning advance at the onset of its ‘Euphrates Shield’ operation, the Turkish army suffered increasing casualties .
 Turkish military says together with allied Syrian rebels it has completely taken Al-Bab from jihadists . On Friday, Turkish military said together with Syrian rebels, it had completely taken the group from jihadists.
 Erdogan said more than 3,000 jihadists had been killed throughout the operation . Turkey's Syria campaign had cost the jihadists a “very serious price,’s Erdogan said .
 North Korea recently launched a ballistic missile towards the sea off its eastern coast . The missile was launched by the North Korean regime .
 North Korea has since warned that it could test-launch an ICBM “anytime and anywhere,” in its first challenge to the new U.S. president .
 John Hemmings is a Research Fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies . The answer to the question can be wrapped up in the findings, he says .
 Well, North Korea is building up its nuclear and missile program that is causing apprehension worldwide . North Korea's nuclear program is causing concern worldwide .
 Its latest missile test triggered a fear of nuclear terror amongst the U.S. and other relevant states .
 US, South Korea, Japan and South Korea call each other in flurry of phone calls .
 U.S. plan to install anti-missile defence system in the South evoked concerns in the North . It was actually the plan of the United States to install the system .
 UN Security Council agrees to draw up new sanctions against the North . Several Western capitals threatened the country of its dire consequences . The test has ignited global resentment .
 US, Japan and South Korea also requested urgent diplomatic talks on Monday at the United Nations . The United Nations prohibits North Korea from engaging in ballistic missile activities .
 The meeting is already under a slew of United Nations and other international sanctions . But it is rather unlikely that the meeting will lead to any serious punishment .
 Despite sanctions and warnings, it has been developing its nuclear program . Despite all sanctions, the nuclear program has been developed .
Nothing has worked so far, neither the UN sanctions nor unilateral steps taken by the U.S., Japan and South Korea .
 US has been on tightening sanctions against the impoverished country . The impoverished country is already under several sets of UN sanctions .
 The test also raised attention-grabbing queries on the proliferation front . Sarcastically, the test also raises attention- grabbingbing queries.
 Alarmingly, North Korean nuclear advancements give a clear message to the international non-proliferation regime . North Korea's nuclear advancements may undermine the global disarmament efforts .
 It is taken as a step further towards miniaturisation of its nuclear warheads . It is a step closer to miniaturising the nuclear warheads.
 Whatsoever, it not only defies the nuclear abolitionists’ demands, but also increases the probability of the horizontal proliferation of the nuclear weapons in the region .
 It also threatens to undermine an already fragile security situation, it says . It threatens to undermined an Already fragile security.
 The ideal solution would be to resolve the issues with a balanced approach of sanctions and diplomatic engagements . However, the ideal solution is to resolve issues with the balanced approach to sanctions .
 India has been covertly helping North Korea in developing its nuclear and missile programs since 2006, says U.S. analysts .
 The UN has issued five major sanctions against North Korea since 2006 . Since 2006, the United Nations has issued 5 major sanctions .
 India has been reportedly involved in training dozens of North Koreans who later took key positions in its sensitive missile programs .
 North Koreans have received training related to missile and space programs in India for the past two decades . The outcome of the recent ballistic missile test can be seen in the shape of the latest test .
 The international community along with the other peace-loving countries is exasperated on North Korea's growing nuclear aspirations .
 Pakistan has condemned it as against the objective of a nuclear weapons-free Korean peninsula . Pakistan has also condemned it; expressing it asagainst the objective.
 It is desired that all countries in the region including North and South Korea, Japan, China, and the U.S. manage the situation diplomatically with utmost responsibility .
 The international community is concerned about the new security implications for the country in particular and the region in general . The International Community is concerned.
 China, one of the biggest partisans of North Korea, has also given a strong verdict against the missile launch . China says it would worsen the situation in the Korean Peninsula .
 The Chinese will need to be patient and hope that the timing works out so that the diplomatic channel will engage before they are forced to backpedal because of distress in North Korea .
 The test is the first by the North this year, South Korea’s Foreign Ministry says . The test demonstrated the “maniacal obsession’ of the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un .
 The North Korean threat is likely to expand into full-blown nuclear-weapons capability early in the term of the next president . It could be seen on the screens now, so it can be seen now .
 The Pentagon has already decided upon THAAD missile defence system . South Korea and Japan have also agreed to use the missile system .
 The test does not mean that North Korea is going to drop any nuclear bomb in the US . Instead, the international community is more concerned about the significant escalating enhancement of North Korean nuclear capabilities .
 North Korean leadership expressed willingness to talk to the world on its nuclear program subject to the lifting of sanctions and the provision of necessary economic assistance . There were plenty of opportunities in the past when North Korean leaders expressed its willingness to talks .
 The United States preferred to hurl threats on North Korea, aggravating the situation further . The collaborative approach would have been effective but regrettably, the U.S. preferred the threats on the North Korea .
 North Korea aspires to become the giant of the region by enhancing its nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles . But now North Korea is trying to become a giant by enhancing nuclear weapons.
 North Korea would need to miniaturise its warheads so that they can be fitted on a missile for delivery . On the other hand, analysts are of the view that in order to carry out nuclear attacks, North Korea will need to Miniature its warheads .
 There still remain reasonable doubts about Pyongyang's ability to miniaturise nuclear weapons . There are still reasonable doubts.
 The report also explores the influence of other major powers on South Asia’s strategic dynamics .
 China “fears that the widening nuclear and 79 CSSMENTOR.COM conventional military gaps between India and Pakistan may threaten regional stability,’ the study adds .
 India has the oldest, largest and fastest-growing nuclear programme of all non-Non-Proliferation Treaty states and the entire developing world . He notes that India is the oldest and fastest growing nuclear programme in the world .
 Australian PM complained to the Australian prime minister about what he called the "dumb deal" The United States made in agreeing to relocate approximately 1,250 refugees from Australia to the United States . He suggested to the Mexican president that the U.S. might help take care of some �
 He apparently remains determined to enact an executive order temporarily banning immigration from seven Muslim-majority countries . He apparently also remainsetermined to enact a temporary ban on immigration.
 It often means paying up front for benefits that are hard to see until you lose them, or that will only be obvious when you really need them .
 Sometimes, successful foreign policy even means keeping real victories quiet. Sometimes, success means keeping victories quiet .
 Invisible foreign policy doesn’t appeal to a president who cares about showmanship and flashy successes .
 Trump's initial storm of activity seems to have calmed in recent days . There is no evidence that he has turned to the kind of quiet, routine actions that make U.S. foreign policy run smoothly .
 Such efforts are not dramatic, but they are essential, and their absence could severely undermine U.S. interests . Such efforts could be detrimental to the United States.
 The policies that Trump decries have something in common with his policies .
 Free trade, alliances, and non-splashy diplomacy all come with public costs and less visible benefits . Free trade and alliances come with fewer benefits and less public costs .
 Free-trade agreements make it cheaper for everyone to buy consumer goods like televisions . But because such a benefit is spread out among all Americans, any given shopper at Best Buy is not likely to give the free- trade agreements themselves much 82 CSSMENTOR.COM thought .
 A factory closes down in their town. They certainly notice, however, when a factory closes.
 A survey of the ingredients of Trump-branded goods reveals that even Trump himself doesn't think that buying American is always the best deal for American entrepreneurs .
 Economists have long understood the concentrated costs and diffuse benefits of trade, which make costs politically salient and benefits harder to sell .
 Less obvious is that the benefits of alliances and diplomacy are also largely invisible .
 The apparent marginalization of Rex Tillerson from Trump’s decision-making and public diplomacy would make sense only to a president who views diplomacy as marginal .
 Thomas Schelling, the Nobel Prize-winning scholar who passed away late last year, noted that all of us tend to prioritize short-term gratification over long-term benefits .
 A liberalizing trade environment, a robust network of alliances, and regularized diplomacy provide worthwhile benefits . Elites have 83 CSSMENTOR.COM.COM agreed that a liberalized trade environment and a robustNetwork of alliances provide benefits .
 This trick also stops policymakers engaging in policies like protectionism that seem like a quick win but can be seriously damaging . In addition to providing benefits that are hard to see, such as the lower costs of goods thanks to trade, this trick is also a problem .
 The Smoot-Hawley tariff was introduced in 1930 to protect the U.S. economy from foreign competition . It ended up prolonging the Great Depression .
After this dismal experience, the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act changed the institutional blueprint of American trade policy . The Act was passed after a dismal experience .
 The new format helped make protectionism easier to resist by giving the president advance authority from Congress to negotiate trade agreements . It also tied U.S. tariff reductions to reciprocal foreign tariff cuts to reciprocal tariff cuts .
 Alliances and day-to-day diplomacy force policymakers and the public to pay premiums on insurance policies that they may need .
Good relationships with allies and partners have helped keep major wars at bay for 70 years . Strong alliances help reinforce the balance of power, as well as keep wars on the ground .
 Trump's berating of Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull was so shocking. This is one reason why Trump’s berating is so shocking, he said .
 Australia has been a staunch U.S. ally, contributing troops to nearly all conflicts in which the United States has been involved since World War I . Former GOP foreign policy officials point out that Australia is a staunch ally .
 Australia's contributions to conflicts in Asia are an important reminder of Australia’s importance to the United States’ future position in Asia . Over 17,000 Australians served in the Korean War and over 60,000 in the Vietnam War .
Foreign policy elites still back a liberal international order, but they need to step up as Trump challenges it . Trump challenges them .
 There are important pockets of support even within Trump's administration, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Tillerson and Mattis voiced strong support for NATO during their confirmation hearings . Vice President Mike Pence voiced support for the alliance at this year’s Munich Security Conference .
 Trump's rise is not simply a story of popular revolt against the liberal order, says CNN's John Sutter . But it is not just a story, he says, of a popular revolt.
 Even people’s views about trade do not necessarily track cleanly with their economic self-interest .
Trade preferences are shaped by many of the same forces that drove the presidential vote, rather than by the specifics of trade policy .
 Most voters probably weren't thinking much about alliances and diplomacy when they cast their ballots . Even if they had, it’s doubtful they would train their fire on longtime United States partners .
 respondents were asked to rate whether countries were allies or enemies of the United States . The survey was conducted just before the revelation of the troublesome Australia call .
 Trump made these issues salient by weaving a campaign narrative around concerns about free-trade deals and paying too much to support rich allies .
 He then wrapped these issues up in rhetoric about the most egregious mistakes elites have made in recent years, most notably the Iraq war debacle and the 2008 financial crisis, to seek to convince the public that a new approach was necessary .
 White House adviser Steve Bannon is by his side in the attack on international order . In short, the source of the attack is not the public, nor is it partisan elites, but rather it is the president himself .
 All this will severely complicate any efforts to restore faith in the order of the world . All this would severely complicate efforts to restored faith in Britain .
 It will always be difficult to get voters roused about something as abstract as the liberal international order. It is not merely a problem of better messaging, it is a problem for better messaging .
 It's up to those elites who still recognize and prioritize the invisible benefits that the system has provided to protect or promote it .
 Australia, Japan, and South Korea will be useful if there is a confrontation with China . China itself lacks allies, especially since China lacks allies .
Someone will have to point out that trade protection leads to price hikes at Walmart .
 Trump may have to remind him that some foreign policy victories need to stay invisible . He won't be able to take public credit for some of them.
 Crisis stability, terrorism prevention, intelligence gathering, and many other aspects of foreign policy are largely about the dogs that didn't bark .
 Elites still need to confront the criticisms of the existing order that Trump has exploited. Elites need to address the criticisms that Trump's order has exploited .
 Council on Foreign Relations trade expert Edward Alden has detailed the failure of every administration since John F Kennedy's to deliver on promised trade adjustment assistance to workers left behind by increasing globalization .
 NATO allies do need to get serious about spending a minimum of 2 percent of their GDP on defense . Only Estonia, Greece, Poland, the United Kingdom and the United States manage to meet the target .
 Track record of the postwar international order has been written in invisible ink . The track record is written in the ink of invisible ink.
 If we are not successful in defending it, its benefits may finally become plain to see . The benefits may be gone because they are gone .
 The policies of the Trump administration are unclear if not contradictory, but at best, it's unclear if they're contradictory .
 Putin needs to understand who in the White House and administration is key in making policy, he says . Putin must also understand who is key to making policy.
 An iron law of politics in Washington is that influence on the president is inversely proportional to physical distance from the Oval Office .
 Pentagon is metaphorically a million political miles away from 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue . Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis is by far the most experienced and knowledgeable senior appointee in national security and defence .
 Rex Tillerson has so far been relatively invisible in setting a mark on U.S. foreign policy . In contrast, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is relatively invisible .
 FSB has compiled dossiers on the two Stephens — Bannon and Miller — who appear to hold sway over much of President Donald Trump’s thinking .
 The Washington Post ran a lengthy piece on the new National Security Advisor Lt. Lt. Steve Bannon's personal history .
 McMaster has not been in place long enough to detect what his future policies may or may not be . McMaster has been in charge of McMaster's policies for more than a decade .
 The Russian president only needs to go back four or five decades for appropriate lessons . If that is correct, the Russian president should go back 4 or 5 decades .
 Nixon’s triangular politics balancing the Soviet Union with an outreach to China . The most relevant is President Richard Nixon's triangular politics .
 The second is Ronald Reagan’s firm stand on intermediate nuclear forces that ultimately led to the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty between Moscow and Washington . The third is Reagan's firm stand.
 The threat of ‘monolithic communism’ embodied in the unshakable ‘alliance’ between Moscow and Beijing . For much of the Cold War and certainly during the Eisenhower/Kennedy/Johnson administrations.
 The overture to China not only eased withdrawal from the Vietnam War, but also eased withdrawal of Vietnam War .
 Détente with the Soviet Union followed along with the ABM Treaty and Strategic Arms Limitations agreements . The ABM treaty and Strategic arms Limitations agreement were signed in 1994 .
 Reagan persisted in deploying both cruise and Pershing missiles to Europe to counter Moscow's SS-20’s .
 For Putin, as Nixon exploited the USSR-PRC cleavages, Moscow can do the same regarding the U.S. and pressures in Europe eroding alliance cohesion .
 Putin must not back down once he embarks on his policy choices. From Ronald Reagan, Putin must back down on his policies .
President Barack Obama will be the most formidable challenge for Washington . He has been the president of both U.S. presidents .
First, the seemingly monolithic cohesion of NATO and the EU is in tatters . First, the seeming monolithity of the EU and NATO is in a tatters.
 The rift between Turkey, Netherlands and Denmark and possible confrontation with the U.S. in Syria over the Kurds are indicators that “something is rotten’ in these alliances, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This ‘rottenness’ can be exploited as Nixon did in the early 1970s with China and Russia .
 Conditions in the Middle East and Persian Gulf are even riper for Russian engagement than before, according to reports .
 As battle for Raqqa appears to grow closer, U.S. support and reliance on Kurdish Pesh Merga and YPG forces enflame Turkish hostility towards the PKK and the Kurds .
 The Arab Gulf states over the P-5 Plus One nuclear agreement with Iran and growing costs of the Yemen intervention provide Moscow an opportunity to play honest broker .
 greater Russian access to these markets can lead to better understanding of the capability and technology of weapons the United States has sold . U.S. has sold more weapons to Russia than it has ever sold .
 The major if not overriding aims are to enhance Russian security on geostrategic, political and economic levels . The major aim is to enhance Russia's security.
Le Pen would attempt a Charles de Gaulle and withdraw from NATO militarily or entirely is surely not impossible . Whether Le Pen would try to pull out of NATO is certainly not impossible.
 Germany's election defeat of Angela Merkel by a government more favourably disposed to Russia is not beyond belief .
 Russia has real interests in South Asia, especially on matters related to India and Pakistan . Russia has interests in increasing its influence and arms sales .
 Russia could be helpful in Afghanistan by virtue of its relationship with Iran . Russia could become an honest broker meditating between India and Pakistan .
 This is what the United States has attempted to do with little success . The U.S. has failed to achieve a significant amount of success in recent years .
 The Trump administration may be following an ‘America First’ policy, an opening for Moscow . The president's interest in becoming embroiled further in the region is an opened for Moscow.
 If Putin is as clever as some believe, the opportunities are too great to waste . If Putin was as clever, he may be too clever to waste, he might be too smart .
 As Nixon exploited cleavages between China and the Soviet Union, Putin would leverage the fault lines in the alliance, says Putin .
Closer relations with Turkey would provide leverage both in Northern Europe and in Syria . Closer relations could provide leverage in the region if Ankara was perceived to be moving towards Moscow's orbit .
 Propaganda, fake news, disinformation and misinformation are tools the Kremlin knows how to use .
 If Western cohesion cannot be entirely shattered, it is unlikely that these activities would provide a new cause celebre around which NATO and the EU might unite .
 Russian influence without involvement of large number of military forces surely will grow . If Mosul and Raqaa fall, Russian influence will grow.
 Trump administration continues to increase forces in the fight against IS . A further benefit is that if the fight continues to be caught in a quagmire .
 The writer is UPI’s Arnaud de Borchgrave Distinguished Columnist . He is a Senior Advisor at Washington D.C. and chairman of two private companies .
 Why America Loses Wars It Starts: Failure to know and to understand the circumstances in which force is used guarantees failure .
 A consensus has existed for decades among the main political forces of the U.S. and Europe . The idea that economic openness is positive is positive, says analysis .
 The flows of trade and investment and investment have thus been gradually liberalised over time . Workers have also been liberalised in recent years .
 Western societies have become more prosperous, more open and more cosmopolitan . Thanks to this liberal order, Western societies are more prosperous and more open .
 Most voters were prepared to accept a greater level of globalisation . Some lost out from this economic openness, but some lost out .
Developing countries have also benefitted from economic globalisation, exporting products to the wealthy transatlantic market and sending remittances to their countries of origin .
Social democrats, Christian democrats and liberals have become increasingly squeezed electorally by new extremist parties . In recent years, they have called for the closing of borders, both to trade and to immigration .
 Most of these are parties of the far right (although there is also a far-left variety), and they call for regaining national sovereignty . They attribute to global markets, to a dysfunctional EU and to migration policies that they consider excessively liberal .
 All of them aspire to achieving this by reducing international trade and expelling immigrants . All aspire to reduce international trade by reducing the number of immigrants .
 Their protectionist, nationalist and xenophobic messages seek to give simple solutions to complex questions . They are attracting increasing numbers of voters disenchanted with the directions societies are taking .
Over the course of what follows we put forward five hypotheses to account for the support for these new parties . We put forward 5 hypotheses to explain the support of new parties.
Experts and news media concentrate on two hypotheses to explain why the electorate is lending increasingly more support to the new anti-establishment parties . Economic decline and xenophobia are the main reasons for the increase in support for the new parties .
 There are those who maintain that the populist revolt is fuelled by lower and middle-class voters who have seen their incomes stagnate .
As Branko Milanovic2 has shown, these are the people who have lost out from globalisation . As Branki Milanovic 2 has shown , these are people who lost out on globalisation.
Low-wage workers from Western countries have been unable to adapt to the new world-wide economic and technological reality . They are losing their jobs due to competition from products made in low-wage countries .
 The French National Front is drawing on the support of socialist voters, from the working and even middle classes . Many unemployed and poorly-paid workers in areas suffering industrial decline, Labour voters, supported Brexit in the hopes that a UK outside the EU might better protect them.
 The second, similarly plausible, hypothesis is that voters are not leaning to the right for economic but rather identity and cultural reasons . The third, similar, is the hypothesis that voters don't want to be left out of the right .
Since the end of the Second 91 CSSMENTOR.COM World War it has been politically incorrect to express . The latent racism and xenophobia that have always existed in the West has always existed .
 Voters are turning to parties with strong leaders who promise to protect the ‘national identity’ and halt the process of change .
 Fear of terrorist attacks by extremist Islamic groups fuels this discourse . It enables hostility towards foreigners to be focused on Muslim immigrants . Europe has not experienced such a political debate for many years .
 Putin in Russia is a person both Trump and Le Pen profess to admire . Putin has a fatherfigure at the head of the government, according to Putin .
For the moment there is empirical evidence to corroborate both hypotheses. For the moment, there is evidence to support both hypotheses .
 U.S. regions that import the most Chinese products tend to de-industrialise most rapidly, creating pockets of unemployment .
 It is precisely these areas that tend to vote for the most radical politicians, with the most protectionist policy platforms .
White middle and upper classes are becoming more and more openly xenophobic . Other studies have shown that voters supporting parties of the extreme right in Europe and Trump in the US are far from being losers of globalisation .
 The best predictor of voting for the far right is support for policies clamping down on immigration, not centre-right economic preferences or mistrust of politicians in general .
 Study shows men are more disposed to supporting these parties than women . Women are worst affected by the increase in free trade, as they do low-wage jobs .
Anti-establishment parties threatening to reverse decades of economic policies that have generated wealth and prosperity . For many, it is important to discern which of the two hypotheses is correct .
 Both hypotheses are correct, in which case it will be necessary to address both causes together . But perhaps both hypotheses are wrong, and both are correct .
 It is possible that limiting the problem to economic decline, inequality and xenophobia is overly reductionist . It's possible, but it is possible, that limiting economic decline and inequality is over- reductionist.
 The reality is more complex and there are other factors that might account for the rejection of globalisation and the liberal order . There are more factors that may account for globalisation.
 The impact of new technology Robotics and artificial intelligence are normally presented as major advances for our societies . The impact on new technology is usually presented as big advances for society .
 Robots have been introduced into many industries, from car-making to aviation and shipyards .
In the future they will drive and cook for us and make household repairs . In the future, they will cook and make house repairs .
 We can use them to chat instantaneously, carry out banking operations, watch a football match or film and find out how to get anywhere as fast as possible . We can also use them as a way to help you get anywhere.
 The advent of Uber as a replacement for conventional taxis, in addition to other applications, is transforming our lives . Uber is transforming the lives of people in the world.
 It is precisely this progress, and the speed with which it is unfolding, that scares many people . But it is precisely that progress is being made, and it is frightening many people.
 Technology increases productivity, but it also reduces employment in the short term, particularly routine work not requiring much qualifications .
 The Luddite movement called for the destruction of the machines during the Industrial Revolution . This leads many members of the working classes to look askance and reject modernity .
 All this is creating a major technological gulf between the highest-qualified professionals, who see their incomes rise and are comfortable in an ever-more competitive world .
 Millions of poorly-qualified and rural voters feel that the state has failed to do enough to help them clamber aboard the train of modernity .
 Those who can afford to invest in an education that will prepare them for the 21st century have everything to gain . Those who are able to pay for their education will be able to afford it .
 Those who cannot afford this will experience more and more difficulties in finding work and will be stranded on the sidelines, even if they have a university degree . Those who can't afford it will face more difficulties.
 This creates enormous frustration and may account for the anti-establishment vote . This creates huge frustration and could account for anti- establishment vote .
 In those days, people retired at the age of 65 because life expectancy at the time was exactly 65 years .
Life expectancy in most developed countries has risen to around 80 years . Retirement has remained at 65, but life expectancy in some countries has increased to 65 .
 In an increasingly competitive and globalised world, this level of social spending is hard to maintain .
 It requires raising the retirement age, increasing the contribution years or cutting the value of pensions . But the resistance is enormous, says the author .
 Most people in many European countries view pensions as an inalienable acquired right . Most people see pensions as a right to have a right .
 Some of the solutions put forward to protect them are increasing tariffs on products originating from Asia . Some are introducing capital controls to preserve wealth inside the country and raising taxes .
 Another group that may be becoming more and more protectionist is public sector workers .
 Hitherto workers in the state sector have been less exposed to foreign competition than their counterparts in the private sector . Their salaries have remained relatively high, allowing their salaries to remain relatively high .
Once the globalisation of economic activity passes from the secondary sector of industrial manufacturing to the service sector, competition is also going to be noticed in the public sector .
 Public-sector workers tend to have better-organised trade unions, according to experts . But resistance to liberalisation will be accordingly greater for public- sector workers .
 The recent opposition to the free-trade agreement between the U.S. and the EU and TISA may be explained from this perspective .
 The opening up of the public tendering process to foreign suppliers is seen as a threat . 94 CSSMENTOR.COM then act as a Trojan horse for completely privatising such sectors as education, health and water .
Teachers and students in state education comprise another interest group that is becoming more resistant to globalisation .
 The former do not want to be exposed to the competition that exists in the private sector . The ex-businessman says he wants to avoid being exposed to private sector competition .
High-quality state education funded by public spending. And the latter demand high-quality education funding by public money .
Many pensioners argue that wage competition with emerging economies should be restricted . They argue that capital controls should be used to retain the generation of wealth and its taxation .
 There is a feeling that free trade benefits the upper echelons of the establishment above all, because they can provide their offspring with a better education and insert them into the transnational elite .
Children of the middle and lower-middle classes are educated at public universities with dwindling resources . They can afford an education at Harvard or Berkeley in the US, Oxford, Cambridge or the London School of Economics in the UK .
 The fifth and final cause that might account for the rejection of the liberal order is the growing mistrust that large swathes of the population feel towards democratic institutions. The crisis of representative democracy is the fifth and last cause .
8 mainly among parties of the centre-left and centre-right, that have played an excessively dominant role in political life . Many Western countries have witnessed the development of a kind of partitocrazia .
 For many voters, this liberal centre takes turns wielding power, but their policies are very similar . For many, it's very similar to that of other liberal centres .
There is a sensation that this partitocrazia is at the mercy of a plutocracy, comprising major economic interests, that benefits disproportionately from the way the system operates .
This leads to a lack of connection and trust between the elites and the rest of the population . This leads to the lack of trust and connection between the elite and the other population .
 Many citizens think that the political class does not represent them . Many think that experts form part of this elite that benefits from the current system, which is why they fail to offer solutions .
 According to this hypothesis, the global financial crisis of 2008 and the way it was subsequently handled will have had social effects . The impact of which we are only just starting to discern is only just beginning to discern .
 The credibility of experts, above all of economists, has been damaged by their failure to predict the crisis . The most 95 CSSMENTOR.COM influential profession in the public debate has been conspicuously damaged .
Taxpayers had to bail out banks while very few bankers have had to pay for their mistakes . Thereafter the perception that the current political and judicial system benefits the elites will have been reinforced by the fact that taxpayers had to bailout banks .
 Many voters feel that the banks’ upper echelons have walked away with early retirement pay-offs worth millions of dollars, or euros, while ordinary employees have to work all their lives .
 TV viewers and newspaper readers became aware that experts were not neutral . Many television viewers became aware of the problem .
 Each expert explained the causes of the crisis from a very different perspective . Each expert put forward solutions that were often in mutual conflict .
 Some called for greater fiscal stimulus, while others defended austerity . Others defended austerity.
 This has created a good deal of confusion, while simultaneously undermining the role of experts . This has also created a lot of confusion. This has caused some confusion, but also undermined experts' role .
 For many, there is a sensation that each expert has his or her own agenda, and that almost all defend the liberal order because it benefits them .
 Experts’ and technocrats’ loss of legitimacy arises from the lack of political solutions to our societies’ problems, says John Sutter .
 For many years, politicians have hidden behind a veil of technical solutions . Politicians have been trying to find solutions for many years .
Central banks should be independent and headed by technocrats shielded from public and democratic scrutiny . They have agreed that central banks should have been independent .
 The World Trade Organisation and the International Monetary Fund have delegated the negotiation of free-trade and investment treaties to experts . They have ceded sovereignty to international bodies such as the World Trade Organization .
 In the case of Europe, the transfer of sovereignty to the European Central Bank and the European Commission has been even greater .
 The delegation worked well for as long as the economy and employment were growing. Such delegation works well for a long time, says the economist .
With the advent of the crisis, the authority and legitimacy of the technocrats started to be called into greater question . But with the lack of a political response, they began to accumulate more and more power .
 It may be argued that the politicians have left it to the central banks to tackle the crisis with monetary stimuli .
 The structural problems besetting developed societies cannot be solved by monetary policy alone . Unfortunately, it is becoming more and more evident that the structural problems can't be solved.
 All this questioning has led to doubts being cast on the open society . Many voters are prepared to lend their support to candidates who speak in a way that connects with the ordinary citizen .
 The antiestablishment message succeeds in attracting an amalgam of highly 96 CSSMENTOR.COM heterogeneous voters, but with an ever-wider basis .
 It encompasses those who feel vulnerable and left behind, but also those who are doing well economically but are disillusioned with politicians and technocrats . Those who want to curb the power of the state and the establishment to unleash market forces .
 The questioning of experts emerged particularly starkly in the Brexit campaign . The questioning was particularly stark in the campaign.
Donald Trump’s victory in the U.S. elections and the rise of parties like the French National Front and the Alternative for Germany have taken the establishment by surprise . The rise of moderate forces alternating power in Western countries has called into question decades of moderates alternating power.
 The fear of losing national identity in societies that are increasingly diverse and cosmopolitan, anxiety about technological change and its impact on employment, frustration about the dwindling resources available to maintain the welfare state .
 All these intermingle and threaten the open society and the international order that has held sway for decades and has been responsible for spectacular economic progress but has also produced growing material inequalities and inequalities of opportunity in advanced societies .
 Responding to the well-founded fears of their citizens is perhaps the greatest challenge confronting Western nations .
 The nationalist, protectionist, xenophobic and authoritarian leanings of many anti-establishment parties need to be combated by focusing on the causes from which they arise .
 Simply ignoring them and hoping that the storm will blow over, as has been the habit of recent years, is a recipe for failure . Just ignore them and hope that they'll blow over is a Recipe for failure.
 Developing better policies for integrating immigrants and refugees is crucial in this context . Developing good policies for integration is crucial for refugees and immigrants in the future .
 It is also necessary to ensure a better redistribution of the enormous amounts of wealth generated by globalisation . It is needed to emphasise the advantages of diversity and to prepare citizens for technological change .
 It is not so much a case of protecting against the effects of globalisation as empowering citizens, it is not a case for protecting against globalisation . It is the most out of it to the fullest extent possible.
 It is necessary to give a better explanation of the limitations faced by the welfare state and the reforms it needs in order to be sustainable . It is also necessary to open new public forums and channels enabling citizens to feel more and better represented .
 Miguel Otero Iglesias, Senior analyst, Elcano Royal Institute, and Federico Steinberg are among the authors .
 Russia and China stand on the same side of a major policy issue as the U.S. It is one those few times that Russia and Chinese veto wielding rival nations stand on same side.
 Pakistan and India, also usually found on opposite ends of UN resolutions, have expressed their opposition to the move . Pakistan, India and India have also expressed opposition.
 The lines, as they are currently drawn, are not based on political affiliations . Instead the nations with nuclear weapons oppose the ban, and the ones without support it .
 The official reason given by the U.S. and its allies is that countries like North Korea and Iran will not abide by the ban and hence global disarmament would never be possible . Both North Korean and Iran sat in on the talks, although both North Korea.
 The military and political power afforded by nuclear weapons will never make them obsolete for the nations that possess them . However, it is not hard to see that it will never be obsolete.
Almost all nuclear-capable countries are in the process of upgrading their arsenal . It is difficult to see them give it up .
 counties who support the ban are not deterred. Despite the nigh impossibility of the move, counties still support the move .
 They hope to pass a resolution banning nuclear weapons through their numbers . Then let the moral and legal pressure generated from the abstinence of major nations to whittle them down .
 These are ambitious, and slightly unrealistic plans that would take decades to have any effect . The plans would take years to take any effect, but would have no effect, they say .
Juncker said rights of EU citizens will be top of the agenda for negotiations . With just two years foreseen for negotiations, Juncker said.
 Settling Britain’s exit bill is estimated by the Commission to be 60 billion euros ($64 billion, £52 billion)
 Britain on Thursday will begin the monumental task of incorporating EU legislation for when the divorce is finalised .
 The government will publish a ‘white paper’ on Thursday outlining its plans for the legal overhaul . MPs will be able to amend the laws as they are brought under the national system .
 Juncker will meet in Malta with EU President Donald Tusk, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy .
 Tusk bid farewell to Britain on Wednesday after receiving the British government's divorce letter . The divorce letter triggers Article 50 of the EU's Lisbon Treaty — the exit clause .
 Britain has until October 2018 at the latest to come up with a draft divorce plan, says Michel Barnier .
 May called for Britain and the EU to “work hard’ to avoid failure in the negotiations . May asserted in January that ‘no deal is better than a bad deal’ in her letter .
 The cliff edge scenario of Britain leaving the European bloc with no deal has alarmed business leaders . Business leaders have emphasised the need for a transitional arrangement to allow for the divorce deal to be gradually implemented .
Guy Verhofstadt said such a transition period should be limited to three years . The European Parliament’s chief Brexit negotiator, Guy Ver Hofstadt, said the transition period would be three years.
 leaders of the 27 remaining EU countries will hold a special summit on April 29 to rubber stamp the plans . Tusk is due to issue draft “negotiating guidelines’s’ on Friday .
 EU's 60th anniversary this month marks the first anniversary of the EU's first anniversary . The bloc has tried to show a united front in the face ofBrexit .
 Britons last year voted 52 percent to 48 percent in favour of the EU . Tens of thousands of pro-EU protesters marched in London on Saturday .
 Scots voted to stay in the EU but were outnumbered nationwide . The referendum result has also led to a resurgence of Scotland’s independence campaign .
 Foreign Minister Boris Johnson played an instrumental role in the leave campaign . The Telegraph described it as 'a magnificent moment' on its front page .
 Britain is undergoing a reimagining of its identity and place in the world . To answer this question one must first look to Britain which is changing its identity .
 The UK has been forced to reconsider where it stands in the world . With political turmoil and an ever-shakier British Union, the UK is forced reconsider .
 Many Brexiteers have declared Britain as now open for business on the international stage . Many of the Brexites have declared the UK as open to business .
 The imperial pink has all but gone from the map with only a few far-flung outposts remaining as reminders of the Empire's former reach .
 Many MP’s have been calling for better trade deals with the Commonwealth . It is not clear how prepared the UK really is to deal with Pakistan on an equal footing .
 When the UK is trading on colonial nostalgia it is difficult to see a meaningful and mutual beneficial relationship, with the subcontinent .
 There has been a concerted push to get better trade deals between the colonies in the Anglosphere .
 British MP Daniel Hannan has called for a union of English speaking countries .
 CANZUK is backed by the influential media mogul Conrad Black . The political organisation has been backed by Black .
 Pakistan, a country further removed from the “shared heritage’ of the CANZUK nations, is at risk of being marginalized . Pakistan's language, culture, culture and religion, are at risk.
 This was in contrast to his campaign to leave the EU, which focused on curtailing European immigration . This was a campaign that heavily focused on immigration particularly from Eastern Europe .
 Antipodean immigrants have always held a different status then immigrants from developing countries . The term expat is often reserved for them, as opposed to the derisive term of immigrant .
 A 2014 YouGov poll found that 59 per cent of respondents thought the British Empire was “more something to be proud of’ than ashamed of .
British imperial nostalgia is a phenomenon without severe tensions and fault lines in a country that is acutely divided . However, it would be misleading to characterise the recent rise of British imperial nostalgia .
Young middle-class voters rallied around the EU as a progressive cause, seeing themselves more as international citizens . The vote showed the new conflicts in British society, according to the BBC .
 The vote came from deprived working-class areas in the post-industrial North of England .
 Scotland voted to remain by a margin of 62 per cent to 38 per cent in a referendum . The SNP’s strangle hold on Scottish politics is evident in their threats to once again hold an independence referendum .
Commonwealth attachments between the UK and Pakistan seem consigned to the history books . England and Scotland share a remarkable amount of culture and links .
 It is difficult to see post-Brexit attitudes as sustainable given the current limits to Britain’s global reach and influence .
 The demise of British nationalism is unlikely to continue in its current pseudo-imperialist trajectory .
 The hypocritical tirade of UK, EU and U.S. populist-nationalists against the globalization bogeyman is ironic . The ideas of these movements are organized and disseminated through social media and internet forums .
 India recently rebuffed British trade interests over the decision to cancel Indian post university visas . Some politicians have pinned their postBrexit hopes on.
 Britain faces a difficult task in forging a new identity and place in the world . Britain's revitalised interest in the former Empire will bring a revaluation of the colonial legacy in the wider commonwealth .