 The Russian-Ukrainian Friendship Treaty has been highly controversial on both sides in the past . Ukraine to ditch Russian friendship treaty amid tensions amid tensions .
Demonstrators at an anti-war rally in Moscow slammed Russia's actions in Crimea since February 27, 2014 . The question arose as to whether Ukraine should withdraw from the important friendship treaty.
 Both sides agreed to respect their respective territorial integrity and existing borders . In Article 2 of the treaty, which came into force in 1999.
 Russia grossly violated the treaty with the annexation of Crimea and the covert war in the eastern Ukrainian coal-mining region of Donbass . From Kyiv's point of view, Russia grossly violate the treaty.
 Ukraine informed Russia and the UN of its intention not to renew the treaty . In previous months, Ukraine informed both Russia and UN of their intention not.
 Kyiv only decided to do discontinue the treaty four years after the annexation of Crimea . The Ukrainian government mainly used legal arguments to explain why it did not end the treaty .
 The treaty has been referred to during various lawsuits against Russia before international courts . The treaty was referred to in various cases against Russia .
 There were fears that the withdrawal from the treaty would "unleash" Russia, according to Ukrainian experts .
 The decision was, however, against a formal withdrawal, but in favor of a non-renewal . The decision is against a full withdrawal, though .
 From Ukraine's point of view, this way is simpler under international law. From Ukraine, this is simpler for Ukraine, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Russia finally recognized Ukraine as an independent nation, including Crimea . In short, Russia recognized Crimea as a nation .
 The treaty was signed in 1997 by the then-presidents of Russia and Ukraine, Boris Yeltsin and Leonid Kuchma . It only came into force after both parliaments ratified it in April 1999 .
 The fact that such an agreement was not reached until six years after the collapse of the Soviet Union was mainly due to the dispute over the Black Sea Fleet .
 Russia and Ukraine signed an agreement on the status and distribution of the Black Sea Fleet . Russia received the lion's share of the ships . The treaty was signed just three days before it was signed .
 Critics complain that it does not contain any mechanisms for conflict resolution . Critics say that it doesn't contain any mechanism for conflict Resolution .
 In the years that followed, Russian-Ukrainian friendship was repeatedly tested . The friendship has been repeatedly tested.
 The already seriously crumbling relations were further strained in late 2003 . In late 2003, relations between the U.S.-U.S. relations were strained .
 There was a dispute over the Ukrainian island of Tusla in the Kerch Strait when Russia tried to connect it to its mainland by building a dam .
 Moscow turned off the supplies to Ukraine for the first time in 2006 . The treaty expressly forbids economic pressure on Ukraine .
 Kyiv protested loudly against Russian measures but still kept to the treaty . On both occasions, Kyiv protests loudly against the Russian measures .
 Ukraine asks Germany, NATO to send ships to Sea of Azov Gas delivery . The treaty was on the brink of collapse from the Russian side in 2008 .
 The lower house of the Russian parliament suggested to then-President Dmitry Medvedev that he consider withdrawing from the treaty if Ukraine were to make a bid for NATO membership .
 At that time, the NATO summit in Bucharest sidelined the prospect of Ukraine's accession to the distant future .
 A Membership Action Plan, a kind of pre-accession program that Kyiv was striving for, was rejected . But a membership Action Plan was rejected.
 Yuri Luzhkov, the then-mayor of Moscow, proposed to let the treaty with Kyiv expire in order to question Ukraine's ownership of Crimea . The treaty is expected to expire in the coming months .
 The border issue is unaffected due to a separate treaty on the border between Russia and Ukraine from 2003 that will remain in force . From Kyiv's point of view, the border issue was unaffected .
 Germany offers to mediate between Russia and Ukraine. The shelling begins around sunset .
 The front lines near Donetsk see nightly mortar and machine gun fire as the conflict rages on .
 Caught in the crossfire are many elderly civilians who are too impoverished to go elsewhere . Many elderly civilians are too poor to leave the country.
 Residents of Zhovanka in the so-called ‘gray zone,’ a thin strip of land separating warring militaries, line up to see a visiting doctor .
Residents continue to live in half-destroyed homes with leaky roofs, even through the winters . rent in nearby cities has skyrocketed since the beginning of the conflict .
 Women line up to receive medicine and multivitamins in Zhovanka. Living on the front lines on humanitarian aid .
 Food and humanitarian supplies are delivered to the town by charity organizations . Crossing checkpoints sometimes require people to wait more than a day in line .
 Svetlana Zavadenko lives on the front lines in Spartak, Russia . She has six broken ribs and a broken leg in her home.
 The walls collapsed after several mortars exploded in her yard . She was injured when the walls collapsed.
 Neighbors had to dig Zavadenko out of the rubble and she was sent to the hospital with six broken ribs and a ruptured liver . She was also sent to hospital with a broken liver .
 She smokes ‘Minsk’ brand cigarettes and laughs when asked what she thinks about the war .
 Zavadenko recovered from her injuries and lives alone with several pets . She lives with her pets.
 Spartak has not had electricity, gas, or water services since 2014 . She uses a grill to cook her food, so she uses it to cook food .
 For firewood, she goes to an abandoned furniture factory nearby and collects plywood . She goes to the factory nearby to collect plywood.
Living on the front lines. Possibility of a drawdown Damage from shelling .
 A new ceasefire may be in sight after an October peace summit in Berlin . Ukraine's President Petro Poroshenko said he was ready to end hostilities in eastern Ukraine .
 Even if both sides agree on a ceasefire, they will face opposition from their militaries . They claim their sacrifices were too heavy to put down their weapons .
 Life on the Kerch Strait goes on as tensions mount . Life on Kerch strait goes on in the summer of 2018 .