 My first trip to Ukraine was in early 1992, six months after independence was declared .
 During that visit, I interviewed many people but the highlight was Leonid Kravchuk, the country’s first president .
 Ukraine has been struggling since the start of the Ukrainian revolution . The country's government has been in turmoil since the revolution began . Ukraine is one of the world's most troubled countries .
Ukrainian journalist has tried to help the country economically over the years by aiding business investment and reporting on its political situation . He says he has also reported on the country's political situation.
 In 2004, I spent four weeks covering the Orange Revolution, and returned in June 2015 concerned that the country's decades-long struggle with Russia had entered the most dangerous phase ever, of destruction and open warfare .
When I interviewed Kravchuk in 1992, every one was concerned about the region's stability, the future of the Soviet Union's nuclear stockpile and how Ukraine would protect itself from Moscow .
 The weapons were divided amongst Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Russia and Byelorussia . There was a protocol that prevented an accidental nuclear war .
 To illustrate, he escorted me, my photographer and a translator-friend into his private office . Two telephones sat - one red and one white, one red, one white .
 The red one connected him directly to the Kremlin and the white connected him to the leaders of the three other republics that housed nuclear weapons . The other one connected the president to the presidents of three other countries .
 A nuclear attack was only possible, he said, if all four agreed upon it . He said a nuclear attack would only be possible if all the four agreed on it .
 Russia and its operatives have caused 6,200 deaths, 30,000 wounded, 1. million displaced persons and the loss of 9% of Ukraine’s territory . That seemed tenuous at the time, but what happened following those tumultuous events has contributed to today's violence .
 Kravchuk asked for a follow-up interview 20 years after his first interview in 1993 . He agreed, more than 20 years later.
 "My life would be in vain if they take this land," he said . "There is no alternative but to fight,” he said.
 Ukraine's decision to surrender its nuclear weapons has condemned the country to Russian infiltration and takeover . I asked Kravchuk about Ukraine’s decision to give up nuclear weapons .
 Kravchuk then engaged in lengthy negotiations with President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore . The U.S. and Western Europe imposed systematic pressure on us, he says . Kravchenko says .
 The Russians spent the next 20 years tightening their grip, gutting Ukraine’s military and Ukrainian leaders let them do so .
 Russians were here running the secret service and organizing meetings against Ukraine, he said .
 Ukraine appeal under the Geneva Convention to be designated as an “occupied country’s” Ukraine will lead to a suspension of debts freeing up more money for defense and impose reparations on Russia for damage, displacement and deaths .
 Russia would veto this on the Security Council and the General Assembly, he said . "I think other prominent Ukrainians would agree to do this, but I have doubts about," he said.
 He wants to restore the Greater Russian Empire, not the Soviet Union, he says . He wants the Russian Empire to be restored .
 Hitler wanted to incorporate all Germanic people under an expanded Third Reich empire . This philosophy, he said, is no different than Hitler’s who wanted to include all German people under the Third Reich .
 Ukrainians must never give up to keep their country and he never will, he says . He says Ukrainians must not give up their country. He says he will never do so.
 My first visit to Ukraine was in February 1992 and the City of Kiev was gray, bleak and joyless as was the rest of Soviet Union .
 Last month I re-visited -23 years and several other assignments later -to find a new nation of extremes .
 Russian operatives still lurk in the corridors of power. There is prosperity and there is poverty; there is peace and war and war . There are reformers in high places and looters in low places .
 The 2014 revolution forced the thieves and Russian puppets fully out of the shadows . The revolution forced thieves and puppets to leave the shadows of Russia .
 Former President Victor Yanukovych betrayed the people, stole from them and then began murdering them . Former President Yanukovych was the leader of the Yanukovych regime .
 Events spiraled downward until he was toppled exposing his Russian-inspired kleptocracy .
 This has enraged and called Ukrainians in greater numbers than ever to make sacrifices . This has angered and called Ukrainian people in greater number than ever.
 This trip I saw more flags than ever and met some remarkable patriots who have realized that the public itself must rally to the cause of trying to stop, and eventually reverse, the steady takeover by Russia since independence .
 Yanukovych lived like a 19th Century Czar between 2002 and 2014 . He oversaw the destruction of Ukraine's military in preparation for the slow invasion of Ukraine .
 Its manpower was reduced and its equipment sold for profit by corrupt officials . Its equipment was sold for Profit by corrupt Officials .
 Most revealing was his estate outside Kiev and his scale of excess . But most revealing was the scale of his excess .
 Before 2014, his lifestyle was top secret, guarded by 1,000 soldiers and a 25-foot high green fence along a 34-mile perimeter .
 The corruption that has ruined Ukraine is no longer a whispered rumor or a mere suspicion . The corruption has ruined the country's economy and its reputation .
 The most poignant moment for me on this visit was an interview with a young member of the Right Sector, led by Dmytro Yarosh .
 If volunteers had not helped, he argued, the eastern half of the country would have fallen into Moscow's hands by now . He argued volunteers would have helped, if they had not.
 I interviewed "Maley" his battalion code name, and he told me his story . I interviewed him about his battalion name and his story.
 He taped a brass plate his mother bought for him to his chest, and went to the front to join the cause . He lost patience so he took his grandfather's hunting rifle, and taped the plate .
 The war is not close to Kiev or Lviv, but there are reminders in the form of memorials and men in fatigues . Some are asking for donations for the families and health care costs of volunteer soldiers .
 A 45-year-old professional woman in Kiev raises money for medicine and her husband helps volunteer battalions by procuring supplies .
 At the time, he was driving a new, outfitted ambulance back from Belgium to the war front . He paid for with donations and fundraising efforts there .
 The diaspora is also re-awakening to Ukraine's needs, after two decades of being mistreated by Ukraine's corrupt officials . Ukraine has been mistreated for two decades by its corrupt officials.
 Canada has been quick to condemn Putin and to provide military training support and funds . Canada has as many as two million people of full or partial Ukrainian heritage .
 Canada also endorses the provision of lethal weapons to Ukraine by the west to repel and push back the Russians . Russia is out of the country, and now Russian troops are out of Ukraine .
 Canada and others cannot do so unilaterally and are waiting for the White House to agree . Canada and other countries are waiting to agree on the issue .
 He's a former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine and Russia and Fellow at the Atlantic Council in Washington . He's also a former United States Ambassador to Russia .
Recent publicity that some Ukrainian militias are comprised of neo Nazis frightens some politicians and donors . But recent publicity is not the same thing that some politicians are concerned .
 There's concern about the corrupt army leadership and whether it's under control . There's also concern that the army is under control.
 peoplesproject.com has been helping to modernize the army by digitizing inventory, devising transparency procurement platforms to eliminate corruption, creating weapons and raising funds through crowd funding site .
 Ukrainian software experts have also joined with aviation experts to make 40 drones a month . They are using available software and cameras and parts from China .
 Volunteers have developed encryption devices to protect communications in the field . They have developed a radio communications system that allows frontline commanders to direct the movements of soldiers using tablets .
 Ukraine's military industry has begun to work multiple shifts replacing the equipment that was sold for personal gain .
 50,000 conscripts will be called up this year, the first of several mobilizations that will be trained by western military advisors .
 All of these military reforms and citizen activism must continue if Ukraine is to win the war against Russia and the fight against corruption at home . Ukraine's military reforms must continue, says the author .
 More western help, in terms of military equipment and debt relief, must arrive soon . But more western help must arrive.
 Ukrainians - who are easygoing and flexible - must become even tougher and more demanding that bribery, money laundering and influence peddling end .
 Reforms are being undertaken but not quickly enough and this fall's mid-term election may reflect dissatisfaction . This fall's election could reflect dissatisfaction with the government .
 The country's 20,000 prosecutors would be summarily dismissed and replaced with new people who are forced to adhere to reforms, the rule of law and transparency .
 If reforms are stillborn, the next revolution following those in 2004 and 2014 won't be peaceful and leaders won't have enough time to scurry back to Russia .
 Patriotic activism is spreading and has become the country's de facto official opposition party . Patriotic activists are spreading and have become the de facto Official Opposition party .
War raging in this country against Russia in Ukraine .
 The fighting is 25 hours’ drive east, and the psychology is even further away . But the fighting is just 25 hours' drive east .
 There are reminders here and there, a memoriam to a lost loved one or volunteer soldiers in fatigues .
 The city has population of 800,000, more than a dozen universities and enterprising people with world-class businesses and skills . The city is home to more than 12 universities and a dozen businesses and businesses .
 Canada-Ukraine free trade agreement is a splendid idea, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: This region illustrates why this week’s Canada-Ukrainian free trade deal is a great idea .
 It’s a national vote of confidence by Canadians in Ukrainians, with a very credible upside . It's a vote ofconfidence by Canadians, with an upside, according to the Ukrainians .
 One-third of the world’s rich ‘black earth’ as well as an over-sized share of brainpower . One- third of world's rich “ black earth” as well.
 Literacy is the world's fourth-highest and every year 16,000 software experts and 130,000 engineers graduate . The level of literacy is 99. per cent .
 Just outside Lviv, I took a photo of two farmers in a horse-drawn cart commuting .
 Ukraine remains the world’s biggest producer of grains, sunflower oils, mushrooms for Europeans . It is now blanketed with apple orchards and processing plants to produce juice and cider .
 The European Union has given the country full access to its market next year . The biggest upside for its agri-business is that the EU will give the country access to the market .
 The country’s human capital has found a major niche and been succeeding despite war and corruption .
 The world’s fourth-biggest cluster of certified IT professionals is in the U.S., India and Russia .
 There are 100,000 software engineers and architects, proficient in English, building products and doing research for clients around the world . There are more than 100,00 software engineers.
 He is CEO and founder of N-iX, with offices in Lviv, Sweden and Bulgaria . He is also CEO and CEO of the company, which has offices in Sweden, Bulgaria and Sweden .
 Russia is losing out to Ukraine after the seizure of Crimea and eastern violence . Such commitments require stability and stability, according to the Russian government .
Thousands of IT experts have resettled in Lviv or Kiev . 1. million people have been displaced by the war .
Thousands of volunteers are helping rebuild and repurpose the rag tag national army . Ukraine now has the world's first ‘geek army’ of thousands of volunteers .
 A succession of Russian puppets posing as Ukrainian Presidents downsized its forces and sold off its equipment to foreigners for personal gain .
 His firm occupies three floors in a Soviet-style building with a security guard but no chairs or cheer in its lobby . His firm occupy three floors.
 Pavliv’s firm is an oasis right out of Silicon Valley with high ceilings, plenty of natural light, open plan seating, clumps of chairs for meetings .
 Ukrainians create wealth and excellence. It’s not coincidental that where corruption and meddling has been absent, Ukrainians have created wealth and Excellence . Ukraine has a history of corruption.
 The backdrop to trade deals is that the new government in Kiev is trying to eradicate corruption, but progress is slower than many want .
 Ukraine is the largest country in Europe, twice the size of Germany . It's tragic that Ukraine has become Europe's biggest under-achiever .
 Ukrainians have staged two revolutions since independence -2004 and 2014 -to rid themselves of the rot within . Ukrainians have stage two revolutions in the past two years .
 45 million people, gentle and smart, simply will have run out of patience . The next time won't be peaceful because these 45 million will be peaceful, says author .
 He lives twenty miles from the current front and one-third of his constituency is in occupied lands . He lives 20 miles from his constituency in occupied land .
 World attention focuses on ISIS and Iran, with its half an atomic weapon . The Islamic State of Iraq and Syria are both known to be the most powerful Islamic state of the world .
 Vladimir Putin backed by thousands of nuclear weapons, which is gradually conquering Ukraine . 45 million people the size of Germany and Poland combined .
 European and American retaliation has been soft, and ineffective . Even so, European and U.S. retaliation has not been hard, and effective .
 It's moving tanks, artillery, troops, and equipment into Ukraine by the trainload . It's also moving tanks and artillery into Ukraine .
 He's a former U.S. ambassador to Ukraine and Director of the Eurasia Center at the Atlantic Council in Washington . He's also a former United States ambassador to the Ukraine .
 He grabbed one-third of Georgia in 2008 using the same tactics . Despite hideous publicity worldwide, he is riding high in Russian polls .
Bipartisan support builds to provide defensive weapons to the Ukrainian army . But slowly, in Washington, bipartisan support builds for Ukraine's army .
 Canada's Defense Minister Jason Kenney has stated boldly that Canada supports supplying Ukrainians with weapons but cannot do so unilaterally . Canada's defense minister has stated that Canada does not support supplying Ukrainians.
 In January, he led a gigantic peace march in Kyiv after Russian artillery blew up a civilian bus in his town killing 15 civilians . He led a huge peace march after the attack .
 He dismisses Putin's claims that Russian military is not involved, that this is not an occupation . He says Ukrainian residents of Russian descent want liberation and to rejoin Russia .
"I am Russian speaking and part Russian and I identify as Ukrainian," he said . He said he identifies as Ukrainian .
 Refugees are a financial burden for the country and many have moved in with relatives and friends . Many have moved into the country with relatives, friends .
 Ukraine is carefully checking those entering from the east in fear that Russian agitators will try to destabilize Ukraine in order to create a pretext for an invasion, he said . He said that Ukraine is careful to check those entering in fear of an invasion .
 Russians march downtown or to the city hall, pulling out tricolor Russian flags and waving them . They march in the streets of Moscow, waving them and pulling out Russian flags .
"They tear down the Ukrainian flag at administrative buildings, put up the Russian flag, and get the television cameras to provide an image to the rest of the world," he says .
 The family has an evacuation plan to stay with relatives in western Ukraine if Russian tanks roll westward . His wife, children, and extended family remain in their village .
 Ukrainian military is trying to rebuild quickly after being dismantled by Moscow-controlled former President who fled last year . Russian military is well-equipped.
 He looted the country financially and also appointed a Russian as defense minister . He sold off the military's best equipment to foreign dictators for personal gain .
 The country conscripted 50,000 men for military service this summer . The United States, Canada, and Britain are supplying hundreds of military trainers and non-combat equipment .
 Few members of the public know where Ukraine is much less its size and strategic importance . Ukraine is less than one of the world's most important countries .
 The country is the third most educated populace in the world, with thriving software, aeronautical, pharmaceutical, and agribusiness sectors .
 The U.S. will wake up when the Russian Federation attacks a NATO country, he says .
 Ukraine is interrupted, its identity and promise stolen by invaders and predators for centuries . Ukraine is a nation interrupted and its identity is stolen by invading and predators .
Ukrainian language is as different from Russian as is Spanish from French . But the two are distinctive and the Ukrainian language is different from Russia .
 Putin's postulation is not only inaccurate, but deeply hurtful and insulting, given Russia's historical and ongoing abuse of Ukraine . Russia's history of abuse of the Ukraine has been a major problem .
 Joseph Stalin perpetrated one of the greatest crimes against humanity by purposely starving to death millions of Ukrainians for resisting his Five-Year Plan to collectivize agriculture .
 The new movie is entitled Bitter Harvest and stars veteran actor Terence Stamp and new British sensation Max Irons . It is Stamp's first leading role .
 It is a love story set during one of history's darkest moments . It portrays events most don't know and cannot imagine .
 Canadian Ian Ihnatowycz produced this film to set the record straight for the West about the suffering of Ukrainians at the hands of Russia .
 His parents and grandparents fled the country during the Second World War . His father and grandparents were among those who fled to France .
Few outside Ukraine knew about what happened because it had been covered up . The story of this genocide needed to be told, says the Ukrainian government .
 The scale of The Great Famine remained hidden by the Soviets, but in 1991 Ukraine declared independence and opened the Soviet archives . The scale remained hidden, but the archives opened in 1991 .
 U.N. Joint Statement signed by Russia declared Holodomor had taken seven to ten million innocent lives . These revelations led to a 2003 United Nations Joint Statement .
 The European Parliament adopted a resolution recognizing the Holodomor as a crime against humanity in October 2008 . The resolution was adopted on October 23, 2008, the European Parliament .
 The movie is a fitting backdrop to the current violence against Ukraine by Russia by Russia . The film is based on the film about the Ukraine conflict .
 In 1933, alarming reports about mass starvation were reported in the British press, but ignored in the U.S. In 1933.
 In 1934, the United States officially recognized the Soviet Union and in 1934, Stalin won membership into the League of Nations . That same year, the U.S. officially recognized Soviet Union, and the USSR in 1934 .
 Europe's largest country, Germany and Poland combined, with 45 million people . Concern about Russia's illegal invasion of Ukraine has been muted since it is Europe's biggest country .
 Europe Between Hitler and Stalin, written in 2010 by Yale Professor Timothy Snyder, was written by Timothy Snyder .
 The slaughter he documents and details is, quite frankly, difficult to comprehend, he documents . The slaughter is difficult to understand, he says .
 "The hunger was caused by collective agriculture, but the starvation was cause by politics," he wrote . The hunger is caused by "collective agriculture"
 During the Great Terror of 1937 and 1938, the Soviet leadership identified peasants, the victims of collectivization, as the prime threat to Soviet power .
 Nearly 700,000 were executed, he wrote . "The true number may be somewhat higher," he said .
 Another 300,000 were executed by Ukrainian government puppets of Moscow . Hundreds of thousands more shipped off to Gulags and work camps .
 Between 1933 and 1945, Snyder estimates that a total of 14 million non-combatants were killed by Stalin and Hitler in the Bloodlands, principally Ukraine, Poland, and Belarus . Snyder estimates the total was 14 million people killed between 1933 and1945 .
 The Holocaust, that killed six million Jews across Europe, took place during this time . The Holocaust has been well documented and depicted .
 Bitter Harvest represents the first feature film to expose the world to the catastrophic Holodomor mass murder .
 Max Irons' performance is riveting, as the patriarch of a family facing extinction . The performance is a poignant portrayal of Stamp's grandson, a young artist and that of Samantha Barks as his lover .
 Irons and Barks are ranking members of the ""Brit Pack,"" young and talented artists from United Kingdom who are successful internationally . They are ranked as the best young artists from the UK .
 Stamp is an acclaimed veteran of stage and screen . He is best known for his roles in The Riot Club in 2014, The White Queen and The Host in 2013 .
 Distribution plans are being negotiated and the film should be available to the public in 2016 . Distribution plans for the film will be negotiated .
 The movie was filmed at Pinewood Studios and on location in Ukraine where final scenes were shot days before Ukraine's corrupt former President opted in late 2013 to join Russia instead of the European Union .
 That decision sparked mass street protests throughout Ukraine and eventually his overthrow . That decision led to mass street demonstrations throughout Ukraine .
 In spring 2014, Putin took advantage of the chaos and sent in operatives to destabilize and occupy Crimea and Donbas .
 His objective was to invade and annex most, if not all, of Ukraine, but resistance has been heroic . His objective is to annex most of Ukraine .
 Ukraine is once more a victim of Russian predation and once again a casualty of Russian propaganda and tepid concern by world leaders . This time, this time, Ukraine is again a victim, says David Frum .
 Bitter Harvest is an important movie that everyone should see . For these and other reasons, it's an important film for everyone .
 This is the real narrative of Ukraine, an unbowed but bruised nation with defiant resilience, still yearning to be free . This is a real story of Ukraine's unbowed and bruised nation.