 A growing military buildup in Ukraine and Russia has put the world on edge, says the U.S. State Department .
 Ukraine has imposed martial law and requested a major NATO military presence in the Black Sea . Russia is sending troops to its border. Ukraine has impose martial law .
 The Russian Coast Guard fired at and captured three Ukrainian navy vessels trying to cross from the Black Sea into the Asov Sea . The incident occurred on November 25th .
 Russia claimed these waters as its own territory and said that it told Ukrainian ships not to enter but they were refusing to respond to its radio warnings . Russia claimed the waters were its own.
 Ukraine, on the other hand, has called this an act of Russian aggression . Ukraine has claimed that Russia is preparing for an invasion .
 The Ukrainian government exploited Azov Sea incident and responded by imposing martial law in the country . The Ukraine government exploited the incident and imposed martial law .
 This martial law allows the government of far right president Petrol Poroshenko to impose restrictions on elections, movement, expression and meetings . The martial law was signed by the president of the Ukraine .
 Poroshenko also responded to the incident with a call for further militarization of the Black Sea . Poroshenko has also called for more militarization.
 The Ukrainian president requested that NATO sends a major military presence into the Black Sea . Ukraine's president requested the presence .
 At the same time, U.S. media outlets are reporting that Russia is sending troops to Crimea and also sending tanks to its border .
 New photos from Google Earth show Russian tanks at a military base about 20 kilometers from the border of eastern Ukraine .
 ImageSat International sent exclusive photos to Fox News that allegedly show a buildup of Russian military forces in Crimea .
Tarik Cyril Amar joins us to make sense of Russia's military buildup in both Russia and Ukraine .
 There’s a lot to respond to here and I want you to help us unpack what's going on with the military buildup . There's a lot of things to do with the buildup, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Ukrainian opposition is accusing the government of using this incident to delay the upcoming presidential elections . But another important piece of context that I want to add is that the government is accused of delaying the elections .
 Petro Poroshenko has been falling in a lot of the polls and is quite unpopular at the moment .
 The presidential election was due to happen in March 2019, but now that martial law could be used to delay these elections . President Barack Obama is expected to run for the presidency in 2019 .
 A recent poll found that 58 percent of Ukrainians oppose the martial law, while 33 percent support the law . A recent survey found that 33 percent of Ukrainian support the martial Law .
 63 percent of Ukrainians believe that Poroshenko imposed the martial law specifically in order to delay the presidential elections . That poll found that 63 percent believe that the law was imposed specifically to delay elections .
 The Azov Sea incident took place in the Russian-Ukrainian Sea . Russian and Ukrainian military buildup on both the Russian and the Ukrainian side .
 I'm not quite sure if I heard you correctly, but I should point out that I'm very critical of Petro Poroshenko the president and his block or his party . I don’t think it’s quite right to see him as far right, he says .
 Ukraine has a far right problem and I hope we can talk about this later as well . I hope to talk about it later as soon as well.
 Poroshenko's great problem is that he is very much part of the old oligarchy that existed long before the Maidan Revolution . He is a great disappointment at reform outside Ukraine but also to many Ukrainians, he says .
 There are questions of international law involved, as well as the status of Crimea and a treaty of 2003 which both sides interpret differently . Both sides interpret the treaty differently .
 Many politicians have called on Ukraine for restraint, for instance Angela Merkel, the chancellor of Germany, to blame Russia .
 Ukraine has already been through several years of de facto warfare with separatists and rebels . Russia backed by Russia in the east of the country, in parts of Donbass.
 martial law has never been declared before . But there have been much more severe battles and more severe crises in this fighting .
 Many Ukrainian citizens are extremely skeptical as to why President Poroshenko is declaring it now . Many observers inside Ukraine, including the opposition, are skeptical .
 The suspicion is that it does have something to do with the upcoming elections in 2019. And the suspicion is it is that the elections will be held in 2019 .
In this respect, let me add one factor which is often overlooked, I think, overlooked . In this respect. Let me add a factor that is often, often, overlooked.
 The initial plans for martial law on the side of Poroshenko were much more severe than what he was finally able to get through parliament . That is that the initial plans were much less severe than that he was originally planned .
 He ran into considerable opposition and he had to make many concessions . He had to made many concessions to make his concessions .
 If we look at what he wanted to impose, it was even worse than what was actually imposed . But if we looked at what was imposed, it would be even worse, it could be worse .
 In his view, it's bad news in a way because it speaks to his intentions, which were even more radical . And that, of course, in my view, is not good news, it’s bad news .
 It is in force in ten regions of Ukraine, not in all of the Ukrainian regions, that's one of the compromises Poroshenko had to make .
 The text contains the possibility of postponing the elections even though it is officially limited to 30 days . But nevertheless, if you analyze the text carefully, it does contain the possibility. The text does contain a possibility of delaying the elections .
 Poroshenko's ratings are actually very bad, and his ratings are very bad . It provides him with incentives to exploit the crisis and exploit tension with Russia in his own political favor .
There are far right elements in the government, and that's an important correction . It's important to just point out, as you said, Poroshenko himself is not far right, as he says .
 Poroshenko is unpopular in the country, according to reports . Theoshenko government has been criticized for its policies .
 There are also widespread allegations of corruption. They’ve been going through some economic problems and there are also allegations.
 Poroshenko has low approval ratings and the opposition is leaning against him in the polls for the presidential election next year .
 Russia claims that Ukraine's waters are its own territorial waters . I believe that Ukraine is saying that the waters in which its vessels were taken were international waters .
 Russia is claiming waters that I believe under international law are international waters. So I'm wondering if you could respond to the conflict where Russia claims the waters are international water .
In this case the Ukrainian position is more plausible, says John Sutter . Sutter is not an expert in international law, he says .
 Russia's position builds on the idea that its annexation of Crimea is legitimate . Russia’s position builds, among other things.
 A very large number of states and of observers disagree with that opinion and consider that an illegitimate annexation . A very small number of countries and observers disagree that opinion .
 The Russian interpretation of this whole situation is very fragile indeed. That is one fact already that means that the Russian interpretation is extremely fragile indeed, says the author .
 Ukraine is principally in the right, he says . However, the legal situation, maybe as it is, he thinks Russia is in the wrong .
 Ukrainian government may also exploit the situation for their own purposes, he says . The Ukrainian government is currently in power in Kiev, he adds .
 President Putin says anything that resembles anything that Putin says is dangerous . I am aware that this is something that President Putin is also saying, he says . We are now in a climate where it’s very dangerous to say anything that looks like Putin says .
Ukrainian political tensions can also become results in Ukraine's domestic politics, says Ukrainian journalist . But I think in this respect, it’s not an unrealistic idea that, unfortunately, this whole escalation and set of tensions can be seen as a result .
 President Yushchenko came into power as a result of the first Maidan Revolution of 2004, 2005 . He managed to rapidly squander the enormous enthusiasm that at least half of the population felt for him .
 He has not been able to convince many Ukrainians that he is fundamentally different from the old regime, as it were . He has been unable to convince them that he's fundamentally different.
 Ukrainians and others suspect, and I think with some reason, that he also is not above corruption and that he is notabove corruption . I think he is also not above politics that are fundamentally not politics of good faith .
 The economy has not worked out well for many Ukrainians. There is, of course, also the economy, which has not, until now, worked well .
 The war has not been successful or an experience that Ukrainians can in any way enjoy or like . The conflict has been dragging on now for many years, but it's not been in a way successful .
 With all the patriotism that of course came up in 2014 and 2015, I think there’s also a certain fatigue for this type of fighting .
 There is a fatigue not only because of casualties but also with displacement and economic disruption . There is also a fatigue because of the loss of people and displacement .
 It's very clear that they’re beginning to tell against very clearly. And all these factors, I think, are beginning to begin, I don’t think so, he says .
 Tarik Cyril Amar will discuss the situation in Ukraine with Tarik. Amar will also discuss the conflict going on with neo-Nazis inside Ukraine . Amar raised earlier of the far right elements in the government.