 Katchanovski’s paper on separatism in eastern and southern Ukraine draws on his own questions . But as with many statistics, the devil is in the details .
 Katchanovski's claim is based on 31 per cent who responded in favor of secession in order to join another country or to form an independent state . 23 per cent of respondents who favored autonomy within a federal Ukraine favored autonomy .
 Katchanovski alleges Euromaidan “shooters’ and “spotters’ were based in twelve buildings occupied by Eurom Maidan supporters . Katch anovski says Eurom Aidan supporters are based in 12 buildings .
 The hotel was also featured in many BBC and other reports as killed and wounded bodies were carried in and laid on floor of reception area .
 Hotel Ukryaina is a large, former Soviet hotel . It would simply have been impossible for the Euromaidan to have controlled the entire building during chaotic violence and protests .
 It is difficult to believe that supposed Euromaidan “shooters’ could have used weapons in the hotel without any foreign journalists noticing and reporting upon this . At the same time.
 Katchanovski never attempts to lay out his research and thus never allows readers and external reviewers to judge whether his arguments and his alleged evidence have merit .
 He also apparently ignores readily available evidence that is instructive . He also appears to ignore readily available information that is helpful .
 The UN, Council of Europe, OSCE, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch lay blame on Russia and separatists for crimes against humanity committed in the Donbas and Crimea .
 Second, he downplays the number of foreign mercenaries who joined the separatists . At the same time, he exaggerates the amount of foreigners who have allegedly joined Ukrainian security forces .
 Katchanovski ignores the fifty or more volunteer battalions who have no similar insignia . Meanwhile, he ignores the 50 or more other volunteer Battalions who are not similar .
 Azov battalion commander Andriy Biletsky was elected to parliament in Prime Minister Arseniy Yatseniuk's Popular Front . The Popular Front cannot be defined as any ‘far-right’ political force .
 A paper or presentation cannot be considered to be scholarly or academic if its author pre-selects the conclusion he/she wishes to advance to fit some political agenda and then marshals supposed evidence in support .
 Katchanovski's two paper’s are much more akin to polemical writing . The two paper's are, thus, much more like polemically writing .
 Whether a paper is indeed “academic or not is decided upon by readers and reviewers – not by the author’s own declarations .
 I visited Odessa in October to conduct academic research for a book I am writing on eastern Ukraine . I investigated the deaths of pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian protesters .
Pro-Ukrainian activists were killed in a fire in the Trade Union building in Odessa . It was only after these killings that the situation on the ground escalated into the tragic fire .
 The first person killed was a pro-Ukrainian unity activist, according to a report . This report points to a group of pro-Russian activists who initially provoked the violence .
 Katchanovski’s sympathies are only with the pro-Russian protesters who died . But, he says, his sympathies aren't with those who died.
 Marples too has pointed out, the photos used in Katchanovski’s paper are from videos and are very blurry .
This makes it practically impossible to see snipers, never mind ascertain who they were . This makes it almost impossible to find out who they are .
 There are only a handful of armed people standing among protesters on the streets . There are not “shooters’ firing from roofs and hotel windows. There certainly could have been some protesters with guns .
 Katchanovski never even considers the chaos that results from pitched battles or the collateral damage that result from the actions of different police, Security Service units and vigilantes involving weapons .
 Katchanovski never even entertained the possibility of Russian actors .
Ukayinska Pravda journalist Serhiy Leshchenko's new book investigates the influence and involvement of President Vladimir Putin and Russian intelligence operatives in Ukraine .
 Even Putin has admitted that his forces assisted in Yanukovych’s fleeing from Ukraine .
 A genuinely "academic" paper would have tried to objectively analyze and present these different scenarios . Then in his conclusions provide and explain what the author took to be the most likely scenario .
 Katchanovski's paper on the massacre caused by snipers appears to have reached a foregone conclusion that is politically driven . He seems to proceed in the opposite direction .
Some elements of his paper also do not stand up to scrutiny as reflected in the following three examples . Still other elements of the paper also don't stand out to scrutiny .
 Katchanovski criticizes the prosecutor-general’s office for not investigating the murders in a thorough manner .
 The office has never been able to investigate high-level crimes such as the murder of journalist Georgi Gongadze in 2000 or presidential candidate Viktor Yushchenko’s poisoning in 2004 .
 Katchanovski makes a rather unusual claim that there is no written order by Yanukovych ordering killings .
 Orders, and especially controversial orders, are not written down in societies without the law .
 There is no written order as to who sent police special forces to repress Orange Revolution on 28 November 2004 . No documentary evidence to prove who gave the orders to conduct massive election fraud in that year’s election .
 Third, a conspiracy mindset was very deeply ingrained in the former USSR and in post-Soviet Russia and Ukraine . The conspiracy mindset is deeply ingrained.
 His position ignores the crucial detail that the far right did not come to power after the Euromaidan came to power . They lost two pre-term elections in May and October 2014 .
 Yanukovych had been preparing to flee throughout the third week of February as can be seen in security camera videos at his Mezhyhirya palace .
 Volodymyr Parasiuk was not a member of Pravyy Sektor. His flight from Kyiv was not in response to a threat expressed by Euromaidan activist Volody myr parasiuk .
 If a Ukrainian president dies or is incapacitated, there is provision in the constitution for the parliamentary chairman to become ‘acting president’ until new elections are held . There is provision for the chairman to be “acting president,’s parliamentary chairman, until the elections are
 The Chair of Ukrainian Studies at Ottawa organizes an annual conference on contemporary Ukrainian topics . The conference is funded by the George W Danyliw Foundation .
 The project was therefore truly visionary in the light of Russia’s recent annexation of the Crimea .
 The annual conference at Ottawa has become a vehicle for ideologically driven attacks on ‘Ukrainian nationalism’ in the writings of individuals such as Katchanovski, John Paul-Himka, Pers Anders Rudling and Anton Shekhovtsov .
 The annual Chair of Ukrainian Studies conference is supposed to be on contemporary developments in Ukraine . It is paradoxical to find that these factors and issues are ignored in academe .
 Intolerance is usually found on the extreme left and right but can also be found among academics who are traditionally assumed to hold liberal views .