 Two U.S. warships expected to arrive in the Black Sea this week as a demonstration of the Biden administration’s support for Ukraine . Fears mount that Russian President Vladimir Putin is contemplating an assault on his neighbor .
 The Kremlin is overseeing the largest movement of Russian troops, tanks and missiles along the Ukrainian border since the annexation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula in 2014 .
 Russia has conducted at least three military training exercises adjacent to the Ukrainian border since mid-March . Russia has carried out at least 3 military exercises in the past two months .
 The dispatch of warships to the Black Sea is meant to underline Biden's affirmation of Biden’s affirmation of the White House . The dispatch was meant to show Biden's support for the U.S.
 Ukrainian serviceman walks in trench as he stands at his post on the frontline with Russia backed separatists near the town of Zolote .
 Fighting between Ukrainians and Russian-backed rebels in Ukraine's Donbas region has been intensifying since the end of January . Kremlin official Dmitry Kozak has issued an ominous warning that a full-scale conflict would likely mean ‘the beginning of the end’ for Ukraine .
 A Ukrainian soldier was killed and another wounded in Donbas on Saturday, Ukrainian military officials said . It is the fourth combat-related fatality for Ukraine’s forces this month alone .
 The soldier died after Russian-sponsored forces opened fire with automatic grenade launchers and 82-millimeter mortars, weapons prohibited under the Minsk peace deal . The ceasefire protocol signed in 2014 has been often ignored .
 Twenty-six Ukrainian soldiers have been killed in the Donbas since the beginning of 2021 . Some were in non-combat-related accidents .
 Ukrainian forces and Russia-backed separatists have been contesting eastern Ukraine since shortly after Russia's annexation of Crimea . The uprising occurred in the wake of the ouster of Ukraine President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskiy visits positions of armed forces near the frontline with Russian-backed separatists . He is in Donbass region, Ukraine April 8, 2021 .
 Zelenskiy has been urging for a new round of peace talks involving other Western leaders . Since his surprise election in 2019 to the presidency in Kyiv, he has been urged for new peace talks .
 The Kremlin and Kyiv agreed a prisoner swap earlier this year, sparking hopes a peace deal might be in the offing . It would halt the seven-year conflict between Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists backed by Russian forces .
 Critics feared Zelenskiy's search for peace would end up creating a permanent Russian enclave in Ukraine’s most easterly provinces, Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Zelenskiy hasn't budged on the issue of Ukrainian sovereignty over the Donbas . He has refused to accept what he says is a Russian charade when it comes to who controls and directs the pro-Moscow separatists .
 Zelenskiy has also been targeting Kremlin allies in Ukraine, including Viktor Medvedchuk, a personal friend of the Russian leader . Some observers hazard that recent Russian moves are an indication of Russian frustration .
 Medvedchuk and his wife accused of channeling funds from Russia-based oil facility to breakaway republics in eastern Ukraine . They have been accused ofchanneling funds to the so-called breakaways republics .
 The Russian Navy's Caspian Flotilla is pictured on the Don River in Rostov-on-Don, Russia April 12, 2021 .
 Analysts remain divided over what the Kremlin’s intentions are with the military buildup . But analysts are split over whether Putin really intends to launch a military offensive or is just testing the resolve of the West .
 If Russian army units gathering close to Ukraine are deployed, it would mark an entirely new stage in the conflict, says Ukraine Alert .
 Biden Affirms United States 'Unwavering Support' for Ukraine in Call What is alarming some Western diplomats .
 Kyiv is planning an offensive on the Donbas, according to reports . Deputy chief of staff of the presidential administration said Ukraine may be plotting ethnic cleansing .
 Kremlin fears a resumption of full-scale fighting in eastern Ukraine . President Putin’s spokesman says the Kremlin would be ready to take steps to protect Russian civilians in the Donbas .
 Ukraine's military chief dismissed the Russian claims that his country's armed forces are preparing to launch an attack on the breakaway east . He accuses the Kremlin of looking for a pretext to mount an offensive .
 Putin is looking to distract Russians from the ongoing agitation for the release of firebrand opposition figure Alexey Navalny, whose health is reported to have worsened in prison . Other analysts and diplomats caution that the Kremlin is whipping up a frenzy over the Donbas .
Military buildup may be part of an electoral strategy ahead of parliamentary elections in Russia in September . They say the military buildup may have been part of a political strategy .
 Putin’s approval ratings are falling, and his United Russia political party seems destined for setbacks in the polls .
 Shaping an emergency short of a full-scale war could boost the prospects of United Russia . The party could benefit from a wave of patriotism, they say .
 Kremlin may be thinking of repeating what happened in 2008 in Georgia when then Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili fell into a trap and responded to provocations from South Ossetia, another separatist region .