 Crimean peninsula entered into Russian custody in the form of two separate subjects of the Federation . Following a period of 22 years as a part of independent Ukraine, the peninsula was entered into Russia custody .
 The Russian Federation increased its territory by 27 thousand square kilometers and its population by over 2 million people . The population increased by 27,000 square kilometers .
 Russia has set a new precedent in the change of jurisdiction over a territory from one state to another . More than 22 years after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia has changed jurisdiction over territory .
 Russia's foreign policy is a watershed in Russian domestic policy and relations between Russia and other countries . This event poses a serious challenge to security throughout Europe, says the author . The event is also a watershed for Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States .
 Crimea did not enter geopolitical considerations of the post-Soviet space until 2014 . Between the Ukrainian state and the Russian choice until 2014, Crimea was not considered a geopolitical choice .
After the fall of the Soviet Union, the peninsula did not experience armed conflict related to refugees, displaced persons, or mass casualties . In contrast to the south Caucasus, Tajikistan, and Moldova, after the fall, did not have armed conflict .
On February 12, 1991, the Supreme Council of Ukraine adopted a law restoring the autonomy of the Crimean oblast as it existed at that time . 2 its status has not changed since then .
 This issue rears its head in Kyiv from time to time, but it has never advanced to practical steps . The issue is still being debated in the country .
 Ukraine's third Ukrainian president, Viktor Yushchenko, supported his Georgian counterpart, Mikheil Saakashvili, in his actions in South Ossetia . The Kremlin's official position has not undergone substantive changes .
 He added that “there, in Crimea, complex processes are taking place within society’s society . However, he added that there, “in Crimea, there are complex processes taking place in society.
 There was no de facto Crimean state with separate non-Ukrainian infrastructure until 2014 . Until 2014, there was no De facto Crimean State with separateNon-Ukraine infrastructure .
 The Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, together with the city council of Sevastopol, adopted a declaration of independence . Only five days before the announced referendum on the status of Crimea .
 Already by March 18, the wheels were in motion to admit Crimea to the Russian Federation . The wheels were already in motion.
 Crimea, for all those years after the collapse of the Soviet Union, was free from strife . However, this does not mean that Crimea was free of strife, as it was not .
 Ukraine's political crisis has become emergent with the onset of a full-blown political crisis in Ukraine . On the peninsula, numerous problems persisted and accumulated, never reaching resolution .
 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea was the sole administrative territory in the unitary state of Ukraine with a predominantly Russian population . First of all, the Autonomous republic of Crimea.
 Ethnic Russians comprised 58.3 percent of the population, ethnic Ukrainians 24. percent, and Crimean Tatars 12 percent .
 A quarter of the region’s nonRussian population consider Russian their native language . About a quarter of Russia's non-Russian population considers Russian their language .
 Russian military presence on the peninsula is based on the May 28, 1997 agreements between Ukraine and Russia . The agreements include the division of the Black Sea Fleet, the status and conditions for the Fleet’s presence on Ukrainian territory .
 On April 21, 2010, Russian and Ukraine signed the Kharkhiv agreements, extending the Black Sea Fleet's lease until 2042 . That is for a quarter century longer than the original agreements of 1997 stipulated .
 Stationing the Black Sea Fleet in Crimea provides employment to a significant proportion of the peninsula’s population . It bolsters pro-Russian sentiments among Crimeans .
 Crimea gained a reputation as the most anti-NATO territory of Ukraine before 2014 . The Crimea gained an anti- NATO territory in 2014 .
 Third, 20 years before the so-called “Crimean Spring,’ the peninsula experienced harsh confrontation with Kyiv . Kyiv experienced harsh confrontations with the peninsula .
 Yuri Meshkov, a representative of the bloc appropriately named “Russia,” won a run-off election and was elected president of the republic .
 A few months later, the “Russia’s bloc won autonomy in the parliamentary elections, garnering 80 percent of the vote . The ‘Russia” bloc won the election in November .
 In 1994, the central Ukrainian government was not primed for conflict with either pro-Russian forces or with Moscow itself . However, in 1994, there was no conflict between the government and Moscow .
 President Leonid Kuchma was one of the primary actors in negotiations to end the conflict in the Donbas . He succeeded in sowing discord among members of the “Russia” bloc, and transforming many of them into “fellow travelers,” people loyal to
 Kyiv instead chose a course of negotiations and closed-door bargaining. In contrast to Tbilisi and Baku, governments took an uncompromising line in their relations with autonomous regions .
 Viktor Yanukovych and even his predecessor, Viktor Yushchenko, have stuck to pro-Western policies and compulsory Ukrainization . Subsequently, Viktor Yanukovych has stuck to this course, despite the latter’s commitment to Pro-West policies and Ukraine .
 Kyiv chose not to exacerbate tensions between Sevastopol residents and Black Sea Fleet sailors . In August 2008, Yushchenko’s support for Mikheil Saakashvili was at the center of the conflict .
 The result was a “freezing of the latent conflict rather than its resolution’s resolution. The result is a ‘freezing’ of the conflict, rather than a resolution .
 The Mejlis came out in support of the new Ukrainian government, the inviolability of the Ukrainian state’s borders, and against the pro-Russian movement in Crimea . This is why, over the entire period from 1991-2014, the Mejli came out.
 Each and every Crimean Tatar supports the Mejlis leadership’s position . This does not mean that each and every Tatar support the Mejlis leadership .
 Kyiv feared the ethnocratic aspirations of Crimean Tatar activists . Their plans for education reform on the peninsula would not be based on Ukrainian law .
 Crimean Tatar and Russian communities in Crimea have been in conflict for years . The conflict is said to be the reason for the conflict .
Only 1. percent favored immediate withdrawal of Russian naval forces from Sevastopol . Only 1.1 percent favored immediately withdrawal of naval forces .
 Crimean Tatar people have been deprived of their homeland for over two decades . The Rehabilitation Act would constitute crucial prerequisites for preservation and development of national identity, culture, and language .
 Ukraine's foreign policy seesaws between Russia and the West, and in its nation-building, nationalism is combined with wariness towards both Soviet and imperial heritage . Crimea is not “out of bounds,” and the latent problems won’t come to a head, says
 A significant majority of politicians and experts in the United States and EU have emphasized Russia’s intervention in the Crimean crisis in the winter of 2014 .
 Russian President and Commander in Chief Vladimir Putin openly acknowledges that in February-March 2014, he personally instructed the military and intelligence agencies to bring the peninsula under control of the Russian Federation .
 The crisis on the peninsula, which led to the change in its jurisdiction, constitutes one factor of the Russian military intervention . However, recognizing the veracity of this assessment, it is impossible not to see that the crisis is one factor .
 Moscow's position on post-Soviet conflicts can be defined as “selective revisionism’s” that is, it displayed complete willingness to defy the opinion held by the overwhelming majority of UN member states . Georgia did not automatically transfer this position to other conflicts
 The Russian leadership has had no general approach to ethno-political conflict, nor to existing de facto states . The Russian leaders have had noGeneral approach to the conflict, or to existing states .
 Russia's position on ethno-political conflicts synthesized several concerns, including NATO expansion . NATO might expand into territories of the former Soviet Union, leadership of newly independent states might try to minimize Russia’s influence . strengthening cooperation between countries involved in these conflicts might er
Post-Soviet space was and remains an area of especially vital interest. Despite having several different approaches to resolving conflicts, for Moscow, the post- Soviet space was still a vital interest .
 Russia was ready to cooperate with international actors where it didn’t present a conflict of interests . Russia was prepared to cooperate.
 The most influential country in the CIS after Russia, Ukraine is considered a “priority partner’ in the former Soviet region . Ukraine is potentially an important participant in integration projects initiated by Moscow .
 Ukraine's transformation from a buffer state into an important player on the side of the U.S. and its allies . Russia abandoned the status quo in Crimea .
 The new government in Ukraine played on fears and phobias towards Moscow .
 Fissures in Ukrainian society along geographical lines deepened . separatist tendencies in the southeast of the country grew .
 The Verkhovna Rada vetoed the law’s repeal on February 23, 2014, but it was enough to galvanize Russophiles and pro-Russian sentiments in Crimea and in certain southeastern regions .
 The protests grew into an open struggle to secede from Ukraine and join Russia . The protests were directed against the new political leaders who had violated the Constitution .
 Russia's support for the separatist movements in the south and east of Ukraine had different consequences . Russia considered a safeguard against Kyiv's aspirations to join NATO .
 The confrontation between Moscow and Kyiv began in Crimea, where Russian policy is led by mass Russophile movement and military presence . The confrontation is the beginning of a new phase in the Ukrainian crisis .
 The Russian contingent was placed there on the basis of international negotiations, which created optimal support for the passing of the referendum that resulted in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea's secession from Ukraine and entry into the Russian Federation .
 It stipulated that organs of local self-government could keep records and make statements in the language of national minorities . If they constituted more than 10 percent of the region's population, they would have to keep records .
 People received the right to correspond with government offices in the regional language . People received a right to correspondence with government officials in the region .
 Russian was recognized as a regional language in the majority of regions in southeastern Ukraine .
 Oleksandr Turchynov said it was absolutely necessary to pass a new law that would take into account the interests of both Eastern and Western Ukraine, all the ethnic groups and minorities .
Nearly two thirds of Ukrainian service-members in Crimea swore allegiance to Russia . The transition of military facilities to Moscow’s control proceeded peacefully .
 All of the aforementioned actions radicalized both public sentiment in Crimea and resolve to destroy the status quo in Moscow .
 The Kremlin decided to cut the Gordian knot, reducing all the potential risks . But the Kremlin decided not to do so .
 The Crimea situation was fraught with almost automatic involvement of Russian troops in a military conflict . After all, any military or political venture, let alone the destabilizing situation in Crimea was fraught.
 The total lack of confidence in Kyiv’s new government only stirred existing fears . Kyiv's new government has been criticised for its lack of faith in the government .
 Even while agreeing with certain indications that an annexation took place, it is impossible not to note the inconsistencies of certain Crimean realities with this explanation .
 Crimea has passed into Russian control . Only one set of problems has been put to rest, while others have cropped up .
 We all, of course, use this term, but to be honest, it’s a false start. We all use it as a way to get rid of it.
 Moscow had diverged from Washington and Brussels before this. The most stark example was the “five-day war’ in the Caucasus, where attempts by the Georgian government to destroy the infrastructure of the unrecognized republic of South Ossetia .
 The current conflict has a variety of important distinguishing features . However, the current conflict is not all the same .
 The current confrontation is taking place in the midst of a high degree of consolidation from the EU and the U.S. regarding Russian policy towards Ukraine .
 Washington considers Russia’s actions a transgression of international law and an attack on the foundations of world order . Russia's actions are considered a Transgression of International law .
 The U.S. leadership does not pretend that it would not like to see a regime change in Russia .
 Washington is trying to prevent Moscow emerging as an alternative center of gravity in Europe . Washington is also trying to stop Moscow from becoming an alternative centre of gravity .
 The European Union is an integrated union comprised of different governments with specific interests . The EU's position shows more nuance due to the fact that it is a union of different countries .
 Poland, Sweden, and the Baltic countries have unequivocally rejected Russia’s actions and equally unequivocally support Washington's policy . The Baltic nations have also rejected Russia's actions and said they support Washington.
 The EU as a whole has, on the basis of a consensus, introduced a number of sanctions against Russia . At the same time, since March 2014, the European Union has, along with the U.S. has, introduced several sanctions against the Russia .
 Not a single EU member state has refused to recognize Ukraine’s territorial integrity and recognize the new status quo in Crimea .
 The maximum potential lies in the possibility of individual representatives of EU member states ‘understanding’ Moscow’s motives, according to a report .
 criticism of U.S. policy towards Russia and Ukraine has not yet reached the critical mass necessary to steer the conversation towards possible policy changes or even a different course .
 After armed conflict broke out in April 2014 in the Donbas region, focus of international attention shifted from Crimea to other southeastern regions of Ukraine .
 The easing of sanctions against Russia was tethered to the fulfillment of agreements reached in the Belarusian capital . The de-escalation of violence in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
 This position was announced at the EU summit in Brussels in March 2015 . This shift in focus does not mean abandoning inroads to the issue of Crimea, which is seen in the United States and the EU as Moscow's transition to a policy of total .
 Russia’s confrontation with the West has rendered its foreign policy track ‘turn to the East’ absolutely essential . Russia's confrontation with West has turned its foreign Policy track “turn to East” absolutely essential.
 Russia has intensified bilateral relations with China, India, and Turkey . Russia decided to lift its ban on supplying S300 missile systems to Iran in April 2015 .
 India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi was willing to receive Sergei Aksyonov, prime minster of the Republic of Crimea, as a member of the Russian delegation . Delhi’s western partners were sharp criticisms from Delhi's western partners .
 Turkish air force shot down a Russian bomber near the Syrian border in November 2015 . The incident seriously damaged bilateral relations between Turkey and Russia .
 It has not produced an immediate effect on developments in Crimea . But it potentially establishes additional risks for Black Sea security .
 Russia’s unilateral decision to reevaluate its border with Ukraine has not met with unequivocal support in a single post-Soviet state . Russia's unilateral decision has not been met with support in the post- Soviet state .
 Member countries of the Customs Union and Eurasian Economic Union took a more passive position than expected .
 Only official Yerevan has expressed willingness to consider the Crimean referendum in the context of the people’s self-determination .
 Moscow's strategic partners can be described as benevolent neutrality at best . In the remaining cases, the position of Moscow’s strategic partners is benevolent .
 The Ukrainian crisis will not hinder the normalization of Russian-Georgian relations. At the same time, the Ukrainian crisis won't hinder thenormalization of relations with Russia .
 Tbilisi has not joined in the sanctions against Russia . It has not removed the restoration of its territorial integrity and de-occupation of South Ossetia from its agenda .
 Dialogue has continued between Grigory Karasin and Zurab Abashidze (Georgia’s Special Representative for Relations with Russia), as well as joint participation in the Geneva consultations on security issues .
 Armenian leader's position does not come across as his exclusive opinion . The Armenian president's position was divided neatly between the two presidents .
 Baku opposed depriving the Russian delegation of its voting rights in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe . Russia believes that the results of the popular vote in Crimea and Sevastopol lend legitimacy to the “return” of the peninsula .
 It's a commonly held view in Russia that Moscow’s actions are guided largely by the U.S. and its allies’ pathological resistance to a peer dialogue with Russia that takes into accounts its interests and arguments .
 Crimean Tatars comprise about 12 percent of Crimea’s total population . The issue of building relationships with Crimea's Tatars has proved especially thorny .
 This is no surprise, given the tragic history of this group, which survived Stalinist deportation and could not return to its homeland for many years . The group was deported by Stalinist officials in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The events of the twentieth century largely define contemporary Crimean Tatar identity . The events largely define modern Crimean Tatari identity .
 During the years of Ukraine’s jurisdiction over Crimea, feelings of anger and blame in mass Crimean Tatar consciousness were transferred to Russia .
 Crimean Tatars' most pressing problems found no resolution during Crimea’s time within the bounds of post-Soviet Ukraine . Crimea's most pressing problem was in Crimea's time in post- Soviet Ukraine .
Official Kyiv artificially inflated fears and stereotypes connected with their tragic history during the period of Soviet totalitarianism .
 Crimean Tatar people with the greatest social capital is the Mejlis . It has established working contacts with the Ukrainian government and political class . As a result, it strictly opposed the referendum on Crimea's status .
 The Russian government has prioritized the integration of Crimean Tatars into Russian society from the beginning of Crimea’s accession into Russia .
 The constitutional commission on the development of the basic law of the Republic of Crimea within the Russian Federation included Lentun Bezaziyev . He is member of several councils of the highest governing body of the autonomous region . He served from 2010-2014 as the Chairman of the Council of
 Article 10 proclaims Crimean Tatar an official language, along with Russian and Ukrainian . The preamble to the Crimean Constitution affirmed the concept of the “multinational people of the Republic of Crimea’s Crimea,’.
This constitutional provision provides a foundation for future normative-legal acts for the development and preservation of full linguistic equality . This constitutional provision is based on a constitutional provision .
 A document proposed the creation of a separate program for Crimea’s development until 2020 . The document also proposed a program aimed at the national, cultural, and spiritual revival of these peoples .
 The declaration of principles and pragmatic policy decisions do not always exactly correspond with each other . However, the declaration of Principles does not always always correspond with the decisions .
 Crimean Tatar activist Mustafa Dzhemilev failed to establish a personal dialogue between Putin and Dzemilev . Dzhamilev is an activist in the Crimea .
 Dzhemilev did not only cease but even strengthened his efforts to internationalize the Crimean issue . After their conversation on March 12, 2014, Dzemilev not only did not stop but strengthened his effort to internationalized the issue .
 He repeatedly called upon American and European politicians to bring in a peacekeeping mission of UN troops to Crimea . Subsequently, he repeatedly called on U.S. and EU politicians to take part in the mission .
 Dzhemilev repeatedly met with Turkish leader Recep Tayyip Erdoğan with the goal of protecting Ukraine’s territorial integrity and containing Russia .
 The position of Dzhemilev and the Mejlis influenced the relationship between the Russian government and the Crimean Tatar movement .
 Russia placed its hope in marginalizing Dzhemilev and his supporters and creating alternative structures loyal to Russia and to the new government . Almost immediately Russia placed the hope in the hope of marginalizing the Dzemilev.
 The confrontation with the Mejlis remains a complex challenge for Russian Crimea . However, now, as before, it remains a challenge for Russia .
 A significant portion of the population is behind these leaders and supports the Mejlis . It is of utmost importance to see that a significant part of the community is behind them .
 Regional authorities’ policy employs prohibitive measures and takes an enforcement approach . The regional authorities' policy uses prohibitive Measures .
 On May 16, 2014, Sergei Aksyonov banned mass political action in Crimea until June 6, under the pretext of preventing incidents connected with the civil unrest in southeastern Ukraine .
 Crimean Tatar National Flag traditionally has been held in central square of the Crimean capital . On June 26, 2014, local authorities forbid holiday events celebrating the Day of the Crimea Tatar Flag .
 In September, authorities seized Mejlis property in Simferopol, and in December, banned a Human Rights Day rally . In December, authorities banned a human rights Day rally in the city .
 Dzhemilev has repeatedly called on Crimean Tatar Youth League to boycott the Russian army's draft in Crimea and Sevastopol . He has also called for a harsher foreign policy towards Moscow .
 The head of the Russian government has been in charge of the country since 2007 . The Russian government is currently in the midst of a political crisis .
 Vladimir Putin listened to an impartial critique of the regional Crimean government and security forces . Nikolai Svanidze, a well-known Russian journalist and historian.
 This dialogue is extremely interesting from the point of view of the different emphases used by the government and by liberal society;e. security and stability vs. open dialogue and human rights .
 Neither the president nor the journalist dissembled, by any means, when they spoke about the challenges to Russian national interests or about discrimination .
 These discourses exist in parallel dimensions, without interfering with one another . However, these discourses can be seen in different dimensions .
 He warns of the danger that a “small but active group of Muslims, which views Moscow with extreme enmity,’ will emerge .
Almost from the very moment of the change in its status, it became the focus of intense international scrutiny .
 The Crimean peninsula obtains 80 percent of its water supply from Ukraine through the North Crimean canal . The peninsula is located on the Crimean peninsula.
 More than two thirds of the incoming water goes towards Crimea’s agricultural sector .
 Ukraine's initiative to disconnect Crimea from its power supply on the eve of 2015 demonstrates the extent of the peninsula's vulnerability . Ukraine’s initiative to disconnected Crimea from power supply shows extent of its vulnerability, says CNN .
 Russia has hardly inherited an untarnished legacy from Ukraine. It is worth noting that Russia hasn't inherited anUntarnished history from Ukraine .
 Ukraine's peninsula was a highly subsidized region more than half of its budget came from Kyiv . While it belonged to Ukraine, the peninsula was highly subsidized .
 According to data from May 2014, 95 percent of the region’s budget will be supplied from the Russian federal budget .
 The total expenditures from the federal budget for Crimea and Sevastopol until 2020 will amount to 733.5 billion rubles .
 Vedomosti . 13 benefit principle, but of investing in the government’s prestige, is the government's prestige .
 The Kremlin sees its incorporation of Crimea as a resurgence of Russia’s political subjectivity and full sovereignty in the international arena .
 The sanctions regimes that some Western countries have aimed directly against Crimea pose additional difficulties . Some Western countries are trying to impose sanctions on Crimea .
 capital investments in Crimea and Sevastopol from EU countries have become illegal . Since December 20, 2014, capital investments from EU nations have been illegal .
 European citizens and companies registered in the EU may no longer buy real estate or legal entities in Crimea, finance Crimean businesses or offer them any related services .
 EU tour operators may no longer offer tour services in Crimea and Sevastopol . In addition, EU tour operator operators may not offer tours in Crimea .
 The U.S. Department of the Treasury has gained the right to impose sanctions on individuals and companies operating in Crimea .
 The peninsula’s first holiday season as a part of Russia showed in sharp relief that organization of the ‘Crimea-Caucasus’ ferry link is also extremely pressing, not to mention the construction of a Kerch strait bridge .
 The LLC “Stroigazmontazh’ was officially announced as the only general contractor for the bridge’s design and construction . The marginal cost was set at 212. billion rubles in 2015 prices .
Some analysts say the decline in the number of tourists from Ukraine can be explained by the sharp decline in visitors . Poor infrastructure has not actually been updated since the Soviet era .
 President Vladimir Putin signed a list of instructions regarding transport development in April 2014 . The measures will ensure reliable passenger air service to Crimea and reduce cost of air travel to the peninsula .
 The law creates a Free Economic Zone in the Republic of Crimea and City of Sevastopol for 25 years . It may later be extended .
 The document laid out the mandatory volume of capital investments in the investment project . It is impossible to implement even the best of intentions without highquality government and management structures .
 Many Russian journalists and experts have already visited Russian Crimea . Local residents are interested in filling elected officials’ posts and in the functioning of democratic procedures, they say .
 In general, the contrast between foreign political disputes and interests and the request to modernize internal policy seems strange .
 The "Russian spring" was itself initiated from below, no thanks to “armchair activists, and in many respects, in spite of them. Be that as it may, officials in both Moscow and Crimea should not forget, that the “Russian spring’
 Sevastopol businessman Alexei Chaly has retained his signature style . Crimea's new status as a part of Russia has a limited lifespan .
 The Russian government would do well to forestall their emergence, not by exerting force, but by raising the quality of infrastructure and resolving other social problems .
 The acquisition of Crimea, for Russia, is not the “end of history, but the beginning of a complex process of integrating the territory, but more importantly, the peninsula's inhabitants .
 Russia would be easier for Russia to assert its position during negotiations with Western partners . For it to meet with success in this regard, it would be harder for Russia.
Internal failures emerge, such as solving management problems, economy, and inter-ethnic relations . External pressure will undoubtedly increase as internal failures emerge .