 Ukraine's pro-Russian presidential candidate Yuriy Boyko went to Moscow to meet Russian Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev without prior announcement . The Ukrainian presidential election is on March 22 .
 presidential candidate to visit a leader of a country with which it is at war . Much of the meeting was broadcast on Russian state television .
 Boyko, a former minister of energy under President Viktor Yanukovych, did not go alone . Boyko was a former energy minister under Yanukovych .
 Viktor Medvedev is a renowned early gas trader and Russian President Vladimir Putin’s closest friend and representative in Ukraine . He went together with the real leader of the pro-Russian "Opposition Platform for Life" He was flanked by Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller .
 The formal topic was the gas trade between Russia and Ukraine, the main source of corruption in Ukraine . The gas trade is the most important source of Corruption in Ukraine.
 Medvedchuk was one of the four first people that the U.S. sanctioned for Russia’s occupation of Crimea on March 17, 2014, one day before Putin annexed Crimea .
 All participants in the meeting made clear that the Ukrainians took the initiative . All participants made clear the Ukrainians were taking the initiative.
 opposition leaders do not travel to a foreign country, and certainly not to an enemy country, to negotiate a gas deal on behalf of their nation .
 Both Boyko and Medvedchuk said they regretted the bad relations between Russia and Ukraine . Both said they regret the situation in Ukraine . The pair said they also regretted the Ukraine-Russia relations .
 Medvedchuk lied that Ukrainian authorities had introduced Western sanctions on Russia and poor Russia had only countersanctioned . Boyko did not mention the Russian sanctions against Ukraine as the reason for the sharp decline in mutual trade .
 Neither Boyko nor Medvedchuk had a single negative word to say about Russia as if Ukraine were at fault for everything .
 Medvedchuk is a presidential candidate . He is a former member of the House of Representatives . He was elected to the presidency in 2012 .
 Medvedchuk spoke for twelve minutes, showing that he's the boss and Boyko is the underling . He spoke for 12 minutes of a televised meeting .
 His speech was a vicious condemnation of whatever the Ukrainian government has done in the last five years . His speech is a vicious condemn of what the Ukraine government has been doing .
 Anybody who watches this video realizes that Boyko is not the real candidate . The video was posted on YouTube .
Medvedchuk's long speech was more anti-Ukrainian, anti-Western, and anti-European than one can imagine . Medvedchuk: "I'm not a Russian, I'm a Ukrainian, I am a Russian. I'm an anti-Russian, I've
 His bottom line was Russia and Ukraine must reestablish good relations, he said . He said Russia andUkraine must re establish good relations .
 Ukraine and Russia discussed a possible gas deal between Russia and Ukraine . The Ukrainian participants had no mandate, for which the Ukrainian participants did not .
Both Nord Stream 2 and Turkish Stream will come on line in December 2019 . Medvedchuk anticipated that both would come in December . Ukraine would no longer be needed, costing Ukraine 5,000 jobs and $3 billion a year in lost transit fees .
 Medvedchuk returned to his old brief when he was an independent chief of staff to Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma . He called for a gas consortium between Russia and Ukraine .
 He claimed Gazprom was ready to prolong the gas transit contract, which makes no sense with all the new pipelines . He claimed that Gazprom is ready to extend the contract .
 Ukrainian consumers would pay one quarter less, he claimed . But he said it is too early to say anything about the eventual price .
 Moscow has run out of steam in Ukraine’s politics and tries the simplest tricks in the absence of any sophisticated ones . This painful and sad Kabuki theater suggests that Moscow is out of power .
 Boyko, who is no fool, probably realizes that this video will offer Ukrainians no reason to vote for him .