 The US-NATO military alliance continues its deployments along Russia’s borders . The campaign by the United States and British governments against alleged ‘Russian Aggression’ continues to increase .
 The U.S. National Reconnaissance Office launched a spy satellite carried by an Atlas V rocket that was powered by a Russian RD-180 engine . It would be impossible for the Senators to revise their rabid hatred of Russia .
 The 1,500-word official report on the launching mentioned RD-180 three times . But it failed to state its country of manufacture .
 Had it been deferred because of malfunction of the Russian engine that powers it, there would have been gloating headlines . The Russian engine powers it.
 U.S. and British intelligence agencies already have a proven record of spying on world leaders . Kofi Annan, Chancellor Merkel of Germany, French Presidents Jacques Chirac, Nicolas Sarkozy and François Hollande and Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff were subjected to greasy little eavesdro
 Washington's anti-Russia propaganda campaign will continue for the foreseeable future . President Trump's initial intentions to enter into dialogue with his counterpart in Moscow wither away to nothing .
 The anti-Russia campaign is gathering force, and it is not difficult to put a finger on why such a counter-productive crusade appeals to so many in West .
 The United States arms and intelligence industries are the main beneficiaries of confrontation with Russia . The U.S. military alliance has been desperately seeking justification for its existence for many years .
 For so long as the military-industrial complex holds sway in Washington, there will continue to be sabre-rattling and mindless military posturing .
International Space Station will continue to be resupplied by rockets powered by Russian engines . But the International Space Station is still being used by Russian rockets .
 Senator Klobuchar, I write with concern over statements you have made about Russia .
 These statements have been made both at home and abroad, and they involve two issues . The alleged Russian hack of the presidential election and Russia’s actions in the aftermath of the February 22, 2014 coup in Kiev .
 U.S. intelligence services allege Putin ordered an influence campaign to denigrate Hillary Clinton and help elect Donald Trump .
 The campaign is purported to include the production of fake news, cyber-trolling, and propaganda from Russian state-owned media .
 It is alleged Russia hacked the email accounts of the Democratic National Committee and Clinton campaign chair John Podesta . It is also alleged that Russia hacked John Podesta's email accounts .
Despite calls from many quarters, the intelligence services have not provided any proof . The intelligence services are not providing any proof.
 Americans are expected to blindly trust these services with a long history of failure . Instead, Americans should trust them with a history of failing, says John Sutter .
 Former Director of National Intelligence, James Clapper, and former Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, John Brennan, have been known to lie to the public and to Congress .
 WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange maintains the emails did not come from Russia . WikiLeaks has an unblemished record of revealing accurate information that would otherwise remain hidden .
 Republicans with an ax to grind against Russia, and Democrats wishing to distract from their own failings in the campaign, refer to them as fact .
 A congressional commission to investigate the alleged Russian hacking is not necessary . A congressional panel will investigate the allegations of hacking .
 The allegations don't rise to the level of ‘an act of aggression’ or “an attack on the American people’s way of life’ The allegations are common occurrences, and they are altogether common occurrences .
 McCain and Graham are on a tour of Russian provocation through the Baltics, Ukraine, Georgia, and Montenegro . It is of concern that they would join Senator McCain on the tour .
 It is unfortunate that these claims have become truisms by sheer repetition rather than careful examination of the facts . It's unfortunate that the claims have been repeated by repetition, not careful examination .
 There are no regular units of the Russian military in the breakaway provinces, nor has Russia launched any air strikes from its territory . Russia has no regular military units in the provinces .
 Ukrainian forces seeking autonomy from Kiev . It has sent weapons and other provisions to the Ukrainian forces . There are most certainly Russian volunteers operating in Ukraine .
 The unrest was precipitated by the overthrow of the democratically elected president Viktor Yanukovych . It was assisted by the United States State Department, other American government agencies, and one Senator John McCain .
 The coup government against the People's Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk was described by President Putin as “uncontrolled crime’s spreading into the south and east of the country . The subsequent military and paramilitary operations launched by the coup government were described by
 If Russia's actions are to be considered “aggression’ or an “invasion, one must find a whole new word to describe what the U.S. did to Iraq in 2003 .
 On February 21, 2014, an agreement brokered by the European Union was signed between President Yanukovych and the leaders of three major opposition parties .
 The agreement contained terms for a cessation of violence, immediate power sharing, and new elections . The agreement also included terms for an immediate end to violence .
 opposition in Maidan Square did not withdraw from the streets or surrender their illegal weapons as agreed . Instead they went on the offensive .
 The next day, they moved to impeach Yanukovych, however they failed to meet several requirements of the Ukrainian Constitution . The next morning, they move to impeaching Yanukovych, but they failed. The next night, they also moved to impeachment Yanukovych . They failed to met several requirements.
 The Ukrainian government failed to indict the president, conduct an investigation, and have that investigation certified by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine . The court has not indicted the president or conducted an investigation into the president .
 They failed to obtain the required three-fourths majority vote. Instead, they moved directly to a vote on impeachment and failed to get that vote .
 Yanukovych remained its legitimate president-in-exile . He requested Russian intervention on the peninsula to provide security and protect the human rights of ethnic Russians .
 Ukrainian military and neo-Nazi paramilitaries have moved with force against the defenders of the Donbass region . The region's people seek autonomy from a Kiev government that they do not recognize .
 Approximately 10,000 people have died in the Donbass War, while only six people were killed during the period of annexation in Crimea .
 The popular referendum conducted on March 16, 2014 lent legitimacy to the subsequent annexation . The referendum was held on March 17, 2014 .
 Official results claim 82% turnout with 96% of voters favoring reunification with Russia . Official results claimed 82% turn out with 96%.
 Six years prior to the crisis in 2008, a poll found that 63% favored reunification . Six years before the crisis, 63% favor reunification.
 Many ethnic Ukranians and Tatars boycotted the election, but rejoining Russia was clearly the will of the majority of Crimean people .
 Article 1 of the U.N. Charter calls for respect for the principle of self-determination of peoples . The United Nations Charter is based on Article 1.
 The 1975 Helsinki Accords affirmed post-World War II borders, also allowed for the change of national boundaries by peaceful internal means . The 1975 Accords also affirmed post World War II boundaries .
 The U.S. should accept the Russian annexation of Crimea both as a pragmatic matter, and one of principle . The United States should accept Crimea's annexation both as pragmatic and a principle .
 Eleven new nations have been added to the alliance. That promise has now been broken three times and 11 new nations added . The alliance has now added eleven new nations .
Ukraine has also entered in partnership with NATO, and at various times, full membership has been discussed . Ukraine has also been discussed as part of NATO .
 Three-senator delegation went to a front-line military outpost in Shirokino, Ukraine to incite an escalation to the Donbass War .
 A video of the New Year's Eve event shows a soldier accepting a gift from a soldier .
 Michael Flynn's resignation appears to be a violation of the Logan Act . Flynn was accused of discussing alleviation of sanctions with a Russian ambassador . Flynn is a former National Security Advisor .
 Your delegation advocate for a foreign policy that was not aligned with that of acting President Obama . It was also contrary to President-elect Trump’s approach to the region .
 The results of your advocacy have the potential to be far more deadly than the mere alleviation of sanctions. And the results of this could be more deadly.