 February 2017 will mark the third anniversary of the collapse of the Kremlin-favored government of Viktor Yanukovych . The collapse of Yanukovych's government will be marked in February 2017 .
 The regime's demise was brought about by bitter protests and by civil society’s reaction to a brutal government response to the Maidan protestors .
 Ukraine saw the emergence of a pro-Western government promising reform . Ukraine saw an energized civil society committed to pressing for the implementation of serious reform measures .
 The current government of President Petro Poroshenko and Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman appears, to many, to be moving slowly and cautiously in a positive direction . The government is implementing much-needed government reform, addressing endemic corruption.
 For some, the government has already achieved what they believe has been the most substantial reform wave seen in Ukraine in the last 25 years . For others, they believe it has already been a significant reform wave .
 Under Groysman, the adoption of a public asset and income declaration law required of all government officials has been hailed as a significant anticorruption achievement .
 Significant reforms also have taken place in the federal prosecutor’s office, energy and banking sectors, and health care system .
 Economic progress has begun to increase slowly as the government has reduced its budget and accounts deficits .
Shortcomings in the rule of law that have plagued the country are also reportedly being overcome . Shortcomings in law have also reportedly been overcome .
 The judicial system, however, remains a problem, and attempts to promote privatization have not been successful . The system is still a problem .
 The government's cautious approach has failed to impress some sectors of a frustrated public that continues to pressure the government for more progress .
 The influence of a small group of old-time oligarchs and politicians remains a distraction . The opposition continues to criticize the government .
 The international community appears to be more encouraged by government action . But many concede more work needs to be done .
 Russia responded to the change of government in Kyiv by seizing Ukraine’s Crimea region and annexing it in March 2014 .
 A 12-point agreement to end the conflict, known as Minsk-2, was reached by the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany . It took effect in February 2015 .
 Europe and the United States have continued to press Kyiv to move forward with implementing Minsk-2 . Since then, the separatists and their patrons in the Kremlin have shown little interest in fulfilling their responsibilities .
 The United States and the EU strongly condemned Russia’s incursions into Ukraine . They have imposed sanctions on Russian individuals and key Russian economic and business sectors .
 The United States has committed close to $1. billion in foreign assistance to Ukraine to advance reforms and strengthen democratic institutions . $135 million in humanitarian assistance provided through the United Nations and $3 billion in loan guarantees .
 In 2014, Ukraine Freedom Support Act was adopted, among other provisions, authorized increased military and economic assistance for Ukraine .
 In September 2016, the House adopted the STAND for Ukraine Act . Among other provisions, it clarified the position of the United States on Russia’s illegal occupation of Crimea .
 Some observers believe there is a growing Ukraine fatigue in Europe and a euroskepticism taking hold in Ukraine .
 Concerns about the new U.S. Administration’s commitment to Ukraine also raising the level of anxiety among many in Kyiv .
 In addition, ethnic Ukrainians in the east 1 CIA, The World Factbook, 2016 . In addition to the CIA, the World Fact book, 2016.
 Ukraine’s political scene has been largely dominated by a powerful political elite and politically well-connected businessmen, or “oligarchs,” who regularly manipulated the government for their own security and profit .
 Ukraine’s recent political unrest involved, for the most part, former President Viktor Yanukovych .
Public reaction shifted from protest to lack of respect for the basic human dignity of Ukraine’s citizens, says Observers .
 The Kremlin reacted with great hostility toward the events in Kyiv, referring to them as an illegal coup . The Kremlin has called the events a coup .
 The emergence of the new, pro-Western leadership in Ukraine also unsettled Moscow because of the presence of the large Russian Black Sea fleet stationed in Crimea . The new Ukrainian leadership also unsettles Moscow.
 In February 2014, heavily armed Russianspeaking forces, aided by Russian troops, began seizing airports and other key installations .
 Moscow announced it was annexing Crimea and making it a permanent part of Russia . The move follows a military operation by the Russian military .
 On March 16, 2014, Crimean authorities held a referendum in support of the annexation by Russia .
 Ukraine, the United States, the EU, and others denounced the referendum as illegal and claimed it was not held in a free or fair manner . The referendum was held in Ukraine, Ukraine and the U.S.
 pro-Russia, armed rebels, aided by Moscow, began to seize government facilities and territory in the eastern regions of the country referred to the Donbas .
 Ukraine has committed its military forces against the separatists . These actions quickly evolved into a full-scale conflict requiring Ukraine to commit military forces .
 Poroshenko pledged to move Ukraine closer to the West, to clean up rampant corruption . He also pledged to deal with the conflict that had emerged in the eastern part of the country .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk maintained that his government’s primary goal was to adopt European standards . The ultimate objective of EU membership for Ukraine.
 Fie consistently reiterated that a key focus of his government would be to fight corruption . Fie's government would also be to reduce government regulation and the size of the bureaucracy .
 Fie stated that the government would cut the number of taxes it collected and devolve more budgetary power to local authorities . Fie said the government will cut the amount of taxes collected and Devolve more power to the local authorities.
 Petro Poroshenko is the president and prime minister of Ukraine . The prime minister is Volodymyr Groysman . Defense Minister is Sepan Poltoral .
 Rada chairman Volodymyr Groysman announced that the legislature would conduct a review of the work of the Yatsenyuk Cabinet . The review would precede a vote of no confidence on the government, he said .
 Ukrainian law prohibits the Rada from considering additional “no-confidence votes against a government for six months . Yatsenyuk was given time to form a new government, make changes, and move the reform process forward .
Observers recall how the Orange Revolution paralyzed the government and alienated voters . Victor Yanukovych delivered the presidency to Victor Yanukovych in 2010 .
 Rada deputies approved five critical pieces of reform legislation to stay on track with IMF 12 Elizabeth Pond, “Gunfight at the Ukraine Corral,” Institute for International Strategic Studies .
 Opinion polls indicated that public skepticism remained high regarding the Poroshenko/Yatsenyuk government’s ability to implement those reforms . Despite the recognized progress made in passing some reform legislation, opinion polls indicate that public skeptical remained high .
 The polls questioned the government's commitment to make a serious impact in fighting the country's deeply ingrained, crippling problem with corruption .
 Yatsenyuk's government failed to form a new government by early April 2016 . He indicated that he would resign if a new prime minister was agreed to .
 Ukraine's parliament says they are committed to continuing an International Monetary Fund program that is keeping Ukraine financially afloat . They say they are also committed to rejecting the economic populism proposed by many in parliament .
 The period since the formation of the Groysman government has been marked by slow but increasingly successful progress in addressing reform and strengthening the economy .
 Lutsenko appears committed to move forward on needed reforms and prosecutions of corrupt officials of both the former and current governments .
 Groysman also replaced Natalie Jaresko, the highly popular minister of finance, with Oleksandr Danyliuk, formerly with McKinsey & Company .
 Danyliuk raised some initial concern as to whether he would be willing or able to undertake meaningful reforms over the long term . Since then he appears to have won increasing support for his efforts .
 Groysman government has achieved some notable successes in the first 10 months in office, according to some . Some successes, including on issues of energy subsidies, corruption, transparency, and banking reform .
 Much of the reform effort has been initiated due to a real desire to clean up the country . The need for outside financial assistance has been motivated by the need for financial assistance .
 The IMF has had to warn Kyiv that more difficult reforms were needed in the banking and pension sectors . A new initiative regarding the electronic declarations by high officials had to be put into place .
 The government has been able to move forward with the further reduction of household energy subsidies demanded by the IMF . The prospect of increased electricity prices spurred several street protests .
 The takeover was backed by Kyiv's international donors as necessary to protect the country’s financial system . The takeover is backed by international donors.
 Kyiv has raised concerns about who in Kyiv wins and who loses from the success of the reform efforts . These and other examples of reform initiatives have generated opposition to the government .
 Some fear that those who have the most to lose will act to slow the reform process down . Some fear those who are most likely to lose to slow down the process .
 Anders Aslund warned that an attempt has been under way in the Ukrainian parliament to deprive the NBU of its independence and oust Hontareva .
 This would have been a major reversal of Ukraine’s economic reforms, says Aslund . This would be a major reverses of Ukraine's economic reforms.
 U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland says she was encouraged by signs of commitment to reform from Ukraine's government .
 The Groysman government has been setting the right tone for moving the country forward . The EU and the IMF seemed satisfied that the Groysmen government has set the righttone for reform .
 In fall 2016, the IMF approved another $1 billion for Ukraine as part of the IMF’s $17 billion assistance program for the country .
 An IMF mission visited Ukraine again between November 3 and November 17, 2016 . The mission was to assess whether enough progress had been made to warrant the release of additional funds to Kyiv .
 The IMF decided that the government needed more time to meet international demands for progress . No additional funds would be provided in 2016 .
 IMF mission devoted atypical attention to governance, specifically to corruption . Ukrainian government must convince skeptical IMF that it is doing something more about corruption .
 The Carnegie study concluded that the process to get control over the influence of the oligarchs will take time . The success of any efforts to weaken their influence will depend on whether Ukraine’s present-day institutions can be reformed .
Several incidents since summer 2016 have called into question the stability and public acceptance of the Poroshenko/Groysman government . Despite the progress that must be attributed to the government, several incidents could present problems in 2017 .
Coming from a national icon, these comments sent shock waves across the nation and throughout the international community, which continued to oppose new elections as potentially destabilizing .
 The group is steadfastly libertarian on matters of personal choice and a staunch proponent of tough anticorruption measures . The group also supports a strong rule of law and an impartial judiciary .
 July was the deadliest month for the Ukrainian military in nearly a year . The Ukraine Defense Ministry says 27 Ukrainian soldiers died .
 As Ukraine transitioned into fall 2016, the Poroshenko/Groysman government seemed to feel it had achieved much .
 In November, the Rada adopted a landmark anticorruption reform requiring thousands of government officials to declare their wealth in an online database . The Rada is a major development, and a surprise to many .
 The system was a key requirement of the IMF in exchange for the release of funds . It was one of the conditions set out by the EU for an agreement on visa-free travel for Ukrainians .
 The disclosure would ensure that the country would move away from a culture that tacitly allowed bureaucrats to amass wealth through cronyism .
 Since adoption, more than 100,000 submissions have been reported . The amount of wealth has been a major surprise to most Ukrainians .
 The General Prosecutor’s Office, the National Agency for Corruption Prevention, and the National Anti-corruption Bureau have announced their intentions to start investigations into the sources of such wealth among officials .
Despite its flaws, the disclosure initiative was seen as a significant step in tackling corruption . According to many, it was seen by many as an important step in combating corruption .
 The publicly available database makes it possible to uncover the sometimes murky connections between public officials via their involvement in different companies and can thus help to reveal conflicts of interest .
 It is important for civil society and journalists to keep up the pressure for criminal investigations to be completed . It is also important for journalists and civil society to keep pressure on criminal investigations.
Former Finance Minister Natalie Jaresko suggested Ukraine had gone through the “longest and most successful reform process’s’.
 This process has occurred in spite of Russia’s occupation of Ukraine, Reuters, July 20, 2016 .
 Jaresko noted that the reforms were not yet irreversible and required continued international support . However, he noted that they needed continued support from the world .
New Ukrainian government becomes complacent, says Anders Aslund . Still others have warned that if the country's gains could be lost .
 Aslund: Early parliamentary election may not survive next spring 2017 . Otherwise, it risks an early parliamentary election .
 Parliamentary elections are not slated until 2019, but populist parties have been urging early elections . The numbers are high in the polls, and the polls are high for populist parties .
 Azov Battalion apparently decided to form its own political party . This concern was heightened recently when Ukraine’s populist, anti-Russia, was heightened .
 Observers believe any wavering of U.S. or EU support could signal to Moscow that Ukraine "fatigue" is growing . Moscow could take additional steps to destabilize the government, they say .
 Many in 30 Comments of Natalie Jaresko at the Atlantic Council, October 11, 2016 .
 Military Deadlock, Political Crisis, The International Crisis Group, December 19, 2016 .
 Russia's actions in Syria and failure to ease the conflict in the Donbas seem to be hardening the EU position on Russia, which may benefit Kyiv for a while longer .
 Russia’s aggression in Ukraine still unsettled, few wanted to invest in what some felt could become an extended war zone . In addition, few had wanted to investment in what they felt could be an extended War zone .
 In December 2015, the IMF tweaked its rules regarding lending to countries in arrears to other states, allowing Ukraine to continue to receive IMF funding even 36 CIA, The World Factbook, January 5, 2016 .
 IMF Director Fagarde warned then-Prime Minister Yatsenyuk that reforms were taking too long . IMF support for Ukraine was in jeopardy unless the pace of reforms was increased, he said .
 In late 2016, it was reported that electricity prices had declined somewhat . In late 2015, electricity prices were reported to have declined slightly .
 Russia suspended its own free-trade deal with Ukraine and banned all imports of Ukrainian food in January 2016 . Ukraine has responded in kind to the move .
 Russia’s tightening of trade restrictions resulted in Ukrainian exports to Russia being cut by 50% . Russia is still an important market for Ukrainian metals and machine-building .
 Ukraine’s economic outlook for the longer time could be inhibited by a continued stagnation in the economic outlook . The UK and the EU begin negotiations for the UK and EU in 2017 .
 The EIU forecasted growth in real GDP of around 1.1% in 2016 and 2.5% in 2017 . It also predicted growth in the real GDP in 2017 and 2016 .
 Ukraine is making a great deal of progress in agriculture, according to some . Some say more reforms are needed, but some say more is needed .
 In 2016, the government estimated that grain sales will top 60 million tons, up 7% over 2015 . In 2015, grain sales are expected to top 60million tons .
 At the end of 2015 the value of Ukraine’s foreign investments was over $60 billion . Ukraine's need for direct foreign investment was $60billion .
 Ukraine possesses large energy resources, according to many, below its potential . The sector has traditionally operated in a environment of low energy prices, subsidies, and high consumption .
International donors demanded the new Ukrainian government concentrate its reform efforts . This sector became one of the first areas in which international donors demanded that the new government concentrate on reform .
 The Poroshenko/Groysman government made a serious effort to address the corruption surrounding the energy sector . It has initiated several reforms, including reducing or eliminating subsidies, which has resulted in lower consumption .
 Ukraine has historically been heavily dependent on Russia for its energy supplies and for the transit fees associated with the flow of gas through Ukraine to Europe . Ukraine has traditionally been heavily reliant on Russia.
 Russia long sought control of Ukraine’s natural gas pipelines and storage facilities . Russia has been trying to keep control of the country's natural gas facilities for years .
 Ukraine’s vulnerability to Russian political pressure through energy policy has been mitigated by the fact that the main oil and natural gas pipelines to Central and Western Europe transit Ukraine's territory .
 Past Russian efforts to greatly increase gas prices for Ukraine provoked a crisis that resulted in the cutoff of Russian gas to Western Europe for several days in January 2006 .
 Russia canceled the South Stream project in December 2014 . Elowever, after the EU raised objections that the project violated EU competition rules, Russia canceled it .
 Ukraine and the EU are now facing another possible problem with Gazprom that could affect Europe’s supply of gas during winter 2017 .
 A court in Ukraine upheld a government decision to impose a $6. billion fine on Gazprom . The Russian company had abused its monopoly position in the natural gas market between 2009 and 2015 .
 Some in Ukraine believe Gazprom may be preparing another gas crisis by threatening to cut gas supplies through Ukraine to pressure the EU to convince Ukraine to back off .
 Ukrainian leaders acknowledge that in order to avoid likely future Russian efforts to use energy supplies as a political weapon, Ukraine would have to sharply reduce its overall energy .
 The Ukrainian Rada passed legislation reducing the energy subsidy provided to consumers . But some reductions in energy consumption were also seen .
 Ukraine filled some of its underground storage facilities with gas to help get through winter 2016-2017 . E1U: Ukraine was able to do without Russian gas only because a deep economic contraction in Ukraine had reduced demand .
 Ukraine has relied on the EU to act as a mediator with Russia to secure the ability of Ukraine to purchase Russian gas in the event more supply is needed . The EU has acted as an EU mediator to secure Ukraine's ability to buy Russian gas .
 Ukraine will also have to make much greater strides in energy conservation . Ukraine will have to also make much more strides inenergy conservation .
Until the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, the Kremlin preferred using indirect methods of influence in Ukraine . The Kremlin preferred to use indirect methods.
 Ukrainian politicians and oligarchs use Russian media to attack uncooperative leaders . These included “carrots,” such as favorable loan terms or lucrative business deals with Ukrainian politicians .
 Ukrainian officials have reported increased Russian interference, particularly in Ukraine’s political affairs and economy .
 Russian disinformation and propaganda activities also have been on the rise . Russian disinformation, propaganda activities have also been on rise .
 The EU's East StratcomTask Force documents cases of fake news and other disinformation in Europe .
As the fighting in Donetsk and Luhansk escalated in December 2016, so did the discrediting of Ukraine in pro53 Op. cit .
 Ukraine also accused of violating Russian airspace over Crimea over Crimea . 55 per cent of Crimea's airspace is not Russian but Ukrainian . Ukraine also was accused of breaching Russian airspace.
 The Ukrainian Deputy Foreign Minister accused the EU of betrayal, 56 that Ukrainian soldiers sell fuel to buy clothes . 57 that there are only three ways forward for Ukraine to be returned to Russia, or to be subjected to a coup . 58 that the EU is betraying the
 Ukraine has been the target of numerous cyberattacks, all pointing to Russia . Ukraine has also been targeted by cyberattacks .
Ukrainian government servers have been hit by numerous and sophisticated cyberattacks . Some experts suggest that the attacks may have come from Russia .
 The attacks seem to come from both Russian government sources and sources supported by the Kremlin . The exact sources are rarely named, if known, but the exact source is rarely named .
 Black Energy is a known cybercrime toolkit that has been around since 2007 . Black Energy was active in Georgia during its conflict with Russia .
 A new version of malware reportedly was detected being used by a mysterious group of hackers targeting Ukrainian government officials . The hackers are targeting Ukrainian officials, specifically their office and cellular phones .
 In 2015, Black Energy hackers apparently targeted government infrastructure in Dnipropetrovsk, a city in the southeast of Ukraine, as well as the Ukrainian railway, creating proxy servers .
 An International Business Times article in 2015 suggested that intelligence services would be able to hide, for “plausible deniability,” behind groups like Black Energy . Black Energy is a widespread cybercrime tool used by hackers around the globe .
 Ukrainian power companies experienced unscheduled power outages in December 2015 . A large number of customers were affected by the outages .
 There were reports of malware found in Ukrainian companies in a variety of other critical infrastructure sectors . In addition, there were reports that malware was found in Ukraine in other critical sectors .
 In January 2016, the Kyiv airport computer systems were apparently hacked, an attack blamed on Russian sources . The attack was apparently blamed on Russia .
Coidd cut close to 70% of Ukrainian-made military goods exported to Russia . It was estimated at the time that a ban, with a few exceptions, was imposed .
 Tensions spiked again in November 2016 when Kyiv announced that the Ukrainian military would conduct missile tests in the region just north of the Crimean border .
 Moscow warned Kyiv to keep missiles out of Crimea air space or risk the possible shoot down of the missiles .
 Russia has connected an extensive electricity grid from Russia to Crimea . Russia has announced plans to construct a bridge that would span the Kerch Strait . The 11-mile roadway would connect Crimea and Russia .
 Moscow announced the deployment of the S-400 anti-aircraft missile system to Crimea in August 2016 . Some 30,000 Russian servicemen are already in Crimea .
 Crimea elections were held in Crimea on September 18, 2016, for eight seats in the Russian Duma . In another sign regarding the future of Crimea, elections in Crimea were held on Sept. 18.
 Four elected deputies represented single district and 4 were elected from party lists . Four elected deputy deputies represented one district and four were elected.
 The ruling United Russia party won 73% of the vote and captured the most seats in Crimea . The ruling party won the most votes in Crimea.
 The Kremlin's latest state budget has pledged to boost the Crimean economy with a 37. billion rubles subsidy .
 The United Nations General Assembly voted 70 to 26, with 77 countries abstaining, for a resolution that recognizes Crimea as “temporarily occupied’ by Russia . The resolution condemns the “abuses’ and “discrimination’ against Crimean Tatars, ethnic Ukrainians
 Unrest in eastern Ukraine took a more ominous turn in April 2014, when armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Ukrainian forces successfully dislodged gunmen from strongholds in Slovyansk, Kramatorsk, and other towns . In July and August 2014, the Ukrainian armed forces moved on separatist forces.
 Accusations flew on both sides as to who fired the missile, but for some it was clear . Dutch government determined the missile was fired by separatist forces using a Russian-supplied Buk missile .
 Ukraine agreed to a cease-fire plan during talks with separatist representatives and Russian officials in Minsk, Belarus, on September 5, 2014 .
 The signing of the agreement led to the end of the Russian-supported offensive against Ukrainian forces . But it did not fully end the fighting .
 Sporadic, sometimes intense, fighting continued, resulting in over 1,300 deaths since the Minsk protocol was signed . The Minsk Protocol was signed.
 The Obama Administration left the leading role in negotiating a settlement to France, Germany, and Ukraine . Russia's representatives met with those of Russia in the so-called Normandy format .
 President Obama and Administration officials had been in regular contact with the main figures in the talks . President Putin, President Poroshenko, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and President Francois Hollande of France were in talks .
 Minsk-1 protocol failed to end the conflict and begin the process of achieving a political resolution to the Donbas . The presidents of France, Russia, and Ukraine met again in early February 2015 to try to secure a new agreement to stop the fighting .
 The agreement called for local elections in rebel-held regions and for legal and constitutional reforms to be negotiated with the rebels . It also called for a special “decentralized” status to the region as well as amnesty for the separatist leaders .
 The return of control to Ukraine of its side of the Russia-Ukraine border was conditioned on the implementation of the decentralization reforms . The return to Ukraine was conditional on implementation of reforms .
 Minsk-2 agreement amounted to a step toward transforming the occupied parts of Donbas into a new Transnistria 67 . Some experts believe Russian troop levels in Ukraine are significantly lower .
 Few believe much has been accomplished in fully implementing the provisions of Minsk-2 by either side . Both sides have commitments by both sides to do so .
 OSCE Special Monitoring Mission is monitoring the cease-fire along the line controlled by Ukraine . Russia-backed separatists have restricted the operational area of the SMM, shot down or jammed SMM drones used to verify compliance .
 The OSCE’s SMM has consistently reported daily ceasefire violations since February 2015 . There have been some lulls in the fighting, but mostly on the part of the separatists .
 SMM has reported that the total cease-fire violations for 2016 will number in the thousands . The SMM said that the number of violations will be in the hundreds of thousands .
 Cease-fire violations continue to result in numerous civilian and Ukrainian military casualties . More than 9,000 dead since 2015, estimated at more than nine,000 since 2015 .
 OSCE continued to report sporadic fighting throughout August 2016 . Heavy fighting seemed to have subsided .
19 Ukrainian soldiers were injured in fighting along the line of conflict after the new cease-fire took effect . 19 Ukrainian soldiers are injured, according to Ukrainian sources .
 separatists immediately blamed the government in Kyiv and vowed to retaliate . Other prominent separatists have recently met with suspicious deaths . The separatists have vowed to retaliation .
 separatist forces launched an artillery barrage and ground assault against Ukrainian military forces in the area around Svitlodarsk, west of the strategic town of Debaltseve . On December 19, the Ukrainian government reported that separatist forces had launched a barrage.
 Debaltseve itself is under separatist control, but the area is an important rail center . The area is a key rail center.
 The OSCE SMM had reported almost 3,000 explosions in the region in the build-up to the assault .
 The Ukrainian military reported five Ukrainian military personnel killed and a large number of wounded during the assault . The attack took place in eastern Ukraine .
 The level of fighting is the most serious flare-up along the front line in some months, according to the SMM . The SMM says the fighting was most serious.
 The withdrawal of heavy weapons from the front lines, particularly in separatist-held areas, has been sporadic at best .
 SMM has been able to access territory in the Donbas . Some of the heavy weapons appear to have been withdrawn .
 The OSCE has also reported that much of the separatists’ heavy weapons and the military personnel supplied by Russia have been repeatedly repositioned along the front lines but not removed from Ukraine . However, the OSCE also said that some of the rebels’ weapons and military personnel have
Several prisoner exchanges have taken place between Kyiv and the separatists . Several prisoner exchanges are taking place.
 The government in Kyiv announced on December 15, 2016, that it would release additional prisoners . The government announced on Dec. 15. 2016 that it will release more prisoners .
 The UN has estimated that some 3. million Ukrainians on both sides of the contact line continue to require humanitarian assistance .
 Both sides were reluctant to allow aid to flow into the eastern regions . Both sides are reluctant to let aid flow into their regions .
 humanitarian assistance continues to be restricted in the Donetsk region . Lately, however, aid is being provided in the region .
 The EU has reported a distribution of some €26 million in 2016 to organizations in Ukraine and the Donbas to provide aid . The EU reported some €4 million in December, including €4million in December .
 Russia continues to report that it is also providing assistance to people of the Donbas region . International inspectors rarely have the chance to observe the kinds of assistance or its distribution .
On many of the Minsk-2 requirements placed on Kyiv, progress has also been mixed . On many of those requirements, progress is mixed .
 In Kyiv, the Rada has passed an amnesty law and adopted a special status law for the citizens of the Donbas .
 Neither law has been signed by President Poroshenko, who has been reluctant to grant blanket amnesty due to the failure of the separatists to meet their Minsk obligations .
 The Rada has completed the first reading of a constitutional amendment . It would provide a certain level of self-government in the Donbas . The amendment would be the first in the country's history .
 The separatists have also rejected the provisions and demanded more far-ranging autonomy . The separatists are also demanding far-reaching autonomy .
 They say border cannot be restored until elections are held in the Donbas . They say the border can't be restored for elections to be held .
 The OSCE SMM has had access to only two checkpoints along the contested border, in Gukovo and Donetsk . Only two checkpoints have been allowed along the disputed border .
 Since the conflict, Kyiv has stopped providing pensions and social payments to citizens of the Donbas who live under separatist control .
 individuals who cross into Ukrainian-held areas and register with the government can receive some form of social benefits . However, individuals who register with government can also receive some forms of benefits .
 Normal commerce between the two sides does not take place, although there is apparently a thriving black market for goods .
 Some eastern companies, such as coal producing companies, are registered tax payers in Kyiv . They are able to sell limited supply of coal to the government .
 Ukraine claims Russia and separatists have not honored the steps necessary to move the election process forward . Ukraine claims that Russia and the separatists are not honoring the steps needed to move forward .
 Rada has yet to pass an election law because it is unclear whether Ukrainian government officials or political parties will be allowed into the region to help set up polling stations, print ballots, or even determine how ballots would be counted and reported . Both sides have agreed to hold any elections in accordance
 The Ukrainian government also wants guaranteed open media coverage of the election and the ability of displaced persons to vote .
 separatist’s demand that a total amnesty law be passed before elections can be held . Kyiv has not agreed to any of the election process demands by Kyiv .
 Control of the border is critical for Kyiv in halting the continuous flow of Russian forces and equipment to the separatists . Some question whether the OSCE can handle such a mission .
 Some Ukrainian politicians insist that the border should be controlled by the Ukrainian Armed Forces as a precondition to elections .
 The plan, according to some, was to have been ready in November 2016 . It could have included deploying an armed OSCE mission to the east to protect the monitoring mission .
 It was unclear what exactly the road map would envision. It was unlikely that the separatists would have agreed to such a provision . Russia continues to insist it has no military forces in eastern Ukraine .
 President Poroshe nk o won a hard-fought victory in moving legislation through the Rada . He does not have the necessary votes to pass this legislation as an amendment to the constitution .
 He is unlikely to secure the votes unless major progress is made by the other side to stop the fighting or to ensure free and fair elections are held in the disputed regions . He is likely to secure those votes unless the others make major progress .
 Russian official statements and the Minsk-2 agreement view the separatist regimes as legitimate interlocutors for Kyiv in determining the future of Ukraine . However, Russia's official statements say the separatist regime is legitimate interlocked .
 Moscow has insisted on decentralization of Ukraine, under which the various regions would have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finance, culture, language, education, and education .
 The concept of Novorossiya is expanding Russia’s dominant control of the area to include 80 “Details of the Talks with Putin in Berlin,” Liga.net, October 21, 2016 .
 Putin may now require massive infusion of Russian military forces, with casualties . Since then, Ukrainian military forces have become somewhat more capable, though .
 The situation in the east is likely to remain unresolved, with no cease-fire in place . Russia continuing to control the Russia-Ukraine border, and an agreement between Kyiv and the separatists on elections, amnesty, and decentralization remain unlikely .
 Moscow may not afford the same opportunity to destabilize Ukraine as stepping up the conflict . Such a status will continue to provide Moscow with leverage over Kyiv but might not afford same opportunity as destabilization .
 The leadership of the DPR and LPR would continue to adhere to Moscow’s strict line if little or no progress were made with Kyiv or if Moscow would attempt to exercise more control over the regions .
 Some believe the DPR will become more independent of Moscow, exercising more control over the economic and business assets and decisionmaking .
 The DPR and the LPR were about to unite into one entity, reviving the concept of Novorossiya . Recently, one report suggested that the DPR and LPR would unite .
 Such a union would, for some, represent a dangerous action, as it likely would make the DPR the dominant local player . It likely would set the stage for more Russian aggression deeper into Ukraine .
 DPR leaders may be prepared to use a show of force, including open military conflict with the LPR, to secure such an outcome . Some suggest there is more enthusiasm for this idea among DPR leaders than among their counterparts in Luhansk .
 Ukrainian forces launched a military assault against Ukrainian forces in the Svitlodarsk area in December 2016 . Ukrainian forces were reportedly trying to seize more territory in the area .
 Some observers believe that Putin may eventually create conditions for an election and reintegration of the Donbas region into the country . By contrast, some observers think that Putin is prepared to give up the region . He believes such a move would further weaken European resolve to continue the sanctions regime on
 Some Europeans had already suggested that sanctions could be incrementally lifted as parts of Minsk-2 are implemented .
 The EU agreed to extend its sanctions on Russia until July 2017 . The idea of a deal was apparently dropped when the EU agreed on the extension of the sanctions .
 Moscow appears to believe that by reintegrating the Donbas into Ukraine and having proRussia legislators elected to the Rada, Moscow could gain even more leverage .
 Russia’s proxies, when allied with existing opposition parties, could control a certain bloc of votes on key issues in the Rada, effectively blocking reform progress .
 Putin's move would force Kyiv and the Rada to honor democratically elected MPs from the Donbas . Such a move by Putin also would force them to offer them protection if they came to Kyiv or to ignore the will of the people of Donbas.
 Kyiv has raised some concern in Kyiv over the possibility of a political crisis . Some suggest this could only become a politically divisive problem .
 Moscow did not want to continue to incur in the current economic environment by prolonging the crisis . Officials initially believed there were additional financial consequences, created by continued low oil prices, Western sanctions, and Russian commitments in Syria .
 Moscow seems able to weather the economic problems and has not waivered in support of its commitment to the separatists . However, Moscow seems to have not waiver in support.
 Other observers believe these arguments miss the entire point of why Putin seized Crimea and supported the separatists in the first place .
 Ukrainian war hero Naydia Savchenko says she disagrees with key aspects of the Minsk cease-fire agreement . She says she wants eastern Ukraine more autonomy and holding local elections in Donbas .
 Savchenko met with representatives of the separatists in Minsk in December . The purpose of the meeting was not clear .
 He also argued that Putin knows “that it is much easier for the West to put pressure on Ukraine to 84 “Why Reintegrating the Donbas is Suicide for Ukraine,” Alexander Motyl said .
 Foreign ministers of France and Germany met with President Poroshenko in February 2016 . This pressure seemed to be on full display when the two countries met .
 Some pressure on Kyiv to meet the Minsk-2 requirements would reward separatists for taking sovereign territory from their own country at the point of a gun .
 The Europeans seem to have backed off from pressuring Kyiv to take the controversial actions many wanted . Both sides still insist that both sides meet their obligations under Minsk-2 .
 Europe's real priority is lasting peace and political reform or simply implementation of the Minsk agreement . This approach reinforces resentment of the West and suspicions of Europe's commitment to its own principles of rule of law .
 Military Deadlock, Political Crisis,’s December 19, 2016, is the International Crisis Group's annual report .
 The EIB has already obligated approximately €3 billion, including energy efficiency, modernization of water systems, and transport improvement projects . The project includes energy efficiency projects, water systems and transport improvements .
 The package also included close to €110 million aimed at developing the private sector, including small and medium enterprises .
Ratification of the pact was initially delayed due to Russian threats to block Ukrainian imports from Russian markets . The pact was originally delayed because of Russian threats.
 Provisional application rather than complete application occurred because the agreement must be ratified by all 28 EU member states . The agreement must also be ratified.
 In April 2016, voters in the Netherlands rejected the agreement, forcing the government to withhold ratification . The agreement was rejected by voters in April 2016 .
 The Dutch presented a document stating that the AA was not a “stepping stone’ for Ukraine to become a member of the EU . The AA did not contain an obligation for the EU or its member states to provide collective security guarantees or other military aid .
 The EU Council accepted the Dutch proposals at its December summit . The Dutch parliament is now awaiting a ratification vote by the Dutch parliament .
 The AA does provide Ukraine with the possibility of a gradual improvement in the Ukrainian economy as the trade relationship takes hold and matures .
 The EU helped modernize Ukraine’s natural gas transit system and worked on reversing the flow of pipelines through Slovakia . Ukraine can receive gas from the West .
 The EU agreed to accelerate its Visa Liberalization Action Plan to allow Ukrainians to travel throughout the EU . But that agreement had not been implemented by the end of 2016 . The EU also agreed to speed up its visa Liberalization Plan .
 Some in Ukraine and Europe believe that post-Maidan disenchantment with Europe may be growing . Despite hopes for a closer association with Europe promoted by veterans of the Maidan protests .
Oligarch-run media outlets, which oppose reform and populist leaders, are promoting anti-EU messages, say observers .
 Some in Ukraine are beginning to conclude that key EU member states are dragging their feet and have failed to honor their promises to Ukraine . The difficulty in the EU’s ratification of the AA with Kyiv and the delays associated with implementation of the visa liberalization agreement.
 The Administration issued two additional executive orders expanding the scope of the sanctions . It also announced visa bans and asset freezes against several senior figures from Russia and the secessionist Crimean government .
 The EU largely matched and even in some cases went beyond United States sanctions . However, after the Malaysian Airlines tragedy on July 17, 2014, the EU was largely matched .
 Since January 2015, the United States and the EU have added to and extended the sanctions on Russian individuals and entities . The sanctions have been extended several times .
 The EU sanctions were extended again, but an agreement had to be reached between the member states . The EU will conduct a thorough review of the sanctions .
 Some felt Juncker's attendance at the forum was to lay the ground for a softer policy toward Russia in the second half of the year .
 Extending sanctions required unanimous vote among all 28 EU member states . The sanctions required a unanimous vote from all 28 member states.
 EU member states are concerned about the commitment of the incoming U.S. administration . Some EU members are concerned that the sanctions will continue .
 Most believe that should the United States ease up on its sanctions, the EU will have no choice but to reverse its sanctions policy given current opposition to them .
 In December 2016, the U.S. administration blacklisted an additional 15 Russian individuals and companies for their dealings in Crimea and Ukraine .
 At the July 8-9, 2016, NATO summit in Warsaw, the NATO-Ukraine Commission met .
 Ukraine is currently the United States’ 80 th -largest goods trading partner, with $2. billion in total goods trade during 2014 . Ukraine is the U.S.’s 80th-largest goods trade partner, according to the United Nations .
 In December, the Department of State notified Congress that it was obligating $445 million to Ukraine for FY2016 .
 Russia and separatist forces it supports can intercept and jam their video feeds and data . Recently, it was reported that the drones have been less effective than anticipated .
 These exercises seek to enhance interoperability and strengthen regional security through realistic training . They also send an important signal of reassurance to Ukraine and other regional partners .
 Congress extended the authority to provide additional security assistance to Ukraine through December 31, 2018 . Congress authorized the use of up to $350 million in FY2017 .
 The NDAA would limit the obligation or expenditure of funds to $175 million of the funds authorized to be appropriated in FY2017 . Ukraine has taken substantial action on defense institutional reforms, NDAA says .
 The legislation would also have tightened sanctions enforcement with a new anti-evasion framework . It would also require regular reports on banks illegally controlling Ukrainian assets .
 The bill would try to drive new private-sector investment to Ukraine . It would clamp down on Russia buying defense equipment or services from NATO allies . It also would target human rights abuses in Russian-occupied areas .
 The prolonged discord at the beginning of 2016 over how to replace Yatsenyuk, create a new government, and avoid national elections stymied the political process .
For some, reforming Ukraine is not rocket science, but it is also not easy and has had to be forced all along the way . For some, reform Ukraine has been difficult but it has been successful .
 Groysman came into office with little public confidence in his willingness to seriously tackle the root causes of much of the country's corruption . He has since shown a relatively strong commitment to enact reforms and has appeared to be less intimidated than feared .
 The potential for a significant period of instability and the possible necessity of a new national election in 2016 was avoided . The government was hit with several political developments and challenges .
After 10 months of Groysman government, doubts still persist. Nevertheless, after 10 months, those doubts still remain .
 Instability has recently increased, in part due to the reemergence of powerful oligarchs and others with entrenched interests in not seeing too much change .
 Europe is supporting Ukraine's transformation, according to the European Council on Foreign Affairs .
 The U.S. and Europe would like to avoid a new national election in 2017, as signs indicate that opposition forces could present a strong challenge . The United States and Europe are urging a faster pace for reforms and more confidence-building among the public .
 The other major challenge for Kyiv is of course eastern Ukraine but also, fundamentally, Vladimir Putin . The other big challenge for the Ukrainian government is the Russian president .
 To Putin, according to many, Ukraine is not a legitimate state and Ukrainians are not an independent people . To many, many, Ukrainian people are not aitimate state .
 Ukraine is merely a territory that Russia has a right to or a state that Moscow should have influence over, regardless of who lives there . Ukraine is just a territory. Ukraine is only a territory Russia has right to and a state.
 The fighting between Russian-supported separatists and the Ukrainian military continues to flare up at times . The fighting has resulted in continued fatalities and casualties .
 There have been periodic reports that weapons and ammunition continue to cross into eastern Ukraine from Russia .
 Many analysts believe that the resumption of large-scale fighting in eastern Ukraine is not likely in the short term . But with Kyiv showing no sign of bending, heavy fighting could resume .
 At the very least, the region continues to evolve into a frozen conflict . The region is still at a very least frozen .
 separatist rebels in the Donbas do not seem to be moving forward in implementing other parts of the Minsk-2 agreement . Beyond the need for a cease-fire, the separatist rebels are not moving forward .
 elections are supposed to take place in disputed territory . It appears unlikely at this time that separatists would allow a totally free or fair election .
 The facts on the ground in the Donbas have also created an internal challenge to the government . The stalemate continues to fuel the growing gap between those inside Ukraine, particularly inside Ukraine .
 Putin and his supporters are trying to stir up political chaos in Kyiv, Ukraine . The mood of European countries and U.S. to support Kyiv is diminishing. This, of course, could change .
 Putin could offer to hold elections anyway, though such elections likely would be flawed . Putin could also offer to take part in elections anyway .
 Putin could conclude that for the West, progress would nevertheless be progress . That would be good enough for Putin’s overall plans for Ukraine .
 The dilemma for Poroshenko and Groysman would be whether to accept the Kremlin’s conditions .
 The new unknown factor for Ukraine’s future also will be the position of the new U.S. administration .
 Many believe EU solidarity will crack and Ukraine could find itself quickly searching for a way to accommodate Moscow . If Washington signals a willingness to step back from its support for Ukraine and the sanctions on Russia, many believe it will crack .
 The Groysman government would be good for Kyiv and the West, despite the continued conflict in the east . Such progress in the economic and reform efforts could also cause problems for the country .
 The EU's decision to renew sanctions on Russia until July 2017 and continued NATO military deployments in Eastern Europe could force Putin to react . Continued success in reform in reform could force Russia to react.
 Putin and his allies have not reacted well to Europe’s continued sanctions or to recent NATO actions . The Russian president could be forced to react in some way to protect his position at home .
 Putin could turn his attention back to Ukraine. Some feel that with Putin’s objectives in Syria well on their way to being realized, some feel that .
 The Kremlin could support an increase in fighting in eastern Ukraine to slow the reforms . It could also generate opposition to the government for its inability to control the conflict .
 The Kremlin's disinformation and cyberattack efforts could increase in anticipation of national elections in the spring . The Kremlin’s disinformation and Cyberattack efforts are expected to increase .
 Increased support channeled to opposition political groups could place additional pressure on Groysman government . Increased support from opposition political parties could place more pressure on the government .
 Or Putin could offer some kind of deal to the incoming U.S. administration to try to draw a wedge between Washington and Brussels .
 All of these options would pose substantial risks for the interests of the United States and the EU to promote stability, security, and economic development in Ukraine .
 On December 20, 2016, the U.S. blacklisted an additional 15 Russian individuals and companies for their dealings in Crimea and Ukraine . The United States blacklisted the additional 15 Russians and companies .
 The Treasury Department designated seven individuals and eight corporate entities involved in a range of projects . The projects include the construction of a bridge connecting Russia to the Crimean peninsula .
 It targeted businesspeople who are associates of President Vladimir V Putin or are involved in activities that aid in Russia’s destabilization of Ukraine .