 Directionality as a thematic category is a novel methodological approach in memes research . Directionality is a new methodological approach to memes research.
 memes reference a given news story or event, they continued to be consumed and reproduced along similar thematic categories . While the memes reference news stories or events, they continue to be reproduced .
 This tendency to follow a narrative is at once endemic to viral media in general and unique to memes given their remix, parody and iteration .
 Russian and Ukrainian netizens took to the Web to discuss aspects of conflict between their two countries by using memes .
 Internet memes offered them the opportunity to criticize or support the policies and politics on both sides as the issues emerged .
 One meme emerged during the Crimean crisis references a phone conversation between U.S. President Barak Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The Crimea River meme was tweeted by @RuNetMemes’s Twitter account on March 4, 2014 . It expresses simultaneously that Obama should simply accept the annexation of Crimea .
 The Crimea River meme, along with its many memetic counterparts, discusses several issues related to the Russia–Ukraine conflict . The meme also discusses diplomatic and policy issues between the United States and Russia .
 The Internet became the proving ground for a flourishing participatory digital culture . In the case of the Russia–Ukraine conflict, the Internet became a proving ground.
 Internet memes have been the focus of a growing body of research . They are rapidly diffused and easily consumed and reproduced .
 These contributions mostly focus on memes that discuss topics, events, and people related to the U.S. These contributions include memes that talk about topics, people and events .
Little research has been conducted on the Russian Internet and its memes . However, little research was conducted on Russian Internet .
 Denisova suggests that memes are a coded language of dissent on the Russian Internet . Denisova says memes are an expression of dissent .
 Arestova, Balandina, and Budko investigate the origins of the Internet meme in Russian culture .
 The aim of this article is to present findings from a content analysis of Internet memes to uncover thematic tendencies and innovations in creating memes related to the conflict .
 The article offers directionality as a tool in analyzing Internet memes . The article also provides directionality in analyzing memes .
 Directionality is also an important tool in analyzing memes, because it enhances our understanding of narrative construction among members of participatory digital culture . Directionality can be used to analyze memes.
 The study draws on an array of disciplines for the purposes of meaning-making across the various memes included in this study . The memes were produced during the course of the conflict in 2014 .
 Freudian psychology, literary theory, postmodern thought, sociological theory, and recent conceptualizations in the fields of media and communication form a tool kit for the analysis of Internet memes .
 It was necessary to remain broad for the simple purpose of aligning memetic artifact with appropriate interpretation . It was needed to remainbroad for thesimple purpose of alignment of memetic artifacts .
First it is necessary to understand the differences between memes and Internet memes . But first it is needed to understand how memes and memes differ .
 Richard Dawkins extrapolates the meme as a cultural corollary to the biological gene . He uses the term to explain evolutionary advances from the perspective that a meme is a cultural phenomenon .
 Dawkins views the meme as a selfish and virulent idea that vies for human attention in order to infect the mind like a virus .
 The meme of evolutionary biologists shares characteristics with its digital counterpart . The meme is foremost an associative concept of cultural evolution .
 The Internet meme is hereby defined as a remixed, iterated message that is rapidly diffused by members of participatory digital culture for the purpose of satire, parody, critique .
 Virtual physicality, social and cultural connection, and purposeful production and consumption accentuate the meme as artifact . Also relate directly to the duality of structure, which implies an interaction between agent and social system .
Virtual physicality implies a cognitive as well as digital memory trace . Virtual physicality suggests a cognitive and digital memory traces .
 Giddens defined memory traces as the structuring properties that enable the merging of time and space in social systems . Gidden defined memory trace as a structuring property that enables time and time to merge .
 Memory traces allow individuals to engage in similar social practices across time and space . Memory traces let individuals engage in such social practices as well as other social practices .
 It is an especially useful concept regarding Internet memes, because their production, consumption, remix, and reproduction occur in the human mind as well as in the digital environment . It is a useful concept.
 The recursive production, consumption, and reproduction of memes evince their importance and underscore their virtual physicality in participatory digital culture .
 Memes as artifacts also possess cultural and social attributes as they are produced, reproduced, and transformed to reconstitute the social system . Memes are produced and reproduced, reproduced and transformed into social systems .
In other words, individuals within the social system understand the process of meme creation . In other words.
 The creation or reproduction of memes may encourage the continued production of a given meme for an indefinite period of time .
 memes as artifacts underscore the purposeful production and consumption among members of participatory digital culture .
 Internet memes are the result of purposeful production and consumption because of social and cultural connections experienced onand off-line . As artifacts of participatory digital culture, Internet memes have been used as a tool for social media .
 Virtual physicality is merely a symptom of their existence as Internet memes . Virtual physicalities are merely a sign of the existence of the Internet .
 Identifying and Analyzing Russian and Ukrainian Memes A content analysis was conducted of all tweets from 2014 on @RuNetMemes’ Twitter feed .
 An initial review excluded memes that lacked an explicit or implicit reference to the Russia–Ukraine conflict . The review was part of an initial review that excluded memes with an explicit reference to Russia.
 Explicit references feature a comparison and/or a contrast between Russia and Ukraine .
 Implicit references require inference to understand connection between the meme and the conflict between Russia and Ukraine .
 Such memes include humorous, insulting, cynical, condescending, or similar portrayals of Russian and Ukrainian leadership . Such memes are without a direct reference to the conflict .
 The date range from January 2014 to December 2014 was used to identify memes that refer to the conflict between Ukraine and Russia .
 The rationale for the date range is a combination of convenience and timeliness . The rationale is that it is a mixture of convenience.
 A sample was identified as either explicitly or implicitly referring to the conflict . A sample is identified aseither explicitly or indirectly referring to a conflict .
 The sample was then analyzed in terms of directionality and theme, which is discussed in greater detail in the analysis section .
 The Internet memes are taken from the Twitter account @RuNetMemes managed by Kevin Rothrock and Tatyana Lokot . The memes were taken from Twitter accounts @Ru netMemes .
 The choice of memes published by @RuNetMemes is subjective and therefor a limitation on the representative value of this research. As such, the choice is subjective .
 Twitter account was used for analysis of Internet memes created during Russia-Ukraine conflict in 2014 . No other known forum for the analysis of memes created by the Russian-Ukrainian conflict .
 Coding and Reliability An emergent coding method established thematic categories . Coding is a coding method that can be used to create categories .
Emergent coding was appropriate after an initial examination of the data . Emergent coding is appropriate after the initial examination.
 The content analysis revealed several dominant themes that fall into the three emergent coding categories, all of which were mutually exclusive, exhaustive, and reliable .
Com reliability coefficient was necessary to ensure precision in assigning memes to appropriate category . The analysis is qualitative, but it is not always accurate .
 It must be noted that the categories do not assume that memes coded as directionally Russian or directionally Ukrainian were necessarily created or tweeted by a Russian or Ukrainian, nor does the researcher assume that Ukraine consists of pro-EU and pro-Russia halves .
 The rationale is to shed light on the intended audience of the meme in terms of social critique . The rationale for using directionality is to shedding light on its intended audience .
 The meme was coded as directionally Ukrainian . It is not essential to know whether a Ukrainian or Russian person created the meme .
 Directionality as a coding concept for Internet memes is helpful, because it reveals the subject matter as well as the audiences .
 Language Kevin Rothrock provided English translations of any Russian and/or Ukrainian text to accompany the original text on the memes .
Russian language is the most salient language among memes in the sample . As the researcher, I feel it appropriate to note that my level of proficiency in Russian allows me to understand its use .
 Understanding the Emergence of Memetic Themes suggests impassioned perspectives on both sides of the conflict . Themes generally suggest that the themes that emerged from the analysis suggest impassioning perspectives .
 The memes themselves continued to be consumed and reproduced along similar themes .
 Often, and especially in the case of the Ukrainian memes, the tweets included an image macro .
 Once text is added to an image, which can be a photograph, screenshot, or other graphic content, it becomes an image macro meme . As Wiggins and Bowers point out, once text can be added to the image, it can be used to create an image .
Several tweets on @RuNetMemes do not fall into this definition . However, in the case of the tweets, several examples don't fall into it .
 Image macro memes typically establish the joke at the top of the image with the punchline placed at the bottom of the picture .
 This type of structure positions the image as a visual connection between the top-bottom parts of the joke . The image was created by an image of a joke .
 The vast majority of memes in the sample did not follow the prescriptive structure for image macro memes . The vast most of memes were not followed by the structure of a macro meme .
 The structure is not typical for image macro memes . However, as mentioned previously, its structure is more complex than usual .
 Russian netizens may have limited familiarity with U.S. image macro memes, such as Condescending Wonka or Philosophical Raptor .
 Analysis Internet memes as the unit of analysis tended to cluster around two categories .
 Directionally Russian implies memes that are decidedly pro-Russia, anti-Ukraine, pro-Putin/Kremlin, and anti-United States/European Union .
 Directionally Ukrainian memes are explicitly pro-Ukraine, pro-United States/European Union, anti-Putin/Kremlin .
 Memes that did not fit into either category necessitated the creation of a third category, designated as directionally neutral or indeterminate .
 memes initially seemed to be a possible match for either of the two major categories . Some memes initially appeared to be possible matches for both categories .
 The Russia-Ukraine conflict was the focus of the conflict . The conflict is the subject of a series of Russian-Ukrainian conflict-related incidents .
 Major themes include sexualized and fetishized remix of Poklonskaya’s speech . Vague references to Russia and Maidan protestors in Ukraine conflict World of Warcraft Popular Cultural References .
 U.S. film references may simply be the popularity of United States films abroad . American films are often referred to by film makers.
 Film References for Directionally Russian and Directionally Ukrainian Memes . Film References are for Directional Russian.
 Putin as Neo from The Matrix dodging questions January 17, 2014 . Putin as Don Corleone and Yanukovich in reference to The Godfather February 27, 2014 Lenin as Forrest Gump running from Ukrainian patriots .
 The Lord of the Rings is an epic fantasy adventure, and World War Z is apocalyptic horror . In terms of filmic genre, the Lord of The Rings is a fantasy adventure .
 Scenes selected for the memes depict desperation, impending doom, and/or catastrophe .
 The World War Z reference includes Ukrainian text on the right side of the two-image panel. Incidentally, the World WarZ reference includes Ukraine text .
 The two memes in the directionally Russian category were several months apart . The narrative development maintained the catastrophic theme even though the two memes were two months apart.
 The directionally Ukrainian memes tended to use the film reference as a means for criticizing Russia or its leadership, but did so with an almost whimsical tone, which was absent from the Russian memetic counterparts .
Common film genres included science fiction, superhero, mafia/crime, dark comedy, romantic-comedy-drama, and comedy . Common film genres among the directionally Ukrainian memes included comedy, crime, comedy .
 Analysis Scatological insults, specifically references to urine or excrement, were unique to memes coded as Russian and targeted Ukraine .
 Ukrainian memes use scatological references to criticize the European Union . Ukraine has been accused of aligning itself with the EU in recent years .
 Comic strip shows Winnie the Pooh eating excrement while praising Ukraine . The Pooh also praises Ukraine .
 Regardless of the homosexual and scatological references, the factual nature of the insult is unimportant . The factual nature is not important .
 The greater the familiarity that members of participatory digital culture have with a given insult, the more likely it will be used for thematically similar memetic creation . If it serves to further the memetic conversation, it will likely persist until it is no longer needed .
Homosexuality-as-decadence led by the U.S. secretary of state .
 memes that refer to homosexuality as an insult capture Voloshinov's position and maintain the moral purity and heterosexual masculinity implied within Putin’s personalization of politics .
 Perhaps the core of any insult reveals more about the aggressor than the target, says the author .
 The term homosexuality-as-decadence reveals a latent heterosexual insecurity . It is directed at men who oppose Putin's policies .
 The author's use as a concept in this analysis reflects no judgment held by the author . The author says the use of the concept reflects no judgement held by his author .
 The preponderance of memes in this category demonstrated an inconsistent pattern . A few directionally Russian memes resemble common memetic structures .
 The structure seems to be largely unique to the directionally Russian memes . There are no directionally Ukrainian memes copying this structural strategy .
 Homosexuality-asdecadence is a major theme among the directionally Russian memes . It fits well within the larger discourse of Putin’s personalization of politics as spectacle .
Members of participatory digital culture celebrate memetic dialogue by recursively reproducing thematically similar content . Discussion in lieu of substantive political and social commentary, members of the digital community celebrate memes .
 The memes in this category are symptomatic of the current political and social constellation of Russian society .
 Structural references to Putin form an essential component of the propaganda that supports Putin’s personalization of politics as spectacle .
 The political era that Vladimir Putin has established since 1999 is defined by the personalization of politics as spectacle . A Personalization of Politics as Spectacle has defined Putin's political era since 1999 as a political era .
 The Putin cult would be ill advised to read the Putin cult as analogous to the cult of Stalin . However, it would be well advised to be wary of the cult's influence .
 Guillory contends that Putin is a “unifying symbol the much older notion of the king’s two bodies’ — Putin” — Putin's personal life and his public persona .
 Putin shed tears to learn of his successful election to an unprecedented third term as Russian president . He also announced plans to divorce from his wife, Lyudmila .
 Putin’s public persona, well-crafted to assert authoritativeness, provides the best examples of Putin's cult as the personalization of politics as spectacle . The Internet memes seek to promote Putin above Russia as morally pure and virile .
 Cassiday and Johnson have argued that the Putin cult is not neo-Soviet but rather post-Soviet . I would add that it is entirely postmodern as well .
 Putin's Memetic Spectacle Spectacle is particularly relevant to this discussion of Internet memes . Putin’s MemeticSpectacle Spectacles is particularlyrelevant to the discussion of internet memes .
 memes are a genre of online communication . Memes are a form of internet communication .
 With regard to the Ukraine–Russia conflict, memes embody the reification of Putin’s personalization of politics as spectacle .
 Putin's cult transcends itself through officially sanctioned and planned portrayals of the Russian leader . As Cassiday and Johnson note, Putin’s cult transcended itself through official sanctioned portrayals .
 Russian netizens recursively consume and produce memes either specific to or related to Putin to further the personalization of politics as spectacle . In addition to the planned aspect of the Putin cult, netizens also produce memes or memes .
 Ross wrote that the cult emerged from Putin’s arguably formidable personality . Ross said that thecult emerged from the Putin's allegedly formidable personality.
 memetic references to Putin seek to defend Putin from opponents, either real or imagined . Putin seeks to defend himself from opponents.
 Putin's virtue as a virile, masculine heterosexual is implied when memes accuse Russia’s opponents of homosexuality . Neither of the categories in this analysis emphasize Putin himself .
 Putin’s moral purity, love of animals, devotion to the Russian Orthodox Church are implied when memes associate urine and excrement with Ukrainian leadership and the European Union .
 Memes that oppose Ukraine, the European Union, and/or the U.S. use direct, threatening language, perhaps because of Western political rhetoric .
 The Ukrainian examples seem to exist as a result of Russian aggression in eastern Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea . In contrast to the directionally Russian memes, the Ukrainian examples appear to react to and exist .
 Ukrainian memes evince original components, but they do not move beyond themes stimulated by Russian actions .
 Memes that are coded as directionally Ukrainian largely respond to Russian actions in eastern Ukraine and Crimea and its relationship with the West .
 A common theme among the blue-yellow memes that emerged after the visual protest of August 20 was the low level of intelligence among Russian police and leadership .
Pop polyvocality meant the purposeful inclusion and remix of popular cultural references such as films and films . The intentional remix of Putin’s own parade of images and tropes used for his personalization of politics as spectacle .
 Interactions between Putin and Medvedev figure prominently in critical memes . Special emphasis on ineffective (if not blundering) leadership .
 In most cases, Medvedev is portrayed as a well-meaning but completely inept leader . Putin relies on input and direction from the moderately less-inept Putin .
 Memes that criticize the separatists tend to portray Ukrainian protesters as simple civilians who are defending their home from Russian incursions .
 The man dodges questions like Neo does bullets. RuNet Memes is a weekly feature on RuNetMemes .
 Clever remix of image macro meme by changing image to match punch line . The image was created to match the punch line.
 The clip was uploaded again to the Japanese YouTube channel, where it garnered massive popularity . It is a series of remixed memes deriving from the Nyash Myash meme .
 RuNet Memes: The obsession with this woman goes all the way to the top . RuNetMemes: "I love this woman. I love her"
 An autotuned Natalia Poklonskaya is featured in the video intermixed with an anime version of Poklonkaya .
 The original Nyash Myash video uploaded to YouTube has nearly 18 million views . As of this writing, the video has almost 18 million hits .
 A host of related memetic examples surged in the wake of the popularity of the initial Nyash Myash video . The video was a viral hit .
 The preponderance of Nyash Myash memes positions her as strong, professional, loyal, and favored by the Kremlin .
 The Nyash Myash video shows a desire for reconciliation between the two belligerents . However, the video also shows a sentiment largely absent elsewhere .
 The Nyash Myash memes were taken from RuNet Memes . The memes position Putin as allegedly infatuated with Poklonskaya without actually mentioning the Russia–Ukraine conflict .
 Other memes coded as directionally neutral or indeterminate included vague references to the conflict . Other memes included a half-eaten cake decorated with a map of Ukraine .
 memes coded as either directionally Russian or directionally Ukrainian . It remains unclear which audiences are being addressed and for what purposes .
 Viewing memes about the Russia-Ukraine conflict reveals a situation in which consumers are recursively producers . The conflict is a problem that consumers are often recursive producers .
 Spreadable media-as-Internet memes have the potential to become massively distributed, possibly inspiring further iterations that are then rapidly diffused .
 Parody sits at the heart of memes; it violates the origin through its remix and replacement with imitation . Parody is the most popular meme of all time .
 Internet users perceive the meme as a conduit for meaningful criticism, discussion, and possibly debate . In the current Russia–Ukraine conflict, it is remarkable that Internet users see it as a source of meaningful criticism and discussion .
 Memes are remixed, iterated messages that are rapidly spread for the purpose of continuing a conversation . Memes have been remixed and updated for the purposes of continuing the conversation .
 The Internet memes associated with the Russia-Ukraine conflict demonstrate a communicative capacity to satirize and poke fun but criticize political policy . In quarters where criticism has no lease, the Internet memes have no lease .
 The Internet memes in this study offer superficial insults of political opponents or policies . The opportunity to voice such criticisms or insults is in and of itself worthy of study .
 The Internet meme offers Russian, Ukrainians, and others the opportunity to voice their opinions . In other words, the meme offers Russians, Ukrainians and others a chance to express their views .
 The Internet meme is an Internet meme that may have been otherwise ignored or impossible to share . The meme is a meme that can be easily produced, consumed, and distributed .
 Study has shown memetic directionality as an analytical tool useful to discuss meaning from discursive exchanges on the memescape . This study has shown Memetic Directionality as a tool useful for discussing meaning on memescape.
 The Ukraine, European Union, and pro-West side of the EU are among the memes that have been used to create memes .
 The same is true for those individuals who identify more with Putin, pro-Kremlin, and so on .
 memes as artifacts in the Russia–Ukraine conflict, given their virtual physicality, are the result of purposeful production and consumption . Memes are also a result of social and cultural connections experienced onand off-line .
 memes are a tempting tool for the dissemination of tightly encapsulated social/political critique . They are relatively easy to understand by many people . In the case of Ukraine and Russia, memes are an easy tool for social/ political critique .
 A Moscow judge ruled that a specific instance in which a celebrity's image was used in an image macro meme qualified as a violation of personal privacy of Valeri Syutkin .
 Memes are sure to accompany the Russia–Ukraine conflict as it continues . More attention must be given to the design and use of memes on both sides .
 Memes appear to have the power to encourage their propagation and perhaps also their censorship . Memes seem to have a power to promote their propagation .
 Putin, Putiniana, and the question of a post-Soviet cult of personality . The question is whether Putin and Putiniana are the same.
 Internet memes, public participation, and the Occupy Wall Street movement, among other things .
 The case of authoritarian Azerbaijan is the case of an authoritarian Azerbaijan . The country is known for its authoritarianism .
 Japanese netizens put reality on hold for a moment, fall in love with new attorney general of Crimea .
 The relationship between cohesiveness, uniqueness, and quiddity concreteness is a key part of the relationship .
 Russia is ready to put nuclear forces on alert over Crimea, Putin says . Russia was ready to go on alert, he says .