 Deputy editor Andrei Lipsky published the document today, February 24 . Muratov said at the time that he would publish the document “next Wednesday’s next Wednesday, but in fact the deputy editor published it today .
 The memorandum was drafted in a group close to the Kremlin that included Konstantin Malofeyev, a wealthy businessman and promoter of Russian Orthodox causes and philanthropies . In the short term, it involves establishing Russian enclaves in neighboring countries and defending the “Russian World’
 Novaya Gazeta: Nationalistic motifs so often heard in Russian state media are not even invoked . There is only cold calculation, he says .
 Malofeyev worked closely with his PR consultant Aleksandr Boroday . Boroday was later to become the head of the ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ and Col. Col. Mal ofeyev .
 Even after these figures were removed, they continued to be seen together . They appear at some conferences and in the media .
 A document has come into the possession of Novaya Gazeta . It was “brought into the presidential administration’s administration last year, it says .
 Malofeyev’s press service has categorically denied this claim . He has announced the intention to go to court . The intention of Mr Mal ofeyev to court.
 The document prescribes the justification, step by step, and also the political and PR logistics for the interference of Russia in Ukrainian affairs . The document is interesting for the fact that at the earliest stages of the Ukrainian political crisis, that is before the flight of Yanukovych from Kiev and the coming
 The Ukrainian drama has introduced some correctives, on the whole . The high degree of coincidence of this project with the Russian government's actions are striking .
 The orthography and punctuation of the original are basically preserved . Novaya Gazeta is based in Russia .
 Ukrainian President V Yanukoych and his ruling "family" are rapidly losing control over political processes . In assessing the political situation in Ukraine, we must proceed from the recognition, first of all, of the bankruptcy of president V Yanukoysch .
 The Russian Federation could conduct negotiations after early parliamentary elections and presidential elections announced by V Yanukovych February 4 of this year . The low likelihood of the appearance of such a consensus subject after early elections.
Early parliamentary and presidential elections can become an excuse for a new spiral of demonstrations and stormings of civil war . In the final analysis, final analysis will hasten the disintegration of Ukraine, according to the Ukrainian media .
 The results of the Munich conference provide sufficient grounds to consider that the European Union and the USA will allow the disintegration of the country . The European Union will not consider such a turn of events to be extraordinary .
 The political, diplomatic, financial, and informational support of the Russian Federation no longer has any sense . The political and financial support of Russian Federation is no longer a sense .
 Russia is obliged to interfere in the geopolitical intrigue of the European Union, aimed against the territorial integrity of Ukraine . Thirdly, under conditions of almost total paralysis of the central government, Russia is unable to form a responsible government .
 Ukraine risks losing the Ukrainian market for energy sales but much more dangerous, says the author . Ukraine is also losing control over the gas transport system of Ukraine, he says .
 This will deliver a blow to the positions of Gazprom in Central and Southern Europe, causing enormous loss to the economy of our country . This will be a huge loss to our country, says the author .
 Russia should not by any means limit its policy in Ukraine only to attempts to influence the Kiev political set-up . Russia should be careful not to limit its policies in Ukraine.
 The Constitution of Ukraine in any event is incapable of becoming a mechanism with which the integration of the Ukrainian eastern territories and the Crimea into the state and legal field of the Russian Federation could be legitimately launched .
 As Art of the Fundamental Law of Ukraine states, questions of change to its territories are decided exclusively by an all-Ukrainian referendum .
 referendum under Art. of the Constitution of Ukraine, proclaimed by popular initiative at the demand of no less than three million citizens of Ukraine who have the right to work . No less than 100,000 signatures in each region are gathered from the regions .
 Donetsk, Lugansk, Rostov and Voronezh regions are in the euro-region “Donbass’s” region . Kharkov and Belgorod regions are members of the ‘Slobozhanshchina’ region . Bryansk
 Russia must attain the signing of agreements on border and trans-border cooperation . Russia must also establish direct state-treaty relations with the Ukrainian territories where there are persistent pro-Russian electoral sympathies present .
 The current events in Kiev persuasively indicate that Yanukovych’s time in power may end at any moment .
There is less and less time for Russia to have an appropriate reaction, says Russia . There is less time to have a reaction to Russia's actions .
 The number of people killed in the riots in the capital of Ukraine directly testify to the inevitability of civil war and the impossibility of a consensus . Yanukovych in the post of president.
Under these conditions it is seen as correct to play on the centrifugal aspirations of various regions of the country . Under these conditions, the annexation of its eastern regions to Russia is seen to be correct .
 Russia is taking upon itself the support of Crimea and several eastern territories . Russia will be forced to take on very burdensome budgetary expenditures in its current situation .
 This will have an effect on macro-economic stability and prospects for the growth of its economy . Undoubtedly, this will have a effect on the economy . This will also have a positive effect on growth of the economy.
 A new Slavic migration stream headed from the west to the east is in counterweight to the Central Asian migration trend . It can count on the appearance of a new Slavian migration stream .
 The industrial potential of Eastern Ukraine will enable a more successful and rapid implementation of the program of re-armament of the Russian Federation Armed Forces . The military-industrial sector included in Russia’s military- industrial complex .
 "Smoothing of Russia in the process of the disintegration of the Ukrainian state" will not only lend a new impulse to the integrationist projects of the Kremlin . It will also enable our country to preserve, as has already been said above, control over the gas-transport
 Russia is returning to one of its chief roles in Central and Eastern Europe . The move will substantially change the geopolitical set-up in the region .
 For the launching of the “pro-Russian drift’ of the Crimea and eastern Ukrainian territories events must be created in advance to lend this process political legitimacy and moral justification, says Peter Bergen .
 A PR strategy must be built to accentuate the forced, reactive nature of Russia and the pro-Russian-minded political elite of the south and east of Ukraine .
 The latest events in Western Ukraine provide a basis for the eastern regions to proclaim their own sovereignty, with their ensuing re-orientation to the Russian Federation .
 The retaliatory actions in the eastern Ukrainian regions must be dual in structure and in scenario . The retaliated actions in eastern Ukraine must beDual in structure.
 At first demonstrators must articulate their wish not to be “hostages of Maidan’s” and its attempt to usurp the rights of other regions and a large part of the population . The Ukrainian elite are espousing the “ideology of civil war and splitting
 The slogans of the moment must be the justified wish not to “support the pro-fascist forces’ of Western Ukraine and the government dependent on them . The annexation to Russia as the only guarantee for stable economic development and social stability.
World public have as few reasons as possible to doubt the legitimacy and honesty of referendums . It is extremely important that ‘world public’ have as many reasons to doubt these referendum’s legitimacy .
 The preliminary plan for such work has already been developed and can be realized in a two-week period . The Preliminary plan for the work is already being developed .
 It is important to arrange these events with a PR campaign in the Russian and Ukrainian press .
 This includes – drafting and launching in media rotation conceptual documents . These are manifestos of sorts of western Ukrainian and eastern Ukrainian separatism . This includes - drafting and launch in media rotations .
 Moscow's "coup d'etat" became the chief justification for its subsequent actions . That is even before the moment which is characterized in Moscow as the “coupd’etat’s’tetat, which became the main justification.
 The memorandum provides a pejorative evaluation of Yanukovych . Yanukovych would be portrayed by the Russian government as the victim of a coup and the only legitimate leader of Ukraine .
 The memorandum is written in a pragmatic tone — to the point of cynicism . The memorandum has been written in the pragmatic tone .
 It has no “spiritual and historical’s’ justifications for Russian interference in Ukraine . There are no ‘spiritual’ and ‘historical’ reasons for interference .
 The authors of the document are concerned to lend “legitimacy’ to the incorporation of Ukrainian territories into the “state legal field’s’ state legal field.
 Russian-Ukrainian euro-regions which in turn join the Association of European Border Regions .
 The authors are convinced that using this legal instrument, Ukrainian regions with “persistent pro-Russian sympathies’ can be drawn into direct state-treaty relations . The authors say the legal instrument can be used in Ukraine . It could be used to
 The memorandum contains a number of crude distortions of reality which were supposed to show the “reactive’s and coerced nature of Russian actions . All of these arguments are later actively used by Russian propaganda .