 Our intelligence professionals operate across the globe, and our work supports customers from the forwarddeployed warfighter to the national policymaker .
 DIA is united in a common vision — to be the indispensable source of defense intelligence expertise . For the past five decades we have done just that, DIA says . DIA has been a key source of intelligence expertise for decades .
 DIA has a long history of producing comprehensive and authoritative defense intelligence overviews . As part of this vision, DIA is known for producing comprehensive, authoritative defense information .
 In September 1981, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger asked the Defense Intelligence Agency to produce an unclassified overview of the Soviet Union’s military strength .
 The purpose was to provide America's leaders, the national security community, and the public a complete and accurate view of the threat .
 DIA produced over 250,000 copies, and it soon became an annual publication . DIA was translated into eight languages and distributed around the world .
 In many cases, this report conveyed the scope and breadth of Soviet military strength to U.S. policymakers and the public for the first time .
Today, we are faced with a complexity of intelligence challenges from multiple threats that we cannot afford to misunderstand . Today, we're faced with an intelligence challenge that we can't afford to overlook .
 DIA is proud to produce an unclassified defense intelligence overview of the military capabilities associated with the challenges we face . In the spirit of Soviet Military Power, DIA produces an un classified intelligence overview .
 This product is intended to foster a dialogue between U.S. leaders, the national security community, partner nations, and the public . The product is aimed at fostering a dialogue about the challenges of the 21st century .
 They are convinced that they have been chosen and they are exceptional, that they are allowed to shape the destiny of the world . They say it is only them that can be right .
 The international order established after the Second World War and developed throughout the Cold War largely ensured widespread peace and stability . New conflicts — large and small — take place in different regions of the world .
 This post-war era, underwritten primarily by the strength of the United States, also gave rise to the greatest period of prosperity in history . The era saw countries rebuild from war and emerge from colonialism to become vibrant and valuable members of the international community .
 Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the U.S. emerged as a world leader militarily, economically and diplomatically .
 Today, the United States faces an increasingly complex array of challenges to our national security .
 The resurgence of Russia on the world stage poses a major challenge to the United States . Russia has seized the Crimean Peninsula, destabilizing eastern Ukraine, and intervening on behalf of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad .
 Moscow will continue to aggressively pursue its foreign policy and security objectives by employing the full spectrum of the state’s capabilities . Moscow will also continue to pursue its national security objectives .
 Its powerful military, coupled with the actual or perceived threat of intervention, allows its whole-of-government efforts to resonate widely . The military's powerful military and perceived threat to intervention allows its efforts to resonate widely .
 Russia continues to modernize its extensive nuclear forces . Russia is developing long range precision-guided conventional weapons systems .
 It is manipulating the global information environment, employing tools of indirect action against countries on its periphery . It is using its military for power projection and expeditionary force deployments far outside its borders .
 Its ultimate deterrent is a robust nuclear force capable of conducting a massed nuclear strike on targets in the United States within minutes .
 Within the next decade, an even more confident and capable Russia could emerge . Russia could be even more capable and capable.
 The U.S. needs to anticipate, rather than react, to Russian actions and pursue a greater awareness of Russian goals and capabilities . The United States needs to be prepared to prevent potential conflicts.
 U.S. and Russian forces may increasingly encounter each other around the globe . Our policymakers and commanders must have a complete understanding of Russia’s military capabilities .
 DIA will continue to provide our leaders decision-space, ensuring they have the time and information necessary to protect our nation . DIA has been in charge of protecting our nation for years .
 The wrong decisions could have dire consequences, says CNN's John Sutter . "The wrong decisions — or the right ones made too late," he says .
 This report examines a resurgent Russia’s military power to foster a deeper understanding of its core capabilities, goals, and aspirations in the 21st Century . The report also looks at Russia's aspirations in its future .
 Moscow was left with a dramatically weakened military after the collapse of the USSR . Military power has always been regarded as of critical importance by Russian and Soviet leaders .
The Russian Federation inherited several formidable tasks and challenges from its Soviet predecessor . The Russian Federation is now the world's most powerful military force .
 The newly-formed Russian Ministry of Defense is the most immediate challenge for the new Russian state . The biggest challenge was to relocate military equipment and personnel from the former USSR and countries of the disbanded Warsaw Pact .
 The assets of the Soviet Union’s nuclear arsenal were of particular importance . The Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal was of special importance .
 Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan reached an agreement to dismantle all tactical and strategic nuclear weapons in the non-Russian republics or return them to Russia . The four states eventually reached a deal to dismantle the weapons .
 Those in the newly independent states were viewed as the basis for building national militaries for new sovereign countries .
 Returning military forces from Eastern Europe were often shipped piecemeal back to unprepared bases in the Russian Federation .
 Other units located in the territory of the former Soviet Union were absorbed by the newly independent states . Other units in the former USSR were also absorbed by new states .
 In certain cases, units such as the Black Sea Fleet in Ukraine or the 14th Army in Moldova actively resisted attempts by the Soviet successor states .
 Some of these stranded units became embroiled in ethnic conflicts in Moldova, Georgia, and Tajikistan .
 Most significantly for the new Russian military, interior military districts, which under the Soviet Union contained low-readiness mobilization forces . The Moscow and North Caucasus Military Districts now become “front-line’s” districts bordering foreign states .
 The Russian Federation emerged from the collapse of the Soviet Union with a much smaller military and an entirely new set of security challenges . The new security challenges include smaller military, smaller military.
9 Russia cut military spending drastically during the decade of post-Soviet economic turbulence . Russia's new military faced dramatic budgetary, readiness, and personnel shortfalls, as well as uncertainty .
 Former Soviet arms industry struggled to gain hard currency by selling its most modern weapons to foreign buyers . Fielding of new weapons systems slowed to a trickle and eventually halted .
 Russian military units lacked Troops gathered around a fire for warmth during the Chechen conflict . The difficulties Moscow’s weakened military faced during its operations against the separatist republic underscored its deterioration during the 1990s .
 Funding and fuel to train and exercise, and pay was often months in arrears .
 The popular image of the Russian military of the 1990s remains ships rusting at pier side, pilots unable to fly . Russian officers moonlighting with second jobs to make ends meet .
Military life that began to appear during the glasnost era of the late 1980s highlighted the harshness of the conscript’s lot .
 Russian generals voiced complaints about the poor quality of the conscripts they actually received . Many young Russian men used any and all legal or illegal measures to avoid military service .
 The military’s most painful trial was caused by insurgency within the borders of the Russian Federation .
 From 1994 to 1995, undermanned and poorly trained Russian forces struggled to secure the breakaway Chechen Republic in the North Caucasus .
 The military’s problems and limitations were widely publicized by the Russian and international press, further undermining its reputation and reinforcing the desire of young Russians to avoid service .
 Throughout the post-Soviet era, there was a recognized need to reform and modernize the military . There was a recognition need to modernize and reform the military.
 Moscow prioritized the maintenance of its nuclear capabilities in the years after the collapse of the USSR . Moscow's forces retained their cumbersome Soviet-era organization, designed for the mobilization of massive numbers of reservists .
 The 1990s and first decade of the 21st century saw a series of military reform efforts announced, discussed, and only abortively implemented . In the 1990s, military reform was discussed, but only abortedively implemented.
 Despite modest improvements and a measure of success in the second Chechen conflict, the Russian military still entered the first decade of the 21st century with a Soviet-era mobilization force structure almost completely equipped with dated Soviet- era equipment .
 Shortfalls in modern command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence, surveillance, and surveillance equipment and capabilities were particularly notable .
 Russian military limitations were fully on display during the August 2008 “five-day war with Georgia’s Georgia . The Russian military limitation was fully on show during the ‘five- day war’
 Russian forces defeated Georgian opponents, but after-action analysis highlighted many failings . Russian forces prevailed and defeated relatively weak Georgian opponents .
 Air and artillery strikes missed their targets, an army commander had to resort to a cell phone to contact a higher headquarters . 29 aircraft and 29 aircraft were lost to Georgian air defenses .
 Shoygu has presided over the continued modernization of the Russian military since 2012 . He has also presided over its operations in Ukraine and Syria .
 Moscow’s limitations in modernizing its military had led to heavy dependence on its aging nuclear forces to defend the state .
 Moscow's nuclear deterrent is not flexible enough for Moscow to use in small conflicts such as Georgia or as a tool of power projection . The presence of a robust nuclear deterrent dissuaded potential aggressors from directly attacking the Russian Federation .
 The New Look program was a comprehensive and massive effort, aimed to change the Russian military from a Cold War-style mobilization force to a more ready, modern, and professional military . The program was aimed at changing the military to be more ready and professional .
 The New Look was controversial and painful for many in or associated with the Russian military establishment . The New look was controversial.
 In late 2012, Anatoliy Serdyukov left office and the former head of the Emergency Situations Ministry, Sergey Shoygu, took over . The unpopular Minister of Defense was associated with the reform effort .
 Shoygu proved adept at easing some of the most unpopular aspects of the New Look . The reform program was largely retaining and refining the essence of the reform program .
 Shoygu's tenure has seen the New Look military engaged in a series of active operations . The New Look has been involved in several active operations in recent years .
 In early 2014, Russian naval infantry, special forces, and airborne troops rapidly seized control of the Crimean Peninsula .
 The operation gave the world its first look at a military that appeared surprisingly disciplined and well-equipped . Russian forces were formed during the years of decay in the 1990s .
 Russian special forces and troops operated to mobilize, lead, equip, and support separatist militias in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine from spring 2014 to the present . Moscow denied their presence by Moscow, Russia's special forces.
 In September 2015, Moscow launched its first expeditionary operation since the Soviet era . Ukrainian forces have stressed the capabilities of the Russian-enabled separatist units .
 The Russian military today is on the rise, not as the same Soviet force that faced the West in the Cold War . As a smaller, more mobile, balanced force rapidly becoming capable of conducting the full range of modern warfare .
Military can intervene in countries along Russia’s periphery or as far away as the Middle East . It is a military that can intervene.
 Russian President Putin has sought to reassert Russia as a great power on the global stage . The Kremlin believes the United States is tilted too heavily in favor of Russia at Russia’s expense .
 Moscow seeks to promote a multi-polar world predicated on the principles of respect for state sovereignty . The 14 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations .
 Moscow has sought to build a robust military able to project power, add credibility to Russia's diplomacy . To support these great power ambitions, Moscow has tried to build the military, says Peter Bergen .
 Russia’s assertive promotion of its national interests, punctuated by its military actions in Ukraine and Syria, demonstrates a more confident and somewhat less risk averse Kremlin . It also has revived international concerns about the re-emergence of a more militaristic Russia .
 Russian military forces played a key role in the seizure of Crimea and fomenting an artificial separatist revolt in eastern Ukraine . Kyiv’s aspirations to join NATO, at least for the foreseeable future, are blunted by the Russian military .
 Russia’s military intervention in Syria has changed the entire dynamic of the conflict, bolstering the Asad regime and ensuring that no resolution to the conflict is possible without Moscow's agreement . Russia's military intervention has also changed the whole dynamic.
 Moscow believes the U.S. is intent on undermining Russia at home and abroad . The actions belie a deeply entrenched sense of insecurity regarding the United States, says the author .
 Moscow views the U.S. and its NATO partners as the principle threat to Russian security, its geo-political ambitions, and most importantly, the Kremlin's continued hold on power .
 Russian National Security Strategy published in December 2015 . This perception of vulnerability vis-a-vis the U.S. is most clearly evident in the new strategy .
 The document identifies the United States and its NATO allies as Russia’s main threat . It accuses the West of pursuing a deliberate policy of containment against Russia to sustain its domination .
 The security strategy also cites the buildup of NATO military capabilities closer to the Russian border . z Russia also has a deep and abiding distrust of U.S. efforts to promote democracy around the world .
 Moscow worries that U.S. attempts to dictate a set of acceptable international norms threatens the foundations of Kremlin power .
 The December 2015 National Security Strategy warns of the importance of preserving traditional Russian spiritual and cultural values against foreign ideas and influences .
 The Kremlin is convinced the U.S. is laying the groundwork for regime change in Russia . It is further reinforced by the events in Ukraine .
 Moscow views the United States as the critical driver behind the crisis in 15 Ukraine and the Arab Spring . The overthrow of former Ukrainian President Yanukovych is the latest move in a long-established pattern of U.S. regime change efforts .
 Russian threat perceptions are not limited to the United States . Moscow views the danger posed by Islamic militants and terrorists with grave concern .
 The Kremlin is particularly sensitive to the growth and spread of these ideologies and their potential to further radicalize Russian Muslims in the turbulent North Caucasus and other Muslim areas of central Russia .
 Russian military operations in Syria are also intended to eliminate jihadist elements operating there . Russia is also trying to prevent them from returning home and posing a threat to Russia .
 Moscow remains anxious about the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan and the potential for Afghanbased Islamic extremists to spill over into the Central Asian states and ultimately into Russia .
 Russian threat perceptions with regard to China are more divided and nuanced . Russia's view of China is more nuanced and nuanced than that of Russia .
 Russian officials regularly praise the cooperative nature of the bilateral relationship . Putin himself has declared that the current RussianChinese relationship is the best it has been in decades .
 The Russian National Security Strategy lists developing a strategic partnership with China as one of Russia’s most important goals .
 Moscow and Beijing share a common interest in weakening U.S. global influence . They are actively cooperating in that regard .
 Some Russians are keenly aware of the growing power disparity between Russia and China . They worry Moscow is at risk of becoming Beijing's junior partner .
 Russia’s current National Security Strategy was signed by President Vladimir Putin on 31 December 2015 as an update to the previous National Security strategy published in 2009 . Others continue to harbor suspicions that China over the longer term will once again become a military threat to Russia .
 The National Security Strategy is the Kremlin’s foundational planning document . It is intended for domestic and external audiences .
 It codifies Moscow’s strategic interests and national priorities for at least the next 6 years . It is the first time it has been codified by the Russian government .
 The tone of this update was harsher than the 2009 strategy, reflecting Moscow’s view of worsening relations with the West . The national priorities were consistent with those identified in previous strategies .
 The 2015 strategy identifies Russian national interests as strengthening the country’s defense, ensuring political and social stability . Russia's status as a leading world power is a key part of the strategy .
 Moscow identified new threats to state and public security posed by foreign nongovernmental organizations . The use of social media to foment unrest and undermine political and social stability, 70 reflecting Russian officials’ allegations .
 The culture priority contains some of the strategy’s most significant revisions . Moscow views culture, language, and history as a tool for influence .
 The new National Security Strategy accuses the United States and NATO of pursuing actions that cause instability and threaten Russian national security . Unlike the 2009 version, the new strategy directly accuses the U.S. and NATO.
 The new strategy reiterated key concepts outlined in Russia’s 2014 military doctrine on the importance of deterrence and conflict prevention, nuclear and nonnuclear deterrence .
 Russian President Putin has worked to consolidate power since returning to the presidency in 2012 .
 His efforts to further centralize control have been challenged by slowing economy, lower energy prices, and growing public discontent with system that lacks any genuine pluralism .
 Putin has tried to deflect from concerns by promising to restore Russia to great power status . The Kremlin has taken steps to neutralize political opposition by expanding laws to impose harsh sentences that discourage public protests .
 i-J has restructured its internal security forces to ensure a more loyal and responsive apparatus . It has also restructured the internal security force to ensure it is more responsive and loyal .
 Russia maintains security forces that are not subordinate to the military to conduct a range of w internal security and policing functions . Russia maintains that security forces do not have to be subordinate to military .
 The Kremlin will likely face continuing challenges to its rule from democracy and anti-corruption activists, labor unrest, as well the ever present threat of terrorism emanating from Russia’s restive North Caucasus region .
 Moscow largely declared an end to major operations by 2009, although it still retains a sizeable military and security force structure and counterterrorism regime in the region .
 A general level of order is maintained via a mix of local and federal-level Russian forces, including Chechen forces loyal to Moscow . Chechen President Ramzan Kadyrov is leading the region .
 Once the center of insurgent activity, levels of instability in Chechnya gradually have plateaued over the years . Those in neighboring Muslim provinces such as Dagestan and Ingushetia have experienced sporadic upswings in activity over time .
 smaller bands still exist with affiliations to various nationalist and extremist groups . ISIS-Caucasus and the Imarat Kavkaz are among the smaller groups of insurgents .
 These groups and their members conduct small-scale operations and bombings against Russian forces . They are mostly from the Ministry of Internal Affairs police or the National Guard .
 Russian authorities will continue to drive feelings of disenfranchisement amongst the populace . The region has been a source for radicalization in the region .
 Ukraine and Turkmenistan retain associate member status . Nine states remain members, with Ukraine and Turkey retaining associate members status .
 Russia’s most important defense and security relationships are with its allies in the CIS Collective Security Treaty Organization . Belarus, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan are Russia's most important allies .
 The CSTO was established in 2002 as part of a larger Russian effort to create a more structured military organization . Based on the 1992 Tashkent Collective Security Agreement, the CSTO is based on the agreement .
 The CSTO has developed a bureaucratic staff under the organization’s secretary general and a rapid reaction force to respond to contingencies that might impact security of the member states .
The CSTO conducts yearly joint military exercises addressing various scenarios such as peacekeeping or counterterrorism operations . The CSTO conduct yearly joint exercises addressing different scenarios such a peacekeeping and counterterrorism operation .
 Russian efforts to build the CSTO into a more structured and capable organization on par with NATO largely have floundered . The CSTO has been in trouble with NATO for years .
 Some of the non-Russian member states worry that Moscow is using the organization to undermine their sovereignty and independence . Uzbekistan’s withdrawal in 2007 was seen as a sign of Russia's growing military cooperation .
Differing threat perceptions, an absence of trust amongst the members, and funding shortfalls have further plagued the organization .
 Moscow appears to no longer be interested in funding Soviet-style patronage relationships . Russia's policy remains largely transactional aimed at expanding arms sales and other Russian economic interests .
 Russia's GDP has increased by a general increase in the size of Russia’s GDP and a political decision to increase the defense burden . This increase in defense spending was enabled by both a general and political decisions .
 The Strategic Armament Program called for spending 19. trillion rubles (equivalent to $285 billion) to rearm Ministry of Defense forces from 2011 through 2020 .
 Moscow’s purchase of new weaponry, investment in weapons-related research and design, and expenditure on modernization and repair of existing weaponry . Each year the SAP is implemented through the State Defense Order .
 Funding for the 10 year program was heavily back-loaded such that just 31% was to be spent in the first 5 years . Nearly 70% of the money was spent from 2016 to 2020, according to the program .
 This constitutes a 30% real cut in defense spending. If it is not amended to increase funds mid-year, it would be the lowest budget for national defense since 2013 .
 Russia faces a growth ceiling, according to the International Monetary Fund and a number of prominent economists . absent structural reforms, Russia's GDP growth would probably reach only 1 to 2 percent per year, even were oil prices to increase significantly .
 Russia views wars as often undeclared, fought for relatively limited political objectives, and occurring across all domains, including outer space and information space .
 Russian leaders have noted the tendency for crises to arise quickly and develop impetuously, and to potentially escalate from local wars into global ones .
In modern cyber-enabled information and battlefield spaces, this destructive non-kinetic initial period can be reduced to milliseconds, and kinetically to hours . In modern technology, the initial period is less than a few hours .
 Russia’s Military Doctrine, last updated in December 2014, contained several new elements not in the 2010 Doctrine . The Doctrine reflects Moscow's military focus and threat perceptions .
 First codified in the doctrine was the concept of non-nuclear deterrence . The idea has been evolving since the Soviet period .
 The doctrine also underscored perceived threats to Russia’s domestic security . The military's requirement to inflict unacceptable damage on any adversary at any time .
 This requires the military to calculate or understand what level of damage would constitute unacceptable damage to an adversary . This requires them to calculate and understand what levels of damage they would constitute .
 Russia’s concept of deterrence, appropriately applied in its view, assures strategic stability . At its basic level, Russia's concept of deterrent is appropriate to its view .
 His constitutional responsibilities include appointing the prime minister, chairman of the Central Bank, government ministers, and judges . He may announce State Duma elections or dissolve it or announce it .
 His annual address sets guidelines for national internal and foreign policies . He resolves internal governmental disputes .
 Open source governs foreign policy, signs international treaties, heads the Security Council, and approves military doctrine .
 The Russian president serves as the Supreme Commander in Chief of the Russian military . In times of emergency he may introduce martial law .
 The Russian Ministry of Defense is subordinate to President Putin as Supreme Commander in Chief . President Putin is charged with implementing presidential policy within the military .
 Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu was appointed Defense Minister on 6 November 2012 . He was appointed after 18 years leading the Ministry of Emergency Situations .
 Shoygu's introduction of frequent strategic-level, no-notice inspections in Russia’s military districts has been critical in assessing and increasing combat readiness in the armed forces, as well as refining defense reforms .
 The General Staffs primary mission is to ensure the military security of the Russian Federation . It is to protect the vital interests of the state and society from external threats .
 The General Staff is responsible for monitoring and characterizing the threat environment and developing strategic and operational plans to equip, mobilize, employ and control the armed forces .
 GenArmy Valeriy Gerasimov serves as the military head of the Russian Armed Forces . He is the chief of the General Staff .
 Gerasimov previously served as deputy chief of the General Staff from December 2010 to May 2012 . He was appointed commander of the Central Military District in May 2012.
 The GOU shapes the Defense Plan of the Russian Federation . It works with the General Staff s MilitaryScientific Committee .
 General Lieutenant Sergey Rudskoy served as first deputy chief of the GOU for 9 years . He will likely leverage this experience to enhance coordination with other militaries operating in Syria . At the pinnacle of Russian military command and control is the Russian president, Vladimir Putin .
6,177 The minister of defense is appointed by the president and is charged with implementing presidential policy within the Ministry of Defense . He is authorized to assume direct command and control during times of crisis and martial law .
 This includes all hiring, equipping, training, care, and feeding of military personW nel. This includes overseeing all hiring and equipping . This also includes overseeing the care of a military person .
 The minister of defense now has legal authority to oversee and direct operations of the General Staff . With the implementation of Russia’s New Look military reforms, the minister of Defense now has the legal authority.
 The chief of the General Staff is also appointed by the president . He serves as the military head of the armed forces .
 The General Staffs primary mission is to ensure military security of the Russian Federation . The service chiefs 25 have the responsibility of organizing, training, and equipping their forces to meet current and future national security challenges .
 The Russian military has established a redundant and survivable command and control system to control its forces that serves as a force-enabler .
 Russia’s C4ISR complex uses multiple capabilities ranging from technologically advanced systems to mechanically simple, simple, legacy Soviet devices . It provides intelligence support to speed up decisionmaking cycles and carry out joint operations .
 The president of the Russian Federation is the commander in chief of the armed forces . He is authorized to assume direct C2 over the military via the Ministry of Defense and General Staff .
 Multiple C2 systems are used at each echelon to disseminate commands and for the transmission of orders . Multiple C 2 systems are also used to distribute commands and to transmit orders .
 Russia’s key C2 nodes and facilities are distributed throughout the country to increase survivability and limit single points of failure .
 Moscow is upgrading C2 systems to take advantage of modern and secure digital communications networks . C2 is being upgraded to be more secure and secure .
 Russia routinely conducts snap and other training exercises to test the systems’ capabilities to pass information and increase decisionmaking efficiency . Russia regularly conducts snap, other training exercise to test systems' capabilities .
 Russian military doctrine underscores the central role of the Russian president in authorizing the use of nuclear weapons .
 He uses the nuclear briefcase, which is carried by officers who always remain near the president .
 The General Staff monitors the status of the weapons of the nuclear triad . It will send the direct command to the launch crews .
 The Russians send this command over multiple C2 systems, which creates a redundant dissemination process to guarantee that they can launch their nuclear weapons .
 The new OSKs are joint force elements that have control in times of peace and war over all general purpose forces stationed in — or deployed to — their territories . In contrast to pre-reform military districts that were primarily land force commands, the new OSks are primarily land
 The phrase ‘military district’ still exists and refers to specific geographic boundaries, but an OSK is the command element for that area .
 The NTsUO works with subordinate regional and territorial defense management centers to coordinate ministry and department activities among lower echelons . It liaises with municipal authorities .
 Russian Military Capabilities u z w o < Nuclear Forces and Weapons R ussia is one of the oldest nuclear powers . First detonating a nuclear device in 1949 .
 Russia is also committed to maintaining and modernizing its nuclear forces . Russia is participating in strategic arms reduction treaties with the United States .
Land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles are controlled by the Strategic Rocket Forces . The sea-based and air strata o w tegic systems are managed by the Navy and Aerospace force .
 Moscow plans to spend about $28 billion by 2020 to upgrade the W capacity of its strategic nuclear triad . In the first leg of the triad the SRF operates three older ICBM systems for more than half of their land-based nuclear delivery vehicles .
 As these aging missiles reach the end of their operational lives, they will be withdrawn from service by 2019-2021 . They will be replaced with newer, modern road-mobile and silo-based ICBMs .
 SRF's missile inventories will be equally split between road-mobile and silo-based ICBMs . The SRF will have a range of missiles that can be used on the ground .
 All existing Tu-160s will be upgraded toTu-160M1 or M2 . The last ‘new’ BLACKJACK was added to the fleet in 2005 .
 Russia has announced that it will resume production of Tu-160M2 bombers and complete development of a new generation bomber within a decade . Both programs may slip if financial difficulties arise .
 The new bomber design is expected to have some stealth and shortor rough-runway capabilities . It will employ both conventional and nuclear armament .
 strategic forces, weapons, and battle management systems are designed and built to be hardened, stealthy, redundant, and reliable . They are trained to function in a WMD-degraded environment .
 Russia continues to retain a sizable nuclear stockpile even after several decades of arms reduction treaties . Russia has a sizable stockpile of nuclear weapons .
 Russia has a large nuclear weapons infrastructure and a production base capable of producing large numbers of new nuclear weapons annually . The United States has a limit of 1,550 warheads on strategic platforms, including one warhead attributed to each heavy bomber .
 The treaty will last 10 years, with central limits to be met by 2018 . The option for a single extension of another 5 years is the option for another five .
 Colonel General Sergey Karakayev has stated that an arsenal of 1,500 nuclear warheads would provide Russia a sufficient deterrent against attack .
 Russia has an active stockpile of approximately 2,000 non-strategic nuclear weapons . Russia currently has a stockpile of about 2,00 nuclear weapons, according to reports .
 These include air-to-surface missiles, short-range ballistic missiles, gravity bombs, and depth charges for medium-range bombers, tactical bombers, and naval aviation . Also include anti-ship, anti-submarine, and anti-aircraft missiles, and torpedoes for surface
 Russia's nuclear modernization includes both strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons . In 1992, then-Russian President Boris Yeltsin admitted having an offensive biological weapons program and publicly committed to its termination .
 The Russian governO ment reversed itself and now claims neither the Soviet Union nor Russia has ever pursued i-J an offensive biological weapons program .
 The declared inventory consisted of a comprehensive array of traditional chemical warfare agents filled in munitions such as artillery, bombs, and missiles .
 As of January 2017, Russia had destroyed 96.4% of its declared chemical weapons stockpile, according to press reporting .
 Russia intends to complete destruction of its remaining declared stockpile by 2020 . Russia plans to destroy its remaining stockpile by the end of the year .
 Russia used chemical incapacitants to resolve the Dubrovka Theater hostage situation in 2002 . Russia may consider using them in other counterterrorism actions. Russia may also use them to resolve a hostage situation .
 Anti-access/area denial refers to preventing an adversary from operating in a particular region or area . Anti-Access/Area Denial refers to keeping an adversary out of the area .
 Russia repeatedly cites in open source literature the need to repel or defend against a Western aerospace attack . Russia has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the past .
 Russia would seek to deter any Western use of aerospace power against Russia using its conventional, non-strategic nuclear forces . Russia would try to deter the use of its nuclear forces.
 Russia would seek to limit the capability of an adversary to conduct aerospace strikes on its territory . Based on insight gleaned from studies of warfare since 1991, Russia would try to limit its ability to strike .
 Information Operations Information operations are seen as a critical capability to achieve decisive results in the initial period of conflict with a focus on control of the information spectrum in all dimensions of battle space .
 Soviet planners viewed the initial period of war as the time that aviation would strike deep in enemy rear areas to destroy mobilization and concentration areas . This concept originated in the 1920s, where Soviet planners saw it as time to destroy concentration areas.
 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations ground operations . Air forces would also prioritize the defense of the country against enemy air attack .
 Russian doctrine, down to the present day, continues to emphasize that strategic objectives can be achieved with mass aerospace strikes early in a conflict .
 Russian planners have analyzed U.S. operations such as DESERT STORM, NOBLE ANVIL, and IRAQI FREEDOM for insight .
 Precision Strike Russian doctrine on Precision Strike is essentially a 21st century extension of the Russian doctrine of ‘deep battle’ initially codified by Chief of the General Staff Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevskiy .
 Deep battle was a strategic concept that focused on terminating, overwhelming, or dislocating enemy forces . The concept was designed to be at the line of contact throughout the depth of the battlefield .
 Deep battle encompassed maneuvers by multiple Soviet Army frontsize formations simultaneously .
 It was not meant to deliver a victory in a single operation . Instead, multiple operations would induce a catastrophic failure in the enemy's defensive system .
 Initially, deep battle focused on improved ground and air forces and was influential in Soviet operations in World War II .
 Chief of the General Staff Marshal Nikolay Ogarkov updated the deep battle concept to develop a more aerospace-centric approach . The concept was updated to incorporate traditional Russian doctrine with precision technology .
 Ogarkov theorized that conventional precision-guided munitions were part of a revolution in military affairs . He theorized throughout his tenure as chief of the Soviet General Staff that precision- guided munitions were a revolution .
In 1983 Krasnaya Zvezda article, Ogarkov took notice of impact of precision weapons and micro-circuitry on development of conventional capabilities .
For Ogarkov, the development of new conventional forms of non-nuclear weapons would enable the sorts of multi-front operations that were envisioned in the original battle concept .
 The Soviet General Staff predicted precision strike could exercise a direct and decisive outcome of a future war . Despite enthusiasm by the General Staff, very little progress was made in the development of precision-guided munitions .
 In 1991, DESERT STORM provided the Soviet military with proof of concept regarding the use of precision-guided munitions . The Soviet military was given proof of concepts for precision munitions .
 DESERT STORM campaign demonstrated the capability of precision-guided airstrikes in the land attack role to paralyze the rear area and an adversary’s economy . Former Soviet officials and Russian authorities argued that the DESERTSTM campaign was a success .
 Targets include vulnerable areas of the economy, command and control centers, and transportation centers . Targets could include vulnerable parts of the country's economy,command and control center, and transport centers .
 The introduction of precision-guided munitions changed the nature of modern war by reinforcing traditional concepts that emphasized decisive action during the initial stage of warfare . At the same time, the traditional Russian reliance on large ground force groupings to achieve tactical and strategic objectives .
 The effectiveness of precision-guided munitions are being tested in a variety of settings . Command Staff exercises KAVKAZ-2012, VOSTOK-2014, and KAVkAZ-2016, as well as operationally against targets.
 Russia's space program is both formidable and in a state of rebuilding . Russia’s space program has been in the midst of a rebuilding process .
 Moscow first used its precision strike arsenal in combat during a series of 2015 strike operations by seaand air-launched cruise missiles against targets in Syria . Moscow's current constellations Kh-101/102 air- launched cruise missiles on a Tu-95MS heavy bomber .
 The next-generation architecture is on par with Western space systems, says the author .
 Russia's current systems provide an array of capability including high-resolution imagery, terrestrial and space weather, communications, navigation, missile warning, electronic intelligence, and scientific observations . Over the next several years, Russia will prioritize the modernization of its existing communications, Navigation, and earth observation systems .
 Russia's space program has included manned missions and leading the world in space launches . Russia has a long-standing heritage in space, including manned missions .
 Russia currently ranked third in total number of satellites in orbit behind the U.S. and China .
 Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin compared U.S. ballistic missile defense efforts in Eastern Europe to the Strategic Defense Initiative of 1983 . He said such an effort justifies the development of Russian counterspace programs .
 The Russian General Staff argues for pursuing in wartime such strategies as disrupting foreign military C2 or information support because they are so critical to the fast-paced, high-technology conflicts characteristic of modern warfare . Russia believes having the military capabilities to counter space operations will deter aggression by space-enabled
 Military capabilities for space deterrence include strikes against satellites or ground-based infrastructure supporting space operations . Military capabilities include strikes on satellites and ground- based infrastructure .
 Russia created the Russian Federation Aerospace Forces by merging 36 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations the former Air Force and Aerospace Defense Troops .
 Russia reorganized its space industry responsible for space research, design, and production . Defense Minister Shoygu stated the change was “prompted by a shift in the center of gravity’s center ofgravity .
 Russia merged the government-owned United Rocket and Space Corporation in 2013 . President Putin finalized the dissolution of the Federal Space Agency on 1 January 2016, naming the joint organization the Roscosmos State Corporation .
8,279 Moscow perceives the information domain as strategically decisive and critically important to control its domestic populace and influence adversary states . Cyber Russia views the information sphere as a key domain for military conflict .
 Information warfare is a key Russia’s planned space launches through 2019 m 1612-11105 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 Communications Earth Observation EWS Unknown .
 This concept includes control of the information content as well as the technical means for disseminating that content . This concept also includes control and control of information content .
 Cyber operations are part of Russia’s attempts to control the information environment . Russia is trying to control its information environment.
 The weaponization of information is a key aspect of Russia’s strategy and is employed in time of peace, crisis, and war . The weaponized information is an important part of Russia's strategy .
 In practice, information battles draw upon psychological warfare tactics and techniques from the Soviet Era for influencing Western societies .
 Moscow views information and psychological warfare as a measure to neutralize adversary actions in peace to prevent escalation to crisis or war . Moscow views the information as a way to prevent escalating to war .
 Chief of the General Staff Gerasimov announced that “information operations troops’ were involved for the first time in the Kavkaz-2016 strategic command staff exercise in September 2016 .
 “Information confrontation,’ or IPb, is the Russian government’s term for conflict in the information sphere . Russian propaganda targets a wide variety of propaganda targets .
IPb is designed to shape perceptions and manipulate the behavior of target audiences . IPb is used to shape perception and manipulate behavior of targets .
 Cyber-Enabled Psychological Operations is one of the newest tools in Russia’s information toolkit . The use of cyber-enabled psychological operations support its strategic and tactical information warfare objectives .
 These new techniques involve compromising networks for intelligence information that could be used to embarrass, discredit, or falsify information . The new techniques include compromising networks.
 Compromised material can then be leaked to the media at inopportune times . Compromise material can also be leaked at the time of a certain time .
Russian intelligence services have been known to co-opt or masquerade as other hacktivist groups . Russian intelligence services are known to be known toCo-opt and masquerade.
 These groups appeal to Russia due to the difficulty of attribution and the level of anonymity provided . These groups appealed to Russia because of the difficulty.
 It is widely accepted that Russia, via patriotic hackers, conducted a cyber attack on Estonia in 2007 . The attack was carried out by patriotic hackers .
 The same group hijacked the Twitter feed of the United States Central Command . The Twitter feed was hijacked by the same group .
 CyberBerkut is a front organization for Russian state-sponsored cyber activity . It supports Russia’s military operations and strategic objectives in Ukraine .
 The West’s liberal world order is bankrupt and should be replaced by a Eurasian neo-conservative post-liberal world order, which defends tradition, conservative values, and true liberty . The West's liberal world Order is bankrupt.
 The West demonizes Russia, which is only trying to defend its interests and sovereignty and act as an indispensable nation in the world affairs .
 More recently, it has focused on the online publication of hacked documents, ostensibly obtained from the Ukrainian government and political figures’ computers .
 CyberBerkut uses information gained through these hacks to discredit the Ukrainian government . The Ukrainian government has been targeted by cyberberkut .
 Russia employs a troll army of paid online commentators who manipulate or try to change the narrative of a given story in Russia’s favor .
 Russia’s Troll Army, also known as the Internet Research Agency, is a state-funded organization that blogs and tweets on behalf of the Kremlin .
 Trolls typically post pro-Kremlin content and facilitate heated discussions in the comments sections of news articles . Trolls usually post anti-Russian content .
 The goal of some trolls is to disrupt negative content, but other trolls promote completely false content . The goal is to simply disrupt negativecontent .
 Another way Russia manipulates the information space is through the use of bots, according to a report .
 Bots are automated pushers of content on Russia uses a Troll Army to disseminate and overwhelm blogs and twitter communications . Bots are also automated pusher of content.
 These bots vary in sophistication and can continuously push content or imitate real life patterns . These bots can be programmed to mimic real-life patterns and patterns .
 Bots have the ability to overwhelm the information space and discourage readers from looking for real content . Bots can also discourage readers of real content from looking at real content.
 The doctrine aims to secure Russian information freedom and protect information technologies from foreign influence, cyberattacks, intelligence collection, and terrorism .
 The doctrine emphasizes the need to develop a national system for government control of the Russian Internet, information warfare forces, and cyber weapons . The doctrine is based on the need for the Russian government to control the Internet .
 DIA, D3 Design RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations . The Internet Research Agency in St. Louis is building a military to support great power .
 A major component of the proposal pertains to a state’s ability to govern its information space as a means of maintaining state sovereignty . The proposal would prevent an arms race in cyberspace .
 Russia commonly uses this term to denounce other nations meddling in their internal affairs . State sovereignty traditionally refers to domestic enforcement law . Russia commonly refers to state sovereignty .
 Russia has implemented numerous laws curbing domestic media in broadcast, print, and cyber media . Russia also proposed a code of conduct for cyberspace with specific dictums regarding non-state cyber-actors .
 The use of social media to organize opposition street protests in 2011 and 2012 prompted a reappraisal of official internet policy . The internet policy was re-evaluated in 2012 and 2013 .
 Numerous other pieces of legislation have been passed restricting the level of foreign ownership of the media . Russian media must account for any foreign funding they receive .
 A recent law has even banned foreign companies from conducting TV audience research in Russia . The law has also banned companies from doing audience research .
 Russia's strategic deterrence policy has been developed by Moscow in recent years . Russia has been developing its own strategic deterrence strategy .
 Russia's main aim is to achieve Russia’s national objectives through a combination of military and non-military means . Russia's goal is to avoid escalation into a full blown, direct, state-to-state conflict .
 Russia’s whole-of-government or interdepartmental strategy and overt or covert military means, indirect action seeks w to exploit weaknesses and fissures in target countries in order to fulfill Moscow's goals .
 Indirect Action 41 In Ukraine, indirect action manifested itself in non-military measures first, with less visible efforts taken to exert pressure on Kiev . Then broadening to wider actions involving financial, economic, and information warfare .
Russian Spetsnaz and other non-attributable military units in Crimea and eastern Ukraine. Later, this was followed by unconventional military action involving Russian Spetnaz . This is followed by other unconventional military actions in Crimea, Ukraine .
 This phase involved the actual seizure of facilities and infrastructure by these covered units, along with the use of local agents, sympathizers, and irregular forces in the vicinity . All of which are distinct hallmarks or evolutions of Soviet-era Spetsnaz wartime operations .
 Russian military views electronic warfare as an essential tool for gaining and maintaining information superiority over its adversaries . Electronic Warfare based on authoritative military academic writings .
 Russia’s world-class electronic warfare forces support denial and deception operations . Russia's Electronic warfare forces allow identification, interception, disruption, and destruction of adversary command, control, communications, and intelligence capabilities .
 electronic warfare can confuse adversary commanders and decisionmaking at any or all levels, demoralize opposing troops, and allow Russian forces to seize the operational initiative . In addition to technical disruption, effective use of electronic Warfare can confuse adversaries and decision making .
Military academics suggest electronic warfare fuse with cyber operations . Electronic warfare forces could corrupt and disable computers and networked systems, they say .
 Moscow sees military power as critical to achieving key strategic objectives and global influence . Power Projection Moscow continues to prioritize modernizing its military forces .
 Moscow has invested heavily in developing sophisticated electronic warfare capabilities . Russian acquisition plans for its ground, air, naval, and missile forces are designed to enable the ability to conduct out of area operations during peacetime .
 The rebuilt Russian military includes modernized, agile general purpose forces, vital to limited out-of-area power projection . The rebuilt military includes new, agile, agile General Purpose forces .
 Moscow intends to use its military to promote stability on its own terms and to assert its great power status . The objectives of the Russian military do not suggest a return to the Cold War posture .
 Russia’s State Armaments Program will continue to emphasize priority programs related to the development of a viable 21st-century military .
 Russia's strategic triad along with the increasing capability of its conventional forces remains a critical deterrent in preventing an attack . Russia’s strategic Triad and the increasing capabilities of its traditional forces are critical deterrent .
 Russian long-range aviation remains a priority for Russian leadership as a key part of its strategic deterrent capability . Russia also provides an advanced conventional option to rapidly project power well beyond Russian borders .
 Russia is modernizing its naval forces, which conduct operations globally in order to “show the flag” and contribute to Moscow’s narrative of Russia's re-emergence as a global power . Russia is also modernizing the naval forces to �
 Russia is also focused on enhancing its C4ISR capabilities, which will enable improved targeting and timely responses to perceived threats . Russia is focusing on enhancing the C4isR capabilities to enable better responses and better targeting .
 Russia periodically deploys assets of its LRA bomber force to conduct limited out-of-area operations as a power projection tool . Russia periodically deployed assets of the LRA Bomber force .
 LRA operations have included activity in the Pacific, the Arctic, and even as far south in 2008 as Venezuela . The LRA has also been operating in the Arctic and the Pacific .
 The capabilities of LRA aircraft allow for missions as far as 5,000-10,000 kilometers away . LRA planes can be used for missions in up to 10,000 miles away .
 The Russian Navy will continue to conduct operations in parts of the world that are deemed important to national objectives . The Navy will also continue to carry out operations in areas deemed important for national objectives.
 Russia has displayed a new capability to field an expeditionary force capable of intervening in a foreign conflict . Russia has also displayed more conventional power projection missions .
 Russia began to deploy military forces to Syria in September 2015, likely both to shore up the regime and assert Russia's status as a military player in the Middle East . Russia will almost certainly be able to logistically support its current level of operations in Syria via a mix of
 Russian air strikes and artillery operations have supported regime ground offensives and focused on opposition targets . Russia has also sought to use the Syrian intervention as a showcase for its military modernization program and advanced conventional weapons systems .
 Underground Facilities Russia inherited a vast underground facilities program from the Soviet Union . The program was designed to ensure the survival of the leadership and military command and control in wartime .
 This program involved the construction of underground bunkers, tunnels, secret subway lines, and other facilities beneath Moscow, other major Russian cities, and the sites of major military commands .
 Many critical sites are built deep underground and in some cases are hundreds of meters deep . The majority of these hardened facilities are near-surface bunkers .
 Deep underground command posts both within and outside of Moscow are interconnected by a network of special deep subway lines . The lines provide leadership a quick and secure means of evacuation .
 Leadership can move from peacetime offices through concealed entryways to protective quarters beneath the city . The leadership can also move from their peacetime office through concealed entranceways .
 The leadership can remain beneath Moscow or travel along the special subway lines that connect these urban facilities to their preferred deep underground command posts . The VIP terminal at Vnukovo Airfield is 27 kilometers southwest of the Kremlin .
 Two of the most important underground complexes for the National Command RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations Authority and General Staff are located some 60 kilometers south of the city .
 The support infrastructure for the UGFs in and around Moscow is substantial . The support for the Russian government is substantial, according to a report .
 A highly redundant communications system allows the leadership to send orders and receive reports . The system is on-site and remote .
 Highly effective life support systems may permit independent operations for many months following a nuclear attack .
 In October 2014, chief of the General Staffs Main Operations Directorate, General-Lieutenant Andrey Kartapolov, told a Rossiyskaya Gazeta correspondent that the new National Defense Management Center is safe from a nuclear strike .
 The National Defense Management Center became operational in December 2014 . The center is at the apex of the national command structure .
 General Kartapolov noted that protection against nuclear strike is always considered in building the most important facilities . The Russian general also noted that nuclear weapons are always considered important .
 The Russian military relies on extensive use of denial and deception to obscure intentions and conceal military movement. Denial and Deception is used by the military to conceal military movements .
 The family of capabilities that composed traditional maskirovka includes camouflage, deception, denial, subversion, sabotage, espionage, propaganda, and psychological operations .
Russian operational and tactical maskirovka is a form of operational combat support . Russian operational and Tactical maskiroVka is the form of Operational and tactical combat support.
 It encompasses interrelated organizational and technical measures and practical actions of staffs, troops, and facilities intended to deceive foreign intelligence . It encompasses a set of interrelatedizational and technical Measures .
 Maskirovka promotes surprise, maintenance of combat capability, and survivability . The company promotes surprise and maintenance.
 Russian military has built on the military doctrine, structure, and capabilities of the former Soviet Union . The Russians have modernized their military strategy, doctrine, and tactics .
 Russia has stated willingness for first-use of nuclear weapons . Russia's need to rely heavily on its nuclear forces to deter aggression is one of its biggest hurdles since the dissolution of the former Soviet Union .
 Moscow has stressed development of precision-strike weapons, a critical gap in its inventory . Moscow has tested them in combat in Syria, providing it with an advanced non-nuclear capability to impact battlefield .
 Moscow is developing a more modern military force capable of power projection outside Russia’s borders . In 2009, Moscow began developing a new military force.
 The New Look reforms instituted structural and organizational reforms and the State Armaments Program emphasized development of modernized platforms and weapons’ systems . The New look reforms included structural and organization reforms .
 In 2013, readiness became an additional area of emphasis with institution of no-notice “snap’s exercises and accompanying mobilization and deployments .
 Moscow’s long-term goal is building a military prepared to conduct the range of conflicts from local war through regional conflict to a strategic conflict that could result in massive nuclear exchange .
 Russian forces have been involved in conflict in Ukraine and conducted expeditionary deployment to Syria . Russian forces are using new tactics and advanced weapons systems in combat .
 Russian force did not spring up overnight but is a result of years of concentrated effort to develop and field an improved military force . This more flexible and modern Russian force didn't start up overnight .
 Russia’s desire to be a leader in a multipolar world and recapture the “great power” status it had in Tsarist times and the latter days of the Soviet Union requires a force capable of deterring aggression, fighting the range of conflicts from local crises to
 Russia is rapidly fielding a modern force that can challenge adversaries and support its “great power’s’ aspirations . Economic slowdown will affect the Russian military's timeline for building all of its planned capabilities .
 Russia’s commitment to building its military is demonstrated by its retention of the draft . Russia's commitment to build its military was demonstrated by the retention of its draft .
 All Russian males are required to register for the draft at 17 years of age . All men between the ages of 18 and 27 are obligated by law to perform one year of military service .
 SRF's three missile armies — the 27th, 31st, and 33rd — have a total of 12 subordinate missile divisions . The SRF has 12 subordinate Missile divisions .
 The Russian SRF have approximately 60,000 personnel . Eight of the divisions operate road-mobile ICBMs, with the other four armed with silo-based missiles . The SRF has approximately 60.5,366 personnel .
 SRF arsenal includes three older ICBM types — 46 SS-18s and 30 SS-19s in silos, and 72 road-mobile SS-25s . Two newer ICBM type — 60 silobased and 18 road- mobile SS-27 Mod Is, and
 The Russian military has outlined that the SRF should be completely re-armed with modern missile systems by 2022 . The SRF has said that the Russian military should be fully re- armed with modern missiles by 2022.
 Russia's goal is to begin Sarmat deployment in the 2018-2020 timeframe . Russia’s aim is to start deployment in 2018- 2020 timeframe .
 Russia has announced a new missile called the Rubezh or RS-26 . The missile is smaller than the SS-27 Mod 2 ICBM and will be deployed in 20 17 years .
 A decision on full development, production, and deployment will occur in the coming months . A decision will be made in the next few months .
 Russia plans to replace the Sarmat with a silobased, 10-MIRV heavy ICBM . The SS-18s' 27-to-30-year service lives expire by 2018-2020 .
 The SS-19 is a silo-based, six-MIRV ICBM that entered service in 1980 . The SRF will replace with the SS-27 Mod 2 by 2019, as the SS19s retire .
 The SS-25 solid-propellant, single-warhead, road-mobile ICBM was first deployed in 1985 . It will retire by 2019-2021, to be replaced by new production SS-27 Mod 2s, and possibly the two-stage, roadmobile
 Hypersonic glide vehicles are maneuverable vehicles that travel at hypersonic speed . They spend most of their flight at much lower altitudes than a typical ballistic missile . They are typically greater than Mach 5 speed.
 The combination of high speed, maneuverability, and relatively low altitude makes them challenging targets for missile defense systems .
 Russia’s overall number of strategic systems is constrained by the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty . The treaty entered into force on 5 February 2011 .
 The treaty limits the U.S. and Russia to no more than 1,550 deployed warheads each . It counts each heavy bomber as one warhead 7 years after entry into force .
 Most of the missiles are maintained on alert, capable of being launched within minutes of receiving a launch order . Most of these missiles are kept on alert .
 Russia intends to retain the largest ICBM force outside the United States . The number of missiles will continue to decrease because of arms control agreements .
 The composition of the force is changing significantly to meet the deployed strategic warhead total limit of 1,550 . The total is now 1,500 .
 Prior to 2010, no SRF road-mobile ICBMs carried MIRVs . By the early 2020s, all will do so .
 The Russian ground forces are composed of the Ground Troops, Airborne Troops and Naval Infantry, Naval Infantry and Coastal Troops . The National Guard is the National Guard .
 The Western Military District has three numbered combined-arms armies . The Southern and Central Military Districts each have two, and the Eastern Military District have four if needed .
 Moscow designates peacekeeping operations. Examples include ongoing efforts in breakaway enclaves in Georgia and Moldova .
 Ground Troops will mobilize forces, operationally deploy to threatened areas, call up reservists, and train reservists .
 Russia's Ground Troops are charged to suppress military conflicts if possible, repulse enemy aggression, conduct defensive and counter-offensive operations to defeat the aggressor .
 The Ground Troops are the land warfighting component of the Russian Ministry of Defense . The ground troops are part of the Russia's Ministry of defense .
 Ground Troops constitute the largest component of the Russian Federation armed forces . The Ground Troop is the largest part of the Russia's armed forces.
 The Ground Troops are currently organized into approximately 40 active and reserve maneuver brigades and eight maneuver divisions . The ground Troops have been organized into about 40 active, reserve and reserve brigades .
 The roles of Ground Troops include repelling enemy aggression and protection of Russia's territorial integrity and Russian national interests .
 The Ground Troops are composed of main combat components — motorized rifle, tank, missile and artillery, and air defense units . Its main peacetime missions include maintaining adequate combat readiness .
 Ground forces have historically played a dominant role in Russian military issues and leadership . Support elements for these units include Russian armored fighting vehicles parade in Red Square .
 A Military to Support Great Power Aspirations is building a Military to support Great Power . The military will also support nuclear, biological and chemical defense .
 mounted infantry are highly mobile forces tasked with holding territory, repulsing enemy attacks, breaking through enemy defenses, capturing important areas, and defeating the enemy .
 They support Motorized Rifle Troop missions with direct fires during meeting engagements . They support motorized rifle Troops with direct fire during meetings .
 Missile Troops and Artillery forces are organized into missile, rocket-artillery, and combined artillery units . The forces are called missile Troops, Artillery and missile-troops .
 Rocket-artillery units operate multiple rocket launchers . and combined artillery units operate composite towed or self-propelled artillery and MLRs .
 These units are equipped with anti-aircraft missiles, anti- aircraft artillery, and anti-Aircraft gun-and-missile systems . They are also equipped with portable anti- Aircraft missile systems .
 The centerpiece of the 2008-2009 New Look reforms was the elimination of the divisional/ regimental structure and its replacement by the brigade . The brigade was replaced by a brigade in 2009 .
 The Russian Ground Troops currently have about 40 combined arms brigades . The Russian ground troops currently have around 40 combined weapons brigades.
 In the winter of 2013, one motorized rifle brigade and one tank brigade were reformed as divisions . In the spring of 2016, it was announced that four new divisions would be formed in the Western and Southern Military Districts and one in the Central Military District . The transition to the brigade
 The reinforced battalion, or battalion tactical group, was a motorized rifle or tank battalion . Other assets, such as artillery, reconnaissance, and air defense resources, were also strengthened by other assets .
 BTGs are similar to NATO battalion task forces and are ad-hoc organizations, individually created and optimized to fulfill a particular mission . BTGs were created to fulfill the mission of the NATO battalion force .
 The new Russian divisions are much smaller than their Soviet predecessors . The new divisions are smaller than the Soviet predecessors.
 Russia's new motorized rifle divisions number around 9,000 . While a Soviet rifle division numbered around 13,000 officers and soldiers, a Soviet motorized rifles division numbered about 13,00 .
 Russia's combined arms brigades “in terms of structure are intended for fighting in local wars" But they also can be successfully employed in large-scale wars, says General Lieutenant Vladimir Popov .
 Analysts claim Russia is developing entirely new military concepts . Some analysts claim Russia has developed entirely newMilitary concepts .
 Recent Russian activity in eastern Ukraine shows a more aggressive application of information warfare concepts that date back to the Soviet period .
 Russian ground forces troops have cooperated with non-traditional semi-military forces such as partisans and Cossacks for centuries . Russian ground force troops have been cooperating with semi- military forces for centuries.
 The contemporary Russian ground forces pose a serious challenge to U.S. military planners . They should be seen as neither a simple continuation of past Soviet practices, nor an entirely new force employing entirely new military concepts, but a highly nuanced and adaptive combination .
 The main combat power of the Ground Troops is centered in tank and motorized rifle divisions and separate tank and rifle brigades that are normally subordinate to combined arms armies . The main battle power of Ground Troop is to fight for the U.S.
 Russia's military strategy is officially defensive, but its basic principle of land warfare is violent, sustained, and deep offensive action, just as it was during the Soviet era . The Russian Ground Troops basic principle is violent.
 Mechanized and armored formations supported by aviation and artillery are to seize the initiative at the outset of hostilities . They will drive deeply and decisively into the enemy's rear area .
 Combined Arms Armies is an operational and administrative organization that forms the basis of the Russian field army . The combined arms army is an operating and administrative group .
 A typical combined arms army includes two to four combined arms brigades, usually motorized rifle 52 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER . In a few cases a tank brigade, plus artillery, missile, air defense, engineer, chemical defense, communications, intelligence, intelligence and reconnaissance.
Army can operate in either offensive or defensive roles in different geographical areas and under various operational constraints . By altering the mix of motorized rifle and tank formations and artillery and missile support, the army can operate on both sides .
 The combined arms army is both an operational and administrative unit . It is both operational and Administrative unit .
 Currently, the 1st GTA includes a tank division, a motorized rifle division, and a tank brigade, plus artillery, missile, air defense, engineer, chemical defense, communications, intelligence, intelligence and reconnaissance .
 The traditional role of a tank army is to exploit penetrations deep into the enemy's rear areas . A tank army has been used in the past to fight back against the enemy .
 The Separate Combined-Arms Brigade is the primary combat formation of the Ground Troops . The separate combined-arms brigade is either motorized rifle or tank .
 Battalion Tactical Groups BTGs are task-organized battalion-plus-sized tactical combat entities that are capable of performing independent combined-arms combat missions . The BTGs can perform independent combined combat missions.
 The United States Army battalion task forces are similar in purpose, structure, and tactical use to U.S. Army Battalion task forces . They are similar to the Army's use of similar structure and structure .
 An order issued on 19 September 2012 required all maneuver brigade commanders to create a contract-manned BTG within the brigade if they had not already done so . The order was issued in September 2012 .
 The need to have effective BTGs is a primary driver of the New Look structural reforms . BTGs are a key part of the new look structural reforms, according to New Look .
 BTGs have their theoretical origins in the late Soviet period, where they were envisioned to fight against NATO on both a nuclear or non-nuclear battlefield . BTGs were designed to fight in a nonlinear, large-scale environment .
 BTGs currently serve as Russia's primary tactical fighting unit . BTGs will continue to serve in all tactical circumstances, both in large-scale and small-scale conflicts .
 The Airborne Troops are an independent arm of service within the Russian Federation armed forces . VDV ('Vozdush no-Desantniye Voyska) is an independent arms of service .
 It is composed of four maneuver divisions, four maneuver brigades, and a separate special purpose reconnaissance brigade . It is made up of 4 maneuver divisions and 4 maneuver brigade .
 The VDV serves as Russia's high-mobility initial invasion and rapid response force . It may be used to help shape the battlespace for follow-on ground forces .
 The VDV's increased mobility comes at the expense of armor and firepower . The primary combat vehicles are generally lighter than their Ground z Troops counterparts . The VV's primary combat vehicle is generally lighter.
 In 2016, air assault divisions and brigades received up to a company of T-72-series main battle tanks . In late 2016, the air assault division and brigade received up To-72 tanks .
 The tank companies within these air assault units will very likely increase to tank 55 battalions by the end of 2018 . The tank firms within theseAir assault units are expected to increase to 50 battalions .
 Naval Infantry Russian Naval Infantry is organized into units that are operationally subordinate to fleet commanders . The Russian Navy is called Naval Infantry .
 Naval Infantry is focused on amphibious assaults, coastal defense, counterterrorism, anti-piracy, and ship security missions .
 The organization and equipment of Naval Infantry units are generally similar to that of motorized rifle units in the Ground Troops . The organization of Naval infantry units is similar to those of Ground Troop units .
 The Naval Infantry consist of four independent brigades, one separate brigade, and three separate battalions . The Naval Brigade consists of four separate brigades and one separate battalion .
 The Russian Coastal Troops consist of Coastal Missile Artillery Forces and CoastalTroops . The Russian coastal Troops are part of the Russian Coastal Military Forces .
 CMAF consists of three independent brigades, two independent regiments, and one independent battalion . CMAf consist of threeindependent brigades.
 The Coastal Troops are organized as ground forces but are subordinate to the Navy . The Coast Guard is based in the U.S.
 The Coastal Troops consist mainly of motorized rifle brigades and artillery brigades . The CoastalTroops are based in the U.S. and Canada .
 Coastal missile defense in Russia is primarily centered on anti-ship missile systems . The Russian military has been criticized for its lack of missile defense .
 Efforts are underway to rearm the coastal missile force with new, longer-range missile systems .
 Former Russian Federation Air Forces and Aerospace Defense Troops merged to create Russian Federation Aerospace Forces in August 2015 .
 The Space Troops are not subordinate to the military districts but to Aerospace Command in Moscow . They also contain the Long-Range Aviation and Military Transport Aviation .
 Overall manpower for the Russian Aerospace Forces is listed at 148,000 including conscripts . Overall manpower is listed for the Russia Aerospace Forces.
 The 14th Air Force and Air Defense Army to support Great Power Aspirations District . The Eastern Military District to the Southern Military District. The 4th Air force and Air defense Army to the southern Military District .
 The LRA is the bomber force of the Russian Aerospace Forces . It is operationally subordinate to the Supreme High Command of Russia's armed forces .
The LRA is tasked with long-range bombardment of strategic targets with conventional or nuclear weapons . The LRA has been tasked with bombing strategic targets.
 Currently, TU-95MS aircraft are being modernized to include the Kh101/102 missile system . Currently, the Kh 101/102 missiles are being used in the aircraft .
 The LRA has an inventory of 16 Tu-160, 60 Tu-95MS, and more than 50 Tu-22M3 bombers . LRA also has a list of more than 100 Tu-23M3 bomber bombers .
 The VTA is subordinate operationally to the Supreme High Command of the Russian armed forces . It is the main provider of the air lift for Russian troops and equipment .
 The various sizes of aircraft allow the VTA to support many different missions from VIP flights, to small cargo, to transporting tanks and aircraft . The VTA has a range of types of aircraft to support VIP flights and cargo flights .
 These aircraft have larger fuel tanks allowing for extended missions without refueling to increase efficiency . These aircraft tend to have bigger fuel tanks, allowing them to be able to take longer missions .
 Historically, Russia has been a leader in developing technologically advanced detection and engagement elements . Russia has a history of developing advanced detection, engagement elements.
During the 1990s, Russia largely maintained its research and development programs for air defense equipment . During the 1990's, Russia mostly maintained itsResearch and development program for airdefense equipment .
 During this period, Russia purchased very few of these systems for domestic use . During this time, Russia bought very few systems for Domestic use .
 The State Armaments Program of 2015, and the subsequent 2020 plan, significantly enhanced support for the purchase and employment of the newest and most capable air defense equipment . The program includes radar, surface to air mis62 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power As
 The kill chain contains the seven elements that a fully functional Russian military integrated air defense system would employ in an air defense scenario . The system would be fully functional, according to the Russian military .
 Russia's initial deployments to Crimea and Syria included the Pantsir and S-300 air defense systems . Russia’s initial deployment to Crimea was the first to Crimea, Syria .
 Russia has built an echelon-based air defense system in the Crimean Peninsula . These systems allowed Russia to build a system that could be used to defend its territory .
 Russian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 459,460 deployed long-range strategic surface to air missile systems in both countries . At a later point in the Crimean and Syrian operations, Russia's Unmanning Aerial Vehicles were deployed in Crimea and Syria .
 Russia lagged behind the world in development of UAVs. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
 Russia has introduced a class of mini-UAVs for use by the military . Most significant defense developments are occurring with larger, more capable systems for tactical and strategic use .
 When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, Russia’s air force entered a decline as industry and operational units languished .
 U.S. and/or NATO will be met with more capable Russian air power. Similar efforts have been used in the Crimea/Black Sea and Baltic regions with Russian expectations .
 Tu-95MS BEAR and Tu-160 BLACKJACK are again using Cold War concepts to conduct international flights that impinge upon the sovereign borders of foreign nations . Finally, a slowly improved strategic bomber force (i.e.e., Tu- 95MS BEar and Tu
 The disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, as well as the economic stagnation that followed, led to a severe downsizing for the Russian Navy .
 Naval construction ground to a halt, and the fleet fell into disrepair and obsolescence . The fleet is now in a state of disrepair .
Under Vladimir Putin, the Russian military's capabilities have undergone significant improvement . The Navy is no exception to the Navy .
 The combined major forces of the current Russian Navy number about onesixth to one-quarter of what was the Soviet Navy in its heyday . The current Navy number is about one- quarter of the Russian Navy's size .
 The Russian Federation has seen a steady increase in the maintenance, training, and deployment activity of the Navy in the past 10 years . The activation of a broad submarine and ship construction program will recapitalize the fleet .
 The Navy's missions remain focused on strategic deterrence and homeland defense . The Navy’s missions are focused on the homeland defense and strategic deterrence .
 Periodic distant deployments support the Russian Federation’s global foreign policy interests .
 The Navy operates nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines . They are an essential arm of Russia’s nuclear triad .
 The Russian Navy is in the top tier of foreign navies. This strategic capability puts the Russian Navy in the highest tier of international navies .
 The headquarters of the Russian Navy is located in St. Petersburg . The headquarters are located in the city of St. The Russian Navy has a large fleet of ships .
 The Russian Federation Navy consists of four fleets (Baltic, Black Sea, Northern, and Pacific) and a flotilla in the Caspian Sea .
 The fleets receive administrative orders and guidance from the Navy Staff in St. John's Navy .
 The Northern Fleet is Russia’s most capable naval force . It is Russia's most capable navy force .
 Based in Severomorsk, located in the Kola Gulf, it is the only ice-free direct access to the North Atlantic . The seven operational ballistic missile submarines provide the bulk of the firepower for the Navy's arm of the nuclear triad .
 Russia’s only operational aircraft carrier is also based in the Northern Fleet . The Navy's only nuclear-powered heavy cruiser is the Navy’'s only heavy cruiser .
 Surface combatants and submarines deploy worldwide from the Kola Gulf . They also conduct counter-piracy patrols off the Horn of Africa .
 The Northern Fleet’s two primary missions are to provide strategic deterrence with its ballistic missile submarines and to defend the maritime approaches to northwest Russia .
 The Pacific Fleet lags behind the Northern Fleet in terms of maintenance and overall capability . It is still able to conduct strategic nuclear strikes against the U.S. mainland . Its surface units are active from the Pacific region to the Horn of Africa .
 The Black Sea Fleet has been a fleet in decline for years, forced to operate with a handful of Soviet-era vessels . The fleet has been in decline since the 1980s .
 New units began to enter the order of battle in 2014 after the occuu z w w o < w u z w o J w H Z w £ W Uh w Q 67 pation of Crimea . New units include modern coastal missiles and naval infantry .
 In 2015, new submarines and surface combatants began to arrive to bolster the fleet . Then in 2015, the fleet began to be bolstered by new submarines .
 The Black Sea Fleet could have as many as six new attack submarines and six new surface ships over the next few years . It can operate in the Mediterranean to counter NATO forces and support operations in Syria .
 The majority of Baltic Fleet vessels are located at Baltiysk in the Kaliningrad Oblast with a handful further north near St. St.
 The fleet’s mission focuses on specifically ensuring sea-lines of communication and trade are open between Kaliningrad and St. St. Petersburg .
 The Baltic fleet presents a significant long-range precision nuclear strike threat to Western Europe . With the arrival of two KALIBR-equipped vessels in 2016, the Baltic fleet is a significant threat .
 Caspian Sea Flotilla was the first Russian surface force operationally equipped with the KALIBR missile system . The Caspians are the dominant naval force on the Caspan Sea .
 Russia's naval superiority ensures Moscow has leverage in regional economic disputes . Russia’s naval superiority means Moscow has power in regional disputes .
 The KALIBR land attack cruise missile gives Moscow a precision strike weapon that can range targets in Central Asia, the Middle East, and parts of Europe . In October 2015, Russia struck Syria in Syria .
 The main missions of naval aviation are to track and destroy enemy submarines and warships . Also help achieve air superiority where the fleet is operating .
 ADMIRAL KUZNETSOV can accommodate 22 strike aircraft and 17 attack helicopters . Most naval aviation aircraft are landbased; the only aircraft carrier, ADMirAL KuZNETsOV, can carry 22 strike planes .
 Russia’s sea-based strategic deterrent is deployed in the Northern and Pacific Fleets .
 There are six DELTA IV SSBNs, one DOLGORUKIY SSBN, and one remaining TYPHOON SSBN used as a test platform in the north .
 All sea-launched ballistic missiles carried by these submarines can reach United States targets from their home68 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations base piers . If required, if required, could be launched with the submarines on the surface .
 SSBNs are protected by nuclear-powered cruise missile and torpedo attack submarines . They also engage enemy surface and submarine forces and pose land attack cruise missile threat against an enemy homeland .
 In the Northern Fleet, these attack submarines include three OSCAR II and one SEVERODVINSK SSGNs . Three VICTOR III, six AKULA I/II, and four SIERRA SSNs are among the attack submarines .
 The SEVERODVINSK class is extremely quiet and is armed with a wide range of advanced cruise missiles to destroy enemy ships and targets ashore .
 A new fifth-generation general purpose nuclear-powered submarine is under development . The submarine is being built in the UK .
 Non-nuclear diesel-electric submarines round out the Russian submarine forces . The Russian submarine force is based in Russia .
 These units are assigned to all fleets for close-in area defense missions in adjacent seas . These units have been assigned to each other's fleets .
 The newest KILO version continues in construction with three more units destined for the Black Sea Fleet and eventually another six for the Pacific Fleet . The new version is the latest in a long line of units for the fleet .
 A single PETERSBURG-class improved design experimental unit is in the Northern Fleet with two additional units to be completed . The new unit will be the first of its kind in the Fleet .
 A future non-nuclear, KALINA design, likely having an air independent propulsion plant, is in development with construction projected after 2020 . The design is likely to have an airindependent propulsion plant .
 The Russian Navy’s major combatant surface ships, frigates and larger, comprise some 32 units . Some 32 units are assigned across all 4 fleets .
 The first new GORSHKOV-class guided missile frigate was recently commissioned with more expected . The first GORSKov-class frigate is expected to be the first of its kind .
 This fleet also has 12 minor anti-ship and anti-submarine combatant ships, as well as 4 ROPUCHA-class amphibious assault ships . This fleet has 12 major anti-ships and Anti- Submarine combatants .
 The Black Sea Fleet has one SLAVA-class cruiser, one 47-year-old KASHIN-class destroyer, two older KRIVAK-class frigates, and the first of a planned six new GRIGOROVICH- class frigates . These are supplemented
 The fleet is supplemented by 15 minor combatants and 7 amphibious assault ships . The fleet has a total of 15 major combatants and seven amphibious attack ships .
 These are supplemented by 24 minor anti-ship and anti-submarine combatants and 4 amphibious assault ships . They are supplemented with 24 minorAnti-ship, anti- Submarine combatants .
 The new SS-N-32 BULAVA submarine launched ballistic missile is being produced for the DOLGORUKIY-class SSBNs .
 Russia plans to deploy KALIBR capability on all new design construction nuclear and non-nuclear submarines, corvettes, frigates, and larger surface ships . The most consequential development is that Russia will deploy the capability.
 KALIBR provides even modest platforms, such as corvettes, with significant offensive capability . All platforms have a significant ability to hold distant fixed ground targets at risk using conventional warheads .
 The proliferation of this capability within the new Russian Navy is changing its ability to deter, threaten, or destroy adversary targets . The proliferation is profoundly changing the Navy's ability to threaten, threaten or destroy adversaries .
 The Navy will have to maintain its older fleet for several years until these new vessels come online . More new classes of ships are planned, but more new classes are planned .
 Russia is still capable of deploying its assets worldwide, best evidenced by continuous support to Syria since 2012 . Russia has also deployed its assets to the Gulf of Aden since 2008 . Russian operations in Syria have been in place since 2012 and since 2008.
 Spetsnaz retains a slightly different set of roles and missions than those commonly found elsewhere . Spetnaz is similar to special operations forces in Western countries .
 The current incarnation of Spetsnaz traces its origin back to naval and ground units created back in the mid 1950s . The current version of the military force was formed in the 1950s to establish a dedicated special purpose force to operate with the armed forces .
 These predecessor units became pivotal in defining the hallmark missions of the modern Spetsnaz force . They include diversionary acts conducted by partisan units behind German lines in World War II .
 Moscow’s recent strategy of using indirect action is associated with Spetsnaz doctrine . These traditional missions are associated with Moscow's recent strategy .
 Within Russia, the term Spetsnaz is often misappropriated and misattributed . The term is often used in Russian slang .
 Moscow’s true Spetsnaz force is a relatively small, select group of mission-dedicated special purpose forces . The National Guard, Federal Security Service, Foreign Intelligence Service, and Justice and Emergency Situations Ministries are among the forces .
 Spetsnaz units in these organizations all retain distinct and separate missions from one another . Estimated to number 20,000-30,000 personnel in these units .
 The Foreign Intelligence Service The SVR is Russia’s main external intelligence agency . It focuses on civilian affairs, while the GRU focuses on military affairs .
 Russia’s huge defense industrial complex focuses on weapons production . The goal is to move toward a combination of military and non-military products .
 President Vladimir Putin and Deputy Premier Dmitriy Rogozin have said high levels of spending on the military and defense industrial complex will benefit the entire economy .
 Challenges, partly due to Western sanctions, have slowed production for some weapons and equipment . Western sanctions have also slowed production.
 Russian industry’s dependence on weapons production, the depreciation of the ruble, and growing interest rates on industrial loans have increased business costs for Russian defense firms .
 Russian economists have warned that the imbalance between civilian and military spending could be problematic .
 Ballistic Missile Sector is a key area of development detailed in Russia’s 2011-2020 State Armament Program . The ballistic missile forces form the backbone of Moscow‘s nuclear triad .
 Russia’s modernization efforts are driven by an aging missile inventory, the need to maintain a credible launch capability . The U.S. is concerned with the deployment of anti-missile defense systems by the United States .
 As of 2015, modernized systems only made up 56% of the missile force . They are scheduled to reach 100% by 2022 .
 Moscow Institute of Thermal Technology for the overall design, NPO Soyuz in Lubertsy for the three solid rocket motors . The All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Experimental Physics in Sarov for the nuclear warhead .
 A new solid-propellant ICBM, the RS-26, was developed as a lighter version of the SS-27 . It will only be deployed as a mobile variant sometime in 2017 .
 Hypersonic glide vehicles are maneuverable vehicles that travel at hypersonic speed . They spend most of their flight at much lower altitudes than a typical ballistic missile .
 Press reporting claimed a successful test of this system from an SS-19 booster occurred in April 2016 .
 The SS-N-18 Mod 3 can carry up to three warheads to a maximum range of over 5,500 kilometers . The latest version can carry three warheads, with a range of up to five kilometers .
 The SS-N-23, initially deployed in 1989, is a three-stage, liquid-propellant missile designed by the State Missile Center Makeyev . It was originally deployed in the 1990s .
 It can carry four warheads to a range of over 8,000km and is launched from Delta IV submarines . It can be launched from a Delta IV submarine .
 An upgrade of the SS-N-23, known as SINEVA, was completed in 2007 by the Krasnoyarsk Machine Building Plant .
 The SS-N-32 BULAVA is a solid-propellant, sea-launched ballistic missile . The missile underwent a 19-year development cycle at the Moscow Institute of Thermal Technology .
 The BULAVA can carry up to six independent nuclear warheads to a range of around 8,000 kilometers . It is in service on the DOLGORUKIY-class submarines and is replacing older SLBMs in the Russian inventory .
 The ISKANDER is equipped with an inertial/GLONASS guidance system and either radar, electro-optical, or infrared image matching terminal guidance system, enabling it to strike moving targets .
 Russia’s 2011-2020 State Armament Program also places a priority focus on the development and production of highly capable cruise missile systems .
 Russia has invested heavily in the development of air-, ground-, and sea-launched cruise missiles, and the development or refurbishment of associated launch platforms . Russia is also developing air-based cruise missiles.
 Russia is focused on producing export variants of several cruise missile systems to remain competitive in the international arms market . In addition to developing domestic variants, Russia is also developing domestic versions of cruise missiles .
 These missiles were developed by the Raduga Science and Production Association, a Tactical Missile Corporation subsidiary located in Dubna . The missiles are designed by the company's subsidiary, the Raduga Science & Production Association .
2,583 Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles The KALIBR-family of cruise missiles are some of Russia's most capable systems . The missiles are the follow-on system to the Kh-55, the main armament of Russia’s Tu-95 and Tu
 The KALIBR-class missiles are the more capable domestic versions of the CLUB-family . Russia has exported the missiles for several years .
 The 3M-14 is a long-range, land-attack cruise missile capable of carrying conventional or nuclear warheads . The KALIBR class of missiles reportedly has an operational range up to 2,500 kilometers and has a lower flight profile .
 The 3M-54 is an antiship missile, capable of being launched from submarine and surface ships . The missile can be launched from submarines, surface ships and submarines .
 The ONIKS anti-ship cruise missile is another capable weapon system produced in Russia . The BASTION mobile shore-based missile complex also has a land-based variant .
Once operational, ADMIRAL NAKHIMOV will be one of the first naval vessels to carry these cruise missiles .
 Russia demonstrated some of its newest capabilities in military technology in its Syria campaign . Russia demonstrated its latest capabilities in its military technology .
 Russia’s use of the KALIBR sea-launched cruise missile for the first time in a combat situation demonstrated its advancements in precision-guided munitions . The Kh-101 airlaunched Cruise missile was the first to be used in combat .
 Long-Range SAMs Russia is adding new defense infrastructure to increase production of its newest long-range SAM system . S-400 regiments are operational throughout Russia . The new SAM system is Russia's newest and most effective long- range system .
 Russia's surface-to-air missile systems remain among the best in the world . Russia maintains a robust production capacity to satisfy both domestic and export requirements .
 In recent years, Russia has also developed several highly-capable SAM systems . Russia has invested in new infrastructure to support aggressive production schedules .
 Many countries, including China, are interested in acquiring some of Russia’s longer-range systems .
 Almaz-Antey is Russia’s primary company responsible for development and production of air defense systems . The company is also responsible for ground surveillance radar stations, and automated control systems .
 Almaz-Antey formed in 2002 as a result of a merger between Antey Corporation and NPO Almaz . The company was formed by the merger of Antey and N PO Almaz.
 The ANTEY-2500 is a long-range air defense system that reportedly can engage short-and intermediate-range ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, precision-guided weapons, strategic and tactical aircraft, as well as early warning and electronic warfare aircraft .
 The PANTSIR-S/Sl is a short-range air defense system developed by the KBP (Instrument Design Bureau) Tula . It is the latest in a series of air defense systems developed by Tula.
 It is armed with 12 missiles and two 30-mm anti-aircraft guns . For target acquisition and tracking it uses two radars and an electro-optical system .
 It was designed to defend ground installations and longer-range SAM systems against a variety of weapon systems . It was built to defend fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters and helicopters .
Each combat vehicle can engage up to four targets simultaneously . It is usually deployed as a battery of 4-6 combat vehicles per site . Each combat vehicle is a battery.
 Russia’s United Aircraft Corporation was created to consolidate aircraft design and production companies under one state controlled corporation .
 UAC controls 18 companies responsible for the design and production of most military and civilian aircraft . UAC has been in charge of the UAC's design, production and design of most aircraft .
 Bombers Russia plans to upgrade and operate fleet of Tu160/BLACKJACK, Tu-95MS BEAR H, and Tu-22M/BACKFIRE bombers beyond 2030 .
 Serial production of new Tu-160M2/BLACKJACK bombers is scheduled to begin no earlier than 2023 at the Kazan Aircraft Plant . The new bombers will be produced at Kazan aircraft Plant .
Samara-based enterprise Kuznetsov, currently being modernized to start production by 2020 . The engines will be produced at the Samara- based enterprise.
 Six flying prototype aircraft were completed through 2016, with additional prototype aircraft in testing by the end of 2016 .
 The Ministry of Defense plans to start serial production this year with the goal of producing 12 for the air force by 2020 . The goal is to produce 12 air force aircraft by 2020.
 Transport Aircraft The UAC is responsible for operating two large aircraft production plants at Kazan and Ulyanovsk . UAC operates two large production plants in Kazan.
 Russia is producing its new transport, the I1-76MD-90A, which is a redesign of the II76/ CANDID transport . Russia plans to produce 39 I1/76MD -90A planes by 2020 . Russia is also planning to
The corporation includes approximately 40 companies, including design bureaus and shipyards . The corporation includes about 40 companies .
 Russia is currently upgrading and modernizing its naval fleet . Russia is constructing multi-role platforms with modular designs .
 Russia's shipbuilding industry is besieged by sanctions . Some new platforms have taken up to a decade to complete construction and enter into service .
 Moscow is working to overcome the negative effects of international sanctions by becoming more self-reliant . Moscow is now producing components formerly purchased from foreign suppliers .
 Russia has eight operational shipyards dedicated to surface ship and submarine construction . Russia currently has eight operating shipyards devoted to surface vessel construction .
 Construction of patrol boats and CO corvettes has continued at a steady pace . Major combatants and amphibious ships have encouned .
 Surface Combatants Construction of the ADMIRAL GRIGOROVICH and GORSHKOV-class frigates, along with the STEREGUSHCHIY-class corvette, was to mark Russia's return as a shipbuilding power .
 A total of 17 of the ships were ordered to be built . The ships include 6 GRIGOROVICH, 4 GORSHKOV, and 8 STEREGUSHCHIY .
 Final delivery of over half of the ships was disrupted due to the lack of gas turbine and diesel engines from Ukraine's Zorya-Mashproyekt State Gas-Turbine Manufacturing Enterprise .
 Delivery of three GRIGOROVICH and two GORSHKOV frigates were eventually cancelled because domestically-produced gas-turbine engines would not be ready before 2020 . The delivery of three of the frigates was eventually cancelled .
 imported engines for the STEREGUSHCHIY corvettes have been replaced by domestic diesel engines produced by the Kolomna Engine Plant in Moscow . Corvettes and patrol boats can continue at a steady pace in spite of construction delays to larger ships .
 The Russian Navy has one operational aircraft carrier in its inventory . The 26-year-old ADMIRAL KUZNETSOV is expected to enter a 2to 3-year overhaul period beginning in 2018 .
 The overhaul is not scheduled to consist of any major modernization or modifications . The KUZNETSOV will keep the fleet in the fleet until a new aircraft carrier becomes operational .
 The Murmansk Shipyard is planning to convert and enlarge its drydock to overhaul the KUZNETSOV . The shipyard will provide maintenance/ repair service for large commercial ships .
 Based on a model mock-up and initial information, the carrier will have a beam of 40 meters and draft of 11 meters . The carrier will be based on the model mock up and initial info .
 The Shtorm will have RITM-200 nuclear reactors, a catapult, and two ski-jump ramps for launching aircraft . It will be able to carry up to 90 aircraft and helicopters .
 75% of the 61 operational submarines are over 20 years old and are slowly being replaced . Submarines Historically the backbone of the Russian Navy, 75 per cent of the submarines are older than 20 .
Russia will continue production of its fourth-generation DOLGORUKIY-class submarines through 2020 . Russia will continue to produce the submarines until 2020 .
 There are currently three in 82 RUSSIA MILITARY POWER Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations service . There are also eight scheduled to enter service in the coming years .
 Russia is also planning to construct a fifth-generation strategic missile SSBN between 2031 and 2050 . Russia is planning to build the SSBN from 2031 to 2050 .
 The YASEN is produced at the Sevmash shipyard . The first of up to 10 hulls was delivered to the Navy in 2014, but the program has encountered delays .
 The flagship of the class required 16 years to complete; hull 2 should soon be completed after 7 years . The hull 2 is expected to be completed in seven years .
Modernization and upgrade efforts are occurring on the OSCAR II SSGN and SIERRA II SSNs . Modernization and upgrades are being made on the SSNs.
 The improved KILO SSK class is being produced without significant delays . The improved class has been produced without major delays .
 The first three KILOS were delivered to the Black Sea Fleet in 2014-2015 . The first two of the KILos were delivered in 2015-2015.
 Since 2010, there have been significant improvements in the condition of Russian ground arms . The modernization and upgrade of the main battle tank inventory are among the improvements .
 The T-72 is one of Russia’s oldest active MBTs . It has been upgraded to include substantial enhancements in explosive reactive armor, electronic components, and enhanced navigation systems .
 Russia’s newest in-service MBT, the T-90, features the new Sonsa-U sighting systems and Shtora soft-kill active protection system . The T- 90 is the new in- service MBT.
 The Omsk Transport Machine Building Plant is one of Russia’s two MBT production and modernization facilities . Russia's Ministry of Defense planned to phase out the T-80U with Sosna-U, z Relikt third-generation dynamic protection complex .
 This universal platform offers the Russian defense industry a more streamlined 83 T-14 Armata Tank . The Russian Defense industry is now using this platform to improve its efficiency .
AFP means of armored vehicle production and will reduce maintenance and modernization costs in the future . AFP means of armoured vehicle production .
 The Kurganets-25 will provide a lighter, universal tracked platform for new IFVs and armored personnel carriers . Like the Armata, the Kurganet will begin production in 2018 .
 The Bumerang wheeled armored personnel carrier has completed preliminary testing as of June 2016 . The armored vehicle has been designed to be used in the military .
 Arms Sales Russia remains the second largest arms exporter worldwide, in terms of the annual value of both its export contracts and equipment deliveries . Arms sales Russia is the world's second largest arm exporter .
 Russia’s arms export strategy included planning $13 billion in annual sales through 2016, and thereafter seeking growth until 2020 . Russia's arms exports strategy included $13billion in annual Sales through 2016 .
 Moscow sees great prospects in the global arms marketplace for many of its products . Moscow sees good prospects for its products in the world .
 Su-35, Su-30 and MiG-29 fighter aircraft, Yak130 combat trainers, and a variety of Mil and Kamov helicopters, are key products . In the aircraft sector,Su-35 and Mi-30 fighter aircraft are key product.
 S-400 TRIUMF, ANTEY-2500, BUK-M2E, and TORM2e surface-to-air missile systems are top sellers . IGLA-S MANPADS, the PANTSIR-Sl air defense missile/gun system
 Russia’s land warfare products are centered on T-90 tanks, BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicles, and Tigr armored cars . Russia's land warfare product is centered on the T- 90 tanks, Tigr armoured cars, and BMPs-3
 ROE typically accounts for approximately 85% of Russia’s total exports of weapons and military hardware . ROE usually accounts for about 85%.
 ROE is incorporated into Rostec (formerly known as Russian Technologies or Rostechnologii) The state corporation was established in 2007 to promote the development, production, and export of civilian and military high technology products .
 Over 15 companies are authorized to export products abroad directly, most often spare parts and maintenance services . These contracts account for about $2 billion annually, ROE manages the majority of Russian arms trade .
 Russia’s largest export markets for arms are the Middle East/North Africa and the Asia-Pacific regions . Russia is the largest export market for arms .
 Russia also maintains sales in Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and some parts of Europe . Russia maintains sales at a much lower level, although at a lower level .
 Moscow is seeking to grow its market share in Southeast Asia and Latin America especially . Moscow is looking to expand its business in the region .
 ROE increasingly has been offering commercial credit for arms transactions, especially to countries in Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa that cannot afford to purchase expensive equipment .
 The Internet Agenstvo Federalnykh Rassledovaniy, 6 Nov 2006, www.apn.ru/publications/print1253.htm .
 The author of the book, “Hard Lessons,’s ‘Hard Lessons’ was released in December 2009 . The book was published in 2009 .
 Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 30 Dec 2009, www.Ng.ru/ nvo/2009-1 2-30_genshtab.html .
 Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye, 15 Aug 2008, www.nvo.ng.ru/wars/2008-0815/8_ossetia.html .
 Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 22 Dec 2015, www.rg. ru/2015/12/22/patrushev-site.html. http://://www.r.gazeta.com/2015-12-15/12-22/Patrushe
 Russian Federation Security Council Website, 12 May 2009, www.scrf.gov.ru. Russia.com .
 The Moscow Times, 19 Aug. 2016, themoscowtimes/articles/experts-proclaim-lost-decade-for-russias-stagnating-economy-55039 .
 Russian Academy of Science Institute of the Russian Language, 1999, 707.707 .
 Chernyye Dyry V Rossisykom Zakondatelstve, 1 Oct 2007, www.K-press.ru/bh.com .
 The Untold Story of the Cold War Arms Race and its Dangerous Aftermath are the two best known books of all time .
 Russian Air Defenses will respond to the latest threats from the Skies .
 Armeyskiy Sbornik, monthly journal of the General Staff of the Russian Federation Armed Forces, 30 Sep 2005 .
 The Dictionary was the definitive General Staff Academy reference work on Russian military terminology at the time of publication . The Dictionary is the most comprehensive reference work in the world .
 Argumenty i Fakty, 4 Jun 2015, www.aif.ru/society/army/vdv-v_v-blizhayshie_ gody_voydut_v_sostav_voysk_bystrogo
 Topol-M, online missile guide, 2 Nov 2014, www.russianspaceweb.com/topolm.com.html .
 A Project of the George C Marshall and Claremont Institutes, missilethreat.com is a missile threat.com .
Jane’s Aero-Enginesm, Aero-engines Turbofan, Russian Federation, 4 May 16 . Jane’'s Aero- Enginesm is the latest in a long line of Russian aircrafts .