 Needs a full overhaul due to new sanctions in February 2022 . Previous list was outdated already. Needs full overhaul.
 International sanctions have been imposed during the Russo-Ukrainian War . Russia and Crimea have been subject to sanctions following the Russian invasion .
 The sanctions were imposed by the United States, the European Union and other countries and international organisations against individuals, businesses and officials from Russia and Ukraine . The U.S. imposed the sanctions against individuals and businesses from Russia, Ukraine .
 Russia responded with a total ban on food imports from Australia, Canada, Norway, the U.S. and the European Union . Russia also responded with sanctions against a number of countries .
 The United States, the United Kingdom, the European Union and Australia are the top five countries in the U.S.
 The European Union, United States, and Canada imposed an initial round of sanctions on 17 March 2014 . By Chechnya, against United States and EU institutions' leaders, against U.S. and EU leaders .
 Albania, Iceland and Montenegro announced on 11 April that they would align themselves to the sanctions . Albania,Iceland, Montenegro and Albania will align themselves with sanctions .
 The United States expanded its sanctions on 28 April to include 17 Russian companies . Japan, Canada, Australia, and Canada also took similar actions soon thereafter .
 The EU also joined the sanctions of 28 April and instructed the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to suspend the signature of new financing operations in Russia .
 The EU again expanded its sanctions repeatedly over the following months . The EU has been expanding its sanctions on the EU again in the past year .
 The European Union and Switzerland add five individuals to their sanctions lists for organising the March 2018 Russia presidential elections in Crimea and Sevastopol . New Zealand imposed "largely symbolic" sanctions in May 2014 .
 The U.S. expanded its sanctions several times, including in December 2015 and April 2018 . The United States expanded its penalties several times.
 International sanctions during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine were imposed during the invasion . This section is empty .
 Crimea Aleksei Chaly Chief of the executive committee of the Sevastopol City Council Russia Sergey Chemezov CEO of Rostec Russia Andrey Vladimirovich Cherezov Deputy Minister of Energy for Russia Federation in the Department of Operational Control and Management for Electric
 Former President of the effectively defunct Federal State of Novorossiya asked Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine . Valery Kaurov was the former president of the state's effectively defunct FTSN .
 Russia Suleiman Kerimov Russian businessman Ukraine Hennadiy Kernes Mayor of Kharkiv Ukraine Ravil Khalikov First Deputy Prime Minister and previous Prosecutor General of the unrecognized Donetsk People's Republic Ukraine Alexander Khodakovsky Minister of Security of the Donetsk people's Republic
 Russia Andrey Kovalenko represents Crimea and on Committee for Financial Markets Russia Vladimir Kozhin Head of Administration under the President of the Russian Federation Ukraine Nikolai Kozitsyn Commander of Cossack forces .
 Russia Alexey Milchakov, also known as Fritz Commander of the 'Rusich' unit, an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia Sergey Mironov Leader of the Russian Parliament faction A Just Russia Russia Yelena Mizulina . Deputy Prime Minister of Crimea Georgiy Muradov Deputy PM of Crimea .
 Ukraine Aleksandr Yurevich Petukhov Chairman of Sevastopol Electoral Commission during March 2018 elections . Andrei Pinchuk Former Minister for State Security of the Donetsk People's Republic Russia Vladimir Pligin Chairman of the State Duma Constitutional Law and Nation Building Committee Ukraine Igor
 Ukraine German Prokopiv Active leader of the ""Lugansk Guard" Russia Yurii Protsenko member of insurgent group near Slovyansk Ukraine Mykola Prysyazhnyuk Former Minister of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine Artem Pshon
 Ukraine Yuriy Sivokonenko is a member of the Parliament of the unrecognized Donetsk People's Republic . He works in the Union of veterans of the Donbass Berkut .
 Russia Russian Agricultural Bank aka Rosselkhozbank State-owned agricultural bank . The bank provided "material support" to Russian officials .
 Financial transactions are heavily restricted by U.S. Treasury Russia RusHydro Russian hydroelectric company . The company is one of Russia's largest energy producers .
 Financial transactions are heavily restricted by the U.S. Treasury Russia Sovcomflot Russia's largest maritime and freight shipping company . The company is the largest shipping company in Russia .
 Russia VO Technopromexport, both OOO and OAO Company supplying support for independent electrical power supply in Crimea Russia Interautomatika Company . The company allegedly sanctioned in order to prevent Russian state company Gazprom from dealing with or acquiring it .
 Ukrainian government says she has repaid government funds that had been allegedly misappropriated . Ukrainian government: She has since repaid the funds .
 The list is said to include eight Swedes, as well as two MPs and two MEPs from the Netherlands . The list also includes two MPs from the Dutch and two MPs.
 Finland's national broadcaster Yle published a leaked German version of the list . In winter 2014/15, three politicians from Lithuania, Latvia, and Poland, were blocked from entering Russia .
 Russia's foreign ministry says it has imposed sanctions on United States President Joe Biden and 12 other U.S. officials . On March 15, 2022, Russia says it will impose sanctions on Biden and other officials .
 Russia has imposed personal sanctions on 61 U.S. officials . Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen and Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm are among those targeted .
 Moscow is set to bar entry permissions for 26 nationals of Canada in response to the country’s earlier announced measures . The Russian Foreign Ministry said on May 21, 2022 .
Russia imposes an entry ban for 9 Icelandics, 16 Norwegians, 3 Greenlanders and 3 Faroe Islanders in retaliation for their joining the European Union Sanctions . Russia has imposed sanctions on 49 UK citizens, including journalists, defence officials and arms industry executives .
 The Russian government has approved a list of legal entities, which are subject to retaliatory sanctions . They include Prime Minister Kishida Fumio, Foreign Minister Hayashi Yoshimasa and other senior lawmakers .
 The relevant resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers was published on the official portal of legal information on May 11, 2022 .
 The list includes 31 companies from Germany, France and other European countries, as well as from the USA and Singapore . The list also includes 31 firms from Germany and France .
 In particular, it includes former European subsidiaries of Gazprom, traders and operators of underground gas storage facilities .
 Russian authorities will not be able to conclude transactions with sanctioned entities under their control . In particular, legal entities and citizens will not have to complete transactions .
 These bans were earlier established by a decree of Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The resolution sets additional criteria for transactions that are prohibited from being performed with companies from the sanctions list . The resolution also sets additional requirements for transactions prohibited from performing with companies .
 transactions concluded in favor of sanctioned persons, or providing for the making of payments, transactions with securities with the participation of such companies . The transactions involve the entry of ships owned or chartered by sanctioned persons into the Russian ports .
 The resolution appoints the Russian Finance Ministry responsible for sending proposals to the Cabinet of Ministers . It also gives temporary permits for certain transactions with persons under sanctions to be granted .
 The document comes into force from the date of its official publication . The document was published in 2009 .
 Terry Manion General Manager and Vice President of Raytheon Canada Mike Mueller President and CEO of Aerospace Industries Association of Canada John Ossowski Head of the Canada Border Services Agency Craig Baines Commander of the Canadian Navy . Vice Admiral Jocelyn Paul Commander of Canadian Land Force, Vice Admiral
 Edmund Clark Former president and CEO of TD Bank Group Andrew Coates Manager at Lockheed Martin Canada James D Irving CEO of Irving Shipbuilding Inc. Edmund Clark was former president andCEO of TD bank Group .
 The people on the list have been banned from entering the Chechen Republic . They had all bank accounts frozen on 27 July 2014 .
 The copyright holder of this document allows anyone to use it for any purpose, provided that the copyright holder is properly attributed .
 Redistribution, derivative work, commercial use, and all other uses are permitted . All other uses, including commercial use.
 Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The Department of foreign affairs and Trade is in charge of the department .
 Action Targets Eight Ukrainian Separatists, a Russian Pro-Separatist Organization and Three of its Leaders, a Crimean Bank, and Three Former Yanukovych Officials .
 Ottawa announced travel bans on the chair of the Sevastopol Electoral Commission, Valery Medvedev, and head of the Crimean Electoral Commission Mikhail Malyshev . Economic sanctions on Crimean oil and gas company Chornomornaftogaz.
 Swiss authorities have frozen some CHF5.75 billion of sanctioned Russian oligarch assets . The total is expected to rise as the European Union announces further measures .