 The Ukrainian Parliament has imposed a 30-day period of martial law . It refrained from taking even during the height of conflict with Russia-backed separatists in the east and Crimea .
 The motion, made by President Petro Poroshenko, was in response to the Russian navy intercepting and firing on three Ukrainian ships off the coast of Crimea .
 conflict raises fears of increased violence in the eastern Donbass region . After years of conflict, the region is essentially controlled by pockets of separatists and pro-Russia insurgents .
 Sunday’s incident took place in the Kerch Strait, a narrow passage from the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov .
 The Sea of Azov is itself shared by Russia and Ukraine . The three Ukrainian ships were reportedly sailing from one Ukrainian port in the Black Sea, around Crimea, to another Ukrainian port .
 Russia blocked off the ships’ passage underneath a bridge with a long oil tanker . Ukrainian intelligence says Russia opened fire on the three ships with fighter jets .
 The Russian navy intercepted the ships and arrested the 24 sailors on board . Some of the sailors were hospitalized for injuries sustained during the attack .
 Russia has denied accusations that the attack was a deliberate provocation . The ships did not get the necessary permission to cross through the strait, Russia says .
 Ukraine says that according to international maritime rules, it needs no such permission . Ukraine says it needs to be given permission to use the sea .
 Ukraine also confirmed Russian claims that there were members of its SBU intelligence agency on board the three ships . Ukraine says that officers were conducting routine counterintelligence operations against Russian spying .
 The Ukrainian president has declared martial law in ten of the country's regions still under his control . He is fending off accusations by Russia of manufacturing a crisis for political gain .
 Poroshenko is increasingly unpopular and in the midst of a difficult campaign for reelection in March . He took power after the ouster of the former, pro-Russia president Viktor Yanukovych .
 Martial law will only affect those regions, Poroshenko says . He says he has determined to be the potential “frontlines of a Russian attack.
 The framework of martial law in Ukraine, however, provides for the widespread reorganization of society towards defense .
 Able-bodied citizens can be directed to work in defense facilities, group political activity can be suspended . Private property can be confiscated, soldiers or internally displaced people can be forcibly quartered in civilian homes . Foreign nationals from hostile countries can be detained .
 Ukraine's president has promised to respect the rights of Ukrainian citizens . So far, none of these more radical measures have been activated .
 The European Union releases a similar statement condemning Russian actions . It says the events are a demonstration of instability and tensions are bound to rise .
 The EU would not recognize the Russian annexation of Crimea, illegal under international law . The statement went on to insist that the EU wouldn't recognize the Crimea annexation .
 Russian intelligence agency FSB released video of three sailors. Three of the captured sailors admit to having trespassed across the border .
 The Ukrainian government says that they were speaking under threat of torture . The government says they are speaking under threats of torture.
 In the video, one of the sailors is obviously reading from a teleprompter .
 The incident in the Kerch Strait is only the most dramatic in series of events escalating tensions in the region .
 Eastern Ukraine has been in a seemingly endless cycle of broken ceasefires between the Ukrainian military and separatist forces . The fighting has simmered over the last three years with separatists establishing a strong foothold in the eastern Donbass region .
 In late August, the head of the so-called “Donetsk People’s Republic,’ was assassinated in an explosion at a cafe .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin blamed the killing on the Ukrainian government . Putin speculated it was likely the result of separatist infighting if not a direct order from Moscow .
 Russia denies the extent of its involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine . Despite overwhelming evidence that it has sent tens of thousands of troops to the regions .
 It is possible to read implicit threats in such examples of forced naivete among Russian officials . It is also possible to reading implicit threats to Russian officials.
 The primary concern at this stage is that such incidents will precede large-scale violence, instigated by Russia, of or exceeding that which began in 2014 . Russia has been involved in a series of violent incidents since then .
 The Ukrainian government has refused to sit passively as Russia annexes even more of its territory in the east . A return to outright war in Ukraine is much more likely than whatever permanent end European and American officials can conjure with talk of de-escalation .