 This paper analyses the Crimean crisis in the light of the principles of contemporary international law . The paper also analyses the Russian doctrine of international law, as well as the Crimea crisis .
 The arguments put forward by Russia are untenable and in contradiction with the previous Russian doctrinal approaches to self-determination and territorial integrity .
 Crimea's annexation by Russia in 2014 marks a serious crisis of contemporary international law and of the world security system . Crimea’s annexation by the Russian government in 2014 is the first time Crimea has been annexed .
 In fact, the annexation has challenged the system of contemporary international law .
Before 1991, Ukraine was a state and Crimea formed an integral part of its territory . Before 1991, the USSR was a subject of international law .
 Crimea's status as part of Ukraine’s territory should have been respected from the perspective of international law . In other words, even before the USSR's disintegration, Crimea’S disintegration.
From the outset it should be recalled that the USSR by its legal nature was a subject of international law . The USSR was an international law subject of the USSR's legal nature .
 The USSR was a sovereign state and subject of international law but also its component Soviet republics had the same legal nature . This meant that not only was the USSR a sovereignState and subject to international law. This meant the USSR was the subject of International law .
 According to the UN Charter, membership is only open to sovereign states .
 Article 80 of the Constitution envisaged the right of the 1 Kurs mezhdunarodnogo prava . Article 80 envisages the right to the 1Kurs mezdunrarodNogo pava .
 Ukraine was a sovereign state before the USSR was created . The USSR was a state during its existence, and continued its existence as a sovereignState after the USSR's dissolution .
 The Ukrainian SSR was party to a number of international treaties and member of some international organizations . The SSR is part of the Ukrainian National Socialist Party .
 It may be argued that Ukraine’s status as a sovereign state under the USSR had formal, rather than real character . It may also be argued the right to withdraw from the USSR, as well as its constitutional right, was formal, instead of real character.
 Ukraine would not have been legally able to withdraw from the USSR in 1991 and gain actual political independence . Without this status and constitutional right, Ukraine would have been able to pull out of the USSR .
 Under the laws of international treaties, Ukraine had the right to withdraw from that treaty . Under the law of international treaty, Ukraine could withdraw from the treaty .
 Russia's president used the expression “Khrushchev’s gift to Ukraine” as if it was a unilateral ungrounded move, a sort of a whim of the Soviet leader .
 Russia's and Crimea's population allegedly did not consent to the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine . It was also argued that Russia’s and Crimea’'s population did not agree to the move .
 Crimea was transferred to Ukraine in accordance with the Soviet constitutional law of that time . However, Crimea was moved to Ukraine by the Soviet law of the time .
 In effect, this meant Russia’s consent to Crimea becoming part of Ukraine . This meant Russia's consent to Ukraine being part of Crimea .
 The change of Art. of the Constitution of the RSFSR and the removal of the Crimean oblast provides evidence for Russia’s consent to the transfer .
 Russia's consent to transfer Crimea to Ukraine may be considered an international agreement . Under the law of international treaties, Russia’s consent to move Crimea to Ukrainian territory may be seen as an agreement .
 The legal status of Crimea as an integral part of Ukraine’s territory was then enshrined in the Constitution of the Ukrainian SSR of 1978 . Crimea was then part of the Ukraine's territory.
 Russia has always officially supported Ukraine’s territorial integrity . Russia has also supported Ukraine's territorial integrity.
 54% of the valid votes were in favour of Ukraine’s independence . It must also be taken into consideration that in the December referendum of 1991, held on the issue of Ukraine's proclamation of independence, 54% were in support .
After the USSR’s dissolution within the framework of the Commonwealth of Independent States, a number of agreements were concluded .
 The Russian Supreme Soviet tried to declare Sevastopol a Russian city on 9.7.1993 . The Supreme Soviet attempted to declare the city a city in 1993 .
 The UN Security Council denounced the declaration . Both parties to the treaty had consented to the territorial integrity of each other within their current borders .
 In a letter dated 19.7.1993 addressed to the President of the Security Council, the representative of the Russian Federation transmitted the text of a statement . The statement was issued on 11 July by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
 The statement contended that the resolution diverged from the policy followed by the President and the Government of the Russian Federation in Ukraine, in Crimea and in Sevastopol .
 The Russian Federation would 6. It is worth noting that the right to self-determination figures in this Agreement as an inalienable right of the CIS member states, rather than peoples as such .
 That is why they were looking for reliable legal guarantees aimed at the prevention of any such territorial claims . That's why they wanted reliable legal guarantee.
 Ukraine has also concluded a number of international agreements with Russia on the status of the Black Sea fleet . The agreements presupposed respect for Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
 Ukraine's leadership asked for reliable guarantees of its territorial integrity, sovereignty and security . Ukraine was asked to abandon its nuclear arsenal in the territory of Ukraine .
 The presidents of Russia and the United States had officially informed the then Ukrainian president L Kravchuk that they were ready to provide Ukraine with guarantees of its security .
 Russia and the US would confirm their obligation to the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclear state . Russia would respect the independence and sovereignty of the state-participants in the CSCE .
 Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council, Supplement 1993-1995, Vol. Reper toire of The Security Council . Vol.
 In April 1997, a round-table discussion was organized by the Moscow Association of International Law . It is interesting to note that in April 1997 a round table discussion was held .
Only a few participants claimed that the transfer of Crimea did not pertain to the city of Sevastopol . The city had allegedly obtained the status of “a city of Russian republican subordination” by virtue of a decree in 1948 .
 If Sevastopol was leased from Ukraine, it would signify “the final surrender of Russian pretensions’s’, Khlestov says .
According to the Constitution of Ukraine of 1978 Sevastopol was a city of “republican subordination’s. That means a Ukrainian, not Russian city .
 The Treaty conclusively guaranteed that Russia lost any legal opportunity to challenge the territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Kolodkin was the then president of the Russian Association of International Law . He was also the head of the Russia Association of international Law .
 Russia has violated principles of international law as expressed in the UN Charter, but also a whole range of international treaties and agreements concluded with the participation of Russia and Ukraine, as well as the UN Security Council's decision .
To put the matter simply, the principle of estoppel obliges states not to contradict themselves . To put the issue simply, to put the principle simply, is the principle.
 The USSR displayed obvious inconsistency in territorial issues after the USSR’s demise .
 During the USSR several territorial transfers took place, including transfers of certain historical Ukrainian territories to Russia .
 Ukraine transferred part of its territories bordering with Smolensk, Kursk, Belgorod and Voronezh oblasts to Russia . For example, Ukraine transferred parts of its territory bordering Russia to Russia.
 In 1924, the big city Taganrog with the surrounding area, inhabited predominantly by Ukrainian population, was transferred to the Russian Rostov oblast . The city was moved to Rostov in 1924 .
 The Shakhtin area in Donbas and Starodubschyna were also transferred to Russia . The Shakhtarin area was also moved to Russia.
 Under the USSR, part of Ukraine’s territory was also transferred to Moldavia .
 Ukraine has never raised any territorial claims to Russia or to any other post-Soviet state after the USSR’s dissolution . Despite these territorial changes, Ukraine, unlike Russia, has never made territorial claims .
 To illustrate Russia’s inconsistency and violation of the principle of estoppel the case of Estonia is also instructive . To illustrate the case, Russia's inconsistency is instructive.
After the incorporation of Estonia into the USSR a considerable part of Estonia's territory was transferred to Russia on the basis of the then existing Soviet legislative acts .
 These territorial changes were legitimate according to the official Soviet position . They were unanimously approved by the competent Supreme Soviets .
After regaining its independence, the Parliament of Estonia declared these decisions null and void . Estonia's Parliament declared the decisions null, void and void.
 Estonia was annexed by the USSR in violation of international law, it argued . It argued that Estonia was annexed to the USSR by the Soviet Union . Estonia is now in the middle of the world's most populous region .
 Russia claimed that the border had to remain as it was in 1991 . Estonia's independence was declared on 24.8.8 1991 .
 Estonia's insistence on the Tartu frontiers was considered to be contradictory to the principles of the CSCE Final Act and to threaten the stability of the Baltic region . Estonia’s insistence on Tartufrontiers was deemed to be contrary to the principle of the
 Russia behaves inconsistently and is in breach of the principle of estoppel. As we can see from this case, Russia behaved inconsistently, says the author .
On the one hand, it insists on the border with Estonia from 24.8.1991, on the other hand, that its border with Ukraine, including Crimea, from the same date should remain .
 Russia's international legal position on the issue of relationship between the right to self-determination and the princi20 See T Langstrom .
 The Russian Constitutional Court issued a decree in the case concerning the constitutionality of certain edicts of the president and a decree of the federal government issued for the regulation of the conflict in Chechnya .
 The Constitutional Court had also made reference to the UN Friendly Relations Declaration of 1970 .
 referendum concerning future status of the republic was held in accordance with the constitution . It dealt with the question whether certain legislative acts of the Republic of Tatarstan, including a referendum, were in accordance to the constitution.
 The Tatarstan decree on holding a referendum was found to be in contravention with Russia’s constitution and thus ineffective .
 Tiunov argues in his textbook on international law that in international law the right to selfdetermination is limited by the principle of territorial integrity . He argues in the textbook that in International law, selfdetermination can be limited by principle of territory integrity .
Self-determination of nations should not take place at the expense of other nations living in the same territory, Blischenko says . If this happens, it should be qualified as an international crime and the issue of international responsibility should be raised, he says .
 Chernichenko is of the opinion that this ‘right’ is not a necessary element of the right to self-determination .
 The legality of secession depends on the consent of the state from which secession shall take place . By contrast, the legality of a state can only be decided by the state's consent .
 Starye i novye teoreticheskie problemy, Izdatel’stvo “NIMP’s’S, Moskva 1999, 186, is a Russian language .
 It is argued that “political, nationalistic, separatist, criminal and other factors often become a driving force for the use of this principle for selfish goals .
 All peoples and states in the contemporary world are mutually intertwined . All people and states are in the same way, according to the UN .
 National interests of one people should not be realized at the expense of the violation and diminishing of the legal rights and interests of other peoples, says the author . "National interests of a person should be realized"
 In Ostroukhov’s view “external self-determination’, ‘internal self- determination’ can be legal only when authorities of a state make “ internal self-etermination’ impossible, i.e. In Ostrikhov's view
 The most important aspect in the principle of self-determination of peoples is to secure conditions for its free development in any form which is chosen by the people .
 Moiseev, Suverenitet gosudarstva v mezhdunarodnom prave, Vostok-Zapad, Moskva 2009, 50, is the first time the two have been together .
There are relatively few legal arguments aimed at the justification of Russia's annexation of Crimea . Russia's doctrine of international law after Crimea’s annexation is not considered a legal justification .
 The Russian Association of International Law addressed to the Executive Council of the Association of international Law . The letter was written in an open letter by the Russian association of international law . It was addressed to an executive council on Crimea annexation by Ukraine in 1991 .
 The Crimea remained in the same state, namely in the USSR with a capital in Moscow, which was at the same time the capital of Russia . The Crimea was in Russia at the time of the Crimea's independence .
 An annexation means the forcible acquisition of a state’s territory by another state . By definition, an annexation is an annexation by a state .
 The transfer of Crimea to Ukraine from Russia was a transfer of the territory of one sovereign state to another . Under the USSR’s Constitution, both Soviet republics were sovereign states .
 Ukraine was one of its founding members of the UN . The Ukrainian statehood was proved by its membership in the UN as a founding member .
 Ukraine has always supported Ukraine's territorial integrity and Crimea's status as part of Ukraine’s territory .
 Russia's Arguments Aimed at the Justification of Crimea’s Annexation, Russia has put forward a whole range of arguments .
 Some of the arguments were presented in the addresses, speeches and interviews of Russia’s president, V Putin .
 Russian international lawyers tend to be apologetic rather than critical with respect to Putin’s argumentation .
 Russian lawyers are inclined to put at the centre of their analyses of Ukraine's internal politics . The peculiar feature of Russian legal argumentation is that there is not enough international legal argument.
 When Ukraine seceded from the USSR it did exactly the same thing, almost word for word. Incidentally, I would like to remind you that.
 Crimea never had such a right under either the USSR's Constitution or the Ukrainian SSR’s Constitution . Ukraine never had a right to freely withdraw from the USSR .
 Ukraine had the right to withdraw from the Union Treaty of 1922 on the basis of which the USSR was created in accordance with the law of international treaties . Ukraine also had theright to withdraw.
 Crimea has never been considered a separate people, neither by Ukraine nor by Russia . The population of Crimea has not been considered separate by Ukraine or Russia .
 The Crimean population is an integral part of the people of Ukraine which has the right to self-determination as a totality . Legally, the Crimean people are an integral parts of the Ukraine which have the right of self- determination .
 Chernichenko, part of the population of one state, is of the same ethnicity . The majority of population of other state does not have the right to self-determination . The population of the one state is of same ethnicity.
 The right to self-determination, as Russian doctrine of international law and the Russian Constitutional Court maintain, does not include the right to secede from the existing state .
 The right to self-determination may not undermine the territorial integrity of an existing state . The right of self- determination may not be undermined by the current state .
 Fourth, Ukraine's Constitution does not allow secession and Ukraine’s criminal law makes it a crime to undermine the territorial integrity of the state .
 Fifth, Russia and Ukraine have always viewed attempts to secede as dangerous separatism . It should be combated by national and international legal means .
 Sixth, the so-called “referendum in Crimea was unconstitutional according to the Ukrainian constitution45 . It was nothing but a sham, according to Ukrainian constitution 45 .
 The “referendum’s holding ostensibly violates the principles of the non-use of force in international relations and non-interference with internal affairs . This fact alone is enough to not recognize the ‘refere referendum’, says the author .
 It recognizes that the authority must lie in the hands of democratically elected organs, representing the local inhabitants . Also recognizes that authority must be held by democratically elected bodies .
 The possibility of the free expression of will in a referendum depends upon the fulfilment of these requirements . The possibility is that a referendum can be held in the future .
 Volovova, Plebistsit v mezhdunarodnye otnoshenia, “MezhdUNarodnom prave,’s’. ‘MezhDunarodsi’ is a Russian word for �
 Professor Volovova says voting in absence of necessary conditions is illegal . The results are only legally valid when the absolute majority of the citizens, meeting the requirements of the law, took part in it .
 The “referendum in Crimea did not meet all these requirements put forward in the Russian doctrine of international law. As we can see, the “Referendum’s” in Crimea didn’t meet these requirements, the author says .
 Russian authors underline that the obligations of states under this principle include non-interference with issues such as governance, the holding of referenda and plebiscites .
 Russian authors maintain that under contemporary international law any territorial changes are only legal with the consent of the states involved .
 The international community as represented by the UN, the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe did not recognize the legality of this “referendum’s’ legality . It effectively declared it null and void .
 In fact, this “referendum was nothing but a mockery of democracy and the right to self-determination, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Bekyashev, Mezhdunarodnoe publichnoe pravo, Uchebnik, Prospekt, Moskva 2005, 84, is the second most popular pub in Russia .
 In February 2014 an illegal coup d’état had taken place, 55 as a result of which the Ukrainian state collapsed and the Crimean population, in fear of a violation of its rights, acquired the right to secede from Ukraine .
 The argument of the coup d’état was also used by the Association of Lawyers of Russian Federation in its statement . The statement was issued on 18.3.2014 .
 There is no doubt that the cause of the tragic events in Ukraine was the forceful change of government in Kiev that occurred outside the constitutional framework . The Maidan movement largely comprise the current government in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian President proclaimed by new, self-appointed leaders of Ukraine does not fit in any legal framework . Removal from office of Ukrainian President is not legal, according to new law .
 The Association is trying to play the role of the Ukrainian Constitutional Court with this statement . The Association says the change of government in Kiev “occurred outside the constitutional framework”
 The idea of the Russian Association of Lawyers “to proceed from a general principle of law, Ex injuria non oritur jus’ seems out of place . Under the principle of sovereign equality of states it is up to the Ukrainian legal system rather than Russia or the Russian
 Russia's president B Yeltsin committed a coup d’état and crushed the Russian parliament in 1993 . Ukraine did not interfere in the internal affairs of Russia and officially refrained from commenting on the character of these events .
 A coup d’état as such is not a violation of international law and it is a matter of national law, not international law, says David Cameron .
 The order established by revolution or coup d’état has to be considered as a modification of the old order, not as a new order . If this order is valid for the same territory, it should be considered a modification .
 The government brought into permanent power in an unconstitutional way is according to international law . The legitimate government of the state whose international identity is not affected by these events is not .
According to international law, victorious revolutions or successful coups d’état are to be interpreted as procedures by which a national legal order can be changed . This is according to International law .
Both events are viewed in the light of international law, law-creating facts . Both events are seen as law-created facts, and are viewed by law-creator .
 It could be argued that for Russian officials it was merely part of a political rhetoric without legal consequences . It could even be argued it was just part of the political rhetoric.
 International law does not intervene into internal struggles, which lead to a change of government . 59 H Kelsen, Principles of International Law, 1966, 387.
 The government, which effectively and independently exercises power, is considered to be the representative of a state in international relations . That is why the government is considered a representative of an international relations.
 Russia should have recognized the new government as the representative of Ukraine, says Vladimir Putin . V Yanukovych lost effective control over Ukraine and escaped abroad, says Putin .
 It cannot be argued that as a result of a “coup d’état’ or ‘revolution’ Ukraine ceased its existence as a state, even temporarily .
 The words of professor Moiseev are also important because they imply that there is only one people in Ukraine which is the source of Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 Ukrainian people taken together are the true and only subject of the right to self-determination . Ukrainian people are also subject of right toSelf-determination, according to the law .
 Moiseev, O nekotorykh mezhdunarodno-pravovykh pozitsiyakh po krymskomu voprosu, Vestnik Diplomaticheskoi akademii MID Rossii .
 I have personally been an advocate of acting in compliance with international law . I have always been a supporter of international law. I have also been a advocate for acting in Compliance with International law .
President Obama has appealed to use the Armed Forces to protect the people with whom we have close historical, cultural and economic ties . He says this will be a legitimate decision in full compliance with both general norms of international law .
 Moiseev published in “Nezavisimaia Gazeta’s’ ‘Carte-Blanche’ in 2013 under the telling title “Carte Blanche.’
 When V Yanukovych was in power, Russia had never raised the issue of any violations of human rights in Crimea, at least on the official level . It is interesting to note that when he was in office, Russia hadn't raised the issues .
Moiseev, Kart-Blansh, Resheniyam Soveta Bezopasnosti OON net al’ternativy. Moiseev: Moisev, Kart. Blansh: Reshenyam Sovesta Be
 The UN, the Council of Europe, the European Convention on Human Rights and OSCE are among those that should have turned to them . In other words, had there been any signs of the violation of human rights in Crimea, Russia, should have taken action .
 The very fact that Russia made no serious attempt to turn to these organizations is very telling . Russia made a very serious attempt. The Russian government has not made any serious attempts to change its approach .
 There was no violation of human rights in Crimea on the part of Ukrainian authorities, says the U.S. government .
 The violations started only after Russia invaded and annexed Crimea, according to the report .
Russian occupation authorities in Crimea are now violations of the rights of Crimean Tatars by the Russian occupation authorities . Of special concern to the international community are now violating rights of Tatars in Crimea .
 Russia also justifies its actions by reference to the concept of “intervention by invitation’s’e. The appeal of Ukraine's president V Yanukovych to the Russian president to use force within Ukraine.
 Yanukovych had already left the territory of Ukraine and escaped to Russia . It is noteworthy that by the time of that appeal, Yanukovych had left the country .
 In the light of Ukrainian criminal law, such an “appeal’s” could be viewed as high treason . In Ukraine, such a "appeal" could be seen as a high treason.
 The Russian doctrine of international law has always viewed “intervention by invitation by invitation with great suspicion’s great suspicion . The doctrine of International Law has always been viewed by Russia as ‘intervention’
 The Russian doctrine of international law has always been critical of interventions and interferences into internal affairs of states . The principle of non-interference with internal Affairs of states lies in its emphasis upon the principle.
 The important value of the formula is its strict and categorical character . The importantvalue of this formula is the strict and categorical character.
 Crimea’s annexation by Russia is an obvious and flagrant violation of a whole range of norms and principles of international law . The annexation began with the UN Charter and ended with bilateral international treaties concluded between Russia and Ukraine .
 This annexation stands in sharp contrast to the Russian doctrine of international law with respect to such principles as territorial integrity and self-determination .
 The arguments were put forward by Russian politicians and legal scholars in an attempt to justify Russia’s annexation . The arguments do not look convincing in the light of the whole previous legal argumentation of Russia .