 There may now be irreparable differences between the East and West portions of Ukraine . After having fallen prey to Western machinations of destabilization and civil war, it is apparent that there is now a difference .
 The DPR and LPR are showing signs of going their separate ways and breaking away from West Ukraine in a more final fashion . With the East of Ukraine more in line with Russia and the West, the West more inline with Western Europe .
 Crimea voted to reunite with Russia after a long separation . Many suspected the DPR and LPR would follow suit .
 geopolitical and diplomatic concerns on the part of Russia prevented such a vote from ever solidifying a “reunification’ with Russia .
 A vote to reunify with Russia in the same fashion as Crimea would have caused a diplomatic emergency between Russia and the warmongering West .
 East Ukraine is making moves toward becoming its own country even without formal recognition . After time passed and the impasse between East and West Ukraine has become more pronounced .
 East Ukraine may very well become their own nation by default and by natural progression of events . East Ukraine – DPR and LPR – may verywell become their Own nation bydefault .
 Eastern Ukraine has, for at least a year, begun working on setting up a governmental system . Eastern Ukraine is working on a political framework, the seizing of banks, and the operation of various industries .
 Greater centralized military structure, as necessitated by the current conflict, has also become a reality .
 Donbass is more so on its way to becoming its own independent country as a result of the actions of the fascists of East Ukraine than perhaps it would have been if simple neutrality and peace would be observed by Kiev .
 Every act of force by Kiev has served to push Donbass further and further away from Ukraine and more toward independence .
 The acts of force are also pushing Donbass toward greater cooperation with Russia . Western forces did not simply roll over separatists and establish NATO bases on Russia’s border in 2014 .
 Russia will recognize all “administrative acts’ coming from the People’s Republics of Donetsk and Lugansk . In February, President Vladimir Putin announced that Russia would be recognizing all ‘administrative act” coming from Donetsk, Lugansk. The
 These administrative acts include the issuance of IDs, passports, and other personal documents . These acts include issuing passports, IDs, and passports .
 The announcement is obviously a step in that direction . It is not an official recognition of the DPR/LPR governments .
 East Ukraine has been under what amounts to an economic blockade since early in the conflict which began in 2014 . The conflict began in the Ukraine in 2014 and has been ongoing since then .
 Kiev stepped up pressure recently by allowing fascist activists from preventing coal produced in West Ukraine from entering East Ukraine . Eastern communities from a vital source of income .
Donbass is now under a full economic and transportation blockade . Russia has repeatedly called for an end to the blockade . Donbass is under an economic and transport blockade .
 On March 1, the Donbass Republics essentially nationalized over 40 types of “enterprises’ or industries . The Donbass republics essentiallyNationalized over40 types of "enterprises" or industries.
 This essentially broke up much of the economic power wielded by Ukrainian oligarchs . Rinat Akhmetov, Ukraine’s richest man, is Ukraine's richest man .
 The nationalization was inspired as a result of Kiev backing out of a deal that would have seen businesses seized pay taxes to Kiev . Kiev continued to pay pensions and other social benefits to residents of the Donbass Republics .
 Kiev eventually stopped paying pensions and froze bank accounts of Donbass residents . However, Kiev stopped paying those pensions .
 Donbass was presented with the impetus for seizing the enterprises as they were essentially funding the war against their own territory . The oligarch-owned businesses were allowed to pay taxes to Kiev .
 There were also concerns related to oligarchy as a concept . But, more acutely, oligarchical influence in the DPR and LPR itself by virtue of the financial influence held by the oligarchs .
 Donbass activists and representatives are claiming that the blockade is revealing tensions inside Western Ukraine . Poroshenko's government and the fascist forces continue to provoke hostilities .
 The blockade has been codified and legitimized by Kiev. Poroshenko’s government and the fascists on the ground appear to be on the same page now .
 separatist leader Alexander Zackharchenko: We aren't changing our position. We aren’t changing our positions, he says .
 The blockade was designed to boycott and break the backs of the people of Donbass . East Ukrainians will also be deprived of much-needed coal to heat themselves .
 Donbass has found another market for their coal – Russia – leaving Kiev literally in the cold to live with the consequences of their blockade .
 Donbass has shipped 90 wagon loads of coal to Russia . A Russian spokesman would neither confirm nor deny the claim .
 Kremlin spokesman would only say that Russia was attempting to “relieve the suffering of the people’ in Ukraine . Dmitry Peskov, spokesman for the Kremlin, says Russia is trying to "relieve" the suffering in Ukraine.
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman stated in early March that Ukraine was losing $73-147 million per month due to the trade blockade . He said the coal shortage is damaging the metallurgy industry and serving to further cripple the Ukrainian economy .
 Russia has called for an end to the blockade and labeled Kiev’s actions as standing in opposition to all common sense . Russia has also called for the end of the blockade .
 Kiev and the powers that back it have made a strategic miscalculation to say the least . But now that Donbass has found another trading partner, it appears that Kiev has found a new trading partner .
 Donbass is not frightened back into subservience, but it is being pushed further and further away both into the Russian orbit and into independence .