 Ukraine's resources could be substantially mitigated by control over Ukraine’s resources, according to the report .
 President Vladimir Putin's annexation of Crimea and control of large swathes of the Donbas region has left world leaders perplexed as to his motives in Ukraine .
 The territories were given to Ukraine in the 1920s by the Soviet government . These territories were taken by the Soviets in the 1930s .
 This paper provides a different perspective on the Russia-Ukraine conflict and I do not apologize for raising different issues that may frustrate even the most enduring reader . This paper gives a different view of the conflict, and I don't apologize.
 Russia’s leaders are willing to wage war to acquire control over Ukraine, says author . This paper contributes to the explanation of Russia's motives in Ukraine, he says .
 understanding why Russia attacks Ukraine remains unclear for two principle reasons . Regardless of the literature’s explanations, the literature's explanations remain unclear .
 scholars have not addressed Russia's underlying strategic resource gaps in terms of military industrial capability and human resources that are threats to Russia .
 scholars have not addressed how Russian control over Ukraine might close these resource gaps . Second, scholars haven't addressed how Russia could close theseresource gaps .
 Ukraine's resources can close or mitigate Russia's resource gaps and secure Russia’s survival . The resource dependency theory will be reviewed in the next section of this article .
Before proceeding to the theory, let us consider a parallel situation prior to the Second World War . However, before proceeding to a theory, we should consider a similar situation before the war .
Skoda munition works the second most important arsenal in Europe . Czechoslovakian population of ten million toilers and soldiers were added to Germany’s strength .
 Russia of the 13. million Russian-speaking Ukrainians, acquisition of Ukraine’s huge military industrial complex along with its huge stockpiles of Soviet era weapons, a military of 1. million including reserves . The overall population of around 42 million might potentially have a very similar effect in terms
 Russia's foreign policy in Ukraine is an alternative explanation to Russia’s foreign policy. The author uses the resource dependency theory to provide an alternative explanations .
 The resource dependence theory has been used to explain interstate advantages and politics . It has primarily an external focus .
Location predicts the geographical areas of interest to Russia .
 The central premise of this paper argues that President Putin's invasion of Ukraine is motivated by Russian Federation's need for critical resources from Ukraine to close Russia's resource gaps .
 The following two hypotheses constitute the resource dependency theory explanation of the Russia-Ukraine war .
 Russia’s gap in military industrial capability and human resources is a threat to Russia . Russia's gap in industrial capability is the biggest threat to the country .
Ukraine resources can fill or mitigate Russia’s resource gaps in military industrial capability and human resources . Ukraine resources can be used to mitigate Russia's resource gaps .
 The first criterion for selecting independent variables was that they must be a threat to Russia . Ukraine's resources can close or significantly mitigate Russia’s resource gaps . The first criteria for selecting the independent variables is that they are a threat.
 A reconnoitre study suggested that the two most critical resource gap threats to Russia were in the military industrial complex and human resources .
 The key premise here is that resource gaps are the most important explanatory variable in the equation . The main premise is that resources gaps are most important variables .
 Euromaidan revolution threatened Russia's control of Ukraine’s resources, author says . Russia was faced with a plausible loss of the resources to the European Union, he says .
 An EU control of Ukraine’s resources would deny them to Russia . When resources are properly developed by EU finance and technology they would be a direct strategic threat to Russia.
 Russian control of Ukraine's resources for its own use and strategic denial to the EU became the motive for the Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine .
 To establish validity, effort was made to triangulate the data by corroborating evidence from multiple sources of data on each phenomenon .
 Ukraine’s resources must fill or significantly mitigate the resource gap . Ukraine's resource gap variable must present a threat to Russia and Ukraine's resources need to fill or mitigate the gap .
 The findings suggest that the Russian Federation has existential resource gaps in military-industrial capability and human resources . The Russian Federation also has an existential resource gap in human resources, according to the findings .
Ukrainian firms produced more than 3000 components and complete armament systems for the Russian military . Prior to the war, Ukrainian firms produced over 3000 components.
 This includes the RM-36 intercontinental ballistic missiles designed by the Yuzhnoye Design Bureau and manufactured by a Yuzhmash industrial complex in Dnipropetrovsk . This also includes theRM-36 Intercontinental Ballistic missiles .
 The SS-18 Satan is the world’s most destructive intercontinental ballistic missile . It is armed with 10 independently targetable 750kt nuclear bombs or one 20 megaton nuclear bomb .
 The SS-18 Satan is a true doomsday weapon and poses an existential threat to Russia’s enemies . It is a real do Doomsday weapon.
 The JSC Khartron, Kharkov produces the guidance system for all SS-18 Satan ICBMs .
 Ukraine enterprises produce the guidance systems for the SS-25 mobile missile launchers and SS-19 silo based strategic missiles . The Kharkov region of Ukraine produces the missiles .
 The Ukrainian Yuzhmash designed the R-5M, the USSR’s first nuclear ballistic missile . The missile was the first Soviet nuclear missile .
 All tallied, critical Ukrainian components and their servicing constitute 80% of Russia’s strategic missiles forces . The Ukrainian military is responsible for most of Russia's strategic missiles .
 Russia has a strategic resource gap in missile technology . Russia’s long-term status as the preeminent nuclear power is at risk .
 Russia's missile industry is a survival issue for Russia, says Russia's defense minister . Russia is trying to close this resource gap by acquiring control over Ukraine’s missile industry .
By the late 1980s seventy five percent of Ukraine’s industrial capacity was used to manufacture Soviet weapons and components . The Russian navy was mostly built in Ukraine .
 The Mykolaiv oblast in southern Ukraine was the Soviet Union’s key ship building centre with its shipyards, shipturbine and gearbox factories . The MyKolaiv Oblast was the USSR's key shipbuilding centre .
 The Mykolaiv shipyards built most of the Soviet, now Russian, navy’s capital ships . The aircraft carrier Admiral Kuznetsov was launched in 1985 from Nikolayev South Shipyard .
 Russian navy has received some new locally built corvettes and frigates . Russian industry simply cannot produce large warships .
 Russia can mitigate this resource gap by taking control of the Ukrainian shipbuilding industry . This situation is a critical resource gap for Russia and its ability to project power outside its immediate boarders and Russia .
 Russian air force uses mostly air-to-air missiles produced in Ukraine . Russian fighters have auxiliary systems made in Ukraine, including the hydraulic system for Russia’s newest fighter the Su-34 .
 The Russian army transport aircraft and helicopters use Ukraine jet engines made in Antonov factory in Kyiv and Motor Sich factory in Zaporizhia .
 President Poroshenko placed a ban on military exports to Russia in 2015 . The ban stopped the delivery of Progress D-18t engines used in the production of the Russian AN-140, the tactical airlift aircraft .
 One half of the components of the AI222-25 engine manufactured by the ODK company near Moscow for the YaK130 trainer aircraft were made in Ukraine . The AN-70, medium military transport, was a joint Russian-Ukrainian venture .
 The Ukraine’s military industrial complex was for strategic reasons located in the eastern and southern part of the country . The Ukraine's military complex is for strategic purposes .
 After Ukraine's independence, much of the military industrial complexes were organized into one state owned enterprise called Ukroboronprom Ukrainian Defence Industry .
 Ukraine has many enterprises producing machinery and mills crucial to Russian military and industry . The heavy fighting around the city of Kramatorsk was basically over the control of NKMZ industrial complex .
 The Russian control of Crimea added 13 Ukrainian defence companies to Russia’s toll . 18 defence companies located in Luhansk and Donetsk are now in Russia's hands . Russia added 13 Ukraine defence companies.
 Little evidence is in existence of what Russia has done with the defence companies in the Donbass . One eyewitness accounts tells of a total evacuation to Russia of the manufacturing equipment of defence company manufacturing rifle magazines in Luhansk .
 Ukraine’s sanctions on Russia have limited but, not stopped, exports of defence components to Russia . Russia has instituted an import substitution program but, claims of its success needs to be viewed with caution .
 Russia instituted an import substitution program for helicopters and planned to use their own Klimov VK-2500 engine for all their helicopters . But only 30 engines were available for import substitution in 2015 .
 The Kimov-2500 engine was designed and first manufactured by Motor Sich company in Ukraine . It is one of the world best turboshafts .
 Putin’s ten-year plan for a massive rearmament of the Russian Federation military can not materialize due to critical resource gaps . The Russian Federation has not been able to duplicate its original and rare competence .
 The military industrial complex requires large highly educated pool of human resources . It will be analysed in the next section of the military complex . The military complex requires a pool of humans to be analysed .
 The Russian military industries have suffered a crisis in personnel because of a lack of critical skills and the Russian demographic trends . The military industry has been hit by a shortage of personnel and demographic trends.
 The Russian population is aging and only 21% of the population under 20 years of age . The age structure is a cause for concern .
 The declining and ageing population is a strategic resource gap that poses an existential threat to Russia . Russia's population is growing rapidly, according to experts .
 The Russian Federation's population of 45 million bridges the Russian Federation’s resource gap in human resources . President Putin must be addressed by President Putin .
 Ukraine's low wages and well-educated workforce has the potential for the EU to have on its borders a low-cost production centre rivalling China's labour costs and India’s service industry .
 The empirical findings support the two hypotheses based on the resource dependency theory approach and give legitimacy to the theory’s explanatory ability .
 Russian Federation has critical resource gaps in military-industrial capability and human resources . The Russian Federation is the largest country in the world .
 Ukraine's resources fill or significantly mitigate Russia’s resource gaps . Ukraine's resource gaps are significant, according to the Russian government .
 The Russian government actions in Crimea and Donbass corresponded to the theory that a government takes actions to secure resources critical to its existence .
 The domino effect of the scenarios discussed above is that Russia is likely to attempt to gain control of more geographical areas where Ukrainian resources are located . Russia is also likely to try to take control of areas where Ukraine resources are found .
 Ukraine districts east of the river Dnieper because of human resources and the location of main industrial complexes . The Ukraine districts are the Ukraine districts.
 The Black Sea coastal districts of interest to Russia are Crimea for its ports and the Mykolaiv and Odessa districts for their shipbuilding industries . Crimea is the Black Sea region of Russia's Crimea region .
 The capital Kiev is of interest to Russia because of the scientific institutions and industrial capacity located there . Also, the capital Kiev has a large number of scientific institutions, industrial capacity .
 The immediate outcome of Russia’s resources gaps was the annexation of Crimea and the war in the Donbass region where much of Ukraine's resources are located .
 The intermediate outcome is perhaps the ongoing Russian New Generation Warfare in Ukraine . Russia may attempt to get effective control of the resource rich areas mentioned above as the specific areas of interest to Russia .
 Russia’s war with Ukraine is to acquire military Jokull Johannesson industrial capability and human resources . This article is perhaps the first study to investigate the Russia-Ukraine war from the resource dependency theory perspective .
 The key premise that the aggression is motivated by the Russia’s gap in critical resources is that control of Ukraine bridges this gap receives little attention in the literature and public media . The main premise is that Russia is trying to bridge this gap .
 Russia-Ukraine war and perhaps wars in general may shift from a geopolitical focus to a more business oriented perspective . We may need to refocus our thinking about the Russia- Ukraine war .
 The theoretical contribution of this study shows that the resource dependency theory can contribute insight into the underlying causes of the RussiaUkraine war and shed light on the aggressor’s strategic intent and actions .
 This finding suggests increased influence of resource scarcity on government policy in international relations . It is characterized by conflicts and wars fought over fundamental resources, such as human resources .
 The implications for future research are that the resource dependency theory can be used for the analysis of other conflicts such as the Syria war and China's actions in Asia .
 A resource dependency theory analysis of plausible Russia-China and Russia-EU conflicts appears to be particularly fruitful . The analysis is based on a resource dependency analysis of the Russian-Chinese conflict .
 A merger of these combinations rather than a war between them is possible, says author . It's more likely than war between the two sides, he says .
 The implications for the Ukraine government are that it needs to make it clear that resources under threat will be denied to Russia by defence or evacuation .
 The Ukrainian military-industrial complex is a treasure to international arms businesses marketing to an ever more turbulent world .
Foreign defence businesses have a tremendous opportunity to acquire key resources in Ukraine at a time when low market value and the low exchange rate make the resources a real bargain .
 The application of the resource dependency theory to the explanation of the motive for armed conflict lays down a concrete basis for further research into the motives for military conflicts .
 The author is thankful to the anonymous reviews providing very constructive reviews and suggestions which were incorporated into the final version of the paper .
 The author thanks colleagues and friends who reviewed the drafts of the paper for the same .
Designing and conducting case studies in international business research. Designing and conduct case studies.
 Qualitative research in organizational and vocational psychology, 1979–1999 . The study was conducted in the early 1980s .
 Rogozin, D Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman of the Military-Industrial Commission, Russian Federation, is the head of the Russian Federation .
 Stephen F Cohen on the US/Russia/Ukraine History the Media Won't Tell You .