 Robert E Burks Second Reader: Michael Richardson Approved for public release .
 The thesis examines the Special Forces Operational Detachment-Alpha in great power competition . The thesis is based on the United States Army’s current modernization efforts .
 The purpose of this research is to analyze the current tactical capability of Army Special Forces to determine what organizational modification is required to be successful in the future operating environment .
 The authors examined case studies of historic modification and determined that the prevailing causes of capability adaptation have been driven by political, economic, societal, and technological environmental change .
 The authors applied these factors to current global trends to determine necessary future adaptation . The authors then applied the factors to the current global trend to determine needed future adaptation.
 The authors recommend an information warfare specialist within the Special Forces Operational Detachment-Alpha to ensure relevancy and success in the future .
 The U.S. military is involved in unconventional warfare, irregular warfare, political warfare and political warfare .
 This thesis examines the Speeial Forees Operational Detaehment-Alpha in great power eompetition . In accordance with the U.S. Army’s current modernization efforts.
 The purpose of this researeh is to analyze the eurrent taetieal eapability of Army Speeial Forces to determine what organizational modifieation is required to be sueeessful .
 The authors examined ease studies of historie modifieation and determined that the prevailing eauses of eapability adaptation have been driven by politieal, economic, societal, and teehnological environmental ehange .
 The authors applied these faetors to eurrent global trends to determine neeessary future adaptation . The authors then applied these trends to ecurrent global trends .
 The authors reeommend an information warfare speeialist within the Special Forces Operational Detaehment-Alpha to ensure relevaney and sueeess in the future environment .
 The CURRENT ENVIRONMENT.61 A, A SHIFT in PRIORITY.63 C, The COMPETITIVE SPACE.67 D, COMPetitIVE WORLD ACTors . 68 1.68 1.61 D, The C Current EN
 The original SFOD-A tasked with the experimental CIDG mission was tasked with a mission to find out what to do with the new mission .
 It is essential to examine the origin of the United States Special Forces and comprehend the unit’s original capability .
 The United States’ late entry into WWII meant that mobilization efforts lagged behind axis and allies in the war . The U.S.’s late entry to WWII meant the United States' late entry was a significant loss to allies .
 The U.S. drew from British units that demonstrated strategic capability . To enable rapid expansion of capability, especially in regard to specialized units.
 Eormed in 1940, the SOE was created by merging the offices of “Section D of MI6’ and “General Staff’s” The SOE is a branch of the War Office .
 Colin Gubbins and the Origins of Britain’s Special Operations Executive, 2.2. Colin Gubins . Colin is the head of the British Special Operation Executive .
 These units ineluded the U.S. Army Rangers and the joint United States / Canadian venture known as 1st Speeial Service Foree .
 Donovan lobbied and ultimately reeeived approval for, but was drastieally different than the eommando operations that were to be exeeuted . The eoneept that Donovan lobbied for, ultimately re-eeuted, was drastsieally Different than the
 Donovan assumed any mission that was not eonventional would naturally belong to his organization . To this end, Donovan assumed that any mission would naturally belonged to his group .
 The Operational Groups As the OSS grew into a formal unit, its responsibilities increased . It organized into unique elements based on mission demand .
 The OGs consisted of United States Army French-speaking volunteers . They were divided into two 15-man sections each with two officers and 13 enlisted men .
 Many of the personnel had backgrounds in combat arms and had previously served as engineers, signalmen, and medics . Many of them had worked as engineers and signalmen .
 The OSS Operational Group. 3, Jedburgh Teams, were smaller in size compared to the OGs . Another element was Jedburgh teams, which were smaller than the OGS .
 These three-man units derived their name from the listed codename of their base in Scotland . They parachuted into occupied Europe to support resistance operations in Europe .
 Each team must incorporate a non-American native speaker from the assigned operational area . The Jedburgh's capability was the requirement that each team incorporate a native speaker .
 The use of this unique unit formation technique ensured team cohesion for the units which were destined to operate deep behind enemy lines . The technique was designed to ensure team cohesion .
 There were many sueeesses for the OSS in Europe . Many failures due in large part to the organization's laek of experienee .
 These men were trained and eross-trained for a variety of missions throughout the Paeifie Theater of Operations . They were then trained for a number of missions .
 One eaeh was involved in administration, photography, medieal, researeh and development, seeret intelligenee, speeial funds, two in supply, three in training . Five personnel were assigned to eommunieations, and Speeial operations .
 It must be stressed again that eaeh of these men performed a multitude of tasks . It must also be stressed that they performed a number of tasks.
 OSS 101 is the first melding of OSS funetions in Detaehment 101 . The men were in reality all from the Speeial Operations Braneh .
 This established from the beginning that regardless of a man’s braneh and training, he performed the duties deemed of the greatest need . This established. This established that despite a man's braneH and training he performed his duties deemed the greatest needs .
 The unit's basing proximity near the forward edge of Allied defenses against the Japanese was important for the hand-seleetion of eandidates .
 European OSS units generally had to infiltrate and remain in oeeupied territory . Detaehment 101 was able to eonduet short-duration penetration patrols, return, reassess, and retrain .
 SOF were some of the first units offered by Army leadership for immediate deaetivation .
 The death of President Roosevelt six months prior to the end of WWII left the OSS without presidential proteetion . President Truman ordered the unit’s deaetivation on 20 September 1945 .
 Donovan protested the deaetivation of the OSS . He began a two-year lobbying eampaign to reaetivate the eapability of the military .
 The result of his effort was the ereation of the Central Intelligenee Agency . The agency is based in the South African capital, South Africa .
 The U.S. military continues to purge itself of SOF, reducing its strategic capability outside of conventional operations .
 The CIA owes its official creation in 1947 to the struggles of General Donovan . Army SOF, particularly Psychological Warfare and USSF, owe their reestablishment to the efforts of General Robert McClure .
 Lieutenant Colonel Russell Volckmann drafted the Army’s field manuals for the Organization and Conduct of Guerrilla Warfare and Combatting Guerilla Forces while assigned to the Infantry School . He was critical to the effort .
 Volkmann and the others were the only experts of UW in the military at the time . The real-world experiences of Volkman and the other made them the only expert at UW .
 These men’s efforts during WWII gave them immense credibility and they were widely respected throughout the military . These men's efforts gave them enormous credibility .
 The central theme of stay-behind guerilla operations remained a constant . But they differed in their opinion of how the proposed force should be organized .
 Volkmann and General Lawton Collins met in the U.S. Army . Collins was the Chief of Staff of the Army's chief of Staff .
 In written correspondence between the two, Volkmann succinctly described and outlined the early tenets of the OCPW’s interpretation of what missions Special Forces would conduct .
 General Taylor's staff prepared a brief for General Taylor, the Army G-3, about the skills, capabilities, and strategic necessity of a special force .
 Briscoe, ‘Training on a Shoestring’ and Paddock, U.S. Army Special Warfare. “Training on the Shoestrings’s’
 To infiltrate its eomponent operational detaehments, by air, sea, or land, to designated areas within the enemy’s sphere of infiuenee and organize the indigenous guerrilla potential .
 The staff of OCPW organized to meet the demands associated with the new unit .
 The slow transfer rates were due in part to a bureaucratic issue of personnel slots .
 There were no personnel slots available within the Army to fill the unit . General Taylor approved the creation of the unit.
 The Army Rangers had been activated at the onset of the Korean War . Through coincidence, slots were found from the Army Rangers .
 Bitzinger, Assessing the Conventional Balance in Europe, 1945-1975, N-2859-FF/RC, 4-7 .
 Psychological and Unconventional Warfare, 1941-1952, 21; Briscoe, “Training on a Shoestring,’s” 105 .
Officers went so far as to discourage volunteers and sabotage their transfer paperwork . These officers went to discourage volunteer volunteers and sabotaged their paperwork .
 Army Chief of Staff published a direetive to subordinate eommanders to eliminate all obstacles . The Army's chief of staff said the ehallenges should be eliminated .
 With the bureaueratic issues solved, transfer rates slowly elimbed as the organization grew to meet operational demands . With the Bureaueratic problems solved, the organization's transfer rates were slowly eliminated .
36 The Lodge-Philbin Act, commonly referred to as “the Lodge Act,’ was a piece of legislation introduced by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge . The Lodge Act One event that offered USSF a reeruitment boost was the lodge-Phil
38 The VFC eoneept later evolved into the Lodge Act and allowed an initial enlistment of 2,500 unmarried, foreign volunteers into the U.S. Army .
 Due to the nature of the applicant's arrival in Western Europe, investigations took a long time due to the difficulty in investigating an applicant who conducted “street work,’ a common job for DP’s .
 The process was also prolonged by the inability of investigators to verify information from emigres who had lived behind the iron curtain .
 Any association or relative with links to communism was scrutinized . Fewer candidates arrived for initial training than anticipated .
 Another challenge to the Lodge Act was the prohibition of countries from which applicants could be recruited . Another challenge was the ban on countries which applicants can be recruited.
 Restrictions on recruiting in Austria, Belgium, France, The Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Germany limited the potential for the Lodge Act to attain its initial enlistment goals .
 The Lodge Act would never be realized due to the restrictions of the program . Even when end strength for the Lodge Act increased to 12,500 personnel, the goal would not be realized .
 The lack of established standards and processes through which Lodge Act Soldiers enlisted proved anther challenge with the program . Lodge Act soldiers are being trained to serve in the U.S. Army .
 Many Lodge Act Soldiers processed into the Army in diverse means . One group’s process was rarely the same as its predecessors .
 The lack of standards combined with the testing, background investigations, and registration of the Lodge Act Soldiers dismayed Senator Lodge who repeatedly complained to Army officials .
 Had the Lodge Act not been stymied by military bureaueraey, it would have given SL a large ready-made force of language profieient and eultural experts .
USSL made gradual growth which enabled organizational adaptation and development flexibility . Instead, USSL made gradually growth which allowed organizational adaptation .
 The organizational design of the initial SFOD-A, like so many units, was heavily influeneed by its environment . The Political Environment was heavily influenced by the political environment .
 This environment ineluded politieal and soeial fear of the global speoter of eommunism, the eeonomies of a post-WWII U.S., and the historieally unique teehnologieal eireumstanee of
 The eombination of these faetors led to a demand for a unique foree that was capable of using native populations to serve as force multipliers to deter or combat communist expansion .
 The SFOD-A, USSF’s sole tactical level unit, was specifically designed to meet the requirements of UW tasks to accomplish this mission . USSF is the only tactical unit in the world .
 USSF arrived in a political environment dominated by the U.S. policy of communist containment . USSF is based in San Francisco, California .
 The Truman administration had naively attempted to turn a blind eye to the communists’ intent . George Kennan’s 1947 publication was published in 1947 .
 The Sources of Soviet Conduct, detailed communist expansionist ideology . The sources of Soviet conduct, detailed the communist expansionism .
 Dean Acheson first voiced President Truman’s policy of containment publicly on 12 January 1950 .
 Acheson: U.S. containment would rely on air and naval supremacy . He said the western Pacific island chain was a line of demarcation .
 Kim II Sung gave the North Korean dictator approval to launch an invasion of South Korea in June 1950 . However, rather than having a deterrence effect on communist expansion, this decision emboldened Stalin .
 U.S. troops are deployed to Korea with the approval of the U.N. General MacArthur's approval . The defeat of rapidly deployed and unprepared United Nations forees caused their retreat toward the Southeastern port city of Pusan .
 The initial problems of the war oecurred partially beeause the pieeemeal manner in whieh United Nations forces were deployed but also beeause of inter-war budget cuts and a general lack of contingency planning .
 These units foeused on internal security and developing the Republie of Korea military . These units are foeused by the Korean military .
 budget cuts effectively hamstrung their efforts and denied the ROK an effeetive United States sponsored defense . The ROK has been criticized by the U.S. for its lack of defense spending .
 The Soviets ereated a eommunist North Korean government equipped with effective population eontrol, robust propaganda, and a modernized military . Meanwhile, the Soviets ereated a new regime with a modernizing military and effective population .
 The Soviets withdrew the bulk of their forces to the point that prior to the onset of hostilities, only a small eontingent of advisors remained in plaee .
 The Soviets maintained deniability of direct involvement in North Korea’s offensive aetions .
 MacArthur’s invasion and initial suecess penetrating North Korea, unintentionally brought the Chinese into the war . U.N. forees from the banks of the Yalu back to the 39th parallel .
 U.S. leaders began to experiment with non-typieal units to enable effects to break the deadlock .
14 conventional options can be considered Special Operations because they were condueted by speeialized units with a specific mission orientation . Schnabel, 25, is a former member of the Special Operations team .
 U.S. Army Rangers conduct raids and harass enemy supply lines . These efforts included actions by the Army Rangers during their brief reactivation .
 conventional eommanders have minimal positive effect on high eausalities . However, a laek of strategic application of these forees by their conventional eomanders resulted in minimal positive effects .
 The 8th Army developed a eoneept for a partisan unit of pro-democratic North Koreans . Also developed a unit for a pro-Democratic North Korean unit .
 In a national poll, newspaper editors were asked to respond with what news they believed the Ameriean people would most like to see .
 A decade later, the vast majority of the United States population believed the U.S. involvement in Korea was justified . However, unlike the Vietnam War a decade later.
 Some members of 10* SFG deployed to Korea later in the war . By the time of their deployment, the fight had largely become static and they produced few tangible results .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman noted in 1949 that the economy under existing conditions can only afford a limited amount for defense .
 The military was neither postured to contain nor defeat communist offensive operations . As a consequence, the military was not postured. It was not able to contain or defeat communist operations .
 The Korean War brought to light important lessons for both U.S. and Soviet decision makers about the costs and strategies for great power competition during the Cold War .
 For the Soviets, it demonstrated that the U.S. was willing to risk escalation to counter overt communist advances . For the Soviet Union, it showed that the United States would risk escalation .
 The U.S. could be baited into costly wars that would accrue an intolerable monetary cost leading to defeat . It also demonstrated that the United States may be baiting into costly war that would lead to defeat.
 This policy came to be a cornerstone of defense for every administration that followed Truman and Eisenhower . President Truman and President Eisenhower were no exception .
 President Eisenhower realized that conventional operations’ costs had the potential to bankrupt the treasury . Truman had responded conventionally to communist operations .
 The New Took’s policy forced the military to downsize its land and naval conventional capability . It also increased its aerial atomic and Special Operations capability, particularly psychological warfare .
 Eor USSE: This policy represented a “boom in funding and, as will be discussed, precipitated mission growth and organizational adaptation. Eor U.S.SE: The policy represents a ‘boom’ in funding.
 The SEOD-A has been heavily influenced by the environment of the time . The initial model was also influenced by internal military politics .
 Osgood, “Form before Substance’s’ 17 with the necessary personnel slots to facilitate the manning of the new force . Osgood: “ form before Substance. 17.’ The new force will be the first of its kind to
 The deactivation of the Army Ranger units also demonstrated the pervasive belief by military leaders that the elite capability of the Rangers could be developed quickly in an emergency and required no peacetime units .
 USSF initially remained hyper-focused on its mission of UW to ensure there was no misconception and misuse as a commando force by the conventional army .
 USSF’s operating concept was ubiquitous throughout the early years and transcended all ranks . USSF's operating concept is ubiquitous throughout early years .
 The Korean War provided few opportunities for USSF to prepare for UW operations . The USSF is based in San Francisco, California .
 The OCPW staff focused their initial organizational design on employment in the European Theater . The European Theater is the largest theater in Europe .
 Each staff member advocated primarily based on their individual experience . As the staff had various backgrounds and experience, there was some debate on which European WWII model the unit should follow .
 As individuals transferred to the 10th SPG at Port Bragg, the work of organizing subordinate units began to take shape .
 The company and battalion level units were referred to as Functional B and Functional C Teams, respectively . For instance, the tactical level unit kept the FA designation .
 The responsibility for each echelon of command was broken up according to the level of guerilla unit that was being advised . The responsibility was also being advised by the unit.
 SPG Headquarters was responsible for the development of a guerilla area eommand . Meanwhile, the PCs provided logisties while the SPG headquarters was responsible.
 The first manning attempt mirrored the OSS OG model and consisted of 15-man teams . gPG leaders feared that the size too closely mirrored that of a Ranger section which could precipitate misuse .
 Individual capabilities known as Military Occupational Specialties within the PA Teams was an evolving concept . The PA Teams were known as the Military Occupations Specialties .
 Colonel Bank’s experiences in occupied Prance shaped the initial PA teams’ specialties . Every team would cross-train in mission required skills .
 The two most concrete specialties in Colonel Bank’s vision were the medics and the radio operators .
 Communication and medical skills added to enable operations deep inside enemy zones of occupation . Training was further refined for the expected operating environment .
 Later, weapons, demolitions, survival, and tactics were taught to all personnel on the PA teams . Later, capabilities such as weapons and demolitions were taught.
 The new 10th SPG is the first new unit to be formed in the UK . The new unit will be the first of its kind in the U.S.
 Guerrilla Warfare was facilitated by the Army’s Psychological Warfare Department . Individuals received an initial 8-week Briscoe, “Training on a Shoestring,” 106 .
 10th SFG had to create an internal individual skills program which supplemented the 8-week course . Special considerations for officers and enlisted who could not attend the course forced the course .
Small unit tactics and intelligence gathering operations enabled the activities of the new unit . These added capabilities such as small unit tactics.
 Select individuals received additional training to enable the insertion of teams behind enemy lines . Select individuals also received extra training to allow them to be inserted into enemy lines.
 This training included, rough terrain parachute insertion, provided by a smokejumper school in Montana, and waterborne insertion .
 USSF recruits received a strictest professionalism and standards were enforced . Despite the novelty of the initial training, their skills were watchfully and carefully evaluated .
 Assessment of the new skills of the SFG fell to the training staff of unit’s headquarters . SFG Operations Officer developed evaluations for FA, FB, and FC teams .
 Field Training Exercises such as FREE EEGION and LEGIONNAIRE RALLY tested the newly trained teams’ individual and eollective skills .
 Colonel Bank was ever-present during evaluations and often opted to personally talk to a team to ensure they understood the demands of their respective missions during a UW operation .
 The initial training regimen culminated in an evaluation of the entire SEG during ETX CLEO held at Camp Castro in the Chattahooehee National Eorest . The SEG was evaluated by the U.S. military team .
 Upon completion, 10th SEG was certified and prepared to conduct its UW mission .
 This deployment was based on several events which coincided to create a ripe atmosphere for a UW operation . This deployment is based on a number of events that coincided with the operation .
 Following the death of Joseph Stalin in March of 1953, U.S. leaders sensed a feeling of change within the Soviet Union . German population living under Soviet oppression rose in riotous revolt against their communist oppressors .
 The labor strikes and nation-wide rebellion constituted roughly ten percent of the population . Though discounted by the Soviets and communist German Democratic Republic as minor and fractured, the labor strikes constituted roughly 10 percent.
 The 10th SFG represented a trained and certified UW force capable of meeting the President’s desired goal .
 The U.S. Army Europe command was unable to include the unit into theater plans .
The 10th SEG was sidelined while the Soviets crushed the insurrection with tank armies . The 10th EEG was also deployed to take advantage of the uprising .
 U.S. leaders sought alternative means of combatting communist expansion in Korea . OCPW tried to establish a UW unit, but it was changes in the environment, particularly the financial and human costs .
 USSE was created, organizationally designed and deployed with the required capability to conduct UW in Europe . The inability of military leaders to see the significance of U.S. military leaders left it struggling for relevancy .
 USSE adapted its capability toward other missions that supported the global defense against communist aggression . As a consequence, USSE adapts its capability to other missions.
 The first model foeused on the environment and missions whieh demanded the eapabilities required by the initial SFOD-A and determined its organizational design . The first models were designed to be able to take part in a mission .
 The seeond model foeuses on the environment and adaptations that USSF undertook as it was sidelined from strategie employment in Europe and instead found work in Southeast Asia . USSF has been sidelined from the strategie job in Europe.
 The SFOD-A remained heavily infiueneed by the environment and missions of the regiment as it transitioned to the Paeifie . Like the first model, the eapabilities of the SFO-A remain heavily infIUeneed .
 This model demonstrates USSF’s adaptation from a speeialized niehe foree to a full speetrum Special Operations .
 U.S. policy of containment was carried by every President during the Cold War . A major contributing factor of this was the United States policy.
 Eisenhower and Kennedy focused on enabling defense by enabling partner nations’ efforts . The initial containment policy focused on reacting conventionally to communist offensives .
 The U.S. military increased advisory missions as a means of furthering partner nation defense efforts . The United States military increased its advisory missions .
 USSE in Europe seemed to fade out of utility, but new USSE units formed to meet the demand . USSE unit in Europe seems to be struggling to meet demand .
 USSE was still held in dubious regard by many high-ranking military leaders . USSE units were formed as flexible alternatives to large footprint conventional forces .
 The adaptability of these units for various Special Operations missions meshed well within President Eisenhower and Kennedy’s respective strategies and gained USSE relevancy . USSE's Special Operations units were used in Special Operations.
 Inside Special Forces, 1953-1963 (Atmapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2001) 6.3-6.5-3-5-6-7-5.5 .
 The initial name for these missions were Mobile Training Teams and they became a common mission for USSF in Asia . The first name was Mobile Training teams .
 The MTT mission in Vietnam began under President Eisenhower in 1957 . Security situation in that country deteriorated and economy-of-force operations expanded . MTT began in Vietnam in 1957.
 Another environmental challenge for USSF units in Vietnam came from the aftereffects of the Korean War stalemate .
 Many senior U.S. Army leaders accustomed to winning conflicts, like WWI and WWII, “adopted a never again’s attitude toward the limited objectives imposed on them by the civilian leadership during the Korean War .
 This sense of limiting was felt within the public and political arenas . It was echoed in Presidential policy .
 France’s post-WWII delay of decolonialization and independence of Asian states created an environment primed for the spread of communist ideology .
 Erance’s effort in assisting the transition of several of its Southeast Asian colonies failed . U.S. support was increasingly required when forced through international pressure .
 Guided by the domino theory, which demanded the defense Wars of National Liberation and Liberation Fronts, were common terms used during this time to explain Communist movements .
 24 of every state from eommunist aggression, the United States began to inerease its support to vulnerable governments throughout the world .
 SFOD-As are providing training, advisement, and equipping of forees . This neeessitated the deployment ofSFOD-as to serve as Mils providing training and advisement .
 SEOD-As gained valuable skills and experienoe whioh were oarried over during the Vietnam War . Army senior leadership felt that EISSE was too independent and later oanoelled the program .
 EISSE was the premiere foree for President Kennedy's foreign poliey . USSE had a substantial inerease in strength and employment following the eleotion of President Kennedy . President Eisenhower's departure from the eoneept of ‘massive retaliation’
 President Kennedy developed the ‘Elexible Response’ poliey whioh . It gave the United States deterrenoe options at the taotioal, operational, and strategio levels .
 Chalmers Archer Jr’s book Green Berets in the Vanguard recounts Chalmer's experiences during the initial early period of USSF in SE Asia .
 He recounts several deployments which discuss in detail the various objectives and initiatives USSF undertook in that region . He recounts in detail several deployments .
 Men have fought and died in Malaya, in Greeee, in the Philippines, in Algeria and Cuba, and almost eontinuously on the Indo-Chinese Peninsula .
 This is another type of war by guerrillas, subversives, insurgents, assassins, assassins and assassins . War by ambush instead of combat, instead of aggression, seeking victory by eroding and exhausting the enemy .
 USSF's subsequent adoption of counterinsurgency into its core mission tasks gained traction as President Kennedy’s refocus on the military intensified .
 At this point, USSF had already executed several MTTs in Southeast Asia . USSF has already executed many MTTS in Southeast Asian countries .
 USSE was again the force of choice for the military’s initial effort in Vietnam . USSE is now the force.
 As security in Europe stabilized with tank armies facing off with one another along the East-West German border, the U.S. began to increasingly focus on the Pacific .
 Einked to this shift was the pervasive belief by U.S. leaders that the European powers should decolonize the region and permit the indigenous populations the right of selfdetermination .
 In Vietnam, colonial grievances led to The Eirst Indochina War . Erance struggled against communist forces desiring to free Vietnam from its unwanted host .
 U.S. leaders had offered assistance to the struggling Erench with the provision that Erance allow the Vietnamese the right to self-determination . Erench has been in the midst of a crisis in the South African nation .
 26 preconditioned support, began to lose the war . Damien Fenton, To Cage the Red Dragon SEATO and the Defense of Southeast Asia, 1955-1965 .
 The French suffered a major defeat at Dien Bien Phu on 7 May 1953 and consequently lost Vietnam . The U.S. ultimately acquiesced and provided materiel aid .
 The Geneva Accords of 1954, which the United States helped organize, finalized the conclusion of the First Indochina War . Vietnam was split along the 17th parallel .
 U.S. leaders determined that “any further territorial loss to Communist expansion in SE Asia was inevitable unless a regional defense alliance under United States leadership could be established. Fearing the vulnerability of the neighboring of Laos and Cambodia, United States leaders decided to act .
 The United States created a plan for an America-led security framework for the region which included nations such as the United Kingdom, Erance, Australia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Thailand, and the Philippines . The plan included provisions for collective defense between all signatories .
 U.S. leaders realize they are not dealing with a mirror image of the security situation in Europe . Additional United States forces would be required to maintain regional stability, they say .
 Social Change Much of the U.S. population initially supported Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy’s policies in Vietnam .
 The relatively few numbers of troops deployed to the country under the MTT concept left the greater United States population relatively unaffected by the military support .
 This ignorance resulted in very little societal change throughout the initial years of U.S. deployments. This ignorance led to very little change in society, says the author .
 President Johnson’s 1965 decision to escalate U.S. involvement began to generate profound societal change .
 Eunch and Sperlich: Fenton, 25, from 1966-1967 “increasing numbers of people began to tell pollsters’s pollsters that Fenton was a popular city .
 This downward trend of American public sentiment strained the relationship between the policymakers and the military . The U.S. military says it has seen a decline in public sentiment .
 The loss of public support for the war generated additional restrictions on the means United States forces could use to execute operations in order to limit U.S. causalities .
 U.S. military leaders’ continual attempts to bring the war to a swift close through large conventional operations . This resulted in the United States military leaders trying to bring it to a quick close through conventional operations.
 These efforts affected USSF’s mission focus and organizational requirements throughout the war . USSF's mission focus, organizational requirements were affected by these efforts .
 The cost of the Vietnam War in blood, drove rapid societal change at home, equally costly was the financial burden . The economic environment was the same as the cost of war in blood .
 The full burden of financial capital was slowed by the incremental increases in the war . But it was still debilitating over time .
 The length of the war ultimately demanded increased spending. While the initial buildup of the military for participation in the conflict generated an increase to the Gross Domestic Product .
 This slow path to recession produced little change during the war but had a long-term effect following its conclusion . This slow paths to recession produce little change in the war .
 The helicopter gave rise to the concept of air-mobile units . Bom out of the inter-service rivalry between the U.S. Air Force and the United States Army since WWII .
 The 1st Cavalry Division was not only able to launch forces and artillery into an enemy stronghold but reinforce and resupply them all via helicopter .
 The U.S. military strategy throughout much of the war is focused on area denial and clearance operations .
Military leaders saw air-mobility as the tool to break from the stalemate of the Korean War . Air-mobilities enabled rapid movement into denied areas, they said .
 USSF, being resupplied by air, could perform economy-of-force operations in rural areas . As a consequence, military units were often focused on clearance operations .
 The Vietnam War came in the form of news as it transitioned from paper reporting to television as a means to recount the war’s progress .
 In the advisory years of the Vietnam War (19541961), media coverage of Vietnam or events in Southeast Asia rarely occurred . The Vietnam War was the most important period of the war .
Journalists focused on newsworthy events. With little to spark the interest of the American public, journalists focused on other stories .
 Troop escalation and increase in combat casualties brought additional attention and televised news broadcasts focusing on the war increased .
 The aforementioned factors played a contributing role in the way the military executed their missions . B, MISSION and TASKS played a key role in their missions.
 The original mission of USSF was UW, but the growth of communist backed insurgencies led to additional missions . USSF's original mission was UW.
 The U.S. Army initially employed MTTs and advisory groups to provide military assistance through equipment, training and combined operations . As part of the larger COIN strategy in Southeast Asia, the United States Army employed M TTs and Advisory groups .
 Report on the Govemability of Democracies to the Trilateral Commission,’s ed. ed.
 The 1st SFG.l^O was deployed to the U.S. in 2010 . It was the first time the 1stSFG.O. had been deployed to a host nation .
 This allowed detachments to engage within the culture of their host nation, a skill critical to any foreign interaction . This allowed them to engage in their country's culture and culture .
 The CIDG was a concept started by the CIA’s Military Assistance Advisory Group . It enabled disaffected South Vietnamese rural peasants to defend their own areas while denying the communists safe haven .
^2 xhe concept was largely successful and effectively created friendly safe areas as a thorn in the side of the communists' operations in South Vietnam . By design, this program received CIA funding but used USSF to recruit, train, and equip the locals .
 The CIDG program marked a shift from the typical training or advisory missions of the same period . The program marks a shift.
 The program was more akin to the UW mission of USSF with slight modifications . In essence, the program was like a UW mission with slight changes .
 SFOD-As would be in a host nation's “free territory’s ‘free territory.’ Instead of going deep behind enemy lines, SFO-As will be in the host nation‘s “ free territory”
 “Buon Enao Experiment’ in Darlac province was solely under the control of the CSD and not the Vietnamese government . The village was selected as the first test village .
 The CIDG program was to obtain approval from village chiefs and elders to adopt the program . It was to establish a security force and defensive structure in the village .
 The provineial chief requested the program expand to neighboring villages . Piasecki, 24. 31, concluded with such success that the chief requested to expand the program .
 1962 brought with it an inerease in the CIDG program throughout Darlae Provinee . The result was an early sueeess of the program .
 The inereased aetivity brought with it a greater demand for SFOD-As which necessitated the ereation of the Headquarters United States Army Speeial Forces Vietnam .
 MACV's leaders pressured the CIA to pass eontrol of the CIDG and USSF to the new command . MACV’s leaders then pressured theCIA to pass Eontrol on to USSF .
This transfer changed several of the essential eomponents of the program . This transfer changed many of the key elements in the program.
 South Vietnamese eontrol reverted to South Vietnam after the eompletion of training and the establishment of seeurity . First, instead of being a U.S. eentrie effort, the responsibility for the camps reverted to the South Vietnamese Eontrol .
 The new shift toward an offensive strategy under the COIN effort ehanged the mission for USSF in Vietnam . The new strategy is aimed at the USSF mission in Vietnam.
 Onee the air-mobile unit was on the ground, the Apaehe Foree fell under the ineoming eommander until eompletion of the operation .
 The Corps Taetieal Zones developed this eapability. Although short lived, all the CorpsTaetieAl Zones had a short-lived effect .
 The eost of these operations to the CIDG program was drastie as the indigenous foree losses through attrition through attrition while working in unfamiliar terrain produeed a negative response in future programs .
 CIDG loeations beeame bases for strike operations in their respeetive areas . Instead of providing loeal area seeurity and eivie projeets for the villages the CIDg loeation loeats beeame base for strike operation .
 By late 1964, CIDG eamps were moved along the borders of Laos and Cambodia . To faeilitate this shift, by early 1964, by late 1964.
 This led to a preeipitous deeline in the eapability of USSF and the CIDG, whieh degraded the original eoneept . The original e oneept was the first in the USSF.
 USSF demanded USSF ereate quiek reaetion forees eapable of rapidly reinforeing besieged SFOD-As . Losses from several attaeks from 1964-1965 at Ben Cat and other CIDG bases near the dangerous “iron
 As the eapability of these units grew, they were able to save numerous outposts that would have otherwise been overrun . The units were an invaluable asset as they saved outposts.
 Conventional foree eommanders began to see the Mike Forees as a rapidly deployable foree that could be moved to hostile areas that were too risky for other South Vietnamese or U.S. eonventional forees .
 MIKE forees allowed “USSF and their ‘stikers’ to aggressively seek out and destroy the enemy. This beeame the method of employment of the MIKEforees throughout the rest of the Vietnam war .
 The SFOD-A ehanged little; espeeially with regard to MOS capabilities . The missions for USSF evolved thought the Vietnam period, however the strueture of the SFO-AEhanged little .
 This unit was commanded by a Lieutenant Colonel, the Executive officer was a Major, the Operations Officer was a Captain, and a Master Sergeant in charge of 12 senior Sergeants .
 The 14th SFOD conducted several deployments to Thailand, Taiwan, and Vietnam . Under this model the 14thSFOD conducted numerous deployments .
 The execution of the CIDG program was ultimately filled by SFOD-As . Pilot teams made initial contact with village elders .
 As USSF was short personnel, it was not uncommon for CIDG programs to be filled with incomplete SFOD-As . USSF is short personnel .
 The success of the CIDG program and subsequent expansion necessitated additional SFOD-As and marked the first field adaption of its organizational structure . The structure of the originalSFOD-A tasked with the experimental C IDG mission^^8 was the first to
 The ideal force structure for the CIDG program was a Vietnamese Special Forces unit and a SFOD-A operating as a split-team . Through experimentation, it was determined that the best force structure was a Vietnam Special forces unit .
 Some SFOD-As were not partnered with a Vietnamese Special Forces unit . In practice, this concept was not always possible .
 As the military increased its role in Vietnam, it expanded offensive operations . USSF followed suit and followed suit .
 The Mike Forces were more formalized into the military construct . Unlike the CIDG program which initially focused on local security and remained small, the Mike Forces are more formalize into a military construct.
 The SFOD-A supervised recruiting and conducted training and advisory operations within the Mike Force . The MIKE force proliferated throughout Vietnam as a means to actively pursue the enemy .
 MIKE force dominated the USSF effort in Vietnam . CIDG program began to take a back seat because population centric programs did not mesh with strategic means of prosecuting war .
 The U.S. military focused on body counts and areas cleared instead of the previous population centric metrics .
 A lack of a singular focus prevented doctrinal acceptance of SFOD-A adaptation that had occurred during the height of the CIDG program . This lack of focus prevented the adaptation from being accepted by the program .
 A full time CA and PSYOP personnel on the detachment. Experience gained from years of population engagement demonstrated the importance of having a full timeCA and PSyOP personnel.
 The U.S. Army Special Forces A-Team Vietnam Combat Manual, 120, is a Vietnam combat manual . The manual was written by the United States Army special forces A- team .
 Simpson III, 155. 38 and the government turned large numbers of indigenous Vietnamese into local self-supporting security forces . Simpson III turned large number of indigenous Vietnam into local security forces.
 The vast diversity of the missions and the dynamic nature of the environment required several adjustments to USSF’s original construct . USSF's original construct required several changes to the original construct.
 CA and PSYOP in conjunction with their village defense program tended to be more successful . The changes USSF made were temporary in nature .
 The United States initially sought to employ population-centric military capabilities under COIN which it did not possess . The U.S. did not have such capabilities .
Counterinsurgency is population-based, a broad range of population-centric capabilities were required at the detachment level .
 The shift towards a more offensive attitude in operations post-SWITCHBACK shifted the objective of USSF’s presence away from the population .
 strike operations are a necessary requirement, especially in a COIN environment . Strike operations can be viewed as the easy and measurable way to demonstrate success despite short-term gains .
 The popularity of the strike companies, and their proliferation, demonstrate continued attempts to fight offensively . The popularity and proliferation of strike companies are part of a growing trend .
 The integrated capabilities at the detachment level under the CIDG program might be useful for the future environment where interconnectivity and other globalization factors will require a different kind of capability beyond those which USSF currently possesses . USSF possesses a different type of capability.
 The temporary changes to USSF were ad-hoc at best, but limited wars will require change in USSF structure to meet the demands of the environment .
Military change is rarely, if ever a fast process. Military change, in times of relative peace, is rare . Military change is rare, if never a fast Process .
Change within military bureaucracies often occurs over several decades and is broadly shaped by the environment of the time . Instead, change within military bureaucracy often occurs within several decades .
 USSF has undertaken a vast array of missions since Vietnam . It is beyond the scope of this thesis to categorize all of the regiment's missions .
 This chapter will seek to highlight several missions which best characterized the efforts of USSF and drove organizational adaptation during the selected period . Instead, this chapter will focus on several missions .
 USSF has, perhaps more than any other military organization, either contracted, adapted or expanded depending upon presidential administrations’ desired means of combatting threats .
 Vietnam's national desire to distance the prestige of the country from the failures dictated defense strategy and funding . Such has been the environment since Vietnam, as the national desire for distance the nation from the nation's prestige .
 USSF’s appetite to conform and adapt to conventional military demands. One important consequence was an ebb and flow of USSF's appetite .
 This malleability is not relegated to the immediate post-Vietnam period but instead can be seen in the assignments of SFOD-As over the past four decades . The malleable is not subsequent to the immediate Vietnamese period .
 President Nixon abandoned the “two-and-one-half war’s defense strategy . The military must be prepared to fight two conventional wars and one irregular war simultaneously .
 The U.S. would provide materiel aid and economic support. This departure meant that rather than supplying troops to defend allies and partners globally, the United States would provide aid and support .
 USSF was suffering from weak leadership and numerous ethical scandals . The transition threatened the organization’s existence .
 President Nixon's implementation of this strategy was cut short by his resignation . President Nixon’s implementation of the strategy was also cut short.
 President Ford not only kept the policy but also its authors who supervised implementation . President Ford's policy was kept in place by the president and its authors .
 For the military, the shift in strategy meant that while the U.S. was withdrawing from Vietnam, it would downsize the force .
 USSF’s contemptuous relationship with the conventional Army was due to its “absence from the cannon of strategic theory” was consequently starved of funding . USSF's contemptuous relationships with the traditional Army was subsequently starved of funds .
 Conventional Army officers, seeing no future in the unique force, further dissuaded talented personnel from joining the Army .
 By the late 1970s, the confluence of these two factors nearly put USSF out of business . The two factors had nearly killed USSF .
 "The vast majority of officers and non-commissioned officers with experience and knowhow fled into retirement or the conventional army," says the author of the book .
This necessarily linked China and Russia into a monolithic threat in strategists minds . This necessarily linked the two countries to each other in the past .
 The one-and-a-half war strategy cognitively dissected the monolith and created opportunities . The strategy was designed to create opportunities and create opportunities .
 The First Thirty Years, a History of the United States Army Special Forces, 219. 42 the organization as a reconnaissance and direct-action force offering commanders enhanced but nevertheless conventional capability .
 "Special Forces became a very expensive conventional force," says Mark Boyatt . “Special Forces become a veryexpensive conventional force,’ he says .
 Carter’s foreign policy attempted to create a more peaceful global environment by creating detente with the Soviet Union .
 The Strategic Arms Limitation Talk I and IT President Carter predicated the SALT talks upon the Soviet’s limiting their expansion of nuclear weapons . This led to bi-lateral talks with the Soviets focused on limiting the proliferation of nuclear arms .
 The Soviets proved throughout the 1970s that they had no interest in restraint . However, as the Soviets proved, the communists had no desire to restraint .
 President Carter shifted his defense policy to protect U.S. vital interests, specifically those in the Persian Gulf and Europe . Not wanting to repeat another Vietnam, Carter shifted defense policy.
 This era of ‘limited goals’ further constrained USSF’s role as there was “no taste among executive branch policymakers for anything like unconventional involvements by the military. This era was ‘no taste’ for any unconventional involvement by military.
 The administration sought to roll back Soviet expansion, spoke openly about supporting anti-communist insurgencies, and increased funding for SOF units .
 The administration's reluctance to support anti-communist insurgencies with troops limited its goals to supplying military aid .
 USSE throughout the 1980s concentrated on conforming into the conventional apparatus . Left with a national policy that supported irregular warfare but military leadership and a political environment that did not .
 The new MTT eonstruct is based upon taetics most useful in eonventional battle .
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, remaining political interest in UW evaporated . With the fall of the Russian Union, the interest in the UW disappeared .
 Exeept for the Persian Gulf War, the predominanee of U.S. military endeavors throughout the 1990s .
 The Clinton administration's budget cuts under the Clinton administration should have neeessitated a lighter, more expeditionary foroe .
Senior ranking military leaders reeommended eourses of aetion to President Bush that were eonventional minded but politieally unsuitable . This predominanee of focus came to a elimax in the days and weeks following 9-11 attacks .
 September 11, 2001 brought USSF and UW baek in vogue beeause it “offered signifieant military advantages, emphasized partnerships to reduee United States eausalities, and redueed international pereeption of the U.S. killing Muslims
 SFOD-As deployed en masse to conduct UW as well as a variety of other missions in support of the 2003 invasion of Iraq .
 Following the defeat of the Iraqi military and subsequent “de-Baathification,’ the situation in Iraq degraded into anarchy .
 The chaos of Iraq and the associated increase in U.S. causalities represented a significant political risk for the Bush administration . The chaos was a significant risk for Bush administration.
 This framing of the deteriorating situation served to demonstrate “measures of success’ on the U.S. population. This framing was designed to decrease the impact of individual servicemember deaths on the United States population .
 From 2004 until 2007, when General Petraeus took command of the Multi-National Force-Iraq, the military conducted DA centric CT operations . The military, including USSF, conductedDA centricCT operations while continually providing the media with body-count statistics .
 operations in Afghanistan mirrored the DA focused approach as the Taliban insurgency gained momentum . Operations in Afghanistan mirrors the DA's approach as Taliban insurgency gains momentum .
 entertainment and war futurists have reeently eoineided in their predietions of future environments . Entertainment and war Futurists are also eoineined in future environments.
 Nihilists prediet future Mad-Max-style dystopias, patriots prediet environments where military strength wins the day . Teehnophiles prediet a teehnology-driven future with sentient maehines eontrolling warfare .
 At times, the teehnologieal foeus has left the military with a eapability gap regarding population based operations in support of strategie goals . All of these predietions miss the mark but have effeetively driven strategy and investment.
 USSF was profoundly affeeted by disproportionate funding euts eompared to the eonventional military . The amendment was adopted before the Nunn-Cohen amendment .
 USSF foeused on beeoming profieient at individual and eolleetive tasks that fit into the greater eonstruet of warfare as envisioned by the military at the time .
 USSF’s foeus eentered upon DA and SR operations in support of the AirLand Battle operating eoneept . This was partieularly true prior to the Nunn-Cohen amendment .
 The U.S. departure from Vietnam has been the proliferation of eomputers . The greatest teehnologieal ehange sinee the United States left Vietnam was the greatest .
 The RMA eoneept meshed well with the U.S. military’s propensity for offensive and eonventional operations .
 DoD foeused heavily on expensive teehnologieal innovations. This eontributed to a belief within the military that technologieals would ensure battlefield suecess and the DoD foes would use them .
 For USSF, this meant that while the eonventional military foeused on defeating eon conventional opponents, the non-eonventional role for USSF expanded . USSF has expanded its non-eonventional role in the military .
 This growth was initially seen in the Vietnam War . It had a huge impaet on how that eonfiiot was prosecuted .
 Following the Vietnam War, the media began to foeus on terrorism as an emerging global trend of violenee .
As terrorist attacks began to oeeur against the U.S. abroad, Ameriean interest steadily grew .
Terrorism grew beeause of interest but the growth of the media provided terrorists with a global audienee and made terrorism’s impaet larger than before . This is not to say that terrorism grew beease of interest.
 In the 1970s, the growth of terrorism generated partieular attention during the Ford administration . The Soviets began to promote its use as a new form of proxy warfare .
 Gongora and Von Riekhoff, Toward a Revolution in Military Affairs, 141. Gongora, Von RIEkhoff and Toward the Revolution in military Affairs, are both known as "Gongora"
 Covert Units, Secret Funds, and War against Israel and the U.S. and the United States, 243.
 For USSF, CT represented an opportunity for renewed relevancy . For US SF, CT was held in ‘precarious value’ at the time .
 By 1979, the military had gone from having no CT forces to several “full-time’s” from across the services . By 1979 the military was having several full-time units .
 The failed attempt to rescue American hostages held in Iran in 1980 was highlighted by the Holloway Commission Report . The report highlighted several deficiencies of SOF that contributed to the failure .
 President Reagan’s inauguration and his ‘peace through strength’ foreign policy further set the conditions for sweeping change within the Defense Department .
 failed and nearfailed operations as part of the U.S. invasion of Grenada grew political interest and necessitated further congressional inquiry . However, failed andNearfailed operations in Grenada grow political interest .
 Senators Goldwater and Nichols introduced legislation to end the rampant parochialism in the services .
 The Evolution of Air Force Special Tactics, 1953-2003. Forrest L Marion, Brothers in Berets, is the co-founder of the Army's Special Tactics unit .
 In 1987, Congress passed this legislation and for the first time protected USSF from funding and personnel cuts by giving SOF the same level of representation as other combatant commands .
 Since Vietnam, USSF has had a variety of missions ranging from elite commando operations to UW in support of national objectives . USSF is based in Vietnam .
 The variety of missions resulted in a force more capable of executing ad hoc capability adaptation while decreasing the potential long-term changes that would more specifically enable UW operations .
 For a time, some USSF units concentrated exclusively on conducting CT operations . Some USSSF units focused exclusively on CT operations.
 The U.S. Special Operations Command History was the most fully capable and fully capable of the regiment . This capability requirement was so prevalent that it even affected “Detachment Berlin,’s most fully fully capable, the regiment's most fully available .
” . 49 mission-focused UW element. Cannot Conduct Unconventional Warfare’s ‘49 mission- focused UW element’’
 USSF seems to be the likely unit from whieh to ereate the foree . The need for a National CT unit, USSF seemed to be a likely unit .
 Under General Edward Myer, Colonel Charlie Beekwith began organizing an elite DA-foeused unit . The USSF offieer was an experieneed USSF.
 CT remained one of USSE doetrinal tasks but was no longer the foeus mission . Despite being effeetively foreed out as the national CT foree, CT remained a USSE task .
 The military’s adoption of the AirLand Battle operating eoneept effeetively refoeused the Army toward high-intensity eonfliet . The Army's use of the airLand Battle has been criticized by some .
 USSE found itself inereasingly willing to ‘play ball with the serviees’ and throughout the 1980s, the regiment adopted mostly eonventional missions sueh as DA and SR .
 The AirLand Battle eoneept was eoneeived by General Starry in 1977 . It was largely implemented in the 1980s and was formulated upon two assumptions .
 The Army eould not withstand another protraeted fight like the one in Vietnam . The first was that the Army eud not withstand a protraeteed fight .
The seeond was that eonventional war eould be fought and won against the Soviets in Europe . The seeond is that e onventional war can be fought in Europe and won.
 General Starry's operating coneept focused on defeating a Soviet invasion of Europe by concentrating on winning the first battle .
 This transition of thought from protracted war to one of massive conventional battle left little room for typical USSF missions . The USSF mission was the first of its kind since the end of the war .
 During the Persian Gulf War, the AirLand Battle concept was put on display as conventional Army units produced one of the finest examples of a Jominian “battle of annihilation’s in history .
 American citizens at home were awed by the accuracy of airstrikes through video images distributed by the military from the nose cones of guided bombs .
 The Persian Gulf War both exemplified USSF’s capability to support AirFand Battle through conventional support . But also began a slow revival of USSF irregular warfare capability .
 Special Forces conducted a wide range of missions during the Gulf War, General Tovo said .
 USSF teams trained the pan-Arab force but also provided conventional commanders with “ground truth’ of coalition force capabilities . The proliferation of coalition operations in support of United Nations mandates throughout the 1990s repeatedly demanded USSF to perform this role .
 The reclamation of Kuwait and the defeat of the Iraqi military brought an end to Operation Desert Storm . The Iraqi military was defeated by the U.S. in Kuwait .
 Iraqi Shia and Kurdish populations rose up in revolt against Saddam Hussein . However, with encouragement from the allied forces, Iraqi Shiite and Kurdish population rose up .
 Saddam Hussein turned his military loose on the rebels . The rebels were hopelessly overmatched by Iraqi armor and continuously attacked by helicopter gunships .
 The Bush administration acted to stop what was sure to become a genocide . U.N. approval, with United Nations approval, helped stop the genocide .
 The United States began supplying aid via airdrops to the displaced Kurds in what would become the most massive aerial delivery of aid since the Berlin Airlift . Almost immediately, the U.S. began providing aid via airlifts .
 The 1st Battalion, 10th SFG, had been deployed to Northern Iraq during the war to provide CSAR capability . Members of the 1st battalion were once again called upon .
 USSF members entered Northern Iraq in April 1991, just one month after the Kurdish uprising, to meet with Kurdish leaders and coordinate aerial aid . USSF demonstrated success of USSF to conduct this type of operation made it the “go-to-for Humanitarian Assistance’s
 The RMA saw the technological edge demonstrated by U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf War as a vision for the future .
 This vision predicted that wars could be fought and won through the application of firepower from the air and sea onto land .
Despite indications to the contrary, the military remained focused on highintensity warfare . USSF has played a more significant role in countering irregular threats as it was intended to do .
 By the close of the 1990s, the reputation of USSF had recovered from the Vietnam stigma . USSF was seen as the “go-to-force when strategic effects were required .
 President Bush opted to use USSF and CIA teams to link up with Afghan tribesmen and provide intelligence for the approaching armada of airpower .
 For the first few months in Afghanistan, USSF was able to accomplish multiple goals . USSF helped facilitate the union of many tribes against the Taliban .
 USSF’s focus throughout the initial years of the conflict centered on DA raids with pro-GIRoA James Kitfield .
 George W Bush, Decision Points, 191, Wolfowitz to Rumsfeld, “Using Special Forces on ‘Our Side’ of the Line,’s September 23, 2001 .
 The resurgence of the Taliban demonstrated that the enemy-focused strategy could not succeed . The U.S. and GIRoA concentrate on local security .
Village Stability Operations eventually became the consummate operation for SFOD-As in Afghanistan . Village Stability Operations became the most successful operation in the country .
 The VSO program was begun in 2009 and paired SFOD-As with local villages to capitalize on the Pashtunwali concept of arbakai or local militia .
 The operation was similar in form to previous USSF efforts with pro-GIRoA militias . The difference was in focus in focus.
 VSO, like its Vietnam CIDG predecessor, concentrated its efforts on the population . Rather than attacking the Taliban, VSO concentrated its effort on the people .
 This indirect approach to COIN fit in well with the 2007 joint COIN Field Manual . The military leadership received support from the military leadership .
 USSF's effort in Afghanistan from 2010-2014 was the most successful in the country . The concept consumed the predominance of USSF’s effort from 2010 to 2014 .
 The early success of USSF in Afghanistan boosted USSF’s credibility within the joint force . Many of the SFOD-As that participated in the invasion of Afghanistan were again called upon for the invasion.
 USSF “had led the conventional military to appreciate what they could do,’s Linda Robinson says .
 SFOD-As eonducted a “very broad array of missions during the invasion of Iraq. More than Village Defense,’s 23. 54 proposal they made .
 USSF demonstrated its eapability to execute tactical level operations with operational and strategic impacts . It was UW in Northern Iraq with the Kurds or DA and SR in Western Iraq .
 The anarchic environment in Iraq following the invasion proved to be fertile ground for Sunni and Shia insurgent groups .
 The resultant civil war, combined with political risk for the Bush administration, necessitated USSF to take part in the enemy-centric COIN strategy .
 In December 2003, Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld mandated the creation of an Iraqi counterterrorism unit . USSF’s inherent ability to develop indigenous populations into fighting units and experience in FID made it the best candidate to execute directive .
 The Inside Story of America’s Most Secret Special Operations Team is on the cover of the U.S. Army Special Operations Forces .
 Special Operations Force Program is Achieving Goals, but Iraqi Support Remains Critical to Success . Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction, 2010, is achieving goals .
 The eombination of these units under one banner, as well as the integration of support and reeonnaissanee battalions, ereated a foree eapable of exeeuting the find, fix, and finish tasks of the targeting eyele internally .
 The growth of ISOF neeessitated a more signifieant eoneentration of USSF on a rotating basis to ensure the eoncept remained valid .
 The result has been the longest-enduring relationship between USSF and any foreign military unit . USSF ereated one of the most sueeessful Iraqi Seeurity Foree Organizations .
 The period from the Vietnam War to the Global War on Terrorism has been marked by profound politieal, teehnologieal and eeonomie environmental ehange .
 For instanee, at times, the foree has foeused on unilateral, direet operations in support of national or eonventional military objeetive . xhis mission variation has produeed some long-term organizational adaptation whieh .
 More eommonly ehanges have demanded ad hoe eapability adaptation as dietated by the mission and environment .
 USSF has always maintained the ability to eall in airstrikes . Advaneed edueation in precision bombing provided by airpower experts was identified as a need during the invasion of Afghanistan .
USSF developed a program to build a Special Operations Tactical Air Controller with JTAC capability and authority . Almost immediately after the first troops returned from Afghanistan, USSF developed the program .
General Boykin saw the necessity for urban combat training during his deployment to Somalia . Similar to the SOTAC course, the Special Forces Advanced Urban Combat Course was initiated by General Boykin .
 The program was then disseminated throughout the active duty groups to increase collective DA skills in an urban environment . This program was also disseminated through the activeduty groups .
 SFOD-As, 7th SFG leaders honed the program to inelude “34 hours of combat marksmanship, 60 hours advanced urban combat, and 26 hours of general subjects’ training.
By the Spring of 2000, the revamped SFAUCC graduated ten 7th SFG SFOD-As . The coneept was again disseminated throughout the regiment . eourse was undeniably prescient in its creation and lifesaving on the battlefields of Iraq and Afghanistan .
 USSF has changed many missions since the start of the USSF mission . There are several worth mentioning beeause they highlight internal organizational adaptability .
 Some of the changes demonstrate the need for a sealed version of a SFOD-As . Others highlight the need to add additional external capability .
 In either of these cases, the variety of missions has resulted in an inability to speeialize SFODAs to conduct UW operations .
 SFOD-As in Iraq and Kuwait justifiable scaled their organizations down to deerease deteetion risk and increase eoverage area . splitting teams is doctrinally supported and the primary reason for duplication within theSFOD-A is doetrinally and eulturally unsupported
 USSF Soldiers fail to demonstrate true organizational adaptation beeause . They offer more or less of the same eapability .
 Many SFOD-As requested embedded Military Information Support Operations and CA Teams . For example, many requested embedded military information support teams .
 These additional teams increased detachment’s ability to leverage gains within the rural villages of Afghanistan and link them back to the government in Kabul .
 The VSO operating concept never codified the best practices for the organization of the SFOD-A with enablers .
 Some SFOD-As VSO programs were inundated with enablers . Others opted for a more minimalist approach .
 USSF has conducted a myriad of missions and executed countless ad hoc organizational changes . From the close of the Vietnam War to the Global War on Terrorism, USSF have conducted a multitude of missions .
 These changes have been executed as a result of the missions assigned and the environment in which they occurred . These changes are being executed by the military .
 The results of a wide variety of missions have enabled USSF to gain and maintain relevancy . USSF has been on a number of missions since the start of the year .
 The Trump administration identified great power competition, particularly the growing threats of Russia and China, as primary security concerns for the U.S.
 Kennan was not alone in seeing the necessity of options to project national power outside of conventional military confrontation .
 George F Kennan on Organizing Political Warfare’s 1904-2005, ‘George F Kenna on Organized Political Warfare.’
 Douglas Selvage's new book, Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, Chi n4 NARA, is out today . Cited in his book Radio free Europe andRadio Liberty, he says .
 USSF remains the only organization in the U.S. military specifically designed to conduct these types of operations . Today, USSF is only organization designed to carry out these kinds of operations.
 Throughout the Cold War, the U.S. and the USSR conducted UW operations against one another’s interests .
 USSF remains prepared and organized to conduct or combat UW operations with increased frequency . This is also indicative of a change of environment which has seen a decrease in the usefulness of the “weight of numbers and advaneed weaponry”
 French leaders had become too “inelastic’ to realize ehanges that had oceurred to the character of warfare . If we do not, then we risk the fate of French leaders at the outbreak of World War II .
 To maximize USSF’s eompetitive advantage to conduct UW operations, it must be organizationally tailored for its operational environment . USSF's eomp competitive advantage must be maximized to maximize the advantage .
 Preparing for the current environment in an era characterized by rapid ehange is tantamount to preparing for the last Bank . From OSS to Green Berets, prepare for the next Bank, prepare.
 Sergey Sukhankin, ‘Continuing War by Other Means The Case of Wagner, Russia’s Premier Private Military Company in the Middle East, ed. ed. Sergey Sukankin .
 This requires an analysis of current global trends and peer activities that will likely play large parts in determining the future environment . This requires analysis ofCurrent global trends, peer activities and Peer activities .
 It also requires an analysis of previous USSF adaptations to ensure that mistakes of the past are not replicated in the future . The USSF will also need to review previous adaptations.
 Since the fall of the Soviet Union, the world has significantly benefitted from Pax Americana . The world has benefited from Pax Americaa since the fall.
 This has witnessed the breakdown of barriers in communication and economics that had previously been enforced by nation-states . This has seen a breakdown of the barriers in communications and economics .
 The global number of deaths as a result of war declined as well as the percent of the global population living in extreme poverty . In the 1990s and 2000s, the number of death tolls from war declined .
Globalists predicted that open trade between nations would promote peace, economic prosperity, and establish a more modern world-order . These decades were evidence of truth, says David Cameron .
 The trends of globalization, urbanization, and littoralization are increasingly changing this global environment . Buried within this economic prosperity, though, are the trends of urbanization and urbanization .
 Globalization is an umbrella term used to describe the interconnectivity of the international community as a result of transnational economics and associated technological advancement . The combination of these two factors has facilitated a rise in the transfer of capital between countries .
 The biggest difference is in the level of finance and capital flows, economist Anthony Giddens says .
 Giddens, Runaway World, 9. 63 consumer products, particularly those associated with communications, are among the products .
 societies around the world are being inundated with foreign culture . As a result, societies are being isolated from external influences .
 Over a million refugees from the Syrian Civil War have emigrated and threaten to destabilize an already-strained government .
 The demand for better governance is that these issues rarely remain within the confines of the state . The demand is that they rarely remain in the state.
 The inability of governments to meet their populations’ governance demand has left power vacuums which are then filled by Violent Extremist Organizations . insurgents, insurgents, and/or proxy militias.
 All of these factors have contributed to the diminishment of state power in the Middle East and Eatin America . The Middle East has seen a decline in state power particularly in the region .
 Great power states’ soeieties have generally been unaffected by the deeline of resources and mass migration oeeurring in emerging eountries . Great power States’soeieties are generally unaffected.
 Eonsumer demand has not yet changed. This is not to say that these soeieties are not depleting their own . But rather that the impact has not been felt to the same degree yet .
 This is mostly resultant from the positive economie effect of globalization, technological investment, and the build-up of these governments’ militaries as power projection platforms . This is largely due to the positive economies of globalization.
 As the pace of technology development, populations, and consumption increase, demand for resourees is also increased . The pace of tech development, population growth and consumption is also increasing .
 This has and will eontinue to lead great power states eloser to confrontation . This will lead to greater power states. This will be the first time this will happen .
 CEDs help individuals to “see’s problems systemically, rather than linearly, by mapping the relationship between independent and dependent variables . polarity indieates whether the independent variable results in the same or opposite effect in the Global Trends, “Paradox of
 Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World (Boston: Irwin/MeGraw-Hill, 2000), 102. 65 dependent variable .
 If increasing/deereasing the independent variable causes the dependent variable to increase/decrease beyond what it otherwise would have been, a positive polarity is assigned . If increasing or deereasing a dependent variable causes it to increase or decrease, it is assigned.
 A negative polarity is assigned to a dependent variable . Reciprocally, if increasing/decreasing the independent variable causes the dependent variable to decrease/increase beyond what it otherwise would have been, a negative polity is assigned .
The loops formed in this process can be either balancing or reinforcing . Economic growth will continue to drive international trade, leading to the depletion of natural resources and compelling state evolution .
 The global trends that have dominated the last two decades stem from globalization and will continue unless otherwise abated. The outcome of this analysis is that the global trends will continue, says the author .
 nuclear deterrence between great power states increases the likelihood that proxy warfare will dominate future conflict between great powers .
 The U.S. defense strategy to determine USSF’s role in the future is needed to determine the future of USSF .
 The goal of this concept is to maintain the inter-domain dominance advantages the Army has benefitted from during the GWOT in the event that great power competition becomes great power combat . The goal is to keep the Army's inter- domain dominance advantages.
 USSF must remain foeused, organized, and prepared to eonduet these operations . USSF is the “only element in the United States Armed Forees organized, trained, and equipped speeifieally for UW .
 To better understand the total value that USSF ean provides, it is neeessary to briefly examine the operations of our opponents .
 The examination is not intended to provide a eomplete pieture of eaeh nation’s SOF and UW aetivities . It is intended to give a snapshot of eurrent required eapability with whieh USSF must be prepared .
 The Russian Army’s poor performanee during the Georgian War in 2008 made it elear to the Kremlin that eompetition on the global stage in the 21st eentury required military reform .
 The Army War College is in the Gray Zone of Carlisle, PA . It is the Army's second largest war college .
 The focus of the Kremlin's interest shifted from national control to annexation of wealthy regions along the Ukraine's eastern border . Following weeks of rioting in Kiev and the departure of the pro-Russian President Yanukovych, the focus of Kremlin’s interest shifted .
 Crimea is a predominantly ethnic Russian region of the country . The first step toward this goal was the annexation of Crimea . The annexation was the first step to this goal .
 Pro-Russian separatist units took control of key facilities backed by unknown soldiers who wore sterile uniforms .
 Russian SOF quietly infiltrated Crimea to conduct reconnaissance, organize separatist units, create a sense of chaos . When the time was right, execute limited direct-action operations . In the days leading up to the Crimean referendum, RussianSOF infiltrated Crimea .
 Bukkvoll, “Russian Special Operations Forces in Crimea and Donbas..’s” 69 and the subsequent request for Russian annexation. BukkVoll: “ Russian Special Operations forces in Crimea.’
Information operations retained primacy and enabled the Kremlin to shape the environment while providing greater “flexibility and efficiency’ to the Russian SOF units on the ground .
 At the time of the Crimean parliament referendum vote, Kiev was still searching for a means to respond . These actions were so adeptly synchronized that at the time, Kiev had no means of responding .
 Russian SOF, backed by well-developed information operations, were able to create a fait accompli before Kiev or NATO could muster an effective response .
 Following the annexation of Crimea, additional Russian SOF units began to appear in other regions of Eastern Ukraine .
 The Kremlin's operations in Crimea benefitted from a predominantly ethnic Russian population and local popular support . But its UW operations in eastern Ukraine did not benefit from the Russian population .
 Russian SOF were forced to take a more active role in inciting rebellion, conducting sabotage operations, intelligence collection, and directing attacks against Ukrainian military targets .
 As early as April 2014, Russian SOF units were observed training local separatist units in several cities within the Donbas region of Ukraine .
 The return of Ukrainian conscription would likely have ended in a similar result as Crimea . Had it not been for Ukrainian nationalist resistance units, the return of Ukraine conscription, and sanctions by NATO would have been similar .
 Thousands of Russian regulars have been deployed to the region . Now, combat has ground into stalemate .
 The fate of the Donbass region remains unclear . 21st century UW requires an adaptable force capable of conducting a range of activities .
 Bukkvoll, “Russian Special Operations Forces in Crimea and Donbas’s Crimea and Crimea,’ 17. ‘Russian Special Operation Forces’ in Crimea, 17.’
 The Russian Duma and the Federation Council passed a law allowing companies to legally use arms and “special means’ for the procurement and transfer of hydrocarbons . The law was passed in 2007 . The initial focus of Russian PMCs expanded as operations in the Ukraine ground to a
 The Wagner Group, a premier Russian PMC company, and the 10th Special Forces Brigade are owned by oligarchs with direct ties to the Kremlin . PMC are ostensibly private, their ownership by wealthy oligarchs has made these organizations an extension of Russia's foreign policy .
 The Wagner Group’s actions closely mirrored those of other Russian SOF units . Whether operating in the Ukraine or in Syria, the Wagner Group's actions closely mirror those of others .
 Putin has denied Russian activity in Crimea and Donbas . Sukhankin: ‘Continuing War by Other Means, ’ 297.’
 Hundreds of Wagner PMC and attaehed Syrian Army units attaeked a United States / Kurdish base in Eastern Syria .
 Wagner PMC equipped with T-72 tanks, artillery and mortars attaeked a small outpost eontaining approximately 40 U.S. SOF and Kurdish Syrian Defense Foree fighters .
 The faseinating faetor was the tenaeiousness of the attaekers . While the motivation was most likely to seize the massive Conoeo oil fields, the true motivation for this att aekers was the faseination .
 The Russian PMC was trained and equipped to fight against an aggressive adversary . U.S. rotary and fixed wing aircraft as well as High Mobility Artillery Roeket System were trained to fight .
 Russia is prepared to use its PMCs like SOF to aehieve politieal objeetives whieh . If they originated from a less ambiguous organization, they would have been deelared an act of war . Russia's PMCs are prepared
During the Cold War, China adeptly eondueted UW operations as part of its strategy to expand communism throughout Asia . This eapability gap is especially interesting eonsidering that during the Cold war, China had a strong presence in Asia .
 China’s strategy sees no need for the eapability. The eurrent gap in a SOF UW foree highlights that China's strategy is not to rely on eapable .
 PFA SOF eapability more elosely resembles that of the U.S. Army Ranger Regiment, whieh foeuses on swift Direet-Aetion missions in support of national objeotive .
 China's belief that ‘non-military warfare’ is the future form of global oompetition. This deliberate ehoiee indicates the China’s belief. ‘Non-military Warfare’ has been described as “non- military warfare”
 Dave Majumdar, “China’s Special Forces Units are Getting Ready for War,’ he says . The National Interest, July 17, 2018.
 China's military capability is designed to create “political power for the party,’s military capability, lacks a clear concept for appreciating political warfare .
Like Russia, China has weaponized information and uses it to conduct political warfare . Instead, we note that, like Russia, it's weaponizing information and adeptly uses it.
 Regional powers have used SOE to hit above their weight class on the geopolitical stage . This matters because, as noted in the Joint Operating Environment 2035, the ability of regional powers to attain global reach will likely result in increased competition throughout multiple domains .
 The Palestine Liberation Organization was founded in 1979 . It was formed as the Palestinian Liberation Organization .
 Iran's ability to oppose U.S. goals and initiatives in the Middle East has enabled them to obtain several key strategie objectives . Nevertheless, the ability of Iran to oppose United States goals has allowed them to get several key objectives .
 Quds Force, the IRFs premier SOF unit, was able to train, arm, equip, and advise previously disparate Shia militia groups to join forees under Hezbollah umbrella .
After just a few years, the fledgling proxy movement was able to foree the U.S. and Israeli militaries to withdraw . After just a couple years, it was able.
 The IRI's war with Iraq and realization of eonventional weakness solidified Iran’s affinity for proxies and UW operations . LH's eontinued foeus has enabled LH to aehieve not only a standing army with advaneed weapons but also politieal
 This move toward loeal eredibility was bolstered by LH’s information dominanee . This move towards loeale eredification was bolstered.
 The battle for pereeption dominanee was just as eritieal as the strategie strike eompetition and the gritty defense of the villages in southern Lebanon .
In Iraq, as early as 2003, the Quds Force began training, equipping and advising thousands of Muqtada al-Sadr’s Mahdi Army to counter U.S. military objectives . In Iraq, the injection of Iranian technology to increase the human cost of
 The ability of Iran to compete with the U.S. asymmetrically through the use of UW proxies and information warfare dominance again enabled strategic effects . Iran's ability to compete against the United States has enabled strategic effect, says U.N. officials .
 The ability of Iranian Quds Force to work alongside the Syrian Army is an illustration of Foreign Internal Defense as described in the U.S. Army’s Multi-Domain Operations Training Circular .
 The Quds force exemplified a long-held belief within USSF that the best UW force can also provide the best assistance in a Counter-Insurgency campaign .
 IRI was able to capitalize on weakness and instability to attain greater control over its neighbor . Once again, the IRI is able to gain greater control of its neighbor.
 As ISIS forces marched through Mosul and Fallujah and threatened Baghdad, many Iraqi volunteers opted to join the Popular Mobilization Forces rather than the Iraqi military and police units .
 IRI through the employment of adaptable SOF was able to support conventional forces in one region while building an irregular force in another country simultaneously .
 Many scholars, experts, and defense analysts have prophesied about the future of warfare . Most have focused on the technological aspects of warfare, most on the future.
Futurist literature is replete with predictions of cyber Armageddon scenarios . The reality will be quite like the past competitive environment of the cold war .
 Rather than massed armies invading territories or truly crippling cyber-attacks, modem warfare seeks to advance the political agendas of the state .
Modern war is still capable of producing political endstates, but still capable. However, whether by conventional or irregular means, modern war is capable of produce political end states .
 Our opponents in the modern continuum are increasing their capacity to conduct warfare below the threshold of a conventional response while still eliciting positive results .
As economic growth and relative international prosperity continue to increase, the likelihood of this form of warfare increases. As demonstrated previously in Chapter V, as economic growth, as well as international prosperity continues to increase.
 It is necessary for the U.S. military to maintain a force organized to be capable of either conducting or defeating these operations with regularity .
 Current USASOC strategy dictates that for ARSOF to be competitive in the future environment, one of the essential risks necessary for enabling success it to divest of legacy missions .
 The New Rules of War is a new form of war . The future force will be smaller than McFate, The New rules of War .
 When assessing the future eapability of the SFOD-A, it is therefore neeessary to examine the eapable of theSFO-A during the Cold War .
As terrorists eontinue to threaten our nation, it is also neeessary to examine the eapabilities of the SFODA throughout the GWOT .
 Any recommended change to the SFOD-A cannot be a step backward but must rather build upon existing capability .
 The following recommended change is a combination of the examination of the past, the current global trends and the most likely future environment .
 The current focus of the U.S. military’s manning, training, and equipping for potential large-scale ground combat is likely to require additional SOF capabilities and operations .
 The increased requirement for SOF capabilities will occur for three reasons . This increased requirement will be for three different reasons .
 The increased capability of our conventional forces and the United States’ nuclear deterrence will most likely mean a return to a “cold-war atmosphere’s’. First, the increase in covert and clandestine deployments, not large-scale wars, will be a return.
 Russia, China, and Iran, will continue to turn toward asymmetric options to achieve their interests . Second, adversaries like Russia and China, will still turn towardymmetric options .
 U.S. operations will deny the United States the ability to respond conventionally . These operations will, by design, deny the U.N. ability to response conventionally.
 The U.S. will employ to counter aggression will be through the development of partners and allies . The United States will also use the use of allies and partners in the fight against aggression .
 shift in focus by the conventional military may give state and non-state actors additional space to develop into more robust networks with increased capability .
 U.S. capability increase has potential to edge the United States out of the competitive space changing the status quo of United States hegemony .
 It is incumbent upon USSF to cover any gaps left by the transition of focus .
 To do this appropriately, USSF must modernize in parallel though not in mirror as it did while supporting the AirLand Battle operating concept . USSF needs to modernize its approach to the concept .
 The U.S. Army Special Operations Command, Army Special Forces Strategy Strategy, is based on the Army's Special Operations Strategy . The Army Special Operation Command is based in the United States .
 Like the ehallenges whieh SOF face in continually providing relevance to conventional commanders, they face challenges .
 This temporary additive capability enhancement was again refleeted during VSO operations in Afghanistan . While PSYOP is a core eompetency of USSF, it is something that individual soldiers receive little training on and are almost never validated in .
 If USSF is to be sueeessful in Great Power Competition by gaining information dominanee, it is neeessary to exceed the capability of U.S. adversaries to leverage information .
 PSYOP specialists to a SFOD-A when neeessary, information dominanee must be the umbrella under whieh all other operations take plaee . This means that rather than simply attaehing PSYO specialists to the PSYop specialists to SF
 This is unlikely to happen if it is not trained eonsistently within the SFOD-A and integrated throughout operational planning and exeeution . This is not likely to happen.
 This should be done without adding additional personnel to the unit, as this would also bring an untold number of logistieal adjustments . This should not be done with additional personnel, as it would bring a number of adjustments .
 The capability adaptation should instead be treated as an individual skill with assoeiated MOS identifieation, like SOTACs .
 USSF prepares to modernize in support of Great Power Competition . Ineorporating PSYOP skills will enhanee partners efforts to reeruit and build support .
 As partners’ capability increases, the indigenous approach that USSF is best suited for will be reinforeed . The indigenous approach will be better suited for USSF.
 This inerease in relevaney will deerease the likelihood of adaptations of USSF for unilateral / direet roles such as were seen during the post-Vietnam time period .
 As other SOF units begin to modernize, it is likely that they will be more focused on their respeetive core capabilities .
 The reinforeement of foeus of USSF on indigenous populations through partner operations under an information dominanee umbrella will ensure the United States is not left with a capability gap . USSF is not leaving the U.S. with the capability gap.
 SWCS should reserve billets for USSF soldiers to attend relevant sections of the PSYOP course . The current course falls under SWCS and is manned by individuals with years ofPSYOP experience .
 SWCS would enable an expedited course for USSF soldiers who already have core SOF capabilities such as language training .
 The addition of USSF PSYOP specialists on the SFOD-A would not have no negative effect on the relevancy of traditional PSyOP specialists . The addition would not be a negative effect.
 SFODAs should still request Tactical PSYOP Teams to augment their deployments . Instead of working on basic tasks, these teams would enable larger distribution and messaging .
 This would reciprocally enhance the information dominance umbrella of the SFOD-As operations . It would also have the added benefit of decreasing tribalism between the two branches. This would also benefit the SFO-As operation .
With a sound understanding of the environment and missions that drove these adaptations, it becomes clear that the prevailing cause of transformation was the desire to remain relevant . The author says that the most important thing is to be relevant .
 If USSF is to stay ahead of the relevancy curve, it stands to reason that information dominance at the lowest level is critical to the success of operations in the information age .
 Report on Governability of Democracies to the Trilateral Commission . Report on the Governability. of Democracy of Democrates to the. Commission .
 To Cage the Red Dragon SEATO and the Defense of Southeast Asia, 1955-1965 . To Cage The Red DragonSEATO, 1955 to 1965. To Cage.
Nathan, Nathan, Charles R Burnett, William Cain Jr, Christopher D Compton, Sean M Hankard, Robert S Hume, Gary 11 Kramlieh, J Matthew Fissner, Tobin A Magsig, and Daniel E Mouton .
 Special Operations Force Program is Achieving Goals, but Iraqi Support Remains Critical to Success. Special Operations force Program is achieving goals, but Iraq's support remains critical to success .
 Ives, Christopher K. U.S. Special Forces and Counterinsurgency in Vietnam . Ives is a member of the United States Special Forces . He is a veteran of the Vietnam War .
 Cited in his book Radio Free Europe and Radio Fiberty, Chi n4 NARA release courtesy of Douglas Selvage . The author is also known for his book "Radio Free Europe"
 The Stability-Instability Paradox, Misperception, and Escalation Control in South Asia are all published in Asia .
 Medal of Honor Recipient John Chapman and the Untold Story of the World’s Deadliest Special Operations Force .
 The Eirst Thirty Years, a History of the United States Army Special Eorces, is a history of the U.S. Army special eorces . The Eight Thirty Years is a History.
 Clandestine Cold War Operations of the U.S. Army’s Elite, 1956-1990 .
 The Case of Wagner, Russia’s Premier Private Military Company in the Middle East, is based in Russia . Wagner is Russia's Premier Private Private Military company in the Mideast .
 US Army Special Operations Command, “Eittle Green Men’s“ (Fort Bragg, NC; United States Special Operations command, 2016) “U.S. Army Tactical Mobility Requirements Board Final Report, 20 August 1962. “United States Army tactical Mobility
 Aeeessed August 13, 2019. Aeeess August 13 .