 Ukraine is Ukraine's largest country in the world . The country has been the country's most populous since the 1980s . Ukraine is the most populous country in Europe .
 From June to August 2014, and slightly beyond, I was able to produce more in-depth articles at leisure in an ideal working environment . Once I returned to Canada, I continued to write even under the pressure of a difficult administrative post .
 The war in the east continues in spasms, with no substantial gains by the Ukrainian government or separatist regimes . In the remainder of Ukraine the transformation is readily apparent to any visitor .
 Ukraine is casting off its Soviet heritage, at least the physical manifestations of the Leninist past . It is largely based on what is termed the struggle for independence in the 20th century .
 This marks an end of sorts to the phenomenon known as Euromaidan . For me, this marks anend of sorts. For me it marks an ending of sorts for the phenomenon .
 There is inevitably some overlap between them, but they provide a narrative from the beginning to a logical end point .
 At times, the conjectures therein were obviously incorrect, but those reflect prevailing opinions or thoughts at the time of writing .
 As analyses rather than news stories, there are also discussions with or about the interpretations of other scholars .
 As Euromaidan developed, I tried to maintain a distance from events, which was possible for a scholar of Ukraine who is not of Ukrainian ancestry .
 Many of my colleagues wholeheartedly supported the protests and condemned Russian actions . Many of their colleagues also support the protests .
 Others adopted a concerned and sometimes scathing attitude to what they perceived as the rise of extreme ethnic nationalism in some parts of Ukraine .
 Ukraine introduced its so-called Memory Laws in the spring of 2015 . The laws were introduced by the Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko .
 We argued that they would place prospective shackles on scholars, especially in Ukraine, who might question the reputations of ‘fighters for independence in 20th century Ukraine’
 One of the initiators of the laws declared that we were all agents of the Kremlin . The initiator of the law declared that the Kremlin was all agents .
 No criticism was palatable, even from those who thought they were friends of Ukraine . No criticism of Ukraine was palable .
In Russia, the propaganda was part of the hybrid conflict and was quite effective . In Russia, it was very effective .
 In Ukraine, those who had always distrusted Vladimir Putin were strengthened in their beliefs . Many who had not expected an invasion were heavily shaken .
 I visited Ukraine in both 2015 and 2016 and was able to talk to some of the participants of the events . I visited the country in 2015, 2016 and 2016 .
 I have corresponded with many others, including people who fought on both sides of the border in Donbas . I have also corresponded to many other people, including those who fought in the region .
 An analytical chronicle of events as they appeared at the time would not only be useful, but might also help readers acquire a clearer perspective . I have attended local, national, and many international conferences on problems engendered by Euromaidan .
 It begins just prior to the aborted signing of an EU-Ukraine Association Agreement, during a summit in Vilnius, Lithuania in 2013 .
 The Ukrainian Institute of National Remembrance is tasked with introducing and monitoring the changes of city and street names and removals of statues and memorials dedicated to Soviet figures . It ends with a discussion of decommunisation and the programmes and policies of the Ukrainian Institute.
 Ukraine has been placed in a position of crisis, partly by Russia and partly by its own leadership . Russia and its own business elites remain in place today and wield strong influence .
 The book is aimed at an academic audience in part but framed so that it is accessible to the wider section of the population that became fascinated and horrified by what occurred .
 At the time of writing, the death toll in the war that followed Euromaidan is over 10,000 . Tens of thousands wounded and several million displaced from their homes .
 The declaration of independence in 1991 followed 22 peaceful years following the declaration .
 Ukrainian leaders are trying to distance Ukraine from its Russian neighbour . What has occurred might be perceived as the long-term consequences of independence .
 Russia and the EU have played important roles in recent years in the world's most important countries . Russia and EU have been key players in the recent Russian and European elections .
 Ukraine is one of the largest countries in Europe, and faces opponents that question its right to exist . It is about change and upheaval in Ukraine, one of Europe's largest countries .
 The articles cover a period of over three years, arguably the most traumatic in the history of independent Ukraine .
 The prelude to the signing of the Association Agreement between Ukraine and the Soviet Union is the first step in the process of signing .
 The name given to the demonstrations, Euromaidan, was based on these initial protests . The name is based on the initial protests, and the name was given to these protests .
 The articles in the volume are mainly concerned with Ukrainian politics, with some emphasis on economic, social and historical questions .
 Some are academic, and others are commentaries, but usually founded on a wide reading of the Ukrainian media and government outlets . Some of the commentaries have been published in the past .
 The goal is to make the content comprehensible to the general reader as well as the specialist . The goal in every case is to be comprehensible.
 The articles are ‘frozen in time’ in that they have not been revised, but in almost every respect they remain relevant today .
 The overall goal is to elucidate a complex and divisive period, which is still evolving a quarter century after the collapse of the Soviet Union . The overallgoal is to explain a complex period.
 Russia's future is more crucial than the future of Ukraine . In many respects questions shelved in 1991, thanks partly to the peaceful demise of the Communist state, are re-emerging .
 Most of the articles focus on these events and what followed in the eastern regions . The Euromaidan took on extreme forms .
 Some clashes are still taking place in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, but the intensity has not reached the level of 2014 or early 2015 . Some clashes have still taken place, but some have not reached 2014 or 2015 .
 The far right forces played an important role in the later stages of Euromaidan . But they were unable to dictate their will, he says .
 temporary government installed after president left office was not in any way Nazi, neo-Nazi, or even particularly right wing . They carried out acts of violence, but the temporary government was not.
 He was not physically attacked or threatened even during the final stages of the uprising . He wasn't physically attacked during the uprising.
 The temporary government established by the demonstrators was soon replaced by a newly elected president .
 Yanukovych continues to deny that he gave an order for the Berkut police forces to fire on demonstrators . He also denies he gave a order for Berkut officers to fire.
 The government inquiry has been inconclusive and unsurprisingly the question has elicited much speculation . The inquiry is inconclusive .
 Yanukovych was a weak leader who seemed afraid to order a complete crackdown on the protestors . Though Yanukovych was in many respects a tyrant, he was not a tyrant .
An order to use lethal force may have come from another government agency . But it may not have been from another agency .
 Ukraine experienced a civil war, but the separatist forces were relatively weak until bolstered by Russian military materiel and ‘volunteers’ – including many of the initial leaders of the regimes in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 It would be facile and incorrect to state that these two ‘people’s republics’ were creations of Russia . But, it would be Facile to state these two 'people's republics' were creations.
 They expressed a deep discontentment within the region with Euromaidan and the new government in Kyiv . The new government is in charge of the region's new government .
 Donetsk region had boasted the president, prime minister and most of the Cabinet of Ukraine . Within weeks, the region had lost all its power .
 Many felt detached from the events in the centre and west of the country . And many felt detached.
 One can term these sentiments pro-Russian, pro-Soviet or pro-separatist . One can also call these sentiments Pro-Russian or Pro-Soviet .
 More accurately they were a reflection of the mind-set of many residents . More accurately, they were more accurate than they were.
 The statement applies easily to the western regions and to central Ukraine around the capital Kyiv . This statement applies to the west and to the central Ukraine .
 Dnipropetrovsk and Kharkiv have no desire to separate from Ukraine . But more important, it is clear that industrial regions that were formerly in the Soviet Communist heartland have no want to separate .
 Opinion polls indicate that there is no longing for a Russian invasion or to join the Russian Federation . Even in the distant east, in the coal mining and steel towns of the Ukrainian part of Donbas, opinion polls indicate .
 In this sense, the new Ukraine is here to stay, even if it is not yet clearly defined . The Ukraine is still not clearly defined, but it is in the process of defining it .
After 25 years, there is a general satisfaction within the country with the concept of an independent Ukraine . After 25 years of independence, Ukraine is now a country with an independent country .
 The quest for the so-called Russkiy Mir, initiated in Moscow, has failed . The quasi-messianic phase of the conflict has failed, according to the Russian media .
 Russian leadership is confined to eccentric academics like Aleksandr Dugin and some of the wilder separatist leaders . Most of whom have now left Donetsk and Luhansk, or been killed in action .
 The idea of a Greater Russia – Rossiya – did not take root in any of the prior places in which it was attempted . The idea was not taken root in the first place it was tried .
 Moldova separated from Moldova thanks to Russian intervention in 1992 . This can be seen in the examples of Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and above all Transnistria .
 In the place of a New Russia, there is disorder and a lack of security, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
Host countries are suffering a form of internal cancer that they cannot eradicate because they do not have the force to do so . The host countries are also suffering from internal cancer .
 The government and separatists coexist unhappily and with occasional outbreaks of violence . The government, separatists coexistence unhapply and with occasionally outbreaks of Violence .
 Ukraine’s response to Euromaidan has been ambivalent and at times questionable . Thirdly, Ukraine”s response is ambivalent, at times dubious .
 The Yanukovych presidency was also present in the administrations of the previous two presidents, Leonid Kuchma and Viktor Yushchenko . The book was written in 2011 or 2012 .
 Ukraine's current president, Petro Poroshenko, has become even richer since he entered office . His chocolate company, Roshen, is partly through his chocolate company .
 Poroshenko is far from the worst of these Ukrainian oligarchs who control valuable resources and dictate state policy . But, Poroshenko, in some respects, dictates state policy.
 There have been no radical reforms to take Ukraine in a different direction. There are no radical changes to take the country in different direction .
 There have not been any reforms, but they have yet to make an impact on corruption . That is not to say there have not be any reforms. There have been no reforms, and they have not made an impact.
 Lenin statues, city and street names linked to Communism, monuments to Soviet heroes and architecture that appeared during the Soviet period .
 The campaign has not been without its critics, mainly for the way in which it is being conducted – ‘Communist style’ according to one observer .
 Volodymyr Viatrovych received a death threat in early March in the form of a wreath with the prospective date of his future death on the doorstep of the Ukrainian National Institute of Memory .
 The biggest concern is the nature of the programme to move Ukraine away from the Communist period . For this author, the biggest concern was the way Ukraine is being moved away from Communist period.
 The Lenins have adorned Ukraine for the past 90 years or so . It is healthy to remove the Lenins that have been there for 90 years .
 The quest to replace Soviet heroes with new versions based on a nationalist interpretation of the past seems unwise . But, the quest for new versions of Soviet heroes is unwise, it seems .
 In some parts of Ukraine it could be seen as provocative and the key question is one of direction . In some areas it could also be provocative .
 Russia maintains it is a neo-Nazi takeover of Ukraine . Russia has been a propaganda campaign in Russia against what it maintains is a Neo-Nazis takeover .
 The vitriol extends to anyone who appears sympathetic to the cause of Ukraine .
 Russian propaganda has targeted Canadian Foreign Minister Chrystia Freeland because her maternal grandfather edited a newspaper in Krakow when it was under Nazi occupation .
 Freeland had earlier been banned from travelling to Russia because of her strong support of Ukraine during the conflict and support for sanctions .
 Russian focus on Ukrainian nationalism has become an integral part of its foreign policy . The focus on Ukraine has become a key part of Russian foreign policy.
 In turn, some Ukrainians refuse to accept any Western critiques of their country .
 Critics accuse such critics of being ‘Kremlin agents’ who are working for Vladimir Putin and the Russian government .
 The accusation is usually inaccurate and induced by fear and suspicion . It is usually caused by fear, suspicion or fear and fear .
 One should always recall that a very real danger of their country disintegrating and falling a victim to violence of outside forces influences public opinion .
 We in the West are not in this position and it is very difficult to comprehend the sort of decisions facing leaders in Ukraine. We are in a very difficult position, says David Cameron .
 Ukrainian scholars have taken the view that for Ukraine to pursue a democratic path, an official revanchist nationalist policy is hardly the best option . Still, many scholars have also taken the views of Ukrainian scholars .
 The author's goal in this book has been to take a more distant approach . He has at times offered some examples of what he perceive as hyperbole or innate bias from Western commentators on Ukraine .
 The events have spurned a number of ‘instant critics’ – scholars who had not hitherto focused on Ukraine but have been willing to comment on social media .
 Vladimir Putin is simply responding to U.S. intrusions into the former Soviet space, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Most scholars of Ukrainian background in the West have been fiercely supportive of Ukraine . Most of them have been, conversely, supportive of the country .
 One offered on YouTube a list of those scholars he had ‘uncovered’ as Russophiles . One offered to list those he had 'uncovered' asRussophiles.
 The events analysed in this volume will likely not be understood fully for several decades . As a historian by training, I recognise that the events analysed by this volume may not be known fully for decades .
 Nevertheless, the temptation to comment – and to comment frequently – was too hard to resist .