 Ukraine had the third largest atomic arsenal in the world . The Soviet Union broke up in the early 1990s .
 Kyiv gave its nuclear stockpile back to Russia in exchange for security guarantees . The deal protected it from a potential Russian attack .
 Russia seemed to be a toothless power on the international stage . Even Russian speaking Ukrainians overwhelmingly supported Ukraine\u2019s independence .
 Russia ramped up its global standing and emerged as a considerable military power between 2014 and 2014 . However, between then and 2014, Russia's military power once again rose to prominence .
 Kremlin-leaning Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych rejected an association with the European Union in 2014 . Moscow grew increasingly concerned that its strategic interests in Crimea were being threatened .
 Yanukovych\u2019s removal from power the same year. This resulted in a series of protests across Ukraine, ending with Yanukovych's removal .
 Russia in turn responded by annexing Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula and throwing its weight behind a separatist rebellion that broke out in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia was forced to send a large part of its regular troops to Donbas in eastern Ukraine . The Ukrainian side failed to capture the Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 Ukraine and Russia adopted the Minsk Agreements in 2015 which stipulated that Russia must remove all its troops and machinery from Ukraine in exchange for Kyiv agreeing to hold special elections in Donbas . In a show of compromise, Russia and Ukraine agreed to hold a special elections.
 Ukrainian journalist Olya Vorozhbyt says Ukraine has held up its side of the bargain . The Minsk agreements established a ceasefire, but Russia has not .
 Russia also installed puppet governments in Donetsk and Luhansk, creating military dictatorships in the occupied territories . The territories were initially run by Russian citizens, but were later run by Russia .
 The Kremlin began to change the narrative of the conflict, framing it as a civil war that Russia was involved in simply as a mediator .
Vorozhbyt stresses that the conflict was between Ukraine and Russia and not nationalists and separatists .
 Putin has depicted Ukraine as the birthplace and antecedent of the Russian state . Ukraine is the birthplace of Russia's first state .
 Putin argued that Russians and Ukrainians were not just fraternal peoples, but one, single, united people, part of the same civilisation . In his writings in 2014 and 2021, Putin said that Russia and Ukrainians are not just Fraternal peoples .
 In the late 18th century, Russia incorporated Crimea and the lands of the Black Sea region, which collectively came to be known as Novorossiya or New Russia . This claim stems from the fact that in the late 1800s, Russia incorporating Crimea and Black Sea regions .
 Russians and Ukrainians have lived apart longer than they have lived together . 70 per cent of Ukrainians disagreed with the \u2018one people\u2019 claim .
 A report from the Brookings Institute further argues that Ukraine was a colony of Russia, much like India and America once were of the British .
 The fact that many Ukrainians speak Russian and parts of Ukrainian territory were incorporated into the Russian Empire is therefore \u201cirrelevant\u201d akin to any claim that the Brits may have over America.
 Russia can point to the interests of the few Russian citizens in eastern Ukraine as justification for its involvement in the conflict . However, the devils in the margins, and even with limited Ukrainian support, can be seen as a reason .
 Since 2014, over 14,000 people have been killed in the Donbas . An additional 1. million residents internally displaced, with approximately 75,000 fleeing to Russia .
 Russia has gathered as many as 130,000 troops along different parts of the Ukrainian border with 30,000 soldiers stationed in Belarus alone .
 The Kremlin seems to be making all the preparations for war, including moving military equipment, medial units and blood to the front lines .
 Diplomatic talks between Russia and the West have thus far not yielded any solutions . Russia and West have not been able to find a solution .
 Putin has issued a series of demands on Ukraine and NATO, including a guarantee that Ukraine will not be allowed to join the alliance . The conflict in Ukraine is a civil war .
 The situation may escalate in the coming months. That brings us to the situation today and how it may escalate . The situation in the U.S. may be on the rise .
 Russia will continue to destabilise eastern Ukraine without sending more troops into the country . The first is that Russia will still destabilise the country without sending additional troops .
 Russia may wage an all-out offence against Ukraine, including taking Kyiv and occupying the entire country . If Russia pursues the first option, much like it has done in Azerbaijan and Georgia, Moscow could continue exerting its influence in Ukraine .
 Russia has already issued almost 200,000 passports to Ukrainians in the Donbas . It is a bid to exert pressure on Kyiv to grant the region autonomy .
 This would succeed in hurting Ukraine without occupying it and mitigate the risk of a full-blown conflict . This would be the first time Ukraine has been allowed to leave the country .
 Ukraine is as large and populous as Afghanistan with over 300,000 people who have some form of military experience . The Kremlin may look to the past and determine that occupation is not the best route forward .
 Continuing to issue passports in the Donbas, while covertly supporting the separatist movement, would meet Russian foreign policy objectives while sparing Moscow from much needed accountability .
 Ukrainians want to have both Crimea and the Donbas returned to them as a matter of state sovereignty . Vorozhbyt doubts the efficacy of such a strategy .
 Russia may seek to establish a land corridor to Crimea, by seizing 300km of territory along the Sea of Azov . Russia's asymmetrical tactics of warfare are yet to be determined .
 To do so would require imposing massive costs on the government in Kiev . It would include decimating its armed forces and destroying critical infrastructure .
 Similar to NATO's airstrikes against Serbia in 1999, Russia could wage a war against Ukraine, using rocket launchers and cyber-attacks to undermine Ukrainian resistance .
 A full-on invasion of Ukraine would be something Europe hasn't seen in decades . Europe has never seen such a full on invasion in decades.
 Russia has amassed troops alongside Ukraine's eastern border . Russia has placed 30,000 troops in Belarus under the guise of routine military exercises .
 Putin could take Donbas in the east and launch an attack on Kyiv in the west from Belarus .
 The United States has estimated that such an attack would result in a civilian death toll exceeding 50,000 . The U.S. has estimated such a death toll would be more than 50,00 .
 Ukrainians have indicated that they would not take such hostility sitting down . However, Ukrainians have said that they will not sit down .
 33 per cent of Ukrainians would put up armed resistance if Russia started large-scale military actions . A further 21 per cent said they would participate in civil resistance in the form of protests, strikes and demonstrations .
 The Ukrainian parliament wrote a law for national resistance in January . In January, people across the country will be trained to resist Russian aggression .
 The Russian military was unable to subdue in both Afghanistan and Chechnya, despite the brutality inflicted in both regions . Russian occupation would thus encounter the sort of insurgency that the Russian military would encounter .
 The respondents expect Russia to use military force in Ukraine by a 3-1 margin . Many experts expressed uncertainty about whether Russia will use military forces in Ukraine .
 When asked if Russia would use military force in the next year, 56 per cent of scholars said yes . Only 20 per cent said no .
For the past eight years, Russian public support for the Crimean takeover has hovered between 84 and 86 per cent . For the past 8 years, Russia's public support has been at 84 to 86% for the takeover .
 50 per cent of Russians blame the U.S. and NATO for escalating tensions, while only 4 per cent blame the Kremlin . Another recent survey shows that 50% blame the United States and NATO .
 Two U.S. officials have said that Russia has in place 70 per cent of the combat power it would need to occupy Ukraine .
 Only 25 per cent of Russians support the incorporation of the Donbas into Russia . 26 per cent believe that the contested republics should remain within Ukraine .
 A report by the Critical Threats Project of the American Enterprise Institute and the Institute for the Study of War also argues against the probability of a Russian invasion . The economic costs of such an endeavour would be more than the Kremlin is able to sustain .
 The report states that \u201cPutin may be attempting a strategic misdirection that impales the West in a diplomatic process and military planning cycle that will keep the West unprepared .
 A recent KIS study found that a slim majority of Ukrainians agree with this assessment .
 71 per cent of Ukrainians think the country is already at war with Russia . Only 48 per cent believe that Russia will attack, according to a poll by the Ramzukov Center .
 Another deterrent to war is how much Russia would struggle to retain the occupied territories . Another deterrent is how little Russia would be able to retain its occupied territories.
 Ukraine has fallen under the control of extremist elements and foreign control . Since the outbreak of hostilities, Putin and his allies have depicted Ukraine as a brotherly nation .
 72 per cent of Ukrainians consider Russia to be a \u201chostile state . Even in separatist held parts of the Donbas, 55 per cent expressed a preference for being part of the Ukrainian state .
 In Donetsk and Luhansk, 65% of residents wanted to see the Donbas reintegrated into Ukraine . In Donetsk, 65 per cent of residents want to see a reintegration in Ukraine .
 The more aggressive Russia is, the more resistance Putin faces, she adds . The more patriotic people are now more patriotic and anti-Russia .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Volodymyr Zelensky is adamantly opposed to Russian occupation of eastern Ukraine . He won the election with 73 per cent of the vote in 2019, winning the election.
 Zelensky also won all of the constituencies in eastern Ukraine, despite the pro-Russian candidate initially having the upper hand .
 Ukrainian newspapers are resolute in their opposition to Russia . One compares the West's inaction in Ukraine to the disastrous policy of appeasement pursued by the UK Prime Minister Neville Chamberlin .
 The EU and America have tolerated Russian aggression in Ukraine in the past . But they have seemingly drawn a red line against any escalations that would involve a direct attack .
 Moscow has demanded that no former Soviet states be allowed to join NATO . It has accused the West of flooding Ukraine with weapons and stoking tensions in the region .
 Russia does have some legitimate security concerns, given that NATO was formed as an anti-Russian alliance, upon observation, the Kremlin says .
 Only five NATO countries neighbour Russia accounting for under 6 per cent of its total borders . Only five of the five countries have a total of 6% of their borders .
 NATO has repeatedly declined calls for Ukrainian membership . European military spending has declined over the last few decades, relative to Russia .
 Ukraine changed its constitution three years ago to include a pathway to those organisations as part of the country's future development . Three years ago, Ukraine even changed the constitution to include the pathway to these organisations .
 Ukraine doesn't seem likely to join NATO anytime soon . However, despite public support, it's unlikely to join anytime soon.
 Ukraine must root out corruption and meet other development goals before it is considered for membership . This view has been reiterated by the alliance and by President Biden .
 By applying for NATO, it has annoyed Russia and now faces a hostile and powerful neighbour without any protections from the alliance .
 Putin will have to account for Western support in any calculus for an invasion. Individual countries have pledged their assistance though, and if they maintain their current positions, it seems likely that they will .
 Biden warned that Russia will pay a heavy price if it chooses to invade Ukraine .
 His administration has already approved an additional USD200 million in defensive military aid to Ukraine . In addition to the USD450 million provided in the last fiscal year, he has also approved an extra $200 million .
 Biden directed the Pentagon to deploy more than 3000 American troops to bolster the defence of European allies . Earlier this month, Biden ordered more than 3,000 troops to be deployed in Europe .
 Only 15 per cent of American voters support troops being deployed to Ukraine . Washington will continue to provide monetary support and impose sanctions on the Russian economy .
\u201d European nations have responded to Ukraine's calls for assistance in various ways . She says the main thing that Ukraine needs from the West is more weapons, more sanctions and vocal public support .
 Britain began airlifting thousands of antitank missiles to Ukraine in January . In January, Britain started airlifting hundreds of missiles to the Ukraine .
 The BBC has also reported that Spain is sending warships to join NATO's naval forces in the Mediterranean and Black Sea . French President Emmanuel Macron has offered to send troops to Romania .
 Germany, arguably the strongest European nation, has remained notably subdued . However, Germany has been notably subdued in recent years .
 Russia has bolstered its economy against Western sanctions . halting the Nord Stream 2 project would have severe ramifications for Russia's economy .
German Chancellor Olaf Scholz met with Biden at the White House this month . ScholZ said if Russia invades Russia, there will no longer a Nord Stream 2 .
Between 1991 and 2014, Russia ramped up its global standing and emerged as a considerable military power .
 Moscow grew increasingly concerned that its strategic interests in Crimea were being threatened . As Ukraine veered towards the West, Moscow became increasingly concerned .
 increasing hostilities with Ukraine and the West is advantageous to Russia . The tattered relationship between the USA and its European allies is advantageous for Russia . Putin’s need for a popularity boost ahead of the 2024 Russian Presidential elections .
 Ukraine, a former Soviet Republic, had the third largest atomic arsenal in the world . The Soviet Union broke up in the 1990s .
 Russia seemed to be a toothless power on the international stage . Even Russian speaking Ukrainians overwhelmingly supported Ukraine’s independence .
 In 2014, Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych rejected an association with the European Union in favour of closer ties with Moscow .
 This resulted in a series of protests across Ukraine, ending with Yanukovych’s removal from power the same year . This year, Yanukovych was removed from power .
 Russia annexing Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula and throwing its weight behind a separatist rebellion that broke out in eastern Ukraine . Russia in turn responded by annexing the Crimean Peninsula .
 Immediately after the annexation, Ukraine seemed to have the upper hand . Ukraine seems to have a higher hand .
 Ukrainian journalist Olya Vorozhbyt says Ukraine has held up its side of the bargain, even though Russia has not .
 Russia continued to adopt a series of unconventional tactics against Ukraine, including cyber-attacks, funding and arming irregular militias, and spreading mass disinformation .
 Vorozhbyt stresses that the conflict was between Ukraine and Russia and not nationalists and separatists .
 Russia’s rationale behind supporting so-called Ukrainian separatists is bellied by its claim that Russians and Ukrainians are one people .
 Putin has depicted Ukraine as the “holy Rus’s birthplace and antecedent of the Russian state .
 Russians and Ukrainians have lived apart longer than they have lived together . 70 per cent of Ukrainians disagreed with the ‘one people’ claim, according to poll .
 Many Ukrainians speak Russian and parts of Ukrainian territory were incorporated into the Russian Empire . The fact that many Ukrainians speak Russia is therefore ‘irrelevant’ akin to any claim the Brits may have over America due to their shared cultural similarities .
 Russia can point to the interests of the few Russian ‘citizens’ in eastern Ukraine as justification for its involvement in the conflict . However, the devils in the margins, and even with limited Ukrainian support, can be seen as justification .
 Russia may wage an all-out offence against Ukraine, including taking Kyiv and occupying the entire country . The second is that Russia may make a play for the Donbas, thus establishing a corridor between Russia and Crimea . The third, and most concerning scenario, is
 Russia could continue exerting its influence in Ukraine while prima facie denying its involvement in the conflict . If Russia pursues the first option, much like it has done in Azerbaijan and Georgia, Moscow could continue to exert its influence .
 Russia's asymmetrical tactics of warfare is yet to be determined. Whether or not they could contend with Russia’s asymmetrical tactic of warfare or amass the support of Western allies in doing so is still not determined .
 Russia may seek to establish a land corridor to Crimea, by seizing 300km of territory along the Sea of Azov . Another scenario is that Russia might seek toestablish a land Corridor to Crimea .
 Russia could wage a “stand-off’ war against Ukraine, using rocket launchers and cyber-attacks to undermine Ukrainian resistance . Similar to NATO’s airstrikes against Serbia in 1999, Russia could conceivably wage a "stand-offs" war against the Ukraine .
 A full-on invasion of Ukraine would be something Europe hasn't seen in decades . Europe hasn’t seen such an invasion in decades.
 Russia has amassed troops alongside Ukraine’s eastern border . Russia has placed 30,000 troops in Belarus under the guise of routine military exercises .
 The report states that “Putin may be attempting a strategic misdirection that impales the West in a diplomatic process and military planning cycle that will keep it unprepared,” thus destabilising the country .
 Putin and his allies have repeatedly depicted Ukraine as a brotherly nation . Ukraine has fallen under the control of extremist elements and foreign control .
 55 per cent of respondents expressed a preference for being part of the Ukrainian state . Even in separatist held parts of the Donbas, 55% said they would like to be part of Ukraine .
 Even people who weren’t interested in politics are now more patriotic and anti-Russia, she says . The trend is likely to continue.
 Ukrainian newspapers are resolute in their opposition to Russia . One compares the West’s inaction in Ukraine to the disastrous policy of appeasement pursued by UK Prime Minister Neville Chamberlin .
 Russia does have some legitimate security concerns, given that NATO was formed as an anti-Russian alliance, but the Kremlin's claims seem unsubstantiated .
 Ukraine even changed its constitution to include a pathway to those organisations as a part of the country’s future development . Three years ago, Ukraine even added a pathway for those organisations to be part of its future development.
 Ukraine doesn't seem likely to join NATO anytime soon . Despite public support, Ukraine doesn’t seem likely.
 Biden warned that Russia will pay a heavy price if it chooses to invade Ukraine .
 European nations have responded to Ukraine’s calls for assistance in various ways . Ukraine has called for help in the past to help in Ukraine .
 The BBC has also reported that Spain is sending warships to join NATO’s naval forces in the Mediterranean and Black Sea . French President Emmanuel Macron has offered to send troops to Romania .
 Russia's foreign gas sales totalled USD54 billion in 2021, while its defence budget was USD62 billion . Another Ukrainian publication argued that the Germans are literally financing Russia’s war on Ukraine .
 German Chancellor Olaf Scholz met Biden at the White House this month . The pipeline is a private sector project, separate from Ukraine .
 Chancellor Vorozhbyt says Ukraine is prepared for any and all eventualities . He says Germany is prepared to pull the plug on the pipeline .
Bhopal couple fall off scooter, accuse biker of hitting them from behind . TrendingIMD issues orange alert.