 When factual reporting on major elements in Russia’s disinformation and propaganforeign policy priorities is not favorable, Russia uses da ecosystem . Russia uses a da ecosystem to report on key issues, including disinformation .
 U.S. state-funded international media outlets to inject Department of State’s Global Engagement Center pro-Kremlin disinformation and propaganda into an August 2020 report .
 RT has ‘garnered a signifwith publicly funded, transparent and journalistiicant audience,’ in Latin America, according to the Atlantic Council’s Digital Kremlin . RT's Facebook page during British Broadcasting Corporation and Voice the COVID-19 pandemic.
 RT and Sputnik’s opaque organistatistics are incorrect, this does not diminish their zational structure and lack of financial transparency . The Russian governdering of narratives across Russia's disinformation ment's control over the outlets’ editorial processes.
 Russian govRT’s content has the ability to change the opinions ernment officials and the outlets’ leadership have of its viewers .
 A recent study reported that Ameropenly discussed RT and Sputnik’s role as tools of ican consumers exposed to RT content are more state propaganda .
 RT and Sputnik are Russia’s primary media outlets that produce content for non-Russian speaking audiences . They are Russia's main media outlets .
 Russian N OT TR A NSPAREN T is state-funded and state-directed news outlet . It began broadcasting internationally A N D TH EIR O V ERA L L in December 2005 .
 Sputnik is the main foreign-facing project of Rossiya Segodnya, an international news agency . It was created in late 2013 by a presidential executive order to from independent media .
 Russian government officials are in-chief of both RT and Rossiya Segodnya . RT's parent company, TV-Novosti, was founded by RIA Novosti .
 RT and Sputnik attempt to equate themselves with major independent and fact-based international media outlets . Russia's disinformation and propaganda portray any efforts to criticize their activities ecosystem .
 RT to disseminate disinformation and propaganda and Sputnik are not transparent, and their 4 Global Engagement Center narratives to audiences outside of Russia to this paper include three case studies .
 There is a and show how the outlets inject disinformation into state-funded media outlets and other pillars .
 The first case study examines RT’s ecosystem, such as the weaponization of social reporting during the 2014 Maidan revolution and media, the cultivation of proxy sources and cyberthe subsequent Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 RT and Sputnik frequently give favorable coverage to Turkey before and after the Turkish military shot organizations such as WikiLeaks that have received down a Russian aircraft following its incursion into information from hackers .
 RT and Sputnik’s work as disinformation and propaganda outlets is clearest when reporting on issues important to the Kremlin . RT's work as a propaganda outlet is the clearest in Russia.
 RT and Sputnik’s leaders argue a false equivalency between their outlets and fact-based media organizations, obfuscating how the outlets spread Russian government disinformation .
 RT and Sputnik lack BBC and VOA’s transparent organizational and financial structures . First, RT and sputnik don’t have a transparent organization and financial structure .
 The extent and nature of government involvement in the outlets’ activities is significantly larger at RT and Sputnik .
 RT and Sputnik’s leadership have acknowledged the influential roles their outlets play as amplifiers of Kremlin-backed narratives .
 VOA and BBC have documents detailing their editorial independence from the governments that fund them . In contrast, VOA has documents detailing its independence from governments .
 The relationship between Simonyan and Aleksey Gromov, the First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Russian Presidential Administration, is well noted . Independent media call “Putin’s media puppetmaster,” is well known .
 RT and Sputnik's role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 7 Ministry of Foreign Affairs . RT's Arabic language service expansion from 2007-2011 .
After leaving RT, he re-entered the diplomatic service as the senior counselor at the Russian Embassy to the U.S. He later became the head of the Russian Mission to the Palestinian National Authority in Ramallah .
 Former and current RT and Sputnik employees have also provided firsthand insights into the control the Kremlin has over RT and sputnik’s management and content .
 One employee spoke of training for journalists intended to ensure their reporting would reflect the Kremlin's positions .
 Russian government maintains advisory team that oversees RT’s hiring process . Another shared the Russian government maintained an advisory team.
 Several employees said RT chooses inexperienced journalists to be able to shape their perceptions and limit their pushback on editorial decisions . Other sources confirmed the claims by others .
 Daniel Lange, a former employee at RT DE, said the leadership of RT DE ordered him to spy on Russian opposition figure Aleksey Navalny . Navalny was recovering in a Berlin hospital from a Russian Federal Security Service assassination attempt using chemical weapon .
 RT DE employees reported they received criticism from Moscow for being too slow to publish an article about an October 2020 video conference featuring Russian President Putin .
 Staff received detailed emails about conspiracy theories they could actively promote . For example, staff received detailed Emails about conspiracy theory they could promote .
 A former Sputnik White House correspondent revealed his supervisor's insistence on preapproving any questions he planned to ask the White House press secretary .
 The journalist's questions were frequently changed by his supervisor to be more aligned with Russian policy . When he veered away from the official line, he was reprimanded .
 The number of ---people --who --have ----spoken out and the similarity of their experiences suggest the Russian government directly and consistently influences the reporting of both RT and Sputnik .
 RT reportedly began requiring all employees to sign nondisclosure agreements . RT and Sputnik employees came forward with their stories . RT reportedly started requiring all workers to sign agreements .
 RT journalists and other specialists went to work at Belarusian state media outlets after the Belarusian staff left in protest over the 2020 fraudulent elections . As an example of the direct confluence between RT's activities and its support for the Kremlin’s foreign policy objectives.
 Belarusian state media changed to become closer to Russian style disinformation and propaganda . As a result, the style of state media became closer to Russia.
 Belarusian state media began to promote closer links between Russia U NLIKE MAJOR FACT BASED and Belarus . They started to use common Russian disinformation phrases such as “color revolutions’ and ‘foreign agent’ in their reporting .
 Russian support for Lukashenka regime via RT appears to be similar to other forms of political, financial and military assistance Russia has provided to support the regime .
 Organizational Structure RT and Sputnik’s organizational structure and management hierarchy are opaque .
Until December 2021, Rossiya Segodnya's parent company showed only Dmitriy Kiselyov as the general director and Margarita Simonyan as editorin-chief .
 Rossiya Segodnya recently created a management page that lists a few of the senior staff at their outlets . He still does not provide any detail about how the outlets are managed .
 The organization that operates RT, TV-Novosti, lists Aleksey Nikolov as the general director and Margarita Simonyan as editor-in-chief in government documents .
 Of the employees listed, it appears that some work for both RT and Rossiya Segodnya . The two organizations claim to be separate .
 In some cases, senior staff alternate between different outlets and Rossiya Segodnya .
 The fact that certain individuals appear to work for more than one outlet at a time indicates a connection, at least via personnel .
Independent and fact-based media outlets are consistently more transparent about their organizational structure and management hierarchy . RT and Sputnik incorrectly compare themselves, whether private or government-funded .
 Most provide detailed documents about how their organizations are run, the company’s strategy, and lists of board members and upper management .
 organizational charts of media outlets such as VOA and BBC are examined . When organizational charts are examined, organizational structures are apparent .
 RT and Sputnik lack fiscal transparency. Unlike major fact-based international media outlets, RT lacks fiscal transparency . Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem Ecosystem 9 Finances .
 Russian government does not publish public budget sheets or detailed financial reports . The public must rely on vague estimates occasionally announced by the Russian government .
 The limited amount of information they do provide about budgets and expenditures is difficult to track and often includes conflicting figures .
 Russian independent media outlet Dozhd TV said the budget for 2015 was 18 billion rubles . Simonyan said in a 2015 interview with the media outlet, the budget was 18billion rubles.
 Officials do sometimes round figures when describing budgets, but these discrepancies are significant .
 The leadership of both Russian organizations are likely aware of fiscal issues and are deliberately selective and obfuscating . The leadership is likely to be aware of the fiscal issues .
 Simonyan chairs the budget committee, according to TV Novosti’s charter . He is editor-in-chief of both RT and TV-Novosti .
 TV-Novosti did not publish the mandatory Ministry of Justice reports regarding their budget . In 2020 and 2021, TV- Novosti didn't publish the budget reports .
 This is especially true for Sputnik, which receives a portion of Rossiya Segodnya’s budget, but does not disclose how much. This is particularly true for the Russian-based company .
 The 2019-2020 report includes information on salaries, expenditures, performance ratings, etc. The report will be released in 2020 .
State-funded Deutsche Welle publishes transparent information about its performance and budget . German state-funded DeWelle publishes similarly transparent information .
 Other RT and Sputnik staff share Simonyan's view that high-quality, unbiased journalism is not the media’s goal .
 Sputnik Editor-in-Chief Anton Anisimov spoke to young journalists . He said that what you believe in is in accord with what and war is always a CRITICAL MOwe do .
 RT and Sputnik's role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 11 and war is always a critical moment . RT and sputnik are part of the Russian government's Dis Information Ecosystem .
 Simonyan credits the 2008 Russia-Georgia war with shaping her views on how RT needed to evolve in order to appeal to non-Russian audiences . She also says RT needs to evolve to appeal.
 The outlet's initial purpose was to showcase Russian culture and improve Russia's global image . The outlet’s initial purpose is to showcase Russia's culture.
 RT changed its focus accordingly in 2012 to focus on Russian topics . Simonyan said in a 2012 interview that limiting the channel to Russian topics limited its appeal to foreign audiences .
 He said, “We are supported by the presidential administration and by the government’s government .
 Objectivity is a myth that we have been offered; it has been imposed on us . Objectivity has been a myth for years, says the author .
 The leadership of RT, Sputnik and the Russian government clearly indicate that they work in support of the Kremlin’s policies and goals .
 The ecosystem reflects both the sources of disinformation and propaganda and the tactics that these channels use . The ecosystem also reflects the sources and tactics of these channels .
 RT and Sputnik do not work in a vacuum within the disinformation and propaganda ecosystem . RT and sputnik don't work in the disinformation ecosystem.
Each pillar has the potential to create a piece of disinformation or a narrative that the other pillars pick up, modify, and amplify . Each pillar has a potential to make a story that can amplify or create a story .
Relationships have a media multiplier effect that boosts each pillar’s reach and resonance . These relationships have aMedia multiplier effect.
 The media multiplier effect can create disinformation storms with potentially dangerous effects . The media multipliers can create false stories and create false news stories .
 Russia's government-funded and directed outlets are effectively influencing viewers’ political convictions . Russia’s government- funded and directed outlet is effectively influencing voters’ convictions .
 RT persuades some Americans to prefer that the U.S. withdraw from its global leadership position . RT and Sputnik's role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem is shown for the first time .
 On average, American media consumers exposed to RT content are 15 percent less likely to support an active foreign policy . 20 percent more likely to believe the United States is doing too much to solve global problems, and 10 percent more Likely to value perceived national interests over the interests of U.S
 The study showed that informing people the Russian government funds RT did not return participants’ opinions to their prior perspectives .
 RT and Sputnik facilitate and engage in cyber-enabled influence operations in close coordination with other pillars in the information ecosystem . Connection to Cyber-Enabled Influence Operations.
 RT and Simonyan have a close relationship with Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks . The pair have been in contact for years .
Simonyan and Bogachikhin visited Assange in the Ecuadorian Embassy in 2013, according to a U.S. intelligence community report .
 RT tweeted at least twice about new batches of WikiLeaks releases before WikiLeaks itself made any announcements . RT and WikiLeaks’ close relationship is noted by the fact that RT tweeted two times before WikiLeaks made any announcement .
 RT and Sputnik, as well as proxy sites, then amplified and favorably covered the leaked information . RT and sputnik also amplified and covered the leaks .
 The malware was linked to stories posted on Twitter about a pause in the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine trials at the time .
 Both RT and Sputnik have promoted vaccine conspiracy theories and amplified instances of adverse reactions to U.S., UK, and European-origin vaccines .
 Facebook found Sputnik employees engaged in coordinated inauthentic behavior by using pages and accounts to represent themselves online on independent news pages .
 Russia’s ecosystem, state-funded global messaging, weaponization of social media, and cyber enabled-disinformation, worked together to amplify negative coverage and disinformation meant to harm Russia's perceived adversaries . In these cases, three pillars of Russia's ecosystem, including state- funded global
 A proxy site is an unofficial mouthpiece promoting disinformation Theories and AMPLIFIED INSTANCES and propaganda .
 In the context of Russian of ADVERSE REACTIONS to U.S., disinformation and propaganda, some proxy UK, and EUROPEAN-ORIGIN VAC sites have direct links to the Russian state, some CINES . OfTEN WITH
 RT and Sputnik have mutually beneficial relationships with writers for proxy sites . Finian Cunningham, Pepe Escobar, Christopher Black and Christopher Black have written for the sites .
 Several of the proxy sites these writers create content for, are directed, controlled, and/or guided by Russian intelligence services .
 News Front is a key player within the Russian disinformation and propaganda ecosystem . News Front aims to spread disinformation narratives into non-Russian media .
 Konstantin Knyrik accused independent social media companies of censorship . News Front had previously removed News Front's accounts for using manipulative tactics .
 News Front’s social media activity “relied on a combination of authentic, duplicate and fake accounts...posing as independent news entities,’ Facebook says .
 DFRLab analyzed Facebook's removal of pages and accounts affiliated with News Front . It found News Front’s Spanish-language pages heavily amplified content from Russian state-controlled media outlets .
 RT amplified Knyrik’s call for the Russian government to retaliate against social media companies . The Russian Foreign Ministry has complained about alleged discrimination against Russian-language media on YouTube .
 Aleksandr Malkevich, a Russian national involved in spreading pro-Russian disinformation abroad, also participated in the May 2020 Sputnik interview with Knyrik .
 Russian oligarch Yevgeniy Prigozhin finances global malign influence operations on behalf of the Kremlin . He finances globalmalign influence operation on behalf.
 Malkevich and News Front coordinate disinformation activities, according to the U.S. Department of the Treasury . The U.N. State Department of Treasury says Malkevitch, News Front coordinated disinformation activities .
 Maria Butina pleaded guilty to conspiracy to act as a Russian agent in the United States without registering with the Justice Department . She also hosts one of RT’s current shows on YouTube .
 She is now a member of the United Russia party, representing President Putin’s party . She now is also aMember of the DAMAGING to the Overall Russian Parliament .
 Butina's statements demonizing the U.S. include claims that she was prosecuted because of the color of her hair . Butina says she was enslaved, or that authorities “stuff” female prisoners with hormones to transform them “into obese monsters’
In addition to spreading distorted narratives, it spreads disinformation and propaganda aimed at undermining confidence in U.S., UK and European vaccines . In addition to spread distorted narratives in support of the Kremlin’s broader strategic objectives.
 NEO combines views of pro-Kremlin Russian academics with those of conspiracy theorists and critics of U.S. policy . NEO combines pro-Russian academics with critics of United States policy .
 RT and Sputnik have played a key role in the spread of COVID-19 related disinformation . RT and sputnik’s Role in Spreading COV-19 Disinformation and Propaganda RT has played a role in spreading the disinformation .
 Their reporting has promoted conspiracy theories and sown disinformation about Western vaccines . While simultaneously promoting the Russian made Sputnik V vaccine, they have promoted the Russian vaccine .
 RT and Sputnik’s promotion of COVID-19 related disinformation narratives also attempts to undermine trust between citizens and their governments . RT and sputnik's promotion ofCOVID- 19 related narratives also attempt to undermine Trust between citizens.
 Sputnik France claimed the European Union’s management of the pandemic and vaccine distribution has been a disaster .
 RT and Sputnik’s narratives undermining America, UK, and European COVID-19 vaccines are counterproductive and damaging to global health .
 RT’s COVID-19 coverage targeting foreign audiences differs significantly from its coverage in Russian .
 Independent Russian-language online outlet Meduza described the difference in the coverage as “worlds apart’s apart,’ claiming Russian domestic vaccine opponents often use RT’'s foreign language content to justify their views .
 Novaya Gazeta, which investigated RT France, reached similar conclusions . The outlet focused on criticizing COVID-19 related restrictions abroad, while ignoring or approving similar restrictions imposed by Russian authorities .
 In September 2021, YouTube deleted two accounts associated with RT DE for violating the company’s COVID misinformation policy . The company deleted the accounts in September 2021 .
 In December 2021, YouTube again took down an RT DE affiliated channel that RT created in an attempt to circumvent the September take downs . RT created the channel in a bid to circumvent September's take down .
 The Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs deleted RT DE and threatened German journalists in Russia . In response to the deletions, Russia spread disinformation blaming German authorities and media for conspiring against RT DE .
 T he Russian government attempts to obscure RT and Sputnik’s role as key instruments of state disinformation and propaganda . T he says he has been trying to obscure the Russian government's role in state disinformation .
 The Kremlin claims a false equivalency between the state-directed RT and Sputnik . But the differences are stark, and the difference is stark .
 Russian authorities are significantly involved in the decision-making process related to the outlets’ personnel and editorial policies . Russian authorities.
 RT and Sputnik are far less transparent about their management and financial structures than publicly funded international media .
 RT and Sputnik play an important role in Russia’s disinformation and propaganda ecosystem . They play a key role in the Kremlin's false claims and by interacting with other key pillars in the ecosystem .
 Unclassified open-source information illustrating RT and Sputnik’s activities is readily available to both governments and the general public .
Independent media outlets are not comparable to independent international media outlets . These outlets aren't comparable toindependent media outlets.
 RT and Sputnik operate as state-funded global messengers of Russian government disinformation and propaganda . Instead of providing objective, fact-based reporting, RT and sputnik are state- funded globalmessengers of Russia .
 The Kremlin uses these outlets in an attempt to gain political advantage when Russia does not benefit from the truth . The Kremlin is using these outlets as a political advantage .
 This report’s case studies included as annexes demonstrate how the Kremlin has used these outlets to interfere in elections, undermine democracy, and threaten the rules-based international order .
 Russian State-Funded Media Outlets T he summary below outlines the relationships between the various state-funded media outlets .
 The order stipulated that all the property of dissolved entities will be transferred to the newly formed state international news agency Rossiya Segodnya . The stated purpose of which is to provide information on Russian state policy and public life for audiences abroad .
 All of RIA Novosti’s founder rights for the various organizations it created, such as TV-Novosti, were transferred to Rossiya Segodnya .
 Rossiya Segodnya is the parent company of Sputnik, RIA Novosti and by relation to RIANovosti, TV-NovostI .
Sputnik is Rossiya Segodnya’s main project/brand targeting foreign audiences .
 RIA Novosti’s international news service and Golos Rossii were liquidated in 2013 . It is the replacement for RIANovosti's international news agency and Rossii's international media service .
Rossiya Segodnya is editor-in-chief of parent company Rossiya Se godnya . This link is likely made given her role as editor- in-chief.
 Anton Anisimov Editor-in-Chief and Andrey Blagodyrenko Head of Sputnik in countries that neighbor Russia . Tural Kerimov Head of sputnik is in non-Commonwealth of Independent States . Aleksey Orlov Head ofsputnik
 Originally a state-owned news agency founded in 1941, but liquidated in 2013 by a presidential executive order .
 Rossiya Segodnya kept the name RIA Novosti and restructured it to be Rossiya's main project/brand targeting domestic audiences . The name was changed to RIANovosti.
 Alexsey Gromov's son, also named Alexsey, is KUB’s manager, according to independent media outlet Proekt .
 ADIJ was founded in 2019 by Simonyan, Nikolov, and a few other individuals described by the independent Russian media outlet Open Media . The independent media outlet is based in Moscow .
 Redfish is a digital content creator that is aimed at the Western political left . Redfish was founded in 2010 and is based in London .
 There is significant overlap between Ruptly and other outlets linked to TV-Novosti . There is also significant overlap with other outlets.
 Ruptly grew out of RT’s FreeVideo project, which RT launched in 2009, but is now no longer in service .
 In 2018 the Ruptly Verification Unit, which claims to be dedicated to fact-checking videos, merged with and absorbed a branch of RT that investigated news sources called RT Digital .
 Xenia Fedorova has been the head of RT France since its debut in 2017 . She was also head of Ruptly from 2015 to the beginning of 2017 after which Toktosunova took over .
Ruptly and Redfish are located in Berlin, and until 2021 when Maffick closed its Berlin office, Ruptly, Redfish, shared the same address . Maffik closed its office in 2021 when he closed his Berlin office .
 This discrepancy could be an indicator of a lack of organizational independence . This could be a sign of an organization's lack of independence .
Ruptly presents itself as an outlet independent of the Kremlin’s influence . The connection between Ruptly and TV-Novosti may not be obvious to the average news consumer .
 Various Western companies have used Ruptly’s footage, according to Tubular Labs . It was the most-watched news agency on YouTube in 2020 .
 In 2021 Ruptly made the shortlist for the UK-based Association for International Broadcasting News Agency of the Year award .
 Aleksey Nikolov, managing director of RT and general director of TV-Novosti, was the former AIB Chairman from 2016-2018 . Nikolov was an Executive Committee member from 2018-2020 .
 Nikolov has also been a judge for the AIB’s annual awards 10 of the 11 years of its existence . Nikolov is a former judge for AIB's annual awards.
 Maffick Media GmbH was originally registered in Germany as Maffik Media GMBH . It shared the same business address as Ruptly and Redfish .
 Maffick kept many of the same pages that it ran as subsidiary of Ruptly . The company still runs an online page under the name of an opinion show that RT hosted .
 A U.S. court found that Maffick was unable to demonstrate that it was likely to succeed in showing that a “Russia state-controlled-media” label put on his Facebook pages was false .
 Maffick has registered under the Foreign Agents Registration Act . Documents include information on $5 million in transfers from TV-Novosti to MAffick since October 2019 .
 2014 Russian Occupation of Crimea R T’s growth and development have reflected shifts and changes in the Kremlin’S foreign policy .
 The parent company, TV-Novosti, was founded in April 2005 . RT’s first broadcast was in December 2005 . The outlet's parent company was also founded in 2005 .
 Both events closely followed Ukraine’s November 2004 Orange Revolution, which was in response to a fraudulent presidential election that favored Moscow's preferred candidate, Viktor Yanukovych .
 The revolution ended following a second run-off election won by Viktor Yushchenko . The revolution was followed by a second election in Ukraine .
 The uprising resulted in intense scrutiny of Russia’s involvement in internal Ukrainian affairs from the international community and the media .
 Some speculated one of the main goals of RT, or Russia Today, was to improve the image of Russia during the Orange Revolution .
Margarita Simonyan mentioned in an April 2012 interview that RT’s performance during the 2008 Russian invasion of Georgia was an important lesson on whether it could serve its purpose of influencing the non-Russian information space with Kremlin talking points .
 It was clear RT had failed, which likely led to rebrand with the help of a PR firm just after the war .
 Major political events in Ukraine once again occurred at the same time as major changes in Russian state media .
 President Putin liquidated RIA Novosti, a state-owned news agency founded in 1941, and Golos Rossii, a radio station founded in 1929 .
 The December 2013 order stipulated that all the assets of the dissolved media outlets would be transferred to the newly formed state international news agency Rossiya Segodnya . The state news agency was formed in 2013 .
 Russia invaded Ukraine and RT began broadcasting the Kremlin’s disinformation to the world . Two months after the signing of this order, Russia invasion Ukraine .
 Denial of Russian Military Involvement RT played an important role in attempting to influence foreign audiences in support of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and eventual occupation of Crimea .
 Putin and other government leaders denied Russian military presence in Ukraine . RT promoted Kremlin talking points through false, misleading, and biased coverage of events .
 Most international media reported the Kremlin’s initial denials of any Russian military presence and balanced it with coverage of credible, well-documented Russian troop presence .
 Putin finally did admit there had been Russian troops in Crimea, RT presented his statements without any context . RT presented Putin's statements with no context .
 RT repeatedly called the Russian military presence ‘self-defense forces’ and an RT propaganda piece simply posted multiple photographs of locals posing with the soldiers accompanied by positive quotes .
 CRIMEA said that there were no Russian forces in Crimea . The outlet also reported Putin's misleading claim that he had never denied the OBFUSCATED ITS Russian troops’ presence .
 Review of RT’s reporting on Russian troop presence in Ukraine shows its content follows Kremlin talking points .
 The Kremlin pushed the narrative that neo-Nazism was rampant in MITIGATE Ukraine prior to, during, and after the annexation of Crimea . In a likely attempt to damage the reputations of Maidan Revolution UKRAINE TO activists, the Ukrainian leadership, and the Ukrainian Armed Forces
 RT began to run stories about alleged Nazism I N TERNATIONAL in Ukraine . Before military intervention, RT ran stories about allegations of Nazism .
 These stories promulgated the FOR UKRAINE, falsehood that Ukrainians supported Nazism and fascism . These stories were promulgated by the FORUKRAINE .
 Ofcom found multiple RUSSIAN PUBL I C RT UK reports ‘failed to maintain due impartiality’ and threatened statutory sanctions against the outlet .
 Russia’s FOR MILITARY military intervention in Ukraine is justified. This grossly exaggerated SUPPORT neo-Nazi narrative is designed to build public support at home and abroad .
 Dutch-led investigation team concluded that a Buk surface-to-air missile belonging to Russia’s 53rd Anti-Aircraft Missile Brigade shot down the plane .
 RT developed a series of alternative theories to try to cast doubt on the facts . RT developed an effort to counter this narrative .
 RT promoted the conspiracy that there was a Spanish air traffic controller at Ukraine’s airport who claimed there were Ukrainian fighters escorting the Malaysian Airlines flight right before it crashed .
 Putin also promoted this narrative in an interview after it was widely known to be false .
 The “disrespect for facts’ in RT’s reporting about the flight led one of their journalists to quit on the air .
 The data points to a clear RT strategy to target non-Russian audiences with Kremlin messaging .
 A March 2015 study showed the majority of videos posted to RT’s flagship English-language YouTube channel were about Ukraine .
 Videos on Ukraine accounted for 27 percent of all RT videos and about 27 per cent of views . Videos on the Ukraine account for about 27percent of views.
 For RT Deutsch, 43 percent of videos and 42 percent of views were focused on the conflict in Ukraine .
 About 40 percent of RT's French language YouTube account’s videos and views were also of videos on Ukraine .
 RT was not as successful in promoting its Ukraine videos which underperformed compared to videos on other topics, likely due to low audience interest in the Ukraine .
 Putin Russia obfuscated its role in Crimea and eastern Ukraine to mitigate international reaction and deter support for Ukraine, while building Russian public support for military intervention. Follow-On Efforts and Praise from Putin Russia.
 RT spread the Kremlin’s disinformation under the guise of journalism and created confusion about the truth . The Kremlin's disinformation was spread by RT.
 Russia has created a new media outlet, Sputnik, which was announced on November 10, 2014 . RT did at the beginning of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.
 The unveiling of this new propaganda outlet came just two days before NATO assessed Russia had sent troops and military material into eastern Ukraine .
 RT’s Simonyan was reportedly one of the recipients of the ‘For Service to the Fatherland’ award .
 RT and Sputnik's role in Russia's Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem 25 Annex 3: Case Study . A nother example demonstrates how RT and sputnik serve as tools to reflect and amplify the policies of the Russian state .
 RT and Sputnik’s Turkey-related content did not demonstrate a clear agenda, and stories varied in tone and content .
 Moscow's editorial policy changed drastically just as Ankara became increasingly hostile . Moscow’s stance towards Ankara became more hostile .
 President Erdogan publicly apologized in June 2016 for the incident . RT and Sputnik’s coverage of Turkey reflected this reconciliation and negative coverage .
 The Turkish military shot down a Russian Su-24 jet fighter on November 24, 2015 . It claimed it had violated Turkish airspace .
 Russia argued the jet was downed over Syrian territory and posed no threat to Turkey . Russia argued it was down over Syria and posed a no threat.
 The tone of the content ranged from critical pieces accusing Turkey of supporting terrorists to positive stories about President Erdogan participating in a mosque opening in Moscow .
 An article about the October 3, 2015, accidental Russian incursion of Turkish airspace portrayed Turkey as an understanding partner .
 Putin described the November 2015 shoot-down as a “stab in the back delivered by terrorists’ accomplices,” and accused Turkey of funding ISIS through oil purchases .
 Putin warns Russian tourists visiting Turkey could face security risks . Putin also alleged Turkish government had been promoting “Islamization’s inside Turkey .
 RT and Sputnik significantly shifted their Turkey-related propaganda narratives, according to studies and current and former RT staff interviewed by Oxford Internet Institute .
 The study describes how staff members “cited changes in RT’s narratives about Turkey” and noted “RT has usually portrayed Turkey in a less critical way.’
 Petersburg and Petersburg agreed to bridge their differences over the downing of the Su-24. Petersburg and Moscow agreed to Bridge their differences .
 The meeting followed Putin’s words of support for Erdogan after the failed July 2016 coup d’état attempt in Turkey .
 After the August summit, “Russia’s information operations in Turkey seemed to disappear almost entirely,’ writes Unver .
 Turkey “has drummed up support for the rapprochement between Turkey and Russia,’ says Sputnik Turkey . Turkey’s acquisition of Russia's S-400 missile system “as a sign of the country's increasing independence’ from NATO and the
 Russia began the largest buildup of troops and military equipment on its border with Ukraine and in occupied Crimea since Russia’s 2014 invasion . Russia began, what at the time was the largest build-up of troops, military equipment .
 The buildup was intentionally very visible, and this time Russia did not deny it . This time Russia didn't deny it.
 Russia claimed the buildup was part of a "routine military exercise" by May 2021 . Russia said at least some of its troops would be pulled back from around Ukraine .
Some familiar themes from past disinformation campaigns, especially from the 2014 invasion, reappeared in Annex 2 .
 At the time of publication, Russia has once again built up its military presence on the Ukrainian border . This time, this time surpasses the amount of troops in March 2021 .
 In 2014, Russia developed and deployed multiple disinformation narratives against Ukraine . Many of which were highlighted in Annex 2 of the 2014 report .
 Russian state-controlled media outlets once again deployed incorrect narratives. During the Spring 2021 buildup of troops and military equipment, Russian media outlets used these incorrect narratives .
 Russia was able to build upon the disinformation foundation it laid in 2014 by repeating and reinforcing old narratives . Russia was unable to build on its 2014 success by repeating old narratives and repeating old stories .
 People are more likely to accept a falsehood as true after being exposed to it, says author . This is a proven effective tactic, as studies have shown .
 The U.S. and NATO's Support for Ukraine’s Territorial Integrity Raised Tensions . Russia repeatedly used a disinformation narrative that Russia repeatedly use in 2014 .
 This goes hand in hand with another false claim that Russia is not instigating the conflict but just reacting to the situation . This is one of several false claims made about Russia's response to the conflict .
 RT and Sputnik published various stories to try and frame Russia’s buildup of troops as a response to Western provocations .
 In 2014, Russian state-funded and state-controlled media began spreading disinformation narratives describing the Ukrainian government, and a significant portion of the population, as either fascists or Nazis .
 Ukraine became the second country in the world to simultaneously have a Jewish president and prime minister . Russian disinformation media outlets continued to push this narrative after Ukraine became second country to have two leaders .
 RT continued to feature this false accusation on its homepage even following the Kremlin's announcement that it intended to remove Russian troops from around Ukraine’s borders and Crimea following the Spring 2021 troop buildup .
 The Italian-language branch of Sputnik published an opinion piece in which the author wrongly claimed “Russian citizens in Ukraine, and Russia itself, are threatened by neo-Nazi aggression from Ukraine. The article was published in the Italian language branch of the magazine .
 The Greek-language version of Sputnik incorrectly reported on April 12 that Ukraine’s authorities are reluctant to confront militant groups with supposed neo-Nazi affiliations .
 RT’s Arabic, Spanish and German-language branches also published false neo-Nazi narratives during the early 2021 military buildup .
 Ukrainian Armed Forces Intentionally Injure Children RT has repeatedly continued to spread disinformation narratives after they have been debunked . RT has been accused of spreading disinformation for years .
 The Russian press first reported a story of a young boy allegedly killed by a Ukrainian Armed Forces drone in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine .
 StopFake contacted locals in the village where the event allegedly took place . They confirmed that a boy tragically died, but not because of the Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 A video by Ruptly of the boy’s grandmother gives an emotional interview about how she found his dead body .
 At the time of filming, the story had already been debunked . At the end of the report, they did qualify that the story was not proven to be true .
 Sputnik’s Spanish channel reported on the story on April 9, three days after the OSCE had published its report showing the boy did not die from a drone . The OSCE report was published three days later .
 This story is similar to another disinformation item published by the Russian press in 2014 . This story was similar to a similar story published in 2014 by Russian press .
 A woman told Russia's Channel One she had witnessed Ukrainian soldiers crucify a young boy and drag his mother to death behind a tank .
 The next day, a Novaya Gazeta journalist was unable to find any witnesses in the town where the killings allegedly happened . The next morning, a journalist was able to find no witnesses .
 It was later proven the woman who first spoke to Channel One was lying was lying .
 A fake story about the boy being killed by a drone has been debunked . RT mentioned the story despite it already having been debunked.
 The outlet doubled down on the original disinformation narrative by claiming that multiple “babies’ were crucified . The outlet also doubled down.
 RT and Sputnik frequently present only the Kremlin’s position on an issue .
 On RT’s television shows, disinformation and propaganda that makes the Kremlin look good is repeatedly stated as fact .
 Despite RT’s attempts to market its shows as debates or discussions in which “all things are considered,” pro-Kremlin statements are rarely questioned .
 RT listed false reasons for Russia’s military buildup, including an alleged promise by U.S. President Ronald Reagan to not expand NATO, which Gorbachev said never happened, and the incorrect claim that Ukraine had outlawed the Russian language .
 When speaking in Russian, Rossiya Segodnya is always referred to using the Russian words . RT is always said in English .
 Russian state-owned media landscape. See Annex One for more details on the Russian media landscape .
 Pillars of Russia’s Disinformation and Propaganda Ecosystem for more information about the ecosystem . For more information on the ecosystem, click here for more .
 The unusual attendees included Russian Prime Minister Spokesperson Dmitriy Peskov and Russian State Duma member Konstantin Zatulin . The Glazyev tapes revealed via leaked audio that Russia was involved in organizing pro-Russian protests.
 Russian media outlet Open Media describes Simonyan, Nikolov, and a few other individuals whom the independent Russian media outlets describe as Simoneyan’s RT associates .
 ADIJ, a company established in 2019, became the new parent company of TV-Novosti . There is no clear indication why ADIJ was created in 2005 .
 As of January 2022, she still listed herself as working at RT France, but as the Deputy editor-in-chief . She still listed her as working as RT France's Deputy editor in-chief.
 Some reports mention that Vasily Pushkov was the director of the International Cooperation Directorate for Sputnik . Other articles label him as director of International Cooperation at Rossiya Segodnya .
 British values the BBC aims to bring to the world in good journalism . The BBC is based in London and London .
 VOA will serve as a consistently reliable and authoritative source of news . VOA has been a reliable source of information for years .
 Neither the BBC nor VOA’s mission statements say they exist to bring their respective countries opinions to the world .
 TV-Novosti has not published form number ON0001 since 2010, and it hasn't published form numbers since 2019 . The TV- Novosti's form number is ON0002 .
 The Ministry of Justice has not punished TV-Novosti despite its violations . The TV- Novosti has not been punished.
 Public Collegium on Press Complaints acts as a self-regulator for Russian media . It is funded by the Russian Presidential Grants Fund .
 Rossiya Segodnya is a member of the chamber of the Collegium, but RT is not . He is not a member, but he is not.
 RT did not participate in a hearing about an RT report in November 2020 . For example, a complaint was made to the organization about a RT report, and RT didn't participate .
 West's sole prerogative is that Russia has no right to self-defense, even when the threat is right on its border . Moscow orders ships to conduct Black Sea naval exercises amid confusion over whether U.S. will deploy warships to volatile region .
 Moscow calls on Kiev, NATO to Refrain From Actions That Could Lead to Further Escalation in Donbass . Lavrov says Berlin should provide Info on Navalny before Asking Questions about Ukraine .