 Ukraine’s president, Petro Poroshenko, said on Thursday he expected territory in the east held by Russian-backed rebels to return to Ukraine .
 Poroshenko said he would use all legal and diplomatic means to resolve the simmering conflict in eastern Ukraine . He spoke at his first press conference in the new year .
 Poroshenko said he would propose an international mechanism for de-occupation of the peninsula . He plans to engage the European Union and the U.S.
 Kyiv's sovereignty over rebel-held parts of eastern Ukraine is a realistic goal for 2016, he says . But he concedes that regaining control over Crimea might be a long-term effort .
 Poroshenko's comments came a day after negotiators from Ukraine, Russia and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe agreed to renew efforts on a shaky cease-fire in Ukraine .
 More than 9,000 people have been killed since pro-Russian rebels seized government buildings in April 2014 . Russia annexed Crimea and fighting broke out after the annexation .
 Ukraine and the Russian-backed rebels agreed to exchange 50 prisoners, an OSCE representative says . Most of the prisoners came from the Ukrainian side, the official says . The prisoner exchange is expected to take place in Ukraine and Russia .
 Russia sent its new envoy, Boris Gryzlov, to the Minsk meeting after a rare visit to Kyiv . Russia sent the new envoy to the meeting after the visit .
 Poroshenko did not confirm reports that he held direct talks with Gryzlov . He said he would be willing to meet anyone in order to bring an end to the conflict .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin wants to see some progress on the February Minsk Agreement to get Western sanctions lifted . Political analysts say the Kremlin’s appointment of Gryzlov, a former parliamentary speaker, shows some progress .
 The Minsk Agreement failed to meet its original deadline, the end of 2015, because of major sticking points . The agreement was supposed to end in 2015 .
 Ukrainian politicians disagree on the degree of autonomy for rebel-held areas . The rebels are reluctant to allow open elections and return control of the border with Russia to Ukraine .
It's not clear how far Putin is willing to go to implement the agreement . John Herbst, head of the Eurasia Center at the Atlantic Council, is a former U.S. ambassador to Ukraine .
 Trenin says Putin first wants full autonomy for eastern Ukraine, known as the Donbas, enshrined in Ukraine's constitution . He says Ukraine's leaders are unlikely to accept that .
 Russia's economy has been contracting as the price of oil, its major export, drops to record lows . Russia’s economy has also been contracting.
 Western sanctions against Russia over its actions in Ukraine have cut off its banks from international credit . Russia has been hit by sanctions against the West over its action in Ukraine .
 The Kremlin is looking for a new way out of the current situation, says Herbst . Gryzlov’s appointment shows the Kremlin is trying to change the situation, he says .
 Most analysts say the best case scenario would be a frozen conflict . Herbst agrees with most analysts who say the impasse means the best scenario is frozen .
 Trenin believes the Donbas will eventually be negotiated back under a unified Ukraine but only in name but that Russia will never give up Crimea . The Donbas are currently being held in Ukraine by Ukraine's government .