 He was a supporter and financial backer of the Orange Revolution of 2004, after which he became Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council . He was also a supporter of theOrange Revolution and a financial backer.
 Under Yushchenko he also served as Foreign Minister, and under Yanukovych he was Minister of Trade and Economic Development . He was also Minister of Economic Development under Yanukovych .
 He was also a very prominent and wealthy oligarch as the owner of Roshen chocolate manufacturers, and Channel-5 television network, which provided him with political influence .
 In the summer of 2014, after the tumultuous and tragic protests in Kyiv, he was elected president . He defeated arch-rival Yulia Tymoshenko in the first round of the elections .
 He came to office with a mandate, essentially, to clean up Ukraine, and move the country decisively toward the European Union . He also wants to resolve the impasse with Russia in the Donbas and the annexed Crimea .
 He also supported the Minsk Accords of February 2015, to remove heavy weaponry and forces from the war zone . He also backed the M Belarus Accords, which removed heavy weaponry, and to amend the Ukrainian Constitution .
 Opinion polls indicate that almost 70% of respondents distrust him, the highest by far of any candidate in the 2019 presidential campaign .
 TV star Vladimir Zelensky has a healthy lead with the election less than three weeks away . His positive ranking is around 13%, putting him in a close race for second place with Tymoshenko .
 Poroshenko has adopted an election slogan of “Either me or Putin,” many saw as insulting to his opponents . Many saw it as signifying that only he could be trusted to stand up to Russian president .
'There are many candidates, only one president' was a direct copy of Putin's own slogan in the Russian presidential elections of 2012 .
 The reality is that it is rather late to construct an image of a determined fighter for Ukraine . It is not the first time that Ukraine has been able to build a fighter .
 Poroshenko's presidency has fallen short of expectations. That's not the same as many other levels, but on several other levels .
 Ukraine today is the poorest nation of Europe, surpassing in this regard even Moldova . Ukraine is now the poorest country in Europe, according to the European Union .
 The decline could be explained through losses of important economic territories as a result of a conflict with a Russian-backed separatist .
 Crimea was not a great loss in economic terms, but Russia’s construction of the Crimean Bridge over the Kerch Strait and a naval buildup in the Azov Sea has virtually curtailed sea trade .
 The failure to end corruption and oligarchic control of Ukraine can also be explained by the failure to stop corruption . But it can be explained as well as the failure of the Ukraine government .
Firtash and Kolomoisky have been weakened, but other oligarchs have thrived, such as Henadii Boholyubov and Kostyantin Zhevago .
 Others have survived the losses incurred through the conflict and revived their businesses . Rinat Akhmetov and former president Kuchma’s son-in-law, Viktor Pinchuk, survived the conflict .
 All the above are billionaires, contrasting with the fate of most of the population over the past five years .
 paramilitary armed groups that have loose attachments to the government have thrived . While the army has been strengthened under Poroshenko, paramilitary armed group has flourished .
 The National Corps, which developed from the notorious Azov Brigade and the C14 group, have organized mass marches, attacks on Roma camps, LGTB marches, and others . Without the slightest protest from the Ukrainian president, the marches have taken place .
 Poroshenko has been notable for his silence in condemning the attacks . If these groups have attachments to the government, it is to former Governor of Kharkiv and now Interior Minister Arsen Avakov .
 The Memory Laws of 2015 resulted in the opening of formerly banned archives of the KGB as well as removing Communist statues, emblems, city, and street names .
 Poland declared the 1943 massacre of Poles in Volhynia by the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists as an act of Genocide in July 2016 . Ukraine's closest EU ally, Poland, responded by declaring the massacre as a act of genocide .
 Such measures tend to divide rather than unify a country that was badly shaken by the events of 2014-15 . Such measures also tend to unify the country.
 Prime Minister Arsenii Yatseniuk criticized the president for failure to enact ‘real changes’ as the IMF threatened to withhold credits if further progress was not made in reducing corruption .
 Poroshenko appointed former president of Georgia, Mikeil Saakashvili as governor of Odesa region in May 2015 . He has been granted Ukrainian citizenship with a task of combating corruption .
 Saakashvili blamed Poroshenko for hindering him in carrying out his task . Eighteen months later, he was dismissed, and he blamed him on Poroshenko .
 In July 2017, Poroshenko abruptly stripped Saakashvili of his Ukrainian citizenship . In July 2016, he was stripped of his citizenship .
 The president's initial appointment may have been the president’s chief error, but his behavior subsequently does him little credit .
 The deaths of the ‘Heavenly Hundred’ in Kyiv’s Maidan in February 2014 have resulted in very little. The deaths have also resulted in little.
 Four members of the High Council of Justice have been accused of corruption . They have been charged with corruption .
 The principal Anti-Corruption Court has halted several cases of various crimes including embezzlement involving the son of Avakov, Oleksandr .
 Some $2 billion of the frozen funds of the All-Ukrainian Development Bank were transferred to the International Investment Bank .
 This is today’s Ukraine and it is not substantively or materially different from the Ukraine of Yanukovych, says CNN's John Sutter . This is the Ukraine today and it's today, he says . Sutter: "This is today's Ukraine. This is
 Poroshenko has the funds and power to challenge again for president . It is hardly surprising that many Ukrainians are looking for something different .