 The mass killing has been central subject of only a couple of studies . However, in spite of its importance to the politics of Ukraine and global politics, this mass killing is not a major subject of study .
 Studies concluded that the Maidan massacre was a false flag operation and that far right organizations were involved in the mass killing of both police and the protesters .
 The dominant narrative attributed the Maidan massacre of the protesters to the government forces and mostly ignored killings of the police . However, the dominant narrative promoted by the governments and the media in Ukraine and the West attributed the massacre to government forces .
 The official investigation by the Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine charged Berkut special police commanders and members with the massacre of Madian protesters on Viktor Yanukovych orders . Berkut policemen and Internal Troops servicemen were killed by unknown persons of unknown allegiance .
 It examines court testimonies of wounded protesters and relatives of the killed protesters . It also examines results of forensic ballistic and medical examinations, investigative experiments, and videos and photos of the Maidan massacre .
 The 55 minute long online video appendix with added English-language subtitles is compiled from brief synchronized segments of on-site reports by various Maidan protesters who filmed this massacre on February 20, 2014 .
 The study finds that the investigation and trials were for this reason stonewalled . At least the absolute majority of the protesters were killed and wounded from Maidancontrolled locations .
 Analysis shows patterns of ineffective and delayed Maidan massacre trials and the GPU investigations . The GPU own investigation pointed to the massacre of the protesters and the police by ‘snipers’ in the Maidan-controlled buildings .
 The paper discusses implications of this study for understanding the Maidan massacre and the conflict in Ukraine and the international conflict over Ukraine .
 A large volume of forensic medical and ballistic examinations and testimonies of wounded protesters have been made public . Maidan massacre trials and Ukrainian government investigations made public for the first time .
 The dominant narrative promoted by the governments and the media in Ukraine and the West attributed the Maidan massacre to the government forces and mostly ignored killings of the police .
 If the Yanukovych government, its police and security forces, or any pro-Yanukovych “third force’s “Third force” did perpetrate this mass killing one would expect speedy and effective investigations, says the author .
 It was in the interest of the new governments to conduct such investigations and prosecutions and reveal such evidence . The new governments are expected to do such investigations.
 This is the highest profile political crime in Ukraine and one of the most significant in contemporary Europe . This is a political crime that is one of Europe's most significant. It is the biggest political crime.
 A trial for the Maidan massacre on February 20 is the trial of the century because of its political significance . The trial is expected to be held at the end of February 20 .
 The Maidan governments relied to a large extent on this mass killing, which ultimately brought them to power . The Maidian governments relied on the mass killing to bring them into power .
 The Maidan massacre was one of the most documented cases of mass killing in history . It was the first mass killing to be documented in the history of Maidan .
 Protesters were shot in Kyiv City in presence of thousands of witnesses and more than one hundred journalists from Ukraine, the West, Russia, Poland, and other countries .
 The massacre was recorded in numerous videos filmed by journalists and protesters . The massacre is recorded in live broadcasts of some Ukrainian TV channels .
 Many of the moments of the killings were captured in various videos . Security Service of Ukraine Alfa snipers and commanders during the massacre were intercepted and recorded .
 Such volume of evidence is unprecedented in the typical cases of murder or political violence . Such volume is unusual in the case of political violence.
 The GPU has both highly qualified investigators and resources to identify both 4 organizers and perpetrators of the Maidan massacre of the protesters and police .
 If the elements of the Maidan leadership and Maidan-linked shooters were involved in the massacre of the protesters, the speed and effectiveness of the investigations would be the opposite .
 Evidence of government forces involvement would be covered up or lacking . Evidence would be expected to be falsified or lacking.
 The Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine has consistently denied that the Maidan opposition was involved in the massacre . The official investigation by the Prosecutor General office of Ukraine publicly and consistently denied the allegations .
 The GPU, after it arrested and charged the Berkut special company policemen in April 2014 with the massacre on February 20th, repeatedly denied that any snipers shot protesters from the Maidancontrolled buildings, or that ongoing investigation did not confirm this .
 Previous Studies and Controversies would have been easy and convenient to accept the dominant narrative that the government forces on the Yanukovych order massacred the unarmed Maidan protesters .
 The massacred protesters were from the Maidan opposition, which was led by parties that presented themselves before, during, and after the “Euromaidan’s”
 Maidan parties and leaders resorted to similar and even more undemocratic actions and policies, in particular, violent ones, before, during, and after the “Euromaidan’s” such as an attempt to attack the parliament on February 18, 2014 and
 These politicians and parties often changed political and policy positions and alliances in order to get or preserve power . Some politicians had links to oligarchs, corruption and in some cases to organized crime .
 The evidence and investigation results suggest that some other highly publicized cases of violence during the “Euromaidan’s” such as abduction and crucifixion of Dmytro Bulatov and killings of the first three protesters in January 2014 were staged by elements of the
 The dominant narrative of the Maidan massacre was based on graphic videos and media reports showing the special Berkut company shooting with live ammunition into direction of Maidan protesters . Many protesters were killed and wounded around the 6 same time .
 The Maidan massacre has been central subject of only a couple of academic studies . In spite of its importance to the politics of Ukraine and global politics the Maidan Massacre has been a subject of just a few studies .
 The operation was organized and covertly conducted by elements of the Maidan leadership and concealed armed groups of shooters or ‘snipers’ in order to win the asymmetric conflict during the ‘Euromaidan’ and seize power in Ukraine .
 It was extremely irrational from a cost vs. benefit perspective to massacre both the protesters and the police or the protesters alone for Yanukovych and his government . It was in rational self-interest of some far right and oligarchic opposition leaders .
 The study showed that concealed armed Maidan groups, such as the special Maidan company, broke a truce agreement between Yanukovych and the Maidan leaders and started the massacre in the early morning on February 20, 2014 .
 concealed shooters or "snipers" massacred the unsuspecting Maidan protesters from Maidan-controlled buildings or areas .
 The analysis found that the special Berkut company was most likely shooting at the Maidan “snipers’ and as warning to stop the advance of unarmed protesters to the presidential administration .
 The study did not exclude that the police killed or wounded some of the protesters, specifically armed ones . But the study didn't exclude that some of them were shot by police .
 This academic study was used by the GPU in their investigation of the Maidan massacre and by different sides during the Maida massacre trial .
 Some studies attributed the massacre of the protesters to the Berkut anti-riot police or snipers from the Security Service of Ukraine and Internal Troops .
 There is not a single academic study of trials and government investigations of the Maidan massacre . But they were not based on a comprehensive analysis of this crucial case of political violence .
 academic analysis of the trials and investigations could help determine which party of the “Euromaidan conflict was involved in this mass killing. Since this crucial case of political violence is highly politicized, academic analysis could help to determine who was involved .
 The Maidan opposition leaders during and immediately after the massacre publicly accused the government snipers from SBU Alfa and Internal Troops Omega units of perpetrating the massacre of the protesters on Yanukovych orders .
 Ukrainian president Poroshenko publicly stated during investigation and trial that the arrested Berkut company members perpetrated this massacre on Yanukovych orders .
 Poroshenko stated in his speech on the third anniversary of the Maidan massacre that Maidan protesters were shot by snipers from the Hotel Ukraina, the Music Conservatory and a building nearby .
 The president of Ukraine was speaking on the site of the massacre on Instytutska Street . The statement implied that protesters were shot from the back and the side and 10 from the top .
 President Poroshenko, Oleksander Turchynov, the Head of the National Security and Defense Council, and the head of the SBU stated in February 2015 that Vladislav Surkov, an aide of Russian President Vladimir Putin, was personally coordinating foreign “snipers�
 Serhiy Leshchenko, a member of the Poroshenko's faction in the parliament, revealed that Surkov arrived in Kyiv by plane after the massacre was already over .
 The Prosecutor General of Ukraine and the head of its department in charge of the Maidan massacre investigation stated later that they did not have evidence about such Surkov’s and Russian snipers involvement .
 Nadiya Savchenko said she saw gunshots by “snipers’ from the Hotel and other locations during the Maidan massacre . Savchenko was turned into a national hero and elected to the parliament because of her outspokenness .
 She told this and other information about the Maidan massacre to investigators . She told the investigators about the massacre to the investigators .
 Savchenko said she would not make her understanding of this massacre public now because this would lead to a discord . Savchenko stated that she wouldn't make her understand of this public now .
 The Western governments and organizations, such as the European Union, have blamed the Yanukovych government and the government forces for the massacre of the Maidan protesters . The European Union has threatened sanctions against the government .
 Michael McFaul, who served as the U.S. Ambassador to Russia at the time of the massacre, said that this mass killing was committed by the Yanukovych government . McFaul said that the killing was a mass killing by the government .
 Katchanovski rejected findings and referred to unidentified and undisclosed U.S. government data as evidence .
 The U.S. ambassador to Ukraine told Biden during their visit to the massacre site in 2015 that “snipers were on surrounding buildings. However, Biden told Biden that ‘snipers’ were on nearby buildings .
 This contradicts the GPU investigation that protesters were massacre by the Berkut police on the ground and not by any snipers in surrounding buildings . This contradicted theGPU investigation that Protesters were massacred by the police .
 Prosecutor General of Ukraine gave videos of Maidan massacre to FBI to enhance their quality . Prosecutor General said he gave videos to FBI in 2014 .
 The Western governments and organizations generally ignored the Maidan massacre trials and investigations even though this mass killing was one of the most serious human rights violations in contemporary Ukraine and Europe overall . It had crucial political significance beyond Ukraine .
Top Western officials paid tribute to the killed protesters on the site of the massacre during their visits to Ukraine .
 The Maidan massacre investigations and trials contrasts with other politically important criminal cases and trials, such as the Yulia Tymoshenko trial during the Yanukovych presidency . U.S. administration pressure to remove Viktor Shokin as the GPU head .
 The EU did not show interest in investigations of this mass killing even though in a leaked intercepted telephone call with the EU foreign affairs chief, the Estonian minister of foreign affairs referred to Olha Bohomolets .
 The Maidan massacre was a coup d’état or a fascist coup by some of the Maidan leaders, Maidan opposition, and the United States government . In contrast, the Russian government and media, as well as ex-president Yanukovych and former top officials of his government
 They have not presented sufficient evidence in support of their statements, they say . However, they have not present sufficient evidence.
 Yanukovych made such claims in 2017 in his letters to U.S. president Donald Trump, leaders of Germany, France, Poland and Russia .
 Oleksander Turchynov named as acting president after Yanukovych overthrow . He named such People’s Front leaders as Oleksand Turchy, Andriy Parubiy, Serhiy Pashynsky and Arsen Avalkov .
 Yanukovych stated in his interviews that he had documents and witnesses in support of his claims . Yanukovych said in his letter to Trump and other foreign leaders that he has documents and witness testimony .
 He did not make such evidence public citing potential threats to witnesses in Ukraine . But he did not say such threats were made to witnesses .
 Oleksander Yakymenko, the SBU head under Yanukovych, testified in a Russian court concerning the ‘Maidan coup’ in the end of 2016 . The SBU identified by name several Maidan snipers who massacred the police and protesters .
 The ex-SBU chief stated that during the Maidan massacre on February 20, 2014 the SBU located 10 snipers in the Music Conservatory . The SBU obtained their photos and then tracked five of them entering the Hotel Ukraina but lost track of other five snipers .
 Andriy Klyuyev, the former head of the Yanukovych administration, stated in the end of 2016 that one of the Maidan leaders hired snipers from Georgia and the Baltic States .
 Pashynsky identified as this leader and one of the Georgian snipers identified in a protocol of his interrogation by senior Right Sector activists . He was identified in the protocol of the interrogation.
 The reported Georgian snipers is consisted with Caucasian accent of one of unidentified snipers in intercepted radio-communication of their coordinated shooting .
 He did not make public the specific evidence in support of his statements . However, he did not say what he said about his comments .
 Some international organizations examined the Maidan massacre trial and investigations in their reports . But they did not conduct their own investigations of this mass killing .
 The government forces on the orders of the Yanukovych government were responsible for the massacre of the protesters . They did not question the official investigation conclusions that the government forces were responsible .
 The official investigation had evidence of “shooters’ killing at least three protesters . At least 10 protesters were killed by unidentified “snipers’ from rooftops of buildings, the report says .
 The GPU reportedly informed the court representatives in the fall of 2014 that the Ukrainian law enforcement agencies were not interested in assisting such an ICC investigation . However, the GPU reportedly told the Ukrainian court representatives that the court had no interest in assisting the investigation .
 ICC suggested that it would not pursue the Maidan massacre case and other cases of political violence during the “Euromaidan’s’Somai . It said that they did not constitute crimes against humanity .
 A report by Euromaidan SOS, other Maidan organizations and lawyers of the killed protesters in June 2015 also concluded that the government investigation was ineffective and that it was stonewalled .
 Bellingcat, a team of amateur investigators based on open source information, did not conduct any analysis of the Maidan massacre . The team's founder promised to do it, even though its founder promised.
 The investigations generally focused on violence by separatists and covert Russian military intervention in Donbas . They got significant publicity in the leading Western media .
 The Western mainstream media did not cover the Maidan massacre trials and investigations . Some exceptions, primarily involving testimony by Yanukovych, were not covered .
 Google news searchers produced no reports of major revelations from these trials and investigations of evidence of the massacre of the protesters by “snipers’ from the Maidan-controlled buildings.
 The Western mainstream media has dismissed the Maidan massacre as a conspiracy theory . The Western media has generally repeated the Ukrainian government statements and prosecution charges .
 A Reuters investigation in 2014 reported that the prosecution case against Berkut members was problematic . It relied primarily on videos and photos and misrepresented or ignored some key pieces of such evidence .
 An investigative report by a Monitor ARD TV program in Germany 2014 reported that the government investigation was manipulated and that concealed shooters who targeted the protesters were based in the Hotel Ukraina .
 BBC in 2015 corroborated findings of Katchanovski and earlier versions of this study . Earlier versions of the study concerning the covert presence of armed protesters at the Music Conservatory .
 There was significant coverage of the Maidan massacre trials and investigations in the Ukrainian media .
 Media reports generally presented the government investigation version . However, these media reports generally present the government probe version .
 This coverage omitted major evidence revealed by these trials and investigations that suggested the massacre of the protesters by shooters in the Maidan-controlled buildings .
 The February 20th massacre trial revealed much more evidence of “snipers’ in the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidan-controlled locations .
 The Russian media coverage was dominated by the false flag theory of the massacre . In contrast, the Russian media covered the massacre more closely .
 Media in Russia did not report the revelations from the Maidan massacre trial and investigations . Some exceptions, with certain exceptions, were also not reported .
 Yanukovych and former government members found refuge in Russia . Instead, it often relayed statements about this massacre by Yanukovych and his former governmentMembers .
 Western, Ukrainian, and Russian media cannot be regarded a priori as reliable sources concerning the conflict in Ukraine in general and the Maidan massacre in particular .
 Academic studies show that Western media coverage of foreign countries and conflicts is often political biased and in many cases factually incorrect . In Ukraine, Iraq, Syria, Libya, and Ukraine, the media coverage is often biased .
 The media often follows their respective governments or political elites in covering foreign countries and conflicts . In particular in the case of Ukraine, Ukraine, the media often follow their governments and political elites .
 There is evidence of government censorship and self-censorship by journalists and mostly oligarch-controlled major media .
 Ukrainian professor was a Maidan activist and a Right Sector volunteer . Her blog on Liga.net news site was closed because she asked questions which went against the official narrative of the Maidan massacre .
 She admitted that she was told by Right Sector activists by the end of February 2014 that they had a sufficient weapons . Some of her far right acquaintances transported weapons to Maidan . She admitted she had been told by activists that she had sufficient weapons.
 Ukrainian media reports raised doubts about official narrative of the massacre . However, there were a number of reports that raised doubts concerning the official narrative .
 They contain sworn testimonies by wounded protesters, relatives of the killed protesters, and results of forensic ballistic and medical examinations . Videos and photos of the Maidan massacre pertaining to specific killed and wounded protesters .
 The timing is consistent with time-stamped compilations of videos that are based on similar synchronization and are used during the trial as evidence .
 The analysis includes information concerning GPU investigations of this massacre of the protesters and police in over 2,000 court decisions .
Online court decisions are publicly available in the official online Ukrainian court decisions database . These court decisions can be viewed by the court's official online court decision database .
 Media interviews of prosecutors, Maidan victims’ lawyers and Berkut lawyers are also examined . Media reports about these trials and investigations are also examine .
 The GPU initially stated in March 2014 that its investigation identified snipers who massacred the Maidan protesters, identified their locations, and seized their weapons, and that foreigners were investigated .
 The GPU also officially stated in the beginning of April 2014 that protesters were shot with a Simonov ‘sniper rifle’ from the Hotel Ukraina . The GPU said in the start of the year that protesters had been shot with the gun .
 The Simonov rifle is a semi-automatic carbine of the same caliber bullets as the AKM . It was generally removed from military and police service in Ukraine and available as a hunting rifle .
 The GPU publicly denied from the start of its investigation that there was evidence that some Maidan leaders and armed protesters were involved in the massacre .
 The Maidan leaders who became government leaders after the “Euromaidan’s’ massacre were not interrogated until two and half years after the massacre .
 The GPU also denied that there were any “snipers’ in this hotel or other Maidan-controlled locations and that they massacred the Maidan protesters .
 The GPU prosecutors also stated that their investigation did not find evidence that SBU Alfa snipers or snipers from other government units killed protesters .
 SBU head omitted that these positions were on February 18 and not February 20 . SBU said in April 2014 that they identified positions of SBU snipers on Kostelna Street .
 The GPU reported that its investigation did not find evidence of Russian government snipers or any other third force involvement in the Maidan massacre .
 The fact that policemen equipped with Kalashnikov assault rifles do not fit any definition of professional or unprofessional snipers, the author says . Police were positioned in plain view of protesters and hundreds of foreign and Ukrainian journalists .
 The GPU arrested in April 2014 and charged the Berkut special company commander and two members of this police unit with the murder of 39 out of 49 killed Madian protesters on February 20 on Yanukovych order . The GPU has been charged with murdering 39 of 49 protesters .
 The Berkut special company commander was released by a court to a house arrest . He then fled to Russia, where he fled to the country .
 The investigation established the place of the shooting for only half of these 39 protesters . The investigation found only half the protesters had been shot .
 In the beginning of 2016, this trial was restarted after a deputy commander of a Berkut regiment and its two other members were also charged with the February 20th massacre .
 The charges against all Berkut members in this case were expanded to killing of 48 and wounding 80 protesters on February 20 and to terrorism .
 The GPU investigation previously attributed to unidentified “snipers’ in the Hotel Ukraina and other buildings . The charges also included killings of those protesters .
 Killing of a Georgian protester on February 20 was not included in the charges . The circumstances of his killings have not been officially disclosed .
 The GPU admitted that testimonies of these wounded protesters about their positions and directions of gunshots, along with videos, photos, forensic reports, and findings of expert reports and investigative experiments, showed that they were shot from other sectors than Berkut sectors .
 The GPU investigation did not find evidence that any government or “third force’s snipers, other government units, or ‘titushki’ killed the protesters on February 20th .
 Eyewitnesses among protesters and her own depiction of her position at the moment of the shooting . The location of an entry wound in her NTV interview combined with her location pointed to shooting from the Main Post-Office, which was then used as Right Sector headquarters .
 Yanukovych and his government officials were not charged by the GPU in the Maidan massacre case . The case is currently in the trial stage .
 He and the former head of the Internal Troops testified from Russia via video link as witnesses in this trial in Ukraine . He testified via videolink as a witness in the trial.
Both denied that they issued any orders to use firearms to kill protesters . Both denied that the protesters were massacred from the Maidan-controlled buildings such as the Hotel Ukraina .
 The commander of Internal Troops also stated that his police units were also shot from the Hotel Ukraina .
 No evidence of the massacre order by Yanukovych or his government officials, police, and SBU commanders have been presented during trials .
 The pace of the trial and its remaining stages suggest that a verdict in this crucial case could be no sooner than in a couple of years . The trial is expected to last a few years .
 There is no evidence of such delaying tactics by the Berkut members, says the writer . The GPU and the far right are accused of delaying the trial .
 Berkut members remained in Ukraine after the massacre . They often continued to serve in the police until they were arrested and charged .
 Most of the charged Berkut members afterwards fled to Russia, Russian-annexed Crimea or some other countries, such as Poland . Most of those who were charged fled to other countries such as Russia and Poland .
 The trial of the Berkut members for the massacre of the protesters on February 20 was delayed several times by far right activists . The trial was delayed by far left activists .
 Attacks by C14, a neo-Nazi organization affiliated with Svoboda party, disrupted two Maidan massacre trial sessions .
 Veterans of the Azov regiment of the National Guard of Ukraine participated in one of the attacks inside of the courtroom .
 The non-interference of the police and the lack of any prosecution for such attacks by small groups of far right activists suggest top government officials involvement or backing of such disruptions of the trial .
 The forensic ballistic examinations, conducted for the GPU investigation, found that 19 protesters were killed on February 20 by 7.62x39mm caliber bullets .
 The bullet could be fired from SOK94 model of Vepr hunting carbine based on Kalashnikov machine gun .
 Four other protesters were shot either by military grade bullets or by expanding hunting bullets of the same caliber . Four other demonstrators were shot by military-grade bullets or expanded bullets .
Special Berkut company members were charged with killing them . Their caliber did not match calibers of weapons used by the company, whose members were arrested .
 This bullet caliber does not match calibers of weapons with which Berkut and other government units in Ukraine were armed at the time of the massacre .
 His killing was filmed by a French photographer in a widely publicized video . His death was filmed in the video by a photographer .
 Forensic medical examination revealed that Chmilenko was shot at a steep vertical angle with bullet holes in his neck and left shoulder . He was shot in the neck and shoulder.
 Viktor Chmilenko was shot from the Hotel Ukraina. His position at the moment of his shooting in this video and a significant angle of his wound indicate he was shot .
 Oleksander Khrapachenko was killed by a corroded .308 Winchester caliber expanding hunting bullet .
 This NATO bullet caliber does not match the caliber of AKMS used by members of the special Berkut company .
 Forensic ballistic reports were conducted on the prosecution request in spring and summer of 2014 . They were made public for the first time during the Maidan massacre trial on June 30, 2016 .
 The videos show that he was hiding behind a wall, which completely shielded them from the Berkut positions, at the moment of his killing . The videos were posted on YouTube .
 A protester who was near him at the moment of his killing stated in Ukrainian media interviews that Ushnevych was shot by a handgun from a nearby Maidan-controlled area .
 He also stated that their group including himself were shot from the back and from the sideways while they were behind this wall and near it . He also said that they were also shot at the wall and close to it .
 One protester and one wounded protester were shot with 7.62x54 caliber bullets . One protester was killed and another was wounded .
 The prosecution stated that since the caliber matches Dragunov sniper rifles, this shows that they shot by unidentified government snipers . The prosecution said that since they match the caliber match the rifles, they were shot by unknown snipers .
 LPS type developed in 1908 for Mosin rifles. But these bullets were not of a special sniper type but of LPS kind .
 A Mosin rifle was later found in Dnipro Hotel and the investigation did not test if it matched these bullets . However, a deputy commander of Berkut regiment stated that a Mosin gun was found in the hotel .
 Parubiy helped the Right Sector evacuate their weapons in music cases without confiscating or checking if they were used on Maidan . This hotel was then used as a Right Sector base .
 A Spilne TV live video stream referred to protesters who were in the Hotel Ukraina at the time of the massacre . Protesters were armed with hunting rifles and AKMS but also with Mosin rifles .
 Forensic ballistic examinations determined that wounded protesters were also shot by 7.62x39 caliber bullets, hunting pellets, 9mm handgun bullets, and in the noted case, by7. 62x54 30 caliber bullets .
 Forensic ballistic examinations of only a small number of bullets of wounded protesters were conducted . But in contrast to the cases of almost half of the killed protesters from whose bodies or near them bullets were found and examined .
 In some cases, the bullets were lost after they were handed in to the investigation . Zastavnyi and Tretiakov were among those who lost the bullets .
Bullets extracted from killed protesters, trees, and trees did not match bullet samples from any 7.62x39 caliber Kalashnikov assault rifles of members of the entire Kyiv Berkut regiment .
 The Berkut bullet samples database was stolen by Berkut commanders and members who escaped with them to Crimea in order to remove evidence .
 The Berkut weapons were found in August 2015 buried in a shallow pit and in a nearby pond in a Kyiv City park .
 The GPU announced later that a leader and a member of a pro-Maidan organization of veteran paratroopers removed, cut into pieces, and buried the Berkut weapons . The GPU said later that the leader and the member of the group were removed .
 18 out of 20 wounded protesters had wounds at significant vertical angles . Similarly, 18 of 20 injured protesters were wounded at significant angles .
 This suggests significant mismatch in vertical angles of bullet directions in the majority of cases of the killed and wounded protesters .
 In 13% of cases, protesters had wounds from significant vertical angles when the Berkut was positioned on the ground but significantly above them .
 The match in nearly horizontal levels between the Berkut and shot protesters was in just 6% of cases . The match was in almost horizontal levels, but only 6% were shot .
 In three cases, eyewitness testimony mentioned during the trial and synchronized and time-stamped videos revealed that these protesters were killed before the Berkut special police company members appeared at the massacre area .
 The significant vertical angles of wounds are in all cases consistent with ‘snipers’ in Maidancontrolled buildings or on the roofs of these buildings and not with their shooting by the Berkut police . These cases located on the nearly horizontal levels with the shot protesters .
 In the cases of exceptions when directions of wounds were bottom to top, these directions are consistent with forensic ballistic and medical findings of evidence of ricochets .
 The protesters were shot not from the Berkut positions direction but from Maidan-controlled areas directions . Other evidence suggests that in all three cases of exceptions, when the wounds direction was reported by forensic medical examinations .
 Ihor Kostenko was shot from a Maidan location, a forensic report says .
 ballistic expert found during an on-site GPU investigative experiment that Anatolii Panchuk was wounded in his left back area from a sector that excludes the Berkut barricade .
 Volodymyr Buchenko testified three times during the investigation that he was shot from direction of the Hotel Ukraina and saw a sniper on its second floor at that time .
 Evidence made public during the trial indicates protesters were shot from the Maidan-controlled buildings and not by the Berkut . In all but one uncertain case, protesters with wounds from significant vertical angles were also shot .
 A ballistic expert identified Zhovtnevyi Palace and not the ground level in front of it as the most likely location of the shooter in the Ksenchuk case because of the steep angle of his wound .
 The Berkut was filmed in front of this building shooting around that time . Ksenchuk was among other protesters below them on the hill .
 A forensic ballistic report determined that the 7.62x39 caliber bullet which wounded Ksenchuk was industrially made but not from live ammunition . The bullet was made from a 7.60x39 calibre .
 A training bullet was modified and put into a bullet casing with gunpowder . This suggests that he most likely was shot not by the Berkut special company or any other government law enforcement unit .
 The GPU investigation, and Berkut did not identify himself in any of the videos . This protester, this protester, and the protester, were not identified in any videos .
Information about his location in the investigative experiment video points to simultaneous wounding of another protester near him from similar vertical and horizontal angles, according to the video . But information about the location and direction of wounds is not clear .
 Forensic ballistic reports indicate that protesters were killed from the Hotel Ukraina . These forensic ballistic reports along with other evidence, which revealed during the trial, indicate that they were killed .
 bullets went through through bodies of more than half of the killed protesters . Many other protesters, probably near half, were likely killed from the same weapon .
 Andriy Saienko was shot not from a Berkut position but from a top floor of the Hotel Ukraina . His brother testified during the trial that he was shot from the top floor .
Prosecution still charged two Berkut members with killings of Saienko and all other protesters . But the prosecution still charges two members of the Berkut group with killings .
 A forensic medical report found that Ihor Dmytriv was killed by a bullet that entered on the right side of the body and exited on the left side at a very steep angle . The report was made public during the Maidan massacre trial .
 The moment of his killing was captured in a BBC News video . He was shot when he faced the Berkut police at about the same level on the ground .
 The wound direction points to the top of the Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, or Horodetskoho Street buildings in between the buildings .
 The ballistic analysis of a bullet found in his clothing stated that he was shot from the same exact weapon . Saienko, Kemsky, Zhalovaha, and several other protesters were also shot .
 Forensic medical reports presented during the trial are not sufficient to make conclusions about directions from which protesters were killed . In some cases, the forensic medical reports are not enough to make conclusion about directions .
 At least the absolute majority of the protesters were killed from the Maidan-controlled buildings and not by the Berkut . But such information based on media and social media reports indicates that at least the majority of protesters were not killed .
 At least 12 protesters, including a Maidan medic, testified during the trial or investigation . They testified that they were shot by “snipers’ from the Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, and Zhovtnevyi Palace .
 Pavlo Onufriiv testified during the investigation that there were one or two snipers in black uniforms on the roofs of this hotel and Zhovtnevyi Palace . He testified that he was shot by a sniper that might have been located on the hotel roof or the roof of
 Borys Kharchuk testified during the trial in September 2016 that he was wounded by a sniper from a Hotel Ukrana window .
 He said that he was shot immediately after he saw two persons in black clothes and black balaklavas in a Hotel Ukraina window . One of them was aiming a rifle, he said .
 When Kharchuk shouted “snipers, he noticed that another protester near him was shot in the back . He himself was wounded in his arm when he turned to look at this protester .
 ballistic expert concluded that Roman Kotliarevsky was shot from a sector ranging from the Hotel Ukraina to Bank Arkada .
 A forensic medical report made public during the trial confirmed Kotliarevsky was shot in the top back part of his right thigh at a steep angle from the top to bottom direction . The report was made public by a forensic medical team .
 The wounded medic said he was most likely shot from the Bank Arkada based on the steep direction of his wound channel . The medic said that he was likely shot based on his wounds channel .
 A forensic ballistic report made public during the trial found that this medic was shot from the same 7.62x39 caliber weapon . The weapon was used to kill Mykola-Oleh Pankiv .
 Many protesters during the trial changed or dismissed as unimportant their earlier testimonies about snipers in these locations . Many of these protesters changed their testimonies or dismissed their earlier testimony .
 Ballistic experts found that Kravchuk was wounded not from the Berkut barricade, as the prosecution claimed, but from the Bank Arkada or the attached metro entrance .
 A video shows his position behind a tree just prior to almost simultaneous first two woundings . His reported wound locations and steep directions of these wounds are consistent with the Bank Arkada .
 Belgian VRT video shows his position at the moment of the last wounding in was different than he described during the trial and the investigative experiment .
 The entry wound was located in the left knee area and the exit wound in his left thigh area point to a gunshot from the Maidan-controlled Hotel Ukraina .
 The failure to investigate various evidence of “snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings and denial of their presence there indicate a deliberate cover-up .
 19 wounded protesters testified during the trial and/or the GPU investigation that they were shot from the Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, Muzeinyi Lane, Horodetskoho Street, Music Conservatory, Main Post Office .
 Borys Kharchuk, Pavlo Onufriiv, Sviatoslav Kolesnikov, Oleksander Huch, Volodymyr Buchenko, Vadym Lapko, Andrii Navalianyi, and Petro Ladym.
 The GPU charged the special Berkut company with attempted murder of all 22 protesters . Honcharovsky was the only person charged with the murder .
 Other cases of the wounded protesters either have not been yet presented at the trial or there is lack of reliable evidence concerning locations of their shooters . Other cases are not yet presented.
 BBC, CNN, ICTV, Spilne TV, ZDF, and Ruptly videos show armed Maidan protesters or unidentified shooters covertly shooting from Hotel Ukraina .
 A significant part of the trial sessions involved debates among participants about directions of gunshots . The trial sessions included debates about directions for gunshots .
 Forensic medical reports show that at least the majority of protesters were killed from directions of the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidan-controlled areas . At least the absolute majority of the protesters were shot and killed .
 Melnychuk was most probably killed from a Hotel Ukraina area ranging from the six to eight floor . His wife testified about his position at the time of the killing .
 A Maidan protester eyewitness report says a ‘sniper’ was on the seventh floor of the Melnychuk hotel . This is consistent with a Maidan protest report in a video of the killing .
 Parashchuk was shot dead in the back of his head from the Hotel Ukraina . His sister testified that he was shot in the head after entering the hotel .
 The onsite investigative experiment concluded that Evhen Kotliar was shot in the neck from the Hotel Ukraina seconds after Huryk was killed there . The investigation was conducted in July 2014 .
 A forensic medical examination found Anatolii Zhalovaha was shot in the right back of his head behind his ear . The bullet exited in the middle of his forehead .
 Forensic ballistic examinations show Zhalovaha was shot from the same exact weapon as Saienko, Kemsky, and at least seven other protesters . This direction is also consistent with conclusions of official ballistic examinations .
 An investigative on-site experiment concluded that Volodymyr Chaplynsky was shot dead from the Hotel Ukraina . He was filmed running away in a widely publicized video of the massacre .
 A forensic medical report finds the bullet went into his body from the top to bottom, left to right, and front to back directions . The entry wound was on the left side of the neck and the exit wound is on the back of his right shoulder blade .
 The investigation reversed its own earlier conclusion that this protester was not shot from the Berkut barricade . But the investigation reversed their own conclusion.
 The video clearly shows Chaplynsky position at the moment of the first gunshot with the left side of his body facing the Bank Arkada . The locations of the entry and exit wounds point to the BankArkada .
 The prosecution and Maidan victims’ lawyers relied on “complex examinations’s” and reversed results of ballistic and medical examinations . They mostly changed testimonies of wounded protesters during the trial to argue that the Berkut special company killed 48.
 Forensic reports were conducted by medical experts and not ballistic experts without any on-site reconstruction or measurements close to the completion of the GPU investigation in the end of 2015 .
 They relied on videos and results of reversed forensic and ballistic examinations and testimonies and investigative experiments . They used videos and tests of reverse forensic and Ballistic examinations .
 Forensic reports in all cases pointed to the Berkut positions as the sector of fire from which the protesters were killed or wounded .
 The GPU investigation found that all evidence was collected by the GPU investigation . They ignored all evidence to the contrary, including the one collected from the investigation .
 Ustym Holodniuk was shot in the head from a sector, which included the left side of the Berkut barricade . His face at the moment of his killing was turned in the direction of 4-5 hours o’clock angle towards a camera in a video
 Holodniuk had a significantly different position with the right side of his head and body at 2-3 o’clock hours from the camera .
 Certain cases are either contradictory in terms of available evidence or uncertain because of the lack of evidence . All evidence unequivocally points to killing and wounding of a protester from Berkut positions .
 The evidence presented during the trial cannot exclude that some protesters could have been shot by the Berkut .
 It is possible to infer a similar general pattern for cases of killed and wounded protesters not yet presented during the trial . The trial is currently being held in London .
 Forensic ballistic examination linked bullets from a part of killed and wounded protesters to specific weapons of the Berkut special company .
 The results of this examination, which was conducted manually, contradicted findings of more than 40 previous forensic ballistic reports conducted by some of the same experts, and by using a computer based automated system .
 Its results also contradicted findings of forensic medical reports and positions of protesters in videos that indicate they were shot from the Maidan-controlled buildings . It was physically impossible to kill and wound them from the Berkut positions.
 These complex examinations reversed results of several forensic medical examinations by switching entry and exit wounds, in most cases without any explanation given . In most cases, the examinations were not explained .
 Such reversals meant, with exceptions, reversal of directions of their shooting from Maidan-controlled locations . Such reversal meant, in some cases, of a couple of cases .
In these and other cases, it was still physically impossible to kill them from the Berkut barricade . Such reversals and significant vertical angles of wounds imply that they were shot at a steep angle from below the ground .
 Forensic medical examination reports about entry and exit wounds of other killed protesters as evidence that they were killed from the Berkut barricade positions . The same concerned forensic medical examination.
Because of steep angles of wounds in protesters, such entry and exit wounds would imply that these shots were from below the ground, such as Viktor Chmilenko and Roman Varenytsia .
 There were no evidence of bullet ricochets identified in ballistic and medical examinations in these cases .
 Such ricochets with significant angles of vertical deflection were improbable from the Berkut barricade, because it was practically at horizontal level with the killed protesters . Since forensic textbooks and studies state that the angle of deflection is typically smaller than the angle in ricoche
 The GPU did not use any measurements or lasers to determine bullet trajectories . The on-site investigative experiments were conducted by the GPU .
 The Berkut lawyers stated that experiments also changed positions or wounds locations of killed protesters, such as Dmytriv and Tochyn .
 A Kyiv court issued a ruling in November 2016 to conduct a new forensic ballistic examination of bullets by different ballistic experts . Berkut lawyers questioned the results of forensic ballistic examinations and questioned their results .
 New investigative experiments have to determine whether protesters were shot from Berkut special company positions . Hotel Ukraina, Bank Arkada, Zhovtnevyi Palace, Horodetskoho Street 11, Muzeinyi Lane 8 and 10, the Music Conservatory .
 Berkut lawyers requested that the new investigative experiments check bullet trajectories from these buildings along with three buildings in the government forces-controlled areas .
Both new forensic ballistic examinations and investigative experiments were significantly delayed . Both new forensic Ballistic examinations and investigations were delayed .
 New investigative experiments were not completed by the Maidan massacre court . The April 18, 2017 deadline was set up by the court in Maidan .
 Kyiv Mohyla Academy students are selected as experiment witnesses . The experiments are conducted by the GPU after the end of working hours and last no more than a few hours .
 Large crowds of people who walk in the area of the massacre after the end of their work also slow down the experiments . Large crowds also slow the experiments.
 The investigative experiments were extended by the court until September 1, 2017 . Trial sessions were reduced from two to one per week because of this extension .
 Time-stamped and synchronized videos in video compilations showed that at least four protesters were killed before the special Berkut company first appeared and started shooting with Kalashnikovs and pump rifles .
 The trial revealed that Pekhenko was shot from a steep vertical direction . Arutiunian, Vaida, and Baliuk were killed by hunting pellets .
 Public announcements from the Maidan stage at that time warned protesters about “snipers’ in the Hotel Ukraina and Kozatsky Hotel and not to shoot protesters in the back .
 A Facebook post by the GPU head revealed that the GPU both ordered and was itself involved in making these synchronized video compilations . The GPU both orders and is itself involved.
 These video compilations and other videos were used extensively during the trial as an evidence of the massacre of the protesters by the Berkut .
 The size of these videos was too small to discern such information . However, their size in these compilation was too large .
 Security cameras from Zhovtnevyi Palace, the Hotel Ukraina, and Bank Arkada were not included in the compilation . It was not made public in spite of its importance since it showed both the massacre site at the time of the massacre .
Security camera from Bank Arkada automatically stopped recording just before the start of the mass killing . The head of the GPU special department in charge of the Maidan massacre investigation said there was no movement there .
 The Prosecutor General of Ukraine admitted that much of evidence in the Maidan massacre was destroyed when the massacre area was “cleaned’s” on orders of Maidan leadership .
 The trial did not present any expert examinations of bullet holes in helmets and shields of the killed and wounded protesters . With the partial exception of a blue helmet of Holodniuk, the investigation was not conducted .
 A Berkut lawyer stated during the trial that no forensic ballistic expertise of the Holodniuk’s helmet was conducted .
 A video showing the bullet holes in Roman Huryk's helmet was made public for the first time during the trial .
 Pro-Maidan veterans of law enforcement, who filmed his helmet on the killing site on February 21, 2014, pointed locations of these bullet holes and identified the entry and exit holes .
 The video shows bullet holes during the Maidan trial . The video was shown during the trial of Maidan residents .
 A Berkut lawyer during the examination of the Huryk case on July 21, 2016 also pointed these locations of the bullet holes and their direction pointing towards the Bank Arkada .
 One Kharkiv Berkut member was arrested in June 2016 and charged with killings of the first three protesters on February 18, 2014 . The first three were arrested in February 2014 .
 Another Kharkiv Berkut officer was arrested at the same time and charged with wounding of 33 protesters on the same day . Another officer was also arrested at same time.
 The suspects in the February 20th massacre continued to serve in the police at the times of their arrests . They, like their accused counterparts in the case, continued to work with the police .
 Their cases went to trials only in around the third anniversary of the massacre in 2017 . The actual trials have not started, and the cases have not been heard .
 Both Berkut policemen were released from the detention by Kyiv courts in spite of such serious charges . However, both were not charged with serious crimes .
 One of them was charged with attempts to kill 33 Maidan protesters . He fled along with three other Berkut members to Russia soon after being released from arrest .
 Berkut special company commander charged with the massacre of the Maidan protesters on February 20 . The same concerns the release and escape of the Berkut commander .
 Even the basic evidence concerning killing and wounding of these three protesters have not been made public by the prosecution or media .
 The GPU only reported that these three protesters were killed by hunting pellets in the Kriposnyi Lane area . Police clashed with protesters after failed attempt to storm parliament .
 33 other protesters were wounded by pellets on the same day and in the same area . Similarly, 33 others were injured by such pellets .
 A member of the Maidan leadership was filmed evacuating a car with a hunting rifle, equipped with a silencer and optics, of a Maidan protester .
Protester said in a Ukrainian media interview that he came there along with a group of hunters from Western Ukraine .
 The GPU stated that he was not involved in the massacre simply because his hunting rifle did not fire then . The GPU said that he did not have a hunting rifle that he had fired .
 One of the protesters reportedly was shot from roof of a building in the back of his head, not from ground-level positions .
 Four protesters died from head trauma and related injuries during the counterattack by titushki and the police .
 No one was identified and charged for their killings, but evidence concerning specific circumstances of their killings has not been made public . Many protesters were gravely beaten by titushki and the police around the same time and place .
 The investigation did not identify any suspects in killings of 12 protesters during a storming of the Maidan by the police .
 The GPU, the special parliamentary commission, has been investigated by the GPU . About half of them were killed by pellets of hunting bullets, a media report says .
 There is no information about any investigations of involvements of groups of concealed Maidan shooters in the Hotel Ukraina and the Trade Union buildings . In spite of various such evidence, the police around the same time and place, by hunting pellets and bullets .
 SBU Kyiv Regional head charged with responsibility for killings of 10 protesters . The SBU Alfa attempted to seize the Trade Union building that served as the headquarters of the Maidan .
 The specific names of the victims in this case have not been made public . His trial was not open, and his trial which was not opened .
 The head of the Kyiv SBU was responsible for the death of two protesters, one of whom was reportedly a neo-Nazi . The investigation de facto admitted that the fire was started by the protesters during an attempt by the SBU Alfa to seize this building .
 A court returned charges against him to the GPU because they were not specific . A UN report stated that a court returned charge against him.
 A named suspect in the journalist killing was himself killed in the separatist-controlled Donbas . However, a named suspect was killed by himself in the Donbas.
 A Maidan lawyer stated that the evidence against this suspect was problematic . The evidence against the suspect is problematic, he said .
 No specific evidence was released by the investigation in both cases . The protester was shot by a small caliber bullet, according to reports .
 The court decisions and the investigation also revealed that several protesters were misrepresented in the media for a long time as victims of the lethal police violence . The court decision and investigation also reveal that many protesters are misrepresented as victims .
 The head of the Kyiv branch of the neo-Nazi Social National Assembly admitted in his interview that they burned this building . The building was burned in a bid to build a new building .
 A Svoboda company commander was driven over by another protestor after this protester seized a track and tried to slam it into the police . The GPU investigation, court decisions and a verdict were revealed .
 This was the only case with a verdict in the Maidan massacre case . The protester was not charged with killing but with traffic violations and was granted an amnesty under the amnesty law .
 The failure to identify suspects or their affiliation in these killings is clearly not due to lack of evidence .
 Three members of Maidan company admitted in their BBC and Ukrainian media interviews that they shot the police in the early morning of February 20th from a Kalashnikov assault rifle and hunting rifles with intentions to kill or wound them .
 Its commander said that this company was organized and based in the Music Conservatory after talks with the Right Sector . The company is based in a music conservatory in London .
 A CNN video shows a commander and some armed members of this company going to the protesters barricade in front of the Maidan stage . The video was filmed around 8:20am .
 Two Berkut officers were killed by 7.62mm caliber bullets from either a Kalashnikov assault rifle or Saiga on the Maidan between 8:00 and 8:20am . The GPU stated that these admissions of shooting the police were contradicted by their investigation .
 Two other policemen were killed from the angles pointing to barricade near the Trade Union building with large caliber hunting pellets . Two other police officers were also killed in the incident .
 The commander of this Maidan armed unit, who is now a member of the Ukrainian parliament, refused to be interrogated by the GPU . He also admitted that his unit shot the police .
 A few dozen policemen were wounded in the morning of February 20 . The investigation also confirmed that a few dozen police were wounded .
 The GPU investigation determined that the last policeman on that day was wounded at about the same time as Symysiuk was killed . It is noteworthy that the GPU investigation found that the first policeman was wounded in the same incident .
 covert shooters in the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidan-controlled buildings did not kill or wound any policeman during the massacre of the protesters . This implies that the covert shooters didn't kill or wounded any policeman .
 Deputy Vikings commander was posthumously awarded Hero of Ukraine title by president Poroshenko for his service in Right Sector paramilitary unit during war in Donbas .
 Kyiv court decisions revealed that the Prosecutor General Office of Ukraine investigated the leader and members of the Right Sector and “Warriors of Narnia, a neo-Nazi unit, for their suspected killing and wounding of the Interior Troops servicemen and the police during the Maidan
 Other court decisions revealed a similar investigation of a leader and members of Sokil, a youth affiliate of far right Svoboda party, Bratstvo far right party and other unidentified Maidan activists for their suspected involvement in the killing and wounding of the Interior Troops servicemen and
 Court rulings specifically refer to two Right Sector activists, who were wounded during a Right Sector attack of a separatist checkpoint in Sloviansk on April 20, 2014 . Many other Right Sector members are suspects in GPU investigation in killings and wounding the police on the Maidan .
 The GPU is unlikely to charge and bring to trial any protesters who killed or wounded the police during the Maidan massacre . The court decisions stated that the weapons used by the wounded checkpoint attackers were the same weapons from which two Internal Troops servicemen were killed .
 The amnesty law was adopted by the parliament soon after the violent overthrow of Yanukovych . Killing and wounding of the police by participants of the ‘Euromaidan’ protests are covered by the amnesty law .
 The GPU investigation of the massacre of the police is conducted separately from its investigation of massacre of protesters even though they happened in the same time and place . The GPU is conducting its own investigation into the massacre.
 The government investigation did not even officially consider a version of the killing of both police and protesters by Maidan shooters, specifically far-right-linked shooters .
 No forensic ballistic comparisons of bullets, which killed both police and protesters, were conducted, in spite of similarity of the types and calibers of ammunition and similarities of the police and the protesters wounds reported by heads of Maidan medics .
 The Maidan massacre of the protesters and the police was the most politically consequential case of violence in independent Ukraine . It was one of the most consequential cases in the contemporary politics .
 Academic studies concluded that this was a false flag operation involving far right and oligarchic Maidan parties . However, it was a central subject of only a couple of academic studies .
 At least the absolute majority of the Maidan protesters were killed and wounded from the general direction of Maidan-controlled buildings . One does not need to be a forensic expert to determine, based on the positions of victims in videos and on the map .
 It was physically impossible to shoot these protesters from the air several to several dozen meters above the Berkut positions . There was no forensic evidence of ricochets.
 It was physically impossible for Berkut police to shoot the absolute majority of the protesters when the exact times of their killing and wounding do not coincide with the times of the Berkut shooting in synchronized videos .
 armed riot police unit first arrived and started shooting near massacre area . It was also physically impossible for the Berkut special company to kill a significant part of the protesters by hunting pellets .
 The protesters were separated from the Berkut positions by a concrete wall, trees and shields without piercing these obstacles . The protesters, who were separated by the wall, are beyond the realm of possibility .
 It was also physically impossible by the Berkut to shoot the protesters from weapons whose caliber did not match calibers of weapons used by the police and other government units .
 It was impossible for government or any third force “snipers’ to enter 65 with weapons, shoot for hours, and leave the Maidan-controlled buildings . Many rooms in the Hotel Ukraina were occupied by Svoboda deputies .
 The analysis shows that the investigations and trials were largely ineffective in determining and prosecuting specific organizers, perpetrators and others involved in the mass killing of the protesters . The analysis was based on the investigation and trials .
 Not a single person has been convicted for the Maidan massacre of the protesters more than three years after this mass killing in February 2014 .
 Ongoing trials and investigations are unlikely to produce any verdicts before the fourth anniversary of the massacre .
 The study finds that the Maidan massacre investigations and trials revealed a variety of evidence . At least the absolute majority of the protesters were killed and wounded from Maidan-controlled buildings .
 Analysis shows patterns of ineffective and delayed Maidan massacre trials and the GPU investigations, and trumped-up charges, and ignoring, reversing, and covering-up the evidence .
 Investigation revealed evidence of involvement of Maidan armed groups in mass killings of the police .
 The 66 investigation of the police killing was also delayed and stonewalled . But the 66 investigation into the death of the officer was also stonewalling .
 The investigation failed to identify specific perpetrators and organizers of the massacre of the police .
 The amnesty law was adopted by the parliament after the violent overthrow of Yanukovych by means of the Maidan massacre . It prohibited prosecutions and convictions of “Euromaidan’s’ participants for these crimes .
 GPU prosecutors on their own have no interest to do such ineffective investigations of one of the most if not the most documented cases of mass killing .
 The protesters were massacred by concealed shooters in the Maidan-controlled locations . They by themselves have no capability or motives to delay and stonewall the investigations of the massacre .
 The same concerns the failure to investigate the massacre of the protesters as a single case to determine if the same “snipers’ shot both the protesters and the police . The police have not been able to determine whether they shot the protesters or police .
Unusual reversals of results of forensic ballistic and in several cases medical examinations and testimonies of wounded protesters about “snipers’ in Hotel Ukraina and other Maidan-controlled buildings fit the same pattern .
 identities of some top government leaders cannot be determined by analysis based on publicly available data . All this suggests involvement of some government leaders in such stonewalling of the investigation and the trials and the cover-up .
 The study relied on publicly available evidence, specifically from government trials and investigations .
 It is unable to determine specific identities of organizers and the perpetrators of the Madian massacre .
 The revelations provide corroboration that the Maidan massacre was a successful false flag operation . The trials and investigations provide a corroboration.
 This has major implications for understanding the 67 “Euromaidan,’s nature of the political transition, and the political system in Ukraine . This has big implications for the Ukraine political system .
 The Maidan opposition became a part of the government as a result of this massacre . It became part the government in the start of the violent conflict in Ukraine, which escalated from this massacre to the civil war in Donbas .
 The study implies that the coverage of the Maidan massacre by the Western mainstream media was unreliable . The study also implies that that the mainstream media did not report major revelations from trials and investigations .
 Western governments have been silent on the Maidan massacre investigations and trials in Ukraine . They have been accused of the massacre by the Yanukovych government and his forces .