Three years after Russia annexed Crimea, the region remains in a state of flux . Russia hopes a bridge to Crimea will solve many problems .
At Kiev International Airport, I hand my passport to a border guard . It's difficult to get into, and for many people, it's hard to know where it's going, says one .
 The current tension between Moscow and Kiev is clouded by enmity and suspicion . Those pauses at passport control are an indication of the current tension .
 Crimea, the Ukrainian peninsula annexed by Russia three years ago, is Ukraine's final destination . The peninsula was annexed by the Russian government in 2010 .
For journalists based in Russia, there are faster ways of reaching the Crimean peninsula . Russia annexed Crimea three years ago .
 The Crimean capital Simferopol is the Crimean capital of Crimea . Board a plane in Moscow and two hours later you can be in Crimea .
 Ukraine warns foreign nationals that anyone entering "temporarily occupied Crimea" without Kiev's permission may be banned from future entry .
Ukrainian Migration Service in Kiev to obtain document permitting travel to Crimea . First, we visit the Ukrainian Migration Service.
Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 was a watershed moment . Three hours later, permission slips in hand, our long car journey south begins .
 Three years on we are travelling to Crimea to gauge the mood . It is dark by the time we reach the final Ukrainian checkpoint before the peninsula .
 The land between the Ukrainian and Russian checkpoints is tiny no more than 50m long . The no-man's land between Ukraine and Russia is tiny.
 The appearance here of British journalists has raised official eyebrows . The appearance in the UK has raisedOfficial eyebrows .
 Crimea has a wide variety of Vladimir Putin murals and posters . Crimea has been dubbed Crimea by the Russian President .
 The inquisitive young man with "no name, only a rank" invites his colleagues for similar conversations . The young man invites colleagues to similar conversations.
 Russian customs officers spend the night in the van waiting for customs officers to process our papers and allow our TV equipment through .
Simferopol is the administrative centre of Crimea . Ten hours after arriving at the Armyansk crossing, we finally clear the checkpoint .
 Most of the cars have switched to Russian number plates . New buses manufactured near Moscow have taken to the roads .
In one poster, Putin promises to boost Crimea's spa facilities . "Crimea was famous for being the spa of the Soviet Union"
"All Russian army social programmes will be extended to Sevastopol and the Black Sea Fleet," he promises in another .
On 22 February 2014, Ukraine's pro-Moscow president Viktor Yanukovych fled the country after what he and his Russian allies called an ""illegal coup"" in Kiev .
 Armed with Russian weapons, they seized government buildings, the parliament, the airport, and blocked Ukrainian army bases . They also seized Ukrainian military bases .
 More than 95% of people who had taken part had voted for Crimea's "reunification" with Russia .
 A statue honouring The Little Green Men has been erected near the Crimean parliament building .
 Many in Crimea see the bloody conflict in eastern Ukraine as confirmation that Russia is a safer home . Many of those in Crimea welcome Moscow's rule.
 They discount evidence that unrest in the Donbass was incited and bankrolled by Moscow . They also say that unrest was bankrolled and incited by Moscow.
 Until recently, her sister had been living in Luhansk, one of the self-proclaimed separatist republics in eastern Ukraine .
 Nadezhda, an ethnic Ukrainian, trusts Moscow more than Kiev it is out of nostalgia for Soviet times . She regarded Moscow as her capital when she regarded it as her city .
 Nadezhda describes Crimea joining Russia as "a return to the Soviet Union" Nadezda says Crimea is a return to Russia .
 People pass a mural of Putin at the wheel of a ship in Russia .
 Crimea is not enough to sustain pro-Russia sentiment in Crimea at the level of 2014 . But they are not enough for pro- Russia sentiment in the Crimea region to sustain it .
 With economic links to Ukraine cut, the only way of keeping the peninsula supplied is by sea or air .
 Moscow insists it will change once it has completed a road and rail bridge linking Crimea to the Russian mainland . Moscow insists that will change when it has finished the bridge and bridge .
 The bridge is a multibillion-dollar statement that Moscow is here to stay . Moscow is in the middle of a multi-billion dollar crisis .
Russian red tape. As well as higher prices, there is Russian red tape . I visit a document registration centre.
 Ukrainians have come to exchange Ukrainian documents, like deeds for apartments, for Russian ones . They have been exchanging deeds for Russian apartments .
Russia has handed Crimea back to Ukraine, but has not yet handed it back .
 I am talking to Nadia beside the statue of Ukraine's most famous 19th Century poet, Taras Shevchenko .
Twenty people have come here with flowers to mark the poet's birthday . It is Shevchenko Day and a group of 20 people have arrived with flowers .
 In Russian Crimea, public expressions of Ukrainian pride attract special attention . In Russia, such expressions of Ukraine's pride attract attention .
 Crimea's economy has struggled to adjust to Crimea's transition to Crimea .
 "Three years ago America was planning to station soldiers in three schools in Sevastopol," she claims .
 If people think they live badly in Crimea today, let them go and live in the Donbass in eastern Ukraine . If you think they are living badly in Ukraine today, you can live in Donbass .
 Umer Ibragimov is desperate to find what happened to his missing son .
 Umer, a Crimean Tatar, is desperate for information about his son Ervin . Umer is desperate to find out about Ervin, his son.
 CCTV cameras caught the moment he was seized by men in uniform and bundled into a vehicle . The incident happened in the early hours of the morning .
 Ervin Ibragimov was a member of the executive board of the World Congress of Crimean Tatars . He was a former member of a board for the World congress of the Crimean Tatar .
 The Mejlis had opposed the 2014 referendum on joining Russia . Its elected representative body has been ruled an "extremist organisation" and banned .
 Amnesty International accuses Russian authorities of "systematic persecution" of Crimean Tatars . Human rights group Amnesty International says Russian authorities are persecuting Tatars.
Josef Stalin ordered deportation an act of collective punishment and paranoia . It was Josef Stalin who had ordered the deportation.
 The Soviet dictator suspected Crimean Tatars of collaborating with the Nazis . He is believed to have been a member of the Soviet regime .
"My mother and father told me later they'd be given just 15 minutes to gather their belongings," recalls Umer Umer . Umer's mother and dad told him later they would be given only 15 minutes.
 Conscripted into the Soviet army in the late 1970s, he spent a year fulfilling his "internationalist duty" in Afghanistan .
 Russia and the West argue over sanctions, sovereignty and borders . It seems that most people are just trying to get on with their lives, trying to adapt .
 The region's traditional tourist appeal has diminished, artist Svitlana Gavrilenko says .
 If we become a part of Ukraine again, we will need to solve all this stuff again, he says . "If we become part of the Ukraine again," he says. "We will need a solution again"
 In the Black Sea resort of Yalta I find the promenade packed with people enjoying a seaside stroll in the sunshine .
 The sound of the waves crashing on the shore mixes with jazz chords from street musicians . The sound is similar to the sounds of the ocean.
 Rodion believes "it's not completely impossible" that Crimea would one day return to Ukraine's rule .
 "I don't think Russia in its modern state, with Putin at the top, could ever give Crimea back," she tells me . "I'm not sure what Russia is doing," she says .