 The 2018-19 elections in Russia and Ukraine will change Eastern Europe’s political landscape .
 Russia-led irregular separatists and Russian regulars are fighting in Ukraine's Donets Basin . That could mean new chances for an end to the war, on the one side, and Ukrainian government forces .
 In both cases the Russian and Ukrainian political leaders’ behaviour has more to do with internal than foreign factors . The Russian and Ukraine political leaders' behaviour has a more todo with internal and foreign factors.
Laurent Geslin and Sébastien Gobert discuss Ukraine's energy dilemma . Read also Laurent Geslin & SéBastien gobert, ‘Ukraine’s energy dilemma’, Le Monde diplomatique .
 Vladimir Putin’s Ukraine adventure has been a principal source of his increased popularity . Vladimir Putin's Ukraine adventure is a principal cause of his increasing popularity .
 A new 'Crimea consensus' in Russia has led sociologists to speak of a new ‘Crimeaensus’ in Russian society . It has led to a largely manufactured, yet widespread, collective agreement among much of Russia’s population about the justice
 The date of the 2018 Russian elections will be moved to that of the fourth anniversary of the signing of the Russian-Crimean annexation treaty . Putin’s electoral win shows the importance of the aggressive anti-Ukraine campaign to Putin.
 Petro Poroshenko was the first post-Maidan presidency in Ukraine . He was then holder of the first presidency . This is in contrast to the sudden rise of the once secondary Petro Petrooshenko in spring 2014 .
Ukrainian politician and negotiator. His unexpected post-revolutionary prominence came from a presumption in large parts of Ukrainian society that he would be the right choice to bring peace and security .
 The anti-oligarchic 2014 Revolution of Dignity had pointed to a new political era with statesmen and -women from outside the old oligarchic system .
 Ukrainians gave their vote to the former minister . Ukraine's former minister was elected by the Ukrainian parliament . Ukraine has lost territory in eastern Ukraine and has suffered economic dislocations .
 Poroshenko had the defect of being one of Ukraine’s leading oligarchs . He was widely assumed to be able to lead the Ukrainian state out of the deepening crisis in its foreign affairs .
 Most Ukrainians criticise his unwillingness to change the country’s oligarchic order . Most Ukrainians criticize him for not fully disengage from his own business interests .
Russian President Vladimir Putin has failed to fulfil the hopes of his 2014 voters . His political descent is because of his inability to improve relations with Russia . He has not been able to fulfil his 2014 election hopes .
 Had Poroshenko delivered on this campaign theme, voters might have forgiven him for his inconsistencies .
 Poroshenko was unable to solve the major foreign issue, Ukraine’s bloody confrontation with Russia, and was not willing to push through any real domestic transformation .
 He could even rival the embarrassing record of his former patron Viktor Yushchenko, who lost the 2010 presidential elections coming fifth place with a miserable 5.45% of the vote .
 The forecast for 2019 is that the leadership in the Ukrainian executive and legislature could provide an international pretext for – and domestic impulse to – the solution of the Donbass conflict . The forecast is that Ukraine's leadership could provide a pretext for a solution to the conflict .
 The hope is that a change in Ukraine’s leadership will lead to a reset in Russian-Ukrainian relations . Putin at last decided to pull out from the Donets Basin .
 Russia’s presidential took place in March 2018; Ukraine will have presidential and parliamentary polls in 2019 . Russia's presidential and presidential elections will take place in 2019.
 The Donets Basin or Donbas region is named after its small Siverskyy Donets river, and not after the city of Donetsk or the large Russian river Don . The region is called Donbas, and the Donbas is named for its small river .