 Russia has amassed tens of thousands of troops on borders with Ukraine . Russia has carried out military drills in neighbouring Belarus – a key Russian ally for decades .
 Moscow has demanded Kyiv should not be granted membership of NATO military alliance . Moscow has maintained it does not seek war but has demanded that Kyiv is not granted membership .
 Putin's latest decision has triggered Western sanctions and fuelled fears of a major escalation . Putin’s latest decision is the latest in a series of decisions by the Russian president .
 Moscow has been involved militarily in a number of countries in the region and beyond in recent decades . Moscow has also been involved in many other countries in recent years .
 Donetsk and Luhansk are part of Ukraine’s Donbas region, and Crimea in 2014 and 2014 . In 2008, Russia intervened in the region in 2008 and 2008 . The region is part of the Ukraine's Donbas area .
 The crisis that led to Ukraine’s annexation of Crimea and war in eastern Ukraine mainly happened because of an internal conflict . Crimea and Donbas mainly happened due to internal conflict in Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s pro-Russia President Viktor Yanukovych rejected a deal with the European Union in November 2013 . The deal was seen as a first step to becoming a full member of the bloc .
 The move sparked mass protests, which led to clashes between security forces and protesters . Yanukovych attempted to stop the movement violently .
 During the Maidan movement, dozens of people were killed during the anti-government protests .
 Moscow stood behind Yanukovych, while the West supported the protesters . Moscow stood in support of Yanukovych .
 Moscow conducted military drills on its border with Ukraine, and at Russia’s Black Sea base near the Crimean Peninsula .
 Armed men with no insignia on their uniforms, mostly wearing masks, started seizing government buildings in Crimea . Meanwhile, armed men withno insignia, mostly wore masks, took control of buildings .
 The Kremlin rejected any affiliation with them and defined them as a local movement . The Kremlin also defined the attackers as aLocal movement .
 A new government was formed after the fall of the Crimean parliament by pro-Russian forces in February . A referendum was held on Crimea’s future in March .
 95 percent of voters in Crimea supported joining Russia, according to the new government at the time .
Pro-Russian protesters took to the streets in Donetsk and Luhansk regions in early April . They are demanding the regions to be part of Russia .
 Armed soldiers with no insignia kept targeting state institutions and security forces . Subsequently, armed soldiers kept targeting security forces and state institutions .
 They declared independence in Donetsk and Luhansk regions, starting a war with the Ukrainian army . Russia is supporting them, with apparent support from Russia, against the Ukrainian Army .
 At least 14,000 have been killed in fighting between rebels and Ukrainian forces .
 Russia's military operation on the two Georgian regions in 2008 mainly stemmed from President Mikhail Saakashvili's coming to power in 2004 with the Rose Revolution in Georgia .
 Saakashvili changed the former policies of his country significantly . He was eager for his country to become a European Union and NATO member .
 He also changed Tbilisi’s policies towards Georgian regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Both stayed pro-Russia after the fall of Soviet Union .
Saakashvili government policies to integrate the two regions led to violence at times . The SaakashVili government policy led to violent violence in both regions .
 The Georgian parliament’s unanimous vote for a bill to integrate Georgia into NATO in September 2006 led to increased tensions between Georgia and Russia .
 Moscow hit back at Tbilisi government by imposing sanctions and deporting hundreds of Georgians from the country . Moscow traditionally opposed to any Western expansion in its periphery .
 Georgia arrested four Russian army officers for spying in late September . Georgia arrested the officers in September .
 Kosovo declared independence from Serbia in February 2008 . Russia took steps to enhance its ties with South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 Georgia conducted a military operation to capture the South Ossetian capital of Tskhinvali in August 2008 . Georgia conducted the operation in 2008 .
 Russia responded with air raids on Georgian positions in South Ossetia, as well as Abkhazia . Russia subsequently moved troops into the regions in the five-day conflict .
 Russian forces quickly took control of Tskhinvali and rolled tanks and troops through Ossetia into Georgia . Russian forces reportedly stopped only a few kilometres away from Tbilisi .