 President Erdogan’s desire to mediate between Moscow and Kiev is confounded by Turkish policies in Crimea and Russian separatism in eastern Ukraine .
 Three Ukrainian navy vessels were stopped by Russia from entering the Sea of Azov via the Kerch Strait in the Black Sea, Crimea, Nov. 2018 . Russian jet fighters fly over bridge connecting the Russian mainland with the Crimean Peninsula with a cargo ship beneath it .
 President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s efforts to convince Russia and Ukraine to resolve their differences diplomatically following their recent naval skirmish in the Kerch Strait .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko have discussed the matter . Putin said they would explore this possibility further with Putin during the G-20 summit .
 If this mediation were to come about it would enhance Erdogan’s image at a time when the race for crucial local elections in March is heating up .
 Russia and Ukraine have been a major international success in bringing Russia, Ukraine together . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been a key figure in Russia's success in Ukraine .
 Erdogan's generally negative international image improved relatively in September . He mediated a cease-fire settlement for Syria’s Idlib province, and prevented an attack by Russian and Syrian forces .
 Ankara could play a mediating role between Moscow and Kiev, but stillborn due to a combination of factors . Ankara could also play a role in the relationship between the two cities, according to reports .
 Turkey has in fact taken sides in the dispute between its two Black Sea neighbors . Turkey has already taken sides.
 Ankara is officially opposed to Moscow’s “illegal annexation’ of the Crimea in 2014 . It continues to refuse to accept the Crimea annexation .
 Ankara has spoken out against Moscow's efforts to criminalize Tatar leaders . Ankara also supports the Crimean Tatars, with whom it shares ties of kinship and religion .
 Ankara has also been officially supportive of Ukraine’s territorial integrity . In this case it means opposing ethnic Russian separatism in the Donbass region of eastern Ukraine .
 Erdogan was emphatic that Turkey would remain committed to supporting Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 The Ukrainian government says it is working to overcome the illegal situation in the Crimea . It says it will work in coordination with Ukraine on this subject .
 The Ukrainian side also likes to emphasize in order to strengthen its hand against Russia . These remain Turkey’s official positions today .
 nationalist sentiments run high when it comes to questions of eastern Ukraine and Crimea . Such statements raise eyebrows on the Russian side, where nationalist sentiments are high .
 Ankara has, nevertheless, preferred to remain low-key on the Russian-Ukrainian dispute . Ankara has only mentioned its official position on occasions when the subject can’t be avoided .
 Turkey is increasingly dependent on Russia for a host of reasons, starting with its desire to counterbalance its deteriorating ties with the West, and the situation in Syria, not to mention the growing cooperation in the energy and military industry fields .
 Ankara’s cautious stance was revealed again during the recent face-off at the mouth of the Sea of Azov .
 The Turkish Foreign Ministry appeared to be criticizing Russia by calling on “unhindered passage into the Azov Sea’ to be maintained .
 The United States calls on both sides to refrain from endangering regional peace and stability . It calls on them to use common sense and restraint to avoid increasing tensions .
 Erdogan held separate phone conversations with Poroshenko and Putin on the same day . Erdogan called on the two countries to overcome their difference by diplomatic means .
Pro-government circles in Turkey say Ankara would be mediating between Moscow and Kiev . News of these conversations was picked up by pro-government circle in Turkey as a sign of a new relationship .
 Moscow had already put a damper on this expectation. By that time, Moscow had put it down to Moscow .
 Kremlin spokesman Dmitri Peskov repeated the position a day after Erdogan's phone conversations with Putin and Poroshenko .
 Ankara's difficult position in the Russian-Ukrainian dispute is the fact that the Turkish-Russian relationship is increasingly taking on a strategic appearance . Turkey's relationship with Russia is taking on an increasingly strategic appearance.
 TurkStream project will carry Russian natural gas to Europe through Turkey through Turkey . TurkStream will be the first time the project has been completed in Turkey .
 Ankara has to engage in diplomatic contortions to maintain good ties with Moscow and Kiev . This also provided an example of how Ankara has been able to maintain a good relationship with Kiev .
 The Russian side may be unhappy about Ankara’s stance on Crimea and Donbass .
 Ukrainian side is perhaps unhappier because of projects such as TurkStream, which are designed to circumvent Ukraine . The Ukrainian side, however, is perhaps unhappy with TurkStream .
 Turkey is developing with Ukraine in key areas such as military industry, construction and tourism . Turkey may laud the “strategic ties’ it is developing.
 Russia has not held back from entering projects with Russia that will ultimately weaken Ukraine’s hand against Moscow . But it is not holding back from enter projects that will weaken Ukraine's hand against Russia .
 Turkey’s actions indicate that its interests with Russia will trump its interests in Ukraine if matters come to a head, the diplomat told Al-Monitor . The diplomat said his sensitive position was on background because of his position .
 Selim Kuneralp is among those who say the latest crisis in the dispute between Ukraine and Russia has revealed Ankara's growing dependence on Moscow again .
 Kuneralp indicated that the TurkStream project is contrary to Ukraine’s interests . Turkey is rarely supportive of Russia's policies, despite the fact that Moscow is seldom supportive of Turkey .
 Putin gave Saudi Arabian Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman at G-20 summit in Argentina . Western leaders were in line with Turkey on the need to increase pressure on Saudi Arabia over the Khashoggi murder .
 Moscow’s support in Libya for the faction opposed by Ankara, its traditional position favoring the Greek Cypriots, and even its support for the Assad regime in Syria are all examples of the lack of Russian support on subjects of close interest to Turkey .