 The Russians seized the ships and detained their 24 crew members . The Russians then seized their ships.
 Russia's 2014 seizure of Crimea was rightly seen as a serious violation of global norms . Few at the time recognized it as creating a new tinder for war-other than maybe out of a long-term Ukrainian revanchism .
 Ukraine and foreign observers say it marked the culmination of a yearslong effort by Moscow to force its authority on the Sea of Azov . The waters of which are shared between the two countries are shared by Ukraine and Russia .
 The latest confrontation began last weekend as the three small vessels tried to pass through the narrow Kerch Strait separating Russia's mainland from Crimea .
 The martial law was imposed following the weekend incident in the Kerch Strait between Crimea and mainland Russian Federation .
 All Russian males between 16 and 60 will be barred from travelling to the country while martial law is in place . Petro Tsygykal, chief of the Ukrainian Border Guard Service, announced the ban .
 President Donald Trump called off a planned meeting with Vladimir Putin on Saturday . He had been scheduled to hold talks on Saturday on the sidelines of the G-20 summit .
 The legendary Russian, who defend Ukraine on the frontline, commented on the introduction of martial law . We will remind, the legendary ""Valkyrie"" the Russian who defended Ukraine, that the martial law was introduced .
 Moscow and Kyiv should encourage leaders to open their history books. Washington and European capitals should also open history books .
 For centuries, the Ukrainian church has been part of the Russian Orthodox Church .
 Both the Russian Orthodox Church and Russian authorities are strongly against the move . They have warned Ukraine not to do it, fearing sectarian violence .
 There are three Orthodox communities in Ukraine, including two breakaway churches . There are two Orthodox churches in Ukraine .
 Three Orthodox communities in Ukraine, including two breakaway churches . There are now three Orthodox communities.
 The country is on high alert following a clash between Ukrainian and Russian naval vessels in the Sea of Azov .
 The world's largest Orthodox church is moving close to forming an independent church . Poroshenko pushed the move to split the world's biggest denomination .