 The Russia-Ukraine confrontation delivers a good example of modern economic warfare, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This paper reviews its basic methods and demonstrates that economic aggression comprises a very important component of Russia’s hostile strategy towards Ukraine .
 Ukrainian economy enables economic aggression of Russia . It also reveals some specific features of the Ukrainian economy that enable the aggression .
 The tools of economic warfare are presented as direct and indirect ones . Economic warfare is presented as indirect and direct and direct .
 This situation could be considered as a textbook example of a modern hybrid war . The situation is similar to that of a hybrid war in the past .
 The policy of protectionism, trade wars between countries areg. of such kind. The policy is similar to that of the U.S. and other countries .
 From the point of view of economics, such phenomena have been considered as interference into market in order to distort laissez fair .
 EW is not clear at which point hostile economic actions against another country turn into EW per se .
 The Ukrainian National Institute of Strategic Studies published a monograph recently published by the Ukrainian Institute of strategic Studies . “establishing a fact of aggression in the non-military spheres of social life is extremely complicated, or even impossible,’ it said .
 EW's goal is to cripple the opponent's economy, not to gain any economic benefits, which could be the case with a protection policy . We assume that in case of EW, the primary goal of hostile actions is to crippled the opponent’s economy .
 EW could reach far beyond the economy. EW could also make Ukraine admit policy in line with Russia's vision of its sphere of dominance . Other nations must obey the 'older brother' and share its worldview .
 EW used the plural, not singular in the article’s title, as Russia conducted and continues to engage in multiple acts of EW against Ukraine . Russia conducted a number of acts of Russia against Ukraine, EW says .
 EWs were sporadic and partial as they concerned some specific ware groups and markets . However, before 2014 EWs, they were more sporadic andpartial .
 The ongoing economic warfare is a much more complex phenomenon and is characterized by desperateness of the parties. On the contrary, the ongoing economic war is a more complex thing .
 In order to assess the current Russia-Ukraine economic warfare, we need first to reveal its goals and ways . We need to reveal their goals and how they are going to work .
 Ukraine's economic issues attracted attention of many economists from Ukraine and globally . Ukraine's economy is a key part of the Ukraine crisis .
 A systematic approach and important policy recommendations concerning adaptation of the Ukrainian economic policy in order to survive in EW could be found in publications by Paul d’Anieri, Anders Åslund, Przemyslaw Furgacz, Sergii Kulytski,
 Ukraine suffers losses due to Russian economic aggression because its economy has weaknesses . Russia's economic aggression is a result of persisting structural problems and Soviettime legacy .
 The most obvious ones are lower scale of economy in comparison to Russia and very strong economic dependence on Russian markets and supplies . The most common ones are the lower scale.
 Through decades of Ukrainian state independence not much has been done in order to build a strong and efficient national economy . Ukraine has been in the midst of an economic crisis for decades .
 Ukraine’s trade balance with Russia reached $77 billion7 in 2001-2014 . Russia has a dangerous level of dependence on energy supplies from Russia including those for the nuclear power plants .
Ukrainian economy is held by its dependence on Russian gas and oil supplies . 9.7% of the country's economy is dependent on Russia's oil and gas supplies .
 In the late 1990s, P D’Anieri concluded that economic relations, especially energy trade between both counties, is a weak point of Ukrainian economy and policy . Russia has been often used by Russia for coercion in order to reach political goals concerning Ukraine, like the CIS membership,
 Many of the largest companies controlled by oligarchs have been prone to monopolistic power . Here also belongs inefficiency of markets, many of which are still too concentrated .
 Market inefficiency struck one of the most important economy sectors – banking . Banking is one of most important sectors in the economy .
 In Ukraine, a dominance of so called ‘pocket banks’ which actually served the only one big client and associated persons has been observed . These banks had been often used for exercising some special schemes for massive offshore money transfers .
Financial markets are under the influence of Russia, according to analysts . Russia has been involved in the ongoing conventional and hybrid wars against Ukraine . Russia is also involved in a significant share of financial markets.
 Russian banks control about 40 per cent of commercial bank capital in Ukraine . Most Russian banks are making losses and do not invest into the Ukrainian economy . Russian-owned companies are pumping out currency from the country to fund Russia’s hybrid war11.
 The government at the central and local levels has been accused of corruption and acting more in private interests than for public welfare .
 Russia exerts direct influence over state policy in Ukraine before the Revolution of Dignity . This formed a soil for Russia to exert direct influence on state policy before the revolution .
 Russia has a 'fifth column' to restore Russian political dominance in Ukraine . All the features mentioned above made possible for Russia to a exert multifaceted strategy of weakening the Ukrainian economy .
 EW has been pursuing EW goals through implementation of different instruments . Within this global goal we could distinguish some subsets of EW goals which have been pursued through implementation.
 Russian Black Sea Fleet presence in Ukrainian Sevastopol for 25 years . Russia offered a $100 discount on the price of gas in return for the loan .
 The fact of political motivation of economic strikes is an object of common agreement among most experts in Russia-Ukraine economic relations .
 Another goal, an internal one, could be implicitly derived from the logic of actions of the Putin regime .
 Ukrainian companies compete with Russian producers in export of agricultural products, metals, military products, aviation transportation, space services and space services .
 Hitting these industries with sanctions, embargoes and sanctions would open new possibilities for the big Russian companies which are closely related to the governing regime .
 EW will make it possible to change the political course of Ukraine through installing spokespersons and political parties which are loyal to Russia .
 EW has a catalogue of ways and techniques for EW to achieve these goals . There exists an enormous catalogue of methods for EW.
 Most of them have been applied by Russia in the course of the ongoing hybrid war against Ukraine . Russia has applied most of them to the Ukraine conflict .
 EW measures could be presented in two groups – direct and indirect ones . The EW measures would be presented to the public in a separate group .
 EW has taken action to openly damage the opponent's economy . EW's actions include actions taken with the intention to harm the opponent’s economy .
 Most of the Russia-Ukraine economic controversy has been discussed by P Furgacz for 2014-2015 . Most of them have been quite extensively discussed within a context of the Russian-Ukraine economy .
Ban on specific types of international cooperation that are essential for the opponent country . Ban on specific type of cooperation that is essential for each country .
 To this belong stopping agreements on cooperation in different spheres (academic, scientific, military, labor migration, trans-border movement), denial of access to objects of physical infrastructure as well as to the natural space.
 It must be mentioned here that these measures are initiated exclusively by an economic aggressor who is convinced of his superiority as an economic power . It must also be mentioned that this is not the first time such measures have been taken by an aggressor .
 The aggressor selects the sphere and time for an attack and expects his endeavour to be successful . He expects the aggressor will be successful.
 Russia applied all the instruments listed above, also initiating these measures . Russia also initiated the measures .
 EU, USA and many other countries imposed personal and economic sanctions against Russia for its actions in Ukraine in March-July 2014 . However, the mechanism of sanctions was activated in the middle of 2015 .
 EW. Indirect measures of EW include actions that are a by-product of other hybrid war actions . EW.
 The country must restructure its economy, produce and buy more and more weaponry, increase army staff. Striving to defend its own independence, the country must produce and produce more and increase army personnel .
 Expansion of military expenditures could be achieved through austerity measures taken in other public spheres . Expansion of the military expenditures would be achieved by austerity measures.
 In 2013, the Ukrainian defence budget was 1 per cent to GDP, but in 2017 it reached 3. per cent . In 2017, the budget was 3.% to GDP .
 This diminishes incentives for local and foreign investors and generates an outflow of foreign capital . This reduces incentives for locals, foreign investors. This diminish incentives for foreign investors .
 DFI net inflow to Ukraine dropped in 2014 by more than 10 times, which meant a massive capital outflow caused by military actions .
 Within the next two years it recovered to some extent, but still not reached the pre-war level at $1.9 billion in 2017 .
 The total stock of DFI in the Ukrainian economy dropped in 2013-2016 by $17. billion . DFI stock in Ukraine dropped in the last three years by more than $17 billion .
 capture or destruction of industrial assets and physical infrastructure in course of military actions and occupation . Capture or destruction is a key part of the military action and occupation of the area .
 Russian occupation of parts of Donetsk and Luhansk regions led to national GDP drop by 7 per cent in 2014 to 2013 15 that could be derived from 70 per cent GPD decline in the occupied East and destruction there of about 12,000 units of physical assets 16.
 Russian attacks and Ukrainian response EW had been initiated by Russia against Ukraine a long time before the hybrid war actually started . Russia had been initiating the attacks against Ukraine long before it started .
 The principles were applied many times in order to force Ukraine to carry out policies demanded by Russia .
 hostilities have been accelerating and growing in intensity within a plan of action to make Ukraine change its path . Ukraine approached the signing of the EU Association Agreement in 2012 .
 EW between the countries became permanent and total after the Crimea annexation and triggering the war in the East of Ukraine . EW: After the Crimea annexing, EW between them became permanent. EW: The war between the two countries is now a total and total .
 Russia abolished a preference regime to selected imported goods from Ukraine and imposed higher customs on them . In 2014, Russia abolished the preference regime.
 In 2015, the Free Trade Agreement between Russia and Ukraine was abolished . The most favored nation treatment regime had been imposed, which led to an increase in custom duties for Ukraine .
 Ukrainian custom duties for Ukrainian goods increased by 7 per cent for Russian goods . In result, Ukraine got higher trade balance deficit 21 per cent . Russian goods only increased by 1 per cent.
 Russia-Ukraine EW now consists of many separate wars which actually embrace all good groups traded . Russia-Ukrainian EW is now one of many different wars that actually embrace many good groups .
 In July 2014, the import of Ukrainian milk products was prohibited . In October 2014, export and transit of fruits and vegetables through Russian territory from Ukraine was banned. In August 2015, export of Ukrainian agricultural products was banned .
 Russia has tried to financially destabilize Ukraine by barring it from the most important source of export proceeds stemming from gas transit . Russia has also tried to financial destabilize the country by barring Ukraine from gas transport .
 Success in realization of this project would mean significant problems for the Ukrainian economy . Success in realizing this project will mean significant issues for the Ukraine economy .
 Ukraine has been an object of the hacker attacks that aim to seize control over critical infrastructure objects and paralyze the state administration . The origin of the attacks was admittedly Russia, according to the hacker group .
 Of course, not only Ukraine was attacked by them, but it is priority target . Ukraine is a priority target for Ukraine .
 EW acts from the Russian side were supported by the information war instruments . EW acts were also backed by the Information War instruments .
Ukrainian government. Attempts to undermine the trust of Western partners in the Ukrainian economy .
 Ukraine could not be a good gas transit partner for Europe 24. As an example, the Russian Federal News Agency aired information in August 2017 .
 Discrediting the government's economic policy for the Ukrainian people, including policy of economic sanctions against Russia . The Ukrainian government has been criticized for its economic policies .
 In June 2017, the Russian Internet media including the official ones launched information that Ukrainian sanctions against occupied Crimea hurt its economy much more than the Crimean one . In June 2013, the official media said that Ukraine's sanctions against Crimea hurt the country's economy .
 This fake news was based on an interview of a well-known Ukrainian agriculture economy expert on the effect of the Ukrainian sanctions on the Crimean agriculture .
 Creating a picture of an imaginary great dissatisfaction with the Ukrainian government . The Ukrainian government has been criticised for its policies .
Ukrainian business elite does not support the economic policy carried out by its own government . To this row belong to ongoing efforts to show that Ukrainian business elite do not support economic policy .
 In all the cases of trade wars mentioned above Ukraine fought back by imposing reciprocate sanctions to Russia . The sanctions were imposed on Russia.
 Ukrainian total losses have exceeded those of Russia in absolute and relative numbers . Ukraine's total losses in Ukraine have exceeded Russia's overall losses in Russia .
 There are some economic spheres where Russia's losses were much higher than the Ukrainian ones . However, there are some areas where Russia’s losses were higher than those in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian military-industrial complex produced a lot of the components which are essential for the Russian military industry . The complex also produced some of the equipment which is essential for Russian military industries .
 The most goods of military use produced in Ukraine and exported to Russia cannot be replaced by the Russian domestic production in the short run .
 Russian banks played significant role in Ukrainian market of financial services . Their presence in this key market increased risks of possible financial destruction of Ukrainian economy done on Kremlin demand .
 Ukraine imposed economic sanctions on the biggest Russian banks with state capital operating in Ukraine 29 March 2017 . The sanctions were imposed on March 2017.
 Ukrainian banks barred from engaging in financial operations with mother companies . They were barred from transferring capital abroad, attracting deposits, buying securities, paying out dividends and interest on securities .
 The Ukrainian market was paralyzed by the decision . After this decision, many decided to withdraw from the Ukrainian market .
 In September 2015, Ukraine initiated a ban on flights of Russian aviation carriers to/over Ukraine .
 Russia's response to Ukraine was successful due to effective response from Ukraine . Not all EW acts from Russia’s side were successful .
 This could be true concerning attempts of financial destabilization of the country . This could also be true about attempts to destabilize the country.
 E.g. in June 2014, Russia demanded Ukraine to pay $4. billion for gas consumption in the occupied Crimea and around $70 billion according to the gas supply contracts as of 2009 .
 In April 2014, Russia declared denouncement of the Kharkiv agreements as of 2010 and set a natural gas price for Ukraine at $485 instead of $268 per 1,000 m3 before . In result, Ukraine completely stopped buying natural gas from Russia, relying on
 Ukrainian state budget to occupied territories created additional fiscal burden for Russia . The other examples of successful defence of the country’s economic interests could be stopping payments from Ukrainian state budgets to occupied territory .
 Ukraine could be in the position to apply financial penalties to Russia . In the nearest future Ukraine could apply financial penalty to Russia.
 Ukrainian and international courts will soon give Ukraine a legal right to confiscate Russian assets anywhere . Of course, Russian companies do not accept the legality of these penalties .
 Ukraine initiated a mandative confiscation of the Gasprom assets in the UK, the Netherlands and Switzerland . These legal actions are potentially 31 in May 2018, in line with the Stockholm Arbitrage judgment .
 Crimea annexation and occupation of Donbas also appealed to the international courts to get compensation for the assets lost . Private Ukrainian companies whose property was confiscated by Russia were also appealed .
 A first success is a judgment of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague as of May 2018 that supported their claim against Russia in the amount of $159 million34. A first victory is a first success.
 Thousands of cases against Russia submitted by private persons are being filed in the European Court of Human Rights . The cases could mean significant monetary penalties for aggressor .
 The risks stemming from Russian capital in Ukraine are high because it seeks not only profit, but domination and control of whole industries . It uses its own profits for funding proRussian terrorists.
 Ukrainian economist Oleksandr Paskhaver said: “We do not need Russian capital.’
 The new Law On Privatization was adopted in March 2018 . The new law prohibits Russian companies from taking part in privatization competitions .
 The annual export of Russian consumer goods to Ukraine diminished by $100 million 38 . A civil campaign against the Russian banks resulted in significant outflow of deposits and increased their operational losses . In 2013, a civil campaign started “Don't buy the Russian goods’
 A ban on any trade with Crimea and Donetsk/Luhansk region was introduced after massive campaigns organized by civil society organizations .
 The outcomes of the Russia-Ukraine EW could be presented as economic losses of the involved parties, adjustment strategies applied by economic agents, a new configuration of economic relations .
 Ukraine experienced massive economic losses due to the hybrid war carried out by the Russian Federation . EW accounts for a significant fraction of these losses .
 The aggressive economic actions from Russia’s side did not remain unanswered . Russia's economic actions have been seen as the most aggressive in the world .
There is a problem of much higher importance of trade with Russia to Ukraine, than trade with Ukraine to Russia . However, there is also a problem with structural differences in trade .
 Ukraine suffered absolutely and relatively higher losses than Russia. So in most cases within a narrow context of Russia-Ukraine economic controversy Ukraine sufferedabsolutely and relatively high losses . Russia's economic crisis is the focus of the Ukraine crisis .
 A Åslund divides these losses into four categories . Ukraine value loss amounts up to $100 billion 39 excluding sacrifice of possible economic gains steaming from impossibility of economic use of natural and financial resources .
 Russia's main economic loss is associated with the economic sanctions applied by the USA, EU and other countries of the world because of the Russian aggression against Ukraine . As concerns Russia, its main economic losses are linked to the sanctions .
 Russian officials say sanctions make the Russian economy stronger, but microeconomics don't ring true . They say the sanctions make Russia's economy stronger .
 Russia became toxic as an economic partner and experiences a significant outflow of foreign investments . The dismantling of cooperation in the R&D sphere diminishes its chances for development in the future .
 A raw estimate of actual losses due to the sanctions done by the nongovernmental Russian experts differs greatly . The Russian government has imposed sanctions on the country's economy .
 According to Grigorii Yavlinsky, Russia is losing annually about three trillion ruble 40. Russia has lost about 3 trillion rubles annually, according to the report .
 In the long run, the county's economic progress could become fatal for the county’s economic progress . These losses are not critical, but significant, and in the longrun, they could be fatal .
 Ukrainian government banned any economic relations with the occupied territories . In order to increase the economic and fiscal burden of occupation for Russia, the Ukrainian government said .
 Ukraine has chosen a way of diminishing vulnerability of its economy caused by its tight connection to the Russian markets . As concerns the adjustment strategy, Ukraine is choosing a way to reduce its vulnerability .
 Ukrainian goods have been exported more and more to other than Russian markets, especially to Europe . Ukrainian goods are exported more to Europe than Russian goods .
 Ukraine has achieved significant progress in untying the Gordian knot of seemingly eternal bonding with the economy of its opponent . This shows that Ukraine has been able to achieve significant progress. This shows the country has achieved a significant progress, says the author .
 Ukrainian goods rejected by Russia now are being supplied to the bigger and less risky European and Asian markets .
 Ukrainian agricultural export expanded despite a complete closing of the Russian markets . This is especially true for the Ukraine agricultural export, which expanded despite the closing of Russian markets.
 Ukraine still has significant economic bonds with Russia . However, they became looser with time, and became loose with time .
 Ukraine's economic dependency from Russia 43 did not come true, according to some experts . Russia will soon become an insignificant trade partner instead of number one in 2012 .
 Ukraine's government has pursued a strategy of reorientation of economic relations with developed markets . Disregarding current harsh times, the Ukrainian economy has potential to adjust to a new situation .
 Russia would achieve much bigger losses because of EW than Ukraine 44 . As P Furgacz put it, after some time, the situation will change and Russia would lose much more .
There occurred also a significant change in the inter-country labor migration . There occurred also an increase in the number of people leaving the country .
 Ukraine stands to gain much more in the future, like technological advancement of production, its higher quality, the civilized and non-politicized trade relations . Despite all the losses stemming from cutting economic bonds with Russia.
 In order to achieve all this, there should be a policy of cutting down relations with Russia . But in order to do this, it should be furthered by cutting down ties with Russia.
 The radical reforms in all the spheres of society including economy became a topical agenda . The radical changes in the sphere of society became a topic of discussion .
 Ukraine drives to complete breakdown of the existing structure and mechanisms of external economic relations . As concerns re-configuration of economic relations, Ukraine drives the breakdown of existing structure .
 Ukraine scuttled the Agreement on Programme of economic cooperation with the Russian Federation for 2011-2020 47 . This conclusion follows from the fact that in March 2018 Ukraine scutled the agreement . The agreement held a coordinated vision of Ukraine and Russia onto prospects of the long-run mutually beneficial
 Ukraine has no more interest in cooperation with Russia in various spheres of economy . Ukraine will look for more reliable partners which do not further political interests through economic relations .
 Ukrainian policy is stopping all activities within the Commonwealth of Independent States since May 2018 . Another event that signalizes a radical turn in Ukrainian policy.
 Ukraine is moving fast away to the point of no return in its economic relations with Russia . However, all the above-mentioned shows that Ukraine is going fast away from Russia .
 Ukraine needs a strategy of reducing to a possible (economically rational) minimum the bilateral economic relations regardless of how Russia behaves within a specific period of time . That is why it seems irrelevant “to plan the depth of economic restrictions concerning Russian Federation with regard to grade of
 Ukraine as an independent state has no other choice but confronting coexistence with Russia that means permanent EW, drifting away and diminishing the volume of mutual economic relations with Russia .
Ukrainian economy in the nearest future. It would be interesting to assess prospects of the Ukrainian economy .
 Since 2012, Ukraine has struggled to hold fast as an independent state in its military, political and economic combat with a much stronger opponent – Russia .
 As Ukraine has no intention to give up its independence, this situation has become a permanent one . Ukraine is no intention of giving up its sovereignty, but it has no plans to do so .
 The economic controversies between two nations evolved into the permanent and total economic war . The economic disputes between the two nations have evolved into a permanent andTotal Economic War .
 The best way to win an EW for Ukraine is to minimize the volume of its economic relations with Russia . Ukraine should launch radical reforms in all spheres, economy first of all .
 Ukraine could collapse in this situation without support from the civilized world . The country's economy could collapse without the support of a civilized world.
 The most significant countries of the world introduced economic and other sanctions against Russia which hampered its tries to undermine the Ukrainian economy or to capture other territories . Russia is breaking the world order with its aggressive actions against Ukraine .
 The results of current economic warfare are opposite to the expected ones . In fact, the results are different to the predicted ones .
 Ukraine made no political concessions as concerns its independence and statehood . First of all, Ukraine madeno political concessions. First, Ukraine has made no concessions as concerned its independence .
 Ukraine is now far away from Russia in comparison to 2013. In political sense, Ukraine is far away.
 Russian direct and indirect actions against the Ukrainian economy did not succeed in destroying it . Second time Russian actions against Ukrainian economy were not successful .
Ukrainian economy shows signs of recovery, says economist . Ukraine's economy is showing signs of growth that is connected with technology and quality of goods .
 The ‘eternal’ bonds with Russian economy seem to weaken with a trend to make Russia an insignificant trade partner of Ukraine .
 Russia also did not succeed in ousting Ukraine from the global markets . Russia also failed to succeed in the ousting of Ukraine from global markets.
 Ukrainian goods are successfully traded in EU and Asia markets . Being pushed out of Russian markets, Ukrainian goods nowadays are successfully trade in EU markets .
 The recent experience of Russian EWs with the bordering post-Soviet countries shows that the course chosen by Ukraine could be a success . The recent experiences show that Ukraine's recent experience with the Baltic states, Moldova, Georgia could be successful .
 To these measures belong first of all financial sanctions according to judgments of Ukrainian and international courts .
 Ukrainian government must act pro-actively in its financial claims against Russia for capturing/destroying economic assets and cash flows . Ukraine must stay pressive about confiscation of Russian public assets in Ukraine and globally .
 There are some non-finalized but unforgotten issues that could be put on the agenda . There are also some unfinalized issues that can be put onto the agenda. There is also some other issues that may have been overlooked .
 E.g. It could be a case with $80 billion of the USSR Sberbank assets in Ukraine . Russia declared itself the legal successor of USSR in 1991 .
 The only mainstay of survival and triumph in an economic war with a much stronger opponent is a policy of economic reforms to raise the nation's economic capacity .