 The West is struggling to preserve its principles of collective responsibility for regional security in Europe . The West has to develop a common approach toward necessary yet politically painful and economically costly efforts to limit Putin's actions and plans .
 Ukrainian foreign policy decision-makers are desperately pursuing the twin goals of freezing the Donbas conflict and maintaining international support for the country .
 In this chapter, we begin with a general analysis of mutual perceptions from both sides . Then proceed to identify key interests and concerns regarding the war in Donbas . We analyze whether the political aspects of the Minsk agreements can be implemented .
 Putin's success in attacking Ukraine could embolden him to exert his power and influence in wider Europe . We argue that Putin’s success in attack on Ukraine is impossible to achieve without undermining unity among Western powers .
 U.S.-EU ties are likely to undergo some stress after elections on each side of the Atlantic in 2016 and 2017 . Russia will be tempted to take advantage of such turbulence by pressing forward with its goals in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian decision-makers have accumulated a number of concerns about Western attitudes toward Russian aggression in Crimea and the Donbas .
 Crimea annexation ultimately destroyed Ukrainian trust in Western security assurances. First, the Crimea annexationUltimately destroyed Ukraine's trust in the West .
 The U.S. Congress will address the United States Congress this week . The United States will also address the House of Representatives .
 The UN and the OSCE in February–March 2014 proved that existing international, global and regional organizations that are designed to deal with security matters have little impact when a member state faces aggression from another member state, particularly if that other state is a nuclear power .
 In April 2014 negotiations were conducted in Geneva with participation of the United States, the EU, Ukraine, and Russia .
 The "Geneva format" was not renewed for reasons unexplained in public, according to a report . The report was published on Monday .
 Ukrainian authorities had little hope for Western support, given the weak international reaction to 2008 war between Russia and Georgia .
 Ukrainian officials urged maximum restraint without offering any kind of practical support to contain Russia . Ukrainian officials urge maximum restraint .
 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 53 of major Western powers to fulfill their NATO obligations should a similar crisis arise in the Baltic region .
 Russia continues to benefit from such anxieties and vague Western political commitments . Russia has a history of anxiety and vague political commitments.
 Russia makes it easy for pro-Russian political players in Germany, France, Italy and other countries to advance arguments against any military assistance to Ukraine as a non-member of Alliance . In addition, by engaging in provocative and dangerous behavior in the Baltics, it justifies public
 The United States and the EU sanctioned Russia, and NATO responded to Russian provocations towards the Alliance’s eastern neighbors . The policy remains dependent on a consolidated approach that is reliant on the perception that all NATO member states are sharing the burden .
 In 2015–2016, the European Union faced serious fissures over how to deal with the even more urgent migration crisis . In 2015-2016, there were more debates about how to handle the crisis .
Donald Trump has raised serious concerns in both western and eastern Europe . The new U.S. administration may advance new approaches to foreign policy towards Europe .
 Kyiv believed that the Western powers only began to develop efficient countermeasures against Russia after they suffered directly from the consequences of the Kremlin’s aggression in Ukraine . Second, Kyiv thought that the West only began developing efficient counter measures against Russia .
 The city of Mariupol came under indiscriminate rocket attack in January 2015, resulting in 30 deaths and hundreds of injured . The EU did not manage to augment its economic sanctions .
 DCFTA delayed due to Russian objections, resulting in delay of one year until January 1, 2016 . Consultations about implementation of DCF TA dragged out due to Russia's objections .
 The Russian energy company Gazprom threatened to cut gas supplies to Ukraine due to unsettled arrears and penalties . The EU Commission and major EU countries intervened very actively and forced the Russian gas giant to disconnect its claims to Ukraine from its transit business with the Ukrainian company Naftogas
 Ukraine was given loans and bank guarantees that facilitated alternative gas contracts with European energy companies . Ukraine was also given loans, bank guarantees and loans to help diversification of gas imports .
 Ukraine is concerned about a possible agreement between the West and Russia to reset their relations at the cost of Ukraine’s territory and sovereignty . Third, Ukraine is also concerned about the possible agreement.
 European approach to implementation of the Minsk agreements is fueled by European approach. This perception is fueled particularly by the EU's approach to implementing the agreements, says the author .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel met with Ukrainian President Poroshenko in February 2016 . German government continued to insist on constitutional reform in Ukraine . Russian involvement in determination how local elections in Donetsk and Luhansk were to be held .
 French president Hollande reiterated his position in an address to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe . Hollande reiterated this position in a speech to the Assembly .
 The key point is that from the very first Minsk agreement in September 2014, Russia and Ukraine each pursued contradictory goals . The key points are that the two countries each pursued conflicting goals .
 According to 7 Contracts about reverse gas flows were negotiated and concluded before the conflict . The contracts are based on 7 contracts.
 Moscow linked peace with limiting Ukraine’s sovereignty by means of federalization and a “special status’ for the Donbas .
 Kyiv saw peace as a tool to recover occupied territories and escape from Russian military pressure . Kyiv, on the other hand, saw peace to be a tool for recovering occupied territories .
 EU and U.S. seek selective cooperation with Russia, regardless of Kremlin's long-term goals . Despite unbridgeable differences between Ukraine and Russia about the ultimate destination of the Minsk agreements, the EU and the United States insist on implementation of these flawed agreements .
 Russian troops were trying to seize the strategic town of Debaltseve, in violation of the Minsk-1 agreements . Within the EU, initial steps were taken to engage in new cooperation with Russia .
 The return of Debaltseve to Ukraine was not discussed in the negotiation process until late 2016 . The return was not even discussed until 2016 .
 Russia is hard to understand, but it certainly does not benefit us. How this benefits Russia ishard to understand; it certainly doesn't benefit us . It is not easy to understand how it benefits Russia.
 The current Russian regime is ruling the country not by giving Russian society more opportunities to develop itself, but by tying people’s welfare more tightly to state power .
 Russia will not swap stabilization of Ukraine for offers of deepened trade or cooperation from the West . From this point of view, Russia would not swap stabilized Ukraine for deepenedtrade or cooperation .
 It is just a matter of time before the instrument of selective cooperation backfires and destroys a tenuous European solidarity . It's time before it's time for selective cooperation to backfire and destroy the European solidarity.
 Competition among individual countries to win more benefits from “selective cooperation’ with Russia will always cast a shadow over the need for a common policy .
 Italian PM Matteo Renzi initially resisted new sanctions on Russia17 (although he ultimately joined the consensus) The EU Commission changed regulations regarding access to the European internal gas markets in a way that favored German and Russian companies .
 The main message of those who are trying to shape the Trump Administration’s foreign policy attitudes is a vague promise to the Russian leadership of reciprocity and mutual respect .
 The U.S. and Europe must relinquish their quest to turn Ukraine into an extension of the Western security system, he says .
 Ukraine had non-bloc status between 2010 and 2013 and Budapest “security assurances’ from Russian nuclear power . But that did not prevent Russian aggression in 2014 .
 Ukraine’s most recent history has shown that the country lost territories not due to civil unrest but only after well-organized and disguised external military aggression . The effect of which has been to consolidate Ukrainian society and bring different regions closer.
 Should political realism prevail in the new U.S. Administration, these facts would have to be respected, he says .
 Ukraine is perceived as a "toxic asset" that only increases costs because of its domestic troubles . The realist approach demands that the West transfer this burden to Russia, especially if Moscow wants to claim it .
 It is too early to make certain predictions about Trump’s attitudes toward the Russian-Ukrainian conflict . There is a clear intention to change the basic approaches to U.S.-Russian relations set forth by Obama and George W Bush .
 Senate investigations into potential Russian links and contacts, including potential business interests, of President and associates such as Secretary of State Rex Tillerson .
 For a democratically elected government it would be a challenge to isolate a new approach to Russia from the need to respond to allegations that Russia sought to manipulate public opinion during the elections .
 Moscow and Kyiv will follow the news from Washington on these matters in order to understand whether the new Administration has a new strategy .
 Ukraine is concerned about the short-term nature of such support and the fragile unity underpinning Western approaches when it comes to imposing real costs on Russia .
 The West is preoccupied with working with Russia on conflict resolution for a number of reasons . Russia's possession of nuclear arms, the necessity to engage Russia in Syria, on Iran or the Korean peninsula, or other issues .
 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 59 First, Russian claims over Ukraine are not considered to be completely illegitimate .
 Ukraine could join re-integration projects inspired by Moscow . It was common practice to treat Ukraine as a ‘grey zone’ between EU/NATO Europe and Russia22 .
 The failure of the Euro-Atlantic integration reforms of the “Orange revolution’s” governments, and the pro-Russian stance of the Yanukovych presidency seemed to support that view of Ukraine .
Russian assertiveness prompted ideas of respecting Russian “special interests’ and favoring its partnership with other CIS countries . In addition, growing Russian assertiveness included both hostile actions toward former Soviet republics and economic incentives for key EU countries .
 The most recent examples of using economic and trade-related arguments to justify renewed relations with Russia have been provided by center-left governments in Austria and Greece23 .
 Francois Fillon, the frontrunner in the 2016 French Republican presidential primary, called German and French leaders to support Russia’s interest in a neutral Ukraine .
Since that time he has only strengthened his stance about returning to close dialogue with Putin regardless of his behavior . Since that time, he has been more open to dialogue with the Russian leader .
 The calls have been even stronger in countries that depend on Russian energy imports . These calls have become even stronger.
 Slovakia's Prime Minister Robert Legvold and Celeste A Wallander are both former Prime Minister of Slovakia .
 Viktor Orban is the right-wing Prime Minister of Hungary . Orban's government has suffered from Russian countersanctions . Both countries have suffered from Russia's anti-Russian counter-measures .
 Much of Russia’s influence in these central-eastern European countries, especially Hungary, has been based on lucrative, corruption-laden business deals .
 The Obama Administration started the “reset policy’s” toward Russia only months after the 2008 Russian-Georgian war . Russia's de facto annexation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia was the first time the U.S. started the
 It took two years for the Obama Administration to review its relations with Russia . The Obama Administration initially opposed congressional efforts to penalize Russia .
 The term “Ukrainian crisis,” used often in international media, is simply not correct .
 Ukraine’s domestic crisis ended with the escape of Yanukovych to Russia . The return of the 2004 constitutional reform prevents monopoly of power, and the smooth legitimization of new authorities .
 Putin decided to intervene in an attempt to divert Ukrainian efforts from its reform agenda and aggravating the country’s economic and political situation . These developments were in fact key reasons why Putin chose to intervene, he says .
 As the war broke out, it became evident that Russia had enough strength to defeat and capture three Baltic states before NATO could respond .
 The situation has not changed much after two years of conflict. Army Europe has been in conflict for two years .
 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 61 sions raised the stakes for Russia in case of military escalation . Russia's foreign policy and role in the West raised stakes in the case of Russia's military escalation.
 A country without NATO backing has even less chance to survive an encounter with the Russian military machine . The country is without NATO support .
 Russia could definitely launch a preventive invasion to defeat the Ukrainian army before Western assistance . A military buildup could make Ukraine’s defense forces strong enough to withstand full-scale attack .
 Angela Merkel ruled out the idea of strengthening the Ukrainian army in 2015 . She did not believe it would persuade Putin that he might suffer military defeat .
 French President Francois Hollande warned that the only alternative to negotiations was war .
 European leaders seemed to be “led from behind’ by the Obama Administration on this matter, but not from behind .
 Ben Rhodes says supplying weapons to Ukraine is not an answer to the crisis in Ukraine . Rhodes is a deputy national security adviser and one of President Obama's closest aides .
In March 2015, it was revealed that this decision was made contrary to advice from the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of National Intelligence . In March 2015. It was revealed.
 France and Germany support economic sanctions against Russia and backing of EU financial aid loans for Ukraine . France, Germany and Germany are among the countries supporting sanctions against the Russian government .
 The U.S. decision is a unilateral American decision without the consent of key EU and NATO allies . It is not a unilateral decision, but it is a decision to make it without the permission of key European allies .
 Secretary of State Tillerson suggested that in 2014 he would have recommended supplying weapons and offering air surveillance to Ukraine to respond to Russian aggression .
 Many Western authorities tend to believe that Ukraine is part of the problem, and that it can be influenced at relatively lower cost and can be controlled in the process of peace-making .
 The West is inclined to forget about its own strategic intelligence failure when it came to Russia’s easy takeover of Crimea . It is tempted to lay the blame on weak Ukrainian security and defense institutions .
 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 63. We expect that the new U.S. administration will make its support for Ukraine even more dependent on Kyiv's commitment to reform itself and fight corruption .
 Washington, not Brussels or other European capitals, provides lion's share of military and financial assistance for Ukraine . IMF loan requirements are two crucial elements for Ukraine's survival .
 The EU also faces a certain problem with influencing Ukraine, according to the EU .
 The Dutch advisory referendum rejected the Association Agreement and internal disagreements about reforming the Schengen regime have compromised two soft power tools available to the EU .
 The Netherlands demanded that the European Council conclusions regarding Ukraine of December 15, 201640 be supplemented by an annex about the implementation status of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement . The Netherlands also demanded that that the EU's conclusions on Ukraine be supplemented with an annex .
 The document was approved to assure Dutch voters that the EU is not going to impose any obligations on member states that may go beyond what was concluded in the Association Agreement .
 The EU sanctions against Russia were extended until June 2017 . This impression was strengthened by the fact that the EU sanctions were extended .
There is a risk that political provisions could be used by the new governments in the Netherlands, France, Germany, and may be Italy .
 In this case, this annex could be seen as the Union’s failure to conduct a proactive policy in the Eastern Neighborhood .
 EU-Ukraine trade relations cannot by themselves be an immediate game changer, according to the EU .
 The Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement between Ukraine and the EU would be rather modest . Despite high expectations, the economic results of the agreement would be modest .
 Ukraine's exports and 34% of Ukraine’s imports have stagnated since 2008,41 due to structural problems of the Ukrainian economy .
 Most Western interlocutors believe that the Minsk agreements are the only real way to stop the war . Third, most Western inter Locutors think that the agreement is the only way to end war .
 The Minsk agreements’ success relies on the presumption that the gradual removal of sanctions could prompt Russia to withdraw from the Donbas .
 German,43 French, 44 and former Italian45 ministers of foreign affairs. This view is shared by the German, 43 French,44 and ex-Italian45 ministers .
Many Western leaders are attracted to the theory that deep and comprehensive economic ties serve as safeguards against hostility . Many Western leaders want to see economic ties as safeguards.
According to a line of thinking, improving economic relations would nudge positive domestic developments in post-Soviet Russia . However, according to this line of think, improving relations wouldn't nudge good domestic developments .
 Russia's President Dmitry Medvedev was president in 2008-2012, despite Russia’s invasion of Georgia . These expectations grew bolder in 2008–2012, during the President's presidency .
 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 65 of engine in developing a strategic partnership between the EU and Russia . Ukraine's foreign policy and the role of West 65 in developing strategic partnership .
 Despite growing evidence of Kremlin's authoritarian turn, key European states sought to maintain a cooperative approach to Russia .
 There was an evident asymmetry in economic relations between Ukraine and Russia, according to a study .
 This was the largest share among the Commonwealth of Independent States . Ukraine was one of Russia’s largest trading partner .
 It was prepared to incur some economic losses in exchange for political concessions. EUROPE ’s S EAST FACES’s WEST makes it clear that it was prepared for economic losses .
 Putin authorized the invasion in Ukraine despite the risk of losing one of its biggest natural gas markets . Russia's traditional transit route for energy into Europe is important market for Russian exports .
 The EU's search for a modus vivendi with Moscow cannot ignore Russia’s interpretation of interdependence as a kind of weapon .
 Moscow has proposed gradual removal of sanctions without a clear demonstration of how and when they can be expanded and strengthened .
 sanctions are not goals in themselves in the context of conflict in the Donbas. They have become a test of the EU's ability to carry out a coordinated and substantive response to violations of the post-WWII order in Europe .
 The West is facing a difficult dilemma as it approaches the limits of its limited engagement in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine .
 Ukrainian side faces suspicion, hidden agendas, and zero-sum game thinking on the Russian and Ukrainian side .
 According to polls, 52% of Ukrainian would choose armed or civil resistance against foreign intervention . 3% would flee abroad, according to polls .
 Support for joining NATO skyrocketed to 43% (25% is in favor of non-bloc status), and a potential referendum would be won by NATO supporters .
 These changes in geopolitical attitudes happened in all regions of Ukraine . These changes happened in the Ukraine.
 A majority of respondents choose an all-Ukrainian identity over a regional one . Also, DIF polls in the liberated areas of the Donbas show that a majority of people choose a regional identity over one .
 Less than 7% of respondents said they support the separation of the so-called ‘LNR’ and ‘DNR�’ (People’s Republic of Luhansk” and “Donetsk National Republic’) from Ukraine .
 To a great extent, they are demoralized and not politically active . However, to the great extent they are not politicallyactive .
 If referenda on EU and NATO membership would take place, they would be won in the east and south as well . According to the polls, if referenda were held, it would be held in the East and south .
 At times the Ukrainian leadership plays into Russian hands and damages the trust of Western partners by discrediting its own reform processes . The Ukrainian government has been criticised for its own reforms .
 Ukraine's bargaining position on occupied territories is not clear, even to Ukrainian experts . Its bargaining position is also not very clear, experts say .
 There are significant limits to Ukraine’s ability to negotiate compromise in the framework of the Minsk agreements .
 A closer examination of the implementation elements within the Minsk agreements reveals that they cannot result in stable peace . The Minsk agreement was signed in 2007 .
Military cooperation with the West is very important for Kyiv . The main point of concern is Western attitudes towards Ukraine’s economic restructuring .
 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West 69 olistic economy, which can result only in another destabilization and violent turmoil in the next election cycle .
 The resulting domestic troubles will invite just another Russian invasion in 2014, as in 2014 .
 Ukraine has no additional resources to sustain the postwar reconstruction of the Donbas . So far, Ukraine has been unable to provide additional resources for reconstruction .
 The West is reluctant to commit even more resources or relieve Ukraine from its sovereign debt . The West wants to channel saved money to the post-conflict areas .
 Ukraine’s negotiations in March 2015 with a pool of private lenders and bondholders resulted in no necessary assistance from the U.S. government, as if there was no war going in the Donbas or Crimea had never happened .
Ukrainian elites were not allowed to become “free riders’ and main beneficiaries of a “haircut’s and debt relief.”
 A restructuring deal between private lenders and Ukrainian government placed the debt burden on the public . The deal undermined the well-being of the common people, who remain the main agents of civil society .
Ukrainian economy is struggling to find its way to recovery and modernization . It is true that the Ukrainian economy is struggle to recover and modernization.
 The Crimea annexation and war in the Donbas have had a negative impact on the economy . The economy is constrained by corruption, lack of innovation and lack of long-term capital investment, says the author .
 Ukraine's basic requirements for competitiveness have been extremely low, according to the latest WEF Competitiveness Index . Ukraine’s basic requirements have been very low, says the index .
 The Ukrainian government cannot endure external and internal security threats linked to the conflict in the Donbas .
 The most important counterargument about the Minsk agreements is that their implementation has not been owned by the Ukrainian people, including those who live in the conflict zone .
 The trilateral contact group and its foreign facilitators on ceasefire, demining, exchange of POWs, election issues have been carried out without the consent of the people and their representatives in the national parliament and local councils, volunteer organizations and civil activists .
 Only 13% of Ukrainians believe that elections in the DNR/LNR or their 'special status' would lead to peace in the Donbas . 43% consider these elections impossible in the near future, and 21% consider that these elections may happen, but only under Ukrainian law .
 Ukraine has established as necessary to maintain Ukraine’s sovereignty, as they engage in peace negotiations with Russia . As a consequence, it is crucial that Western powers understand and agree with the red lines Ukraine has set .
 Ukraine wants to understand how the West views the future of Crimea’s status and ways of defusing possible conflicts between Russia and Ukraine over this territory .
 Donald Trump suggested that Crimea would rather be part of Russia than Crimea . Trump was interviewed on ABC's "This Week"
 There is no secret that the West de facto accepted the seizure of Crimea, according to the West . His remarks were widely condemned .
 Sanctions related to Crimea are quite weak and often violated by Western companies . Sanctions are quite strong and often violate by Western firms .
 Western powers and institutions do not recognize elections to the Russian Duma from Crimea . In general they seem to accept tacitly the results of Russian Dumas elections .
 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West cies for all-national Russian parties’ slates . Russia's foreign policy is a key part of the Russian government's policy .
 He would be accused of having betrayed national interests. Also, this attempt would lead to destabilization, as he would have been accused of betraying national interests .
 Clause 8 would make Ukraine pay for the reconstruction of the destroyed Donbas economy .
Western partners have pressed Ukraine to implement Clause 11 on constitutional changes . It is ahead of implementing other clauses from 1 to 10, including a ceasefire . The West wants to avoid new escalation .
 In the eyes of Ukrainians, this smacks of “appeasing’ Russia for its aggression, says Ukraine . Russia has been accused of ‘appeased’ by Ukraine of its aggression .
 Kyiv stresses that it can have dialogue only with those representatives of the occupied areas who are legitimately elected .
 Kyiv also demands withdrawal of foreign troops, according to Clause 10. Kyiv demands withdrawal from foreign troops .
 It is difficult to imagine free and fair elections on the territory controlled by Russian security services and armed half-criminal units . It is hard to imagine.
 More than one and a half million pro-Ukraine voters have left the Donbas, but they need to have the right to vote .
 There are no Ukrainian media at all in these areas, only Russian channels . At present, there are no Russian channels at all .
 Kyiv’s control over the Ukrainian-Russian border has not been restored. First, Kyiv's control over Ukraine's border has been restored .
 Kyiv asked the EU to consider deploying an EU mission on the border but there has been no response yet . The EU has not responded yet to the request .
Without demilitarization of the region it is difficult to imagine free elections . Without demilitaryization, the region could not be free for free elections.
 Russia would like to create a camouflage for presenting the RussianUkrainian conflict as Ukraine’s internal problem . By agreeing to formal elections, Russia would want Kyiv into direct dialogue with Russian proxies .
 Concerns are shared by political opponents of President Poroshenko and by the expert community in Ukraine . The concerns are shared not only by opponents of the President but also by the experts .
 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy and the Role of the West will be able to collect enough votes to get the special election law passed . Ukraine's foreign policy and the role of West 73 Poroshenko will be allowed to collect the votes .
 His idea is to proceed after the elections to restore Ukraine’s border control . He wants to involve former separatists into the formal structures under control of Ukraine .
 He may be able to present himself as a peacemaker for domestic consumption and to secure Western approval . But this long and controversial approach could also erode his support .
 Increase military assistance to Ukraine both by providing necessary equipment for the army and supporting modernization of Ukraine’s indigenous defense industry .
 support for the army should entail defensive lethal arms, encrypted command and communication systems, unmanned aerial vehicles and modern reconnaissance equipment . Support for the Army should include defensive lethal weapons and encrypted command systems .
 Modernization of Ukraine’s indigenous defense industry should include joint ventures to restore naval, air and missile defense capabilities . Modernization should also include joint venture to restore military capabilities .
 The Crimean Tatars are again facing repression in Crimea . They are defending the rights of Crimean Tatar people .
 Illegitimate voting in occupied Crimean constituencies for allnational Russian parties' slates is cause not to recognize legitimacy of the entire Duma .
 The best case scenario presumes EU-U.S. cooperation to reduce the share of Russian oil and natural gas in the European markets . The EU could replace existing joint projects between Russian and European energy companies .
 Ukrainian efforts to substitute Soviet-era nuclear power stations with modern Western stations . Ukrainian nuclear fuel production and alternative renewable energy installations are important to Ukrainian efforts .
 It is essential to make such support conditional on Ukraine’s achievement of real transparency and accountability in domestic politics .
Ukrainian public persons are owned by Ukrainian public persons . It is important to put under severe scrutiny and audit all kinds of foreign assets, including offshore entities .
Non-governmental watchdogs, think tanks and independent media support Western assistance . The emerging Suspilne Movlennia has investigated corruption cases and launched e-declarations for civil servants and government leaders .
 The model for such a legal step is provided by the draft of the Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act . The model is based on a draft of a new Human Rights Act .
 Russia's de facto control of occupied areas looks like legitimization of Russia’s control over occupied areas . Without that, both special status as well as elections in the occupied areas look like legitimizing the situation .
 If Russia agrees to leave the Donbas but has reservations against hypothetical injustices there once it is gone, it is possible to use the experience of IsraelEgypt relations over Sinai to reach agreement .
Ukrainian-Russian border should include lower presence of both Ukrainian and Russian armed forces on the Ukrainian- Russian border . International observer contingent on all roads and transport routes between two countries in the former area of conflict .
 If this does not work, one can not exclude that the Minsk agreements need to be renegotiated . If this doesn't work, it can not be excluded that the agreement needs to be negotiated .
 In any case, until withdrawal and restoration of Ukraine’s sovereign control over its border, sanctions cannot be reduced .
 Russia's military forces appear to have been the main tool stopping Russia’s military attack . They appear to be the main weapon stopping the Russian military attack.
 There are successful examples of countries like West Germany, South Korea, and Israel where Western economic and security assistance appeared to be decisive factors .
 Moldova's ruling coalition was unable to start effective struggle against corruption . In the latter case, despite Western overtures, Moldova’s ruling coalition is unable to begin effective struggle .
 Western support and pressure for reforms in Ukraine remain crucial. That is why Western support is crucial to Ukraine reforms .