 The War "", about the Involvement of Russia in the Eastern Ukraine conflict and the Crimea conflict, is published on 4 Nemtsov's Report on Putin's War in Ukraine . The War is a look at Russia's involvement in the Ukraine conflict .
 Eka Meskhrikadze, Tbilisi, Georgia Meerim Oboskanova, Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic Tamara Vatsadze. All authors are responsible for their published texts .
 All texts published under a name do not necessarily represent the view of the editors or Advisory Board members . All texts are published under the name .
 EUFAJ is committed to European and international integration and to pluralism, different views and public discussion .
 Reprints of certain contributions are free of charge . For others a license fee may have to be negotiated .
 No guarantee for unsolicited articles which, however, may remain in our archive . No guarantees for uns unwanted articles which may remain .
 All contributions are requested in English language . abstracts in other languages are possible . All contributions in English are requested.
 The future of Ukraine, Ukraine's Maidan events, Istanbul Gezi Park, India and the necessity of future female leaders, EU language policies, Africa, the Caribbean .
 The blog counts more than 1 4.700 views from 1 37 countries at present . The blog has more than 4.7 million views .
 You can of course also subscribe to the blogs then you will be alerted regularly . You can also also be alerted by the blogs .
 This is the first time you see a Special of the European Union Foreign Affairs Journal . If you "Like" the page, you will be alerted via Facebook regularly .
 Russian opposition personality and former Deputy Prime Minister under President Boris Jeltsin . But we think we owe it to the respect for Boris Nemtsov .
 He was shot on a bridge near the Moscow Kremlin on 27th February, 2015 .
 The killer who was arrested turned out to have been not present in the theatre . He walks around free at present .
 One has not necessarily to agree to all what he once did and said, in particular when he was Deputy Prime Minister or Minister of Energy .
 Russian market economy reformer is named as one of the architects of market economy reforms . His policy is explained by the system of the outgoing Soviet Union and beginning of a Russian system .
 Eater became one of the leading opposition personalities against the present president . He ran and ran and runs the country more and more autocratically .
 Boris Nemtsov was a politician who would have coped very well with the European Union in a common tradition of values, of liberal views, of human rights and the rule of law .
 He was shot just before publishing a report on the Russian involvement in the Ukraine conflict .
 His death was useful to keep down opposition activities, who could fear a likewise end of their activities, says the author .
Nemtsov was always in favour of peaceful relations between Russia and Russia . But Nemtsov had always been in favour for peaceful relations with Russia .
 Ukraine, and therefore totally against the Kremlin's policy, had friends who produced the paper in this Special some weeks after his death .
 We publish this paper in the Russian original, also for our readers reading Russian, but also in English .
 This paper is too interesting, too authentic not to be translated and republished . This paper was too interesting and too authentic. This paper should be translated, not republished.
 We thank translators they were thrilled by what they translated, too . We thank our translators for their work .
 We wish to our readers an interesting reading time, which they will have without a doubt. And we wish to their readers aninteresting reading time .
After the assassination of the politician, it was completed by his associates . After the assassination, his associates completed the assassination .
 The full text of the study was published a 64-page material, including proofs, published earlier in the media, and Nemtsov's personal data about Moscow’s intervention into Ukrainian politics .
 Nemtsov triumphantly looked at the others, as he did every time he came up with a good idea . Nemtov triumphantly looks at the other people as he comes up with the idea .
 Since the beginning of 2015, Boris had begun to collect materials for the report . Boris has been collecting materials for a report.
 He widely worked with open sources, found people who could share information . He also worked with people who were open to sharing information .
 Nemtsov believed that the attempt to stop the war is the real patriotism . Nemtov believed that he was trying to end the war was real patriotism.
 The war with Ukraine is a cynical and mean crime for which our country is paying with the blood of its citizens, the author says . The war has been described as a "cynical and means crime"
 On February 27, he was killed on Bolshoy Moskvoretsky Bridge, next to the Kremlin walls .
 Nemtsov’s colleagues, friends and the people who considered the work important, took to complete it . Nemtov's colleagues, colleagues and friends took to finish it .
 The contents, handwritten notes, documents everything that he had left, were used in the preparation of the text . The contents of the notes were used to prepare the text.
 Our task is to tell the truth about the Kremlin's interference in the Ukrainian politics, which led to the war between our nations .
 BEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 . eufaj.eu.eu: Eufaj @ libertas-institut.
 At the eve of the 2012 presidential elections there appeared likelihood that he would not win in the first round .
 Such a scenario could create a risk of a significant weakening of Putin’s position and disruption of his legitimacy .
 The election campaign needed maximum mobilization of power resources to ensure Putin's victory in the first round . The election was held in Russia's first election since 2008 .
 The key conditions for his victory became the non-admission of the real opponents to the elections . The real opponents were ready to seriously contend for the presidency, as well as the total administrative control over the relevant media .
 Putin took a number of populist decisions in hopes to consolidate his ranking . Putin has been in power for more than a decade .
 In particular, he signed the so-called "May decrees" of 2012 . A number of experts considered the decrees wasteful and economically unjust.
 Putin publicly criticized the government for the inefficient use of the funds for their realization . In addition, the implementation of the ""May decrees" stalled, and a year later, Putin publicly criticized the government .
 The Kremlin was seriously concerned about the negative trend and began to work out new ways to strengthen Putin’s position among the electorate .
 The scenario the "return of the Crimea to Russia" was undoubtedly planned and carefully prepared by the authorities of the Russian Federation in advance . The Russian Federation was prepared in advance, according to the authorities .
 The Russian special security services recruited the Ukrainian army with generals and officers, heads and officials in the law enforcement institutions . At the crucial moment, they refused the oath and took part of the Russian Federation .
Local politicians, separatists and media financed by Moscow were actively supporting Russia's actions . The local politicians and separatists were actively supported by Moscow .
 Crimean business showed loyalty, having received favorable loans from the Russian banks in non-market conditions . Also the Crimean business show loyalty, with favorable loans.
 In addition, long-term efforts were taken to weaken the Ukrainian economy and its political system as a whole .
 There were overt pressures on Ukrainian authorities compelling them to engage the Ukraine in all sorts of "integration" projects of the Kremlin .
 The revolution in Kiev and President Viktor Yanukovych’s flight from the country in early 2014 created ideal conditions for decisive actions on the part of the Kremlin for the separation of the Crimea .
 A referendum was organized on the peninsula, which became as a formal ground for its annexation to the Russian Federation . With the support of the Russian troops and security services a referendum was held .
 Crimea and Donetsk regions of Donetsk and Lugansk broke out a full-range war . However, the things did not stop with the Crimea .
 The armed forces of the Ukraine were countered by the separatists demanding the secession from the Ukraine of the territories under their control and their annexation to the Russian Federation after the Crimea .
 Russian authorities provided direct military support to the separatists, report says .
 The reasons for Putin actually to unleash the armed conflict on the territory of its neighboring state, suggest two possible interpretations of his actions .
 The first interpretation is that the Crimean success convinced the Russian Federation the readiness of the Russian-speaking regions of the Ukraine to become part of the TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 Putin's idea was "gathering of the Russian lands" The task attracted Putin with its historical scale, despite the possible costs .
Local separatists were supported by militants and political strategists who arrived in the Donbass . To substantiate Russia's claim to these lands local separatists were activated .
 The created situation motivated Putin to seek a political solution to the crisis, despite the obvious military superiority . The situation has greatly contributed to the peace talks with the new Ukrainian government .
In this regard, he provoked the military conflict in order to create a favorable negotiating position with the Western countries . He provoked the conflict to create an agreement, he said .
 The ceasefire in the Donbass can become the ground for lifting economic and political sanctions against Russia . It became inevitable after the annexation of the Crimea .
 The question on the legitimacy of the annexation of the peninsula to the Russian Federation is removed from the agenda . If not de jure, then de facto, the Crimea is a Russian territory, if not de facto .
 Putin has received explicit political dividends inside his country, at the same time. Putin retains significant risks in his country .
 Russian authorities have to continue to support the separatists in the Donbass . There are growing political and economic costs for the separatists .
 Refusal of such a support can be perceived as a betrayal of the current supporters of Putin . Putin is able to trigger a wave of discontent with the president within Russia .
 The continuation of the confrontation with the West, isolation and sanctions can cause significant damage to the Russian economy . Russia's economy has been hit hard by sanctions and sanctions .
Social protests can again undermine the rating of the head of the Russian Federation . This creates a risk of social protests which can also undermine the head's rating .
 The weakening of Putin’s position on the world stage and the escalation of the RussianUkrainian conflict pose to the current president of Russia a real threat of criminal prosecution. Finally, the weakening of the president’'s position on world stage.
 Putin formally charged with war crimes and dock at the International Criminal Court . The changes in the global political situation can well end for Putin .
 HHJJjjTAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 A person who will decide to describe Vladimir Putin’ political career will face an unsolvable problem the Russian president has never had a political career . The Russian president's political career has never been a career.
 Putin’s career is television, and all its phases, starting with the ‘soak in the toilet’ and ‘take care of Russia’ are nothing more than a sequence of television programs .
 Putin managed to build a tele-centered state in which all public institutions from the church to the army are tampered with the relevant television image .
 RBC journalists found out that the television programs on regular working meetings of Vladimir Putin demonstrated on federal TV channels turned to have been prepared long before the date of their appearance on TV .
 It can be assumed that such a practice had begun long before 2015, just until now no one paid attention to it . No one knows how many more of such prerecorded clips are stored in the video library of the Kremlin .
 Some television stories about the opposition became real criminal cases and arrests . It got to the point that some TV stories about opposition became criminal cases .
 Russian propaganda had been relatively vegetarian since the beginning of the political confrontation in Kiev in late 2013 .
 The propagandists themselves did not hide that at the ""peace-time" they do not act in full capacity . However, the propagandist themselves did.
 The resistance in the Ukrainian capital was shown in the way as if the proponents for the European integration were the heirs of the collaborators of the Second World War and the radical nationalists .
 Mentioning the Ukrainian nationalist organization ""Right Sector"" in the Russian media at some point significantly prevailed over that of Putin's party ""United Russia"" despite the fact that the ""Right sector"" received less than 2% of the vote at the Ukrainian elections .
Over the years the Russian propaganda has paid an exceptional attention to the Great Patriotic War . Putin made it a key point in his own ideological system of coordinates .
 The state news agency RIA ""Novosti" in 2005 created a new tradition for the May 9 holiday the mass wearing of St. St.
 The most humane Soviet holiday has become the major national holiday of Putin's Russia a good sign at first sight .
 The Ukraine conflict has turned out to be purely utilitarian when it came to the conflict with the Ukraine . But it also turned out that it was purely utilitarian.
The rhetoric of the war years appeared to be projected for the current political news . The rhetoric of war years seemed to be projection for the present political news.
 The Ukrainian government in the Kremlin propaganda rhetoric became ""Bandera"" and ""Nazi"" and Russia appeared to be engaged in the same case as in 1941-45,e. fight against the Nazis .
 The anti-fascist rhetoric used by the official media has transferred the political crisis into the language of war of annihilation . The rhetoric has been used by official media in the past.
 A woman was shown who allegedly saw a six-year-old boy crucified on the bulletin board by the Ukrainian national guardsmen in Slavyansk . The separatist army fighters had left.
 It turned out that the heroine of the story had never even been in Slavyansk .
 Russian musician Andrei Makarevich has been accused of harassment against the Russian musician . The same city is also connected to the campaign of harassment by the musician .
 He was in Slavyansk after the arrival of the Ukrainian forces there and gave a concert in the neighboring town for locals and refugees . He was a member of Ukrainian forces in the town after the invasion .
 The supporters of the government were talking about Makarevich as an enemy of Russia . They demanded to deprive him of his state awards .
 The war in the Ukraine also demonstrated the diversification of the Russian propaganda depending on the audience and the method of information delivery . The war also showed the diversified of Russian propaganda.
 Television is the absolute mainstream, and the picture given by it must be maximally broad and abstract, without further details .
 The consumer of the television news is passive, and TV tries not to overload him with unnecessary details . The consumer is passive.
 Girkin, who also participated in the annexation of the Crimea, is also not mentioned in the film “Crime’s” film ‘Crime.’ Girkin was also involved in the Crimea annexation .
 Vladimir Putin for the first time admitted deploying the Russian army on the territory of the Ukrainian peninsula . The Russian army has been deployed on Ukraine's territory since 2004 .
 Girkin became a hero to the tabloids and information radio stations,e.e. But Girkin is a hero for the media resources .
 This audience will not believe groundless stories about the "crucified boy" and requires a more nuanced approach . The film is based on the book, which was released in September .
 BEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 "Vesti Nedeli" on the channel "Russia1" could compete with its openness . The program is on the federal channels' transmissions with tabloids and online media .
 Modeled on the basis of the American evening shows, it played a key role in expanding the boundaries of the permissible on the Russian television .
 Kiselev is already included in the sanctions list of the West . His colleague Vladimir Solovyov is also trying to meet the level of the 'Vesti Nedeli'
 The whole Russian state media is one general atmosphere of hatred, and this already without any quotation marks. Actually, the whole Russian media is a general atmosphere.
 Russia will need a long time to recover from the ethical and behavioral standards propaganda of 2014-15. When all this is over, Russia will have to recover, according to the Russian media .
 He explained how they could have Russian military uniforms . "Look at the post-Soviet space," he said .
 From Anapa, we were transferred to Novorossiysk on “trucks, from where we sailed to Sevastopol on a big landing ship. From anapa, from Anapa we were moved to NovarossiYSk on "truck
 As soon as we got off the ship on the ground, we were ordered to take off all the state symbols and insignia of the force .
 We were given green balaclavas, sunglasses, knee pads and elbow pads . We were all given green bikas and sunglasses .
 As the main task we were to settle and be ready to perform any assignment, we were ready to do any assignment . We were prepared to take on any assignment.
 The brigade moved to village Perevalnoe, near which we set a camp . Soon, our brigade moved. Soon, we set up a camp in the village .
 There mostly lived paratroopers from Ulyanovsk about two thousand people . There were about 2,000 people in the town of Uly anovsk .
 Russian troops demonstrate strength of the Russian troops . Such a number was necessary to demonstrate the strength of Russian troops, it was said .
 They created fortifications and organized patrols so that, forbid the God, there did not emerge a Maidan here . They created Fortifications andorganized patrols to prevent the God .
On the eve of the referendum we were warned that the alarm would be announced and we were to be ready . We were warned to be prepared for the referendum .
 The Defense Minister of the Russian Federation, Sergei Shoigu himself, handed them to the Russian marines . The Russian marines, officers from the command of the Black Sea Fleet, were also handed them .
 The Crimea state lies on the annexation of the Crimea for about a year . The annexation of Crimea lasted in this way for a year.
 The former defense minister of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic, Igor Girkin, was told at the program "Polit-Ring" on 22 January, 2015 . The program was broadcast by the online channel ""Neyromir TV"
 Russian special forces took control of strategic objects in Crimea in February 2015 . MPs allegedly voted for holding a referendum on holding a vote .
 Admiral Igor Kasatonov was the ex-commander of the Russian Black Sea Fleet . He is the first high-ranking Russian official to publicly disclose details of the operation in the Crimea .
 The Black Sea Fleet had prepared a springboard, and the officers had known what was going on around . The Ukrainian divisions had been studied on the cards .
 The Black Sea Fleet managed its tasks from 27 to 28 of February . The Supreme Council of the Crimea was taken from the Crimea .
 Almost immediately after the announcements of Admiral Kasatonov, there also appeared Vladimir Putin’s open confessions .
 The President of the Russian Federation directly admitted that he had personally led the actions of Russian forces in the Crimea . The display of which took place on the state TV channel "Russia 1"
 He said when and under what circumstances they had been ordered to start the annexation . He also said that when and what circumstances the annexation was ordered to be started .
 The situation in the Ukraine had TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 . In parting, I will not deny, parting, before everyone had left .
 The Ministry of Defense has transferred the special division of Main Intelligence Department and Marine Corps, paratroopers . The move is to strengthen the protection of our military facilities in the Crimea .
 When it is done by the first persons of the country, it is easier for the implementers to work. Not because I did everything there correctly, but because it's easier to work, he says . It is easier to do everything correctly, he adds .
 The Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America reaffirm their commitment to Ukraine . The U.S. and UK reaffirm the principles of the CSCE Final Act .
 The Russian military in Eastern Ukraine began an armed confrontation after the annexation of the Crimea to Russia . separatists demanded inclusion of Donetsk and Fugansk regions into the Russian Federation .
 The Russian officials consistently deny the fact of participation of the Russian army in combat operations on the territory of the Ukraine .
 There were no Russian military units or military trainers in the south-east of the Ukraine and there are none .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said in an interview with French television channel TF1 on 4 July, 2014 . "We have never been engaged in the destabilization of the situation in Ukraine," he said .
 President's Press Secretary Dmitry Peskov said that the Russian side ""strongly denies"" the presence of Russian troops in the conflict zone Ukrainian conflict zone .
 Russian officials’ words are denied with proofs of the presence of many soldiers and officers of the Russian army on the territory of Eastern Ukraine . However, Russian officials are denying that they have any proof of their presence .
 Since June 2014 the armed forces of the Ukraine have taken a successful offensive against the separatists . The armed forces have been fighting the separatists since June 2014 .
 Ukrainians managed to free most towns of Donbass, including Slavyansk and Kramatorsk, and actually encircle Donetsk . Lugansk cut off its communication with Lugansk .
 The territory of the self-proclaimed DNI and LC has been reduced by three quarters since the beginning of the hostilities . The territory has now been reduced to three quarters by a quarter .
 Russian Federation reinforcements arrive in Russia . They include military equipment and divisions of the regular army . This is possible thanks to the arrival of military equipment .
 Both the Ukrainian and Russian armies have suffered significant losses. In the emerged “kettles’ along the Russian-Ukrainian border both the Ukrainian, Russian and Ukrainian armies have lost significant losses .
 Russian military intervention from the Russian side serves both the statements of the leaders of the separatists, and the evidences collected on the territory of the conflict .
 The decisive role of the reinforcements arrived from Russia, also confirmed former Minister of DNI Igor Girkin in an interview with the newspaper .
 The version that the Russian soldiers and officers fought in Donbass in the summer of 2014, being on a "legal holiday" Also actively supported the leader of the DNI, Alexander Zakharchenko .
 The version on the "vacationers" was also actively spread on the First Channel of the Russian television . A story was presented about a paratrooper from Kostromsk, Anatoly Travkina, who was killed in Ukraine .
 The military personnel, serving under the contract in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, are prohibited to be engaged in combat operations during holidays . It is important to note that the military personnel are not allowed to engage in combat during holidays.
 Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation tried to deny presence of Russian military on territory of Ukrainian conflict .
 Major General Ruslan Vasilyev made the statement on 19 December 2014 .
 The Russian paratroopers in armored vehicles managed to advance 20 kilometers forward in the territory of the Ukraine . After shelling, the Ukrainian Military Forces blocked the advance by the Russian military .
 The Ukrainian side has released the videos in which detainees give testimonies . The videos were released by the Ukrainian side .
 The Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation explained the presence of Russian paratroopers on Ukrainian territory in that they had been lost during the trainings .
Paratroopers had gone to the territory of the Ukraine to take part in the trainings . Paratroopers were questioned by Ukrainian authorities .
 Russian paratroopers said they stained the license plates of combat vehicles . Also said they had stained the plates before going to Ukraine .
 The detainees confirmed that they were acting soldiers of the Russian army .
 Ivan Aleksandrovich, born in Vologda in 1988, was a soldier of 54096 unit, 6th independent tank brigade . Evgeni Ashotovich, bom in 1994, was from 73612 unit, 1 st Guards Brigade 57 . Nikita Genade
 factory marks on armored vehicles had been removed, symbolic had been stained out and license plates taken away . According to Khokhlov, the armored vehicles were sent to Donbass .
 Khokhlov confirmed that he had himself participated in the transfer of the prepared equipment to the separatists on the Ukraine border with the Ukraine . Khoklov said he has himself participated.
 Khokhlov said that on August 8, he voluntarily left his unit, together with a colleague, Ruslan Garafiev, and arrived in Lugansk region . He said that he left the unit, with his colleague, on Aug. 8, and then returned to Lugansk
 Nikolai Kozlov lost a leg as a result of injury in the Donbass . Kozlov is the serviceman of the 31st independent guard’s airborne assault brigade .
 The young man was publicly talked on the social networks by his uncle, Sergei Kozlov .
 Nikolai Kozlov, 21, is an auto mechanic by profession . He was in military service in the military unit 73612, 31st independent Airborne Assault Brigade, and since 1 August, 2013 served in the same place on contract .
 Kozlov took part in operations on the territory of the Ukraine from the beginning of the confrontation . Kozlov has been in charge of operations since the start of the conflict .
 In March 2014 he was involved in blocking of the facilities in the Crimea by the Russian military .
 The military tasks in the Crimea Russian serviceman Kozlov realized in the uniform of a Ukrainian policeman . It is important to note that the military tasks were realized in a Ukrainian police uniform .
 The photo was posted in the social network "VKontakte" in May 2014, by his father .
 The photo was taken on the corridor of the Crimean Supreme Council . Kozlov participated, disguised as an employee of the Ministry of Interior of the Ukraine .
 At the end of the operation, he returned home to Ulyanovsk, Crimea . He was awarded with the medal ""For the return of the Crimea"" and got married .
 He was sent to fight in Donbass in August 2014, when the Russian army launched a massive operation to deter the offensive of the Ukrainian military on the positions of separatists .
European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu.eu .
 Sergei Kozlov's nephew was ambushed when trying to recapture captivated fellow servicemen .
 On 24 August the squad fell under shelling of armor-piercing guns, and a shot severed Kozlov’s leg . Kozlov's leg was severed by a shot .
 He was transferred across the border, was in hospital in Rostov and was later transferred to Moscow . After that he was transferred to Rostov, he was taken to Moscow and later moved to Moscow.
 peace talks were held in Minsk between the President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, and President of Russia, Vladimir Putin . After the August counteroffensive between the separatists and Russian army units.
 The parties agreed to establish a ceasefire which froze the conflict on the territory of the Ukraine for some time .
 Russian military again took an active part in the confrontation with the AFU in January 2015 . The Russian military also provided the offensive of the separatist forces on Debaltseve .
 Russian military servicemen submitted letters of resignation to commanders . This time, they sent to the war zone, before being sent to a war zone .
 This, in particular, reported the newspaper "Kommersant" on February 19 . This, according to the newspaper, was reported by the newspaper .
 The four military s of the RF confirmed that the command had not hidden the intention to send them to war in Ukraine .
 The soldiers wrote letters of resignation, so that in the event of detainment or death to be identified as volunteers, and not professional soldiers . The soldiers were deployed to the war zone on the eve of the deployment .
 The transfer was carried out in small groups of three people, soldiers said . In contrast to the summer-time intervention of the Russian army, the soldiers said.
Lieutenant Colonel Vyacheslav Okanev recorded the speech of the deputy head of the military unit . The speech was recorded by a soldier secretly recorded on tape . The information became known due to the disclosure.
 The conversation took place on the eve of TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 Lieutenant Colonel Okanev says there is an option to move to the Donetsk and Lugansk regions to provide direct assistance to the military servicemen .
 Okanev also explained that because "war was not officially declared" there was no guarantee of financial compensations in the event of death or injury of Russian military servicemen .
 Lieutenant Colonel Vyacheslav Okanev confirmed the authenticity of the record . In an interview with "Gazeta.ru" on 13 February, 2015, he said .
 Dmitry Sapozhnikov publicly confirmed the participation of the Russian army in the military conflict . The confession was publicized on 31 March 2015 .
 Sapozhnikov is a citizen of RF and went to fight on territory of Ukraine as a volunteer .
 Sapozhnikov points to the help that came from Russia .
 The heavy equipment we took Debaltseve said Sapozhnikov. Thanks to them, thanks to the heavy equipment, we took them .
 BEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu .
Gunman: "They originate everything together, create together, and we implement" The gunman says the gunman is the gunman . He says he and the gunman "originally created everything together"
 Buryat tankman Dorji Batomunkuev, 20, of the 5 th independent tank brigade , military unit number 46108, serial number 200220, military ID 2609999 . The fact regarding the presence of Russian troops on the territory of the Ukraine was also confirmed by
 Elena Kostyuchenko was in the burn center at the Donetsk Regional Hospital . He told about his participation in the battles in Donbass to the journalist of "Novaya Gazeta" He was injured in a burn center .
 The Tank Brigade of the Russian Army was aimed at fighting against the Ukrainians . It was aimed to preserve the position of the separatists . He served in the Tank Brigade.
 The license numbers were stained, there were insignia of the unit on some of the tanks, and these were also removed . The license number was stained .
I had already been ready morally and mentally, what would be in the Ukraine. We all knew where we were said Batomunkuev. I was already ready morally, mentally, and I had been ready. I had already already been prepared morally and physically .
 Boris Nemtsov’s sources, representing the interests of the relatives of Russian soldiers, killed in Donbass, applied to Boris NemTsov . Boris Nemnsov's sources applied to the Russian politician .
 Russian Defence Ministry payments to their families. They asked for help to get from the Russian Defense Ministry payments .
Nemtsov’s collocutors helped to set the chronology of the Russian troops on the territory of the Ukraine .
 The Russian soldiers were massively killed in the east of Ukraine in two periods . According to them, the soldiers were killed in a single period .
 The first wave of the coffins went to Russia in the summer of 2014, when the Ukrainian army went on the offensive . The Ukrainian army is currently fighting in Russia .
 The assault was stopped after the direct intervention of the Russian army units . The assault is stopped after a direct intervention by the army units.
 Despite the successful counteraction against the Ukrainian units, Russia's armed forces suffered losses . The Russian armed forces have suffered losses to the Ukrainian forces .
 A significant number of soldiers were killed, in particular, in the battles for the city of Ilovaysk .
 This information could not be concealed, and journalists then shed light on the situation . This information can be used to help journalists find out what happened .
Independent investigation hampered by authorities and families of killed soldiers . Independent investigation hampered not only by the authorities but also by the families of the killed soldiers.
 At the same time they signed on non-disclose of the information under the threat of a criminal prosecution . The information was not disclosed at the time .
 The second wave of mass coffins went to Russia in J anuary and early February 2015 . The first wave of Mass coffins was in Russia in January 2015 .
 According to our estimates, during this period at least 70 Russian soldiers were killed in Ukraine .
 The mass deaths of the Russian soldiers were linked to the escalation of the conflict and the confrontation near the town of Debaltseve .
 Russian soldiers were officially dismissed from the armed forces on the demand of the leadership . Unlike the previous year, this time, they were sent to Donbass .
 It was planned to conceal the participation of our army in the battles, presenting the military as volunteers . Thus, it was planned.
 The soldiers were assured that in case of injury or death, their relatives would get a compensation comparable to the amounts paid in the summer of 2014 . With the parole of honor of the commanders, the commanders were assured.
 All the dead soldiers had no longer been military servicemen. There was no opportunity to apply for a compensation officially since formally all the dead soldier had been killed .
 At the same time they were afraid to speak publicly because of non-disclosure subscriptions, they were also afraid to do so .
 The families of the dead soldiers were often told this case as an example . They were threatened with criminal prosecution in the event of disclosure.
 The families of the Russian soldiers refused to make public statements . The promised payments have not been made, despite the fact that the promised payments are not made .
 The murder of Boris Nemtsov convinced them to give up any claims to the Russian authorities .
 The reason is the fear of criminal prosecution and concern for their own lives . The fear of prosecution is the reason for people to worry about their lives .
 The authors of the report were told by the lawyer who represented the families of two dead paratroopers . Nobody will even notice, the authors of this report will not notice .
 In many ways the regular units of the Russian army determined the military successes of the separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 ""DNR"" and ""LC" played a notable role in the armed forces of the so-called "volunteers" The armed forces were constantly coming from Russia to the conflict zone .
 Russian citizens, who either organized paramilitary groups, or joined already formed units, started to go the territory of the Ukraine from the very beginning of the confrontation .
 Many former employees of the Russian Special Forces and military personnel had criminal records . Among them were people with combat experience in hot spots .
Former officer of special forces, Igor Girkin, Arseny Pavlov and Alexander Mozhaev were key figures in the armed forces of the separatists . Former officer of the special forces was accused of an attempted murder by Krasnodar .
 The recruitment, armament, financial support and transfer of the Russian ""volunteers" to the territory of the Ukraine were mostly organized with the direct participation of Russian authorities . The recruitment and armament and financial support of the Russian volunteer were mostly organized .
 A State Duma deputy, Vyacheslav Tetekin, estimated the number of the ""volunteers" who had taken part and those who were still participating in the combat actions in Donbass to amount to 30 thousand people .
 The same deputy introduced a bill to the State Duma on providing the “volunteers’ statuses of participants of combat actions with all relevant benefits. The bill was introduced by the same deputy .
 The process of sending "volunteers" to Donbass is organized on the basis of nongovernmental organizations that are loyal to the Kremlin .
 Franz Klintsevich is the head of the Russian Union of Veterans and State Duma deputy from the party "United Russia" He has been in charge of the party's leadership for more than two years .
 The collection points for future fighters are just the military enlistment offices in Russian cities .
 The recruitment of Russians in the ranks of DNI and LC is done in Russian cities through military enlistment offices, veterans and Cossack organizations .
 The citizens who are willing to go to the territory of the Ukraine voluntarily are sent in an individual order to Rostov-onDon . They are offset the cost of the tickets .
 The Rostov region is set the material base and the system of training of the fighter before they are in arms in the ranks of the separatists . Also, in the Rostov area, is set a material base for the fighter .
 The direction, combat mission and armored vehicles they get just before crossing the border . The direction and combat mission of the armored vehicles are just before the border.
 The main contingent of "volunteers" are former military and police officers,e. people who have experience with weapons . They include former military, police and military personnel .
 Money to provide fighters comes from Russian funds, which are filled with the active support of the Russian authorities .
 The average salary in Russia in January 2015 amounted to 31.000 rubles, according to the Ministry of Economic Development .
 The minimum duration of the service is one month . The period of their service "volunteers" define themselves .
 Important evidence presented the recruiter of ""volunteers" from Ekaterinburg . Vladimir Yefimov is head of the fund of veterans of Special Forces of Sverdlovsk region .
 He confirmed that Russian “volunteers’ who are involved in combat operations in the Donbass, get money for it . He said Russian ‘volunteer’s’ in combat ops get money.
 In fact, it is the realization of the military intervention under the guise of humanitarian supplies . The U.S. military intervention is the result of a "humanitarian supplies"
 The same way, now we also put the boys in the cars with humanitarian aid and send them "," says Efimov .
 Petersburg states that people were sent to the Donbass from different regions of Russia . All are dressed in army clothing, without any stripes, markings and even the labels of manufacturers .
 Tomsk TV channel ""TV-2" showed on December 6, 2014, a story about the transfer of the local squad of ""volunteers"" to war in Lugansk . Currently closed by regional authorities TomsK TV channel .
 The program was made from the departure point of the bus with future LC combatants . The program is made from a departure point on the bus .
 Such kind of units were sent to the Donbass from different cities of Siberia .
 The volunteers of Tomsk were equipped on the money of sponsors whose names the organizers of the transfer prefer not to publicize . The volunteers were equipped with money from sponsors who don't want to reveal their names .
 UEEsJtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 . 25 received material support, and the ""volunteers"" themselves receive monetary compensation .
 The current legislation of Russia allows to identify the so-called Russian volunteers in the Donbass as mercenaries . The current law allows to name the volunteers as mercenaries.
 Russian investigative authorities pursue only those Russian citizens involved in the fighting on the side of the Ukrainian security forces .
 The same combatants who joined the ranks of the separatists do not experience any problems with law in Russia .
 The President of RF, Vladimir Putin, explained that people who do their duty by the call of their heart can't be considered mercenaries .
 These people identify themselves as supporters of the President of Chechenia, Ramzan Kadyrov . They are often members of the force structures that are under his control .
 Ramzan Kadyrov publicly expressed his willingness to go to the conflict zone in the east of Ukraine and personally participated in the fighting . Kadyro has been in Ukraine since December 16, 2014 .
 collected evidence proves that the combatants, trained in his security agencies, take an active part in clashes in the Donbass .
 The first group of Kadyrov's people, who arrived in the conflict zone, joined the separatist “Vostok’s” battalion .
 The Chechens, who come from Russia, fought with the Ukrainian troops under his command in the spring . Its commander Alexander Khodakovsky confirmed on 1 June 2014.
 Evidence proving presence of Chechen combatants on the territory of the Ukraine had appeared even before .
 A video, made at a rally by the supporters of "DNR" in Donetsk, was publicized in May 2014 .
 TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 . There were about two dozen people, mostly of Caucasian appearance, armed with machine guns .
 The journalist confirmed that he was from the Chechen law enforcement agencies . When inquired by the journalist, he confirmed he was in Chechen .
 On May 26 it became known about the first serious losses among the Chechen combatants, fighting on the side of the separatists .
 That day the ""DNR"" unit made an assault on the airport of Donetsk, under the control of the Ukrainian forces .
 During the fighting two "Kamaz" trucks, transporting combatants, were destroyed . The trucks were transporting combatants .
 The bomb fell at the bottom of the truck, it rolled, and the front wheel was torn off . The front wheel of the vehicle was ripped off .
 "We started to pick cars on the road to load the wounded and sent to hospitals," he said . "Then there started shooting, we started picking cars to carry the wounded," he added .
 The Prime Minister of DNI, Alexander Boroday, said that among the dead of May 26, 33 Russian citizens were identified .
 43 wounded, including citizens from Chechen cities of Grozny and Gudermes . The mayor of Donetsk, Oleksandr Lukyanchenko, added that 43 wounded were taken to hospital .
 Chechen fighters arrived in the Donbass in August 2014, when there started a large-scale operation of the Russian army . The operation was aimed to stop the offensive of the Ukraine on the position of the separatists .
 On August 29, 2014 there was publicized a video of one of the Chechen combatants on the Russian-Ukrainian border on the eve of the invasion .
 The shot recorded a ‘dialogue in Chechen language in front of the column of tanks and other armored vehicles . The shot was recorded by a Chechen soldier who was shot in the head .
Allah Akbar! says the gunman at the camera. There are also Chechens, here. Allah Akbar: "There are alsoChechens"
 Boris Nemtsov sent formal requests to the Russian FSB and the Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation . He demanded an investigation on the illegal border crossings by armed men .
 On August 30 another video, shot by one of Kadirov’s combatants during the city of Gorlovka, was published . The video was published on August 30 .
 The video shows how a group of armed men in full gear go BEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 .
 A significant part of Kadyrov's fighters remained in the territory of Donbass, controlled by separatists .
 The evidence of the presence of the armed Chechens in the ranks of the separatists continued to appear on a systematic frequency . The evidence continues to be consistent.
 A Chechen militant with the call sign ""Talib" is fighting in the Donbass in the ranks of the separatists . He was threatening Ukrainian deputy Igor Moseychuk with death for an insult to Ramzan Kadyrov .
 There appeared documentary evidences on the creation of a separate Chechen battalion "Death" The battalion was formed of veterans of Ramzan Kadyrov’s security agencies .
 Marina Akhmedova published statements of the commanders of the battalion on the territory of the base camp in the Donetsk region .
 The soldiers of this battalion took part in the battle for the airport in Donetsk and Ilovaisk .
 Among the participants of this battalion, according to its commander’s confession, were former separatists who had fought against the Russian army .
 He has the rank of major of Russian Interior Ministry . He was awarded with the medal ""For Services to the Chechen Republic" by the decree of Kadyrov in February 2008 .
 A video was published showing the transfer of the battalion ""North"" in the territory of Donbass .
Up to 70 percent of the militants were from the Special Forces, according to him . Most of them had state awards, he says .
 The battalion was based in the city of Krasnodon and provided it with patrols . According to him, the battalion wasbased in the town and provided patrols .
 The battalion, in particular, took part in the fighting near the towns of Krasnodon and Shastye .
 The armed conflict in the Donbass increases the number of victims on both sides every day .
 The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs documented the death of 6108 people in the conflict zone . The report notes that the data is "reserved" and does not include information about those killed in the exacerbation period of January-February 2015 .
 Russian authorities were carefully concealing the information about the killed citizens of the Russian Federation on the territory of the Ukraine .
 photojournalist Mary Turchenkova published a reportage on the intersection of the Ukrainian-Russian border and a truck marked "Load-200" It returned to the homeland the corpses of 31 Russian citizen, who died in May, during the assault of the Donetsk airport .
 The Russian citizenship of the dead was confirmed by the head of the self-proclaimed DNI, Alexander Boroday . Boroday is a self- proclaimed DNI .
 In fact, it was the first documentary evidence of the involvement of Russian citizens in the war in Donbass .
 Turchenkova managed to fix on a photo several references of the Donetsk regional bureau of forensic medical examination on the death of Russian citizens whose bodies were transported across the border .
 Among the dead was Abrosimov Yuri Fedorovich, born in 1982 . In particular, among the dead is Abrosim Yuri FedOrovich .
 The information about the killed Russian servicemen in Donbass had long been kept closed . Shortly before his death, he had undergone preparation at a training camp in Rostov region .
 The soldiers were killed during the trainings in the Rostov region . The military authorities of the Russian Federation stated that the soldiers were dead .
 The families of the killed military servicemen were also trying not to draw attention to the case . The families are also trying to keep the case quiet .
 The relatives of the dead soldiers in 2014 received large monetary compensations and gave subscriptions on nondisclosure .
 First evidence about the killed Russian military servicemen on the territory of the Ukraine was unveiled by Pskov MP Leo Schlossberg .
 The truth was the first message, as evidenced by the graves of paratroopers Kichatkin Leonid and Alexander Osipov which appeared in Vybuty .
 The Defense Minister, Sergei Shoigu, and the commander of the Airborne Troops, Vladimir Shamanov, argue that the 76 th Division was not involved in the fighting on the territory of Ukraine and suffered no combat casualties .
 Schlossberg says this division buried the paratroopers . Meanwhile, according to Schlossburg, exactly this division is buried .
 Schlossberg Leo was attacked after the publication of these materials . He was severely beaten .
 On August 29 it became known about the death of Ulyanovsk paratrooper Nikolai Bushin on the Ukraine territory .
 Bushin served in military unit 73612, which is permanently stationed in Ulyanovsk .
 He was deputy commander of the 4 th squad of the Guards Airborne Assault Brigade of the Airborne Forces . He was a member of the 31 st independent Guards Airbourne Assault Brigade .
 Two paratroopers, serving in his division Ruslan Akhmedov and Arseny Ilmitov, were under Ukrainian detention .
 Russian troops killed on the territory of Ukraine. More information about the Russian military, killed in Ukraine, is available .
 Most of the dead were in the Airborne Forces, constituting the peacekeeping body of the Russian Federation . About 5000 fighters, in total, are in the five units of the air force .
 The 31st independent Guards Airborne Assault Brigade, stationed in the Ulyanovsk region, were killed . Ilnur Kilchinbaev Almyasovo and Alexander Belozerov were killed.
 According to relatives, they had gone to the teachings in the Rostov region . They were killed on August 25 .
 The 98th Guards Airborne Division, stationed in Ivanovo and Kostroma regions, were killed . Sergey Seleznev and Andrei Pilipchuk from the Kostrome region were killed.
 Sergei Gerasimov, 32, Alex Kasyanov and 27-year-old Evgeni Kamenev were killed on August 24, 25 and September 3, respectively . The administration of the Kostroma cemetery stated about the burials of the three servicemen .
 The 76 th Guards Airborne Assault Division, stationed in the Pskov region, is stationed in Russia . The 76th Guards Air Assault Division is based in the region .
 Nikolai Sharaborin from Chita was killed in Novorossiysk . The 7 th Airborne Assault Division was killed.
 The 106th Guards Airborne Division, stationed in the Ryazan region a paratrooper, was killed .
 The local media wrote that infantry shooters Vadim Larionov, Konstantin Kuzmin, Marcel Araptanov, Vasili Karavaev, Armen Davoyan, Alexander Voronov were either killed or "on the border with the Ukraine" or during the
 Newspaper “AiF-Prikamye’s’ reported about the funeral of soldier Vasili Karavayev .
 He was brought to the village of Kuva, district Kudymkarsky, on September 5 . He has been brought to a village in Kuva.
 Nadezhda Otinova told her cousin Vasili Karavaev, 20, got a wound during the bombing on August 21 in Donetsk . He died five days later in a hospital in Rostov region .
 Two members of the Council on Civil Society and Human Rights under the Russian President, Ella Polyakova, Sergei Krivenko .
 Russian paratroopers fell in shelling on August 13 near the town of Snezhnoe in the Donetsk region .
 Leo Schlossberg sent a deputy's request to the Chief Military Prosecutor's Office of the Russian Federation . He raised questions about the fate of military servicemen of the 76th Pskov Airborne Division .
 Schlossberg wants to name 12 paratroopers whose deaths and burials are documented . But the reasons and circumstances are not, he says .
 Alexander Baranov, Sergei Volkov, Dmitry Ganin, Vasili Gerasimchuk Alexey Karpenko, Tleuzhan Kinibaev Leonid Kichatkin, Anton Korolenko, Alexander Kulikov, Maxim Mezentsev, Alexander
 The circumstances of the death of the military were installed, the Chief Military Prosecutor's Office told Schlossberg . The military prosecutor did not find any violations of the laws . The disclosure of the information was not possible since they constituted a state secret .
 Boris Nemtsov sent a formal request to the General Prosecutor of the Russian Federation on January 27, 2015 . The request was sent by Boris NemTsov, himself .
 He demanded to check the information about the death of the Russian military servicemen on the territory of the Ukraine .
 Boris Nemtsov was killed a month ago . The General Prosecutor's Office has never responded to the politician’s request .
 Vladimir Putin denied the military involvement of Russia in blocking Ukrainian units on the territory of the peninsula of the Crimea .
 The President says the actions were carried out solely by the local defense forces .
 Putin says such a uniform can be purchased in any military bargaining . Such a uniform, according to Putin, can be bought in a military bargaining.
 The aphorism about the "Putin's military bargaining" continues to be relevant until now due to the fact that since the spring of 2014 there has been mass transportation of Russian weapons and armored vehicle to the east of Ukraine .
 Today, so-called "militias of Donbass" have a wide range of weapons, including tanks and selfpropelled artillery, multiple rocket launchers and diverse small arms .
 The Russian officials deny the fact of the supply of military equipment to Donbass . The Russian government says it is not supplying military equipment .
 The separatists claim that the weapons and military equipment of the so-called "militias" are captured and trapped from the Ukrainian army in the fighting .
 Both the Russian and Ukrainian armies use mainly old Soviet weapons and military equipment . The identification of equipment goes from the military units of the army of the RF to the armed forces of the separatists .
 Changing the marking and registration plates just eliminate the opportunity to prove the involvement of the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is currently using military equipment for its military equipment .
 Russian weapons transfer to Donbass is more than enough, according to the Russian government . But even so, the proofs of the transfer of the Russian weapons are not enough, says the Russian official .
 The Russian state officially recognized the fact of transportation of military equipment to the territory of the Ukraine .
 A uniform system of volley fire is designed in Russia and has not been delivered to any foreign country .
 MLRS "Tornado-S" probably exists only in the form of pilot projects . MLRS was mentioned in the second Minsk Agreement, and is named for the first time .
 The weapon appeared in the hands of the separatists, but was also mentioned in an international agreement, concluded by Vladimir Putin .
 The nature of hostilities and their intensity do not allow any other option but to ensure constant ammunition of the “forces of the separatists’ from the territory of Russia’s territory .
For example, a single volley of "Grad" fires 36 shells, each weighing 56 kilograms . For example, one volley of ""Grad"" fires 36 shots, each weighs 56kg .
 One resupply vehicle carries one and a half tons of ammunition . Generally, one resupplies vehicle carries 1 and 1/2 tons.
In the district of Debaltseve at the beginning of 2015, such ammunition is consumed in a day .
 Of this amount, 23 tanks, 56 BMP and BMD, 26 BTR, 19 self-propelled guns, 17 towed guns, 2 MLRS were captured by separatists from Ukraine .
 Khramchikhin does not exclude that the militants had obtained the rest from Russia . But also does not rule out the version that the equipment could have been 'bought' by the separatists .
 A dozen of MLRS, 20 self-propelled artillery. No matter how it happened, the supply of ammunition amounted to a minimum of eighty tanks, the report says .
 It is impossible to imagine how in the midst of hostilities caravans of trucks are freely moving across the front line . Even if we accept the hypothesis that the separatists are fighting with the captured equipment and bought the weapons from corrupt Ukrainian military.
 It is implied that they were produced at the factory named after Degtyarev in Kovrov in 2001 . For example, the report denotes TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May .
 This latest modernized model of a quite old tank was completed in Russia in 2013 and has never been exported . This latest model of the tank has been completed in 2013 .
 The tank T-72B3 dates to August 27, 2014, when it was captured near Ilovaisk . There were documents in it confirming that it had belonged to the Russian army .
 The video was made in the city of Lugansk, which is under the control of the separatists . Another indication of the presence of Russian military equipment on the territory of the Ukraine became the video .
 The self-propelled anti-aircraft defense missile-gun complex “Pantsir SI’s’ complex was developed by the Russian military industry .
 None of the countries that have ZRPK ‘Pantsir SI’ does not border with the Ukraine . However, apart from Russia, none of the nations that has Z RPK “PantsIR SI” do not border .
 The equipment could enter Donbass only through the Russian-Ukrainian border . It is quite obvious that this equipment could only enter through the border .
 Russian arms go at the disposal of the separatists and are actively used against the Ukrainian army . Despite the official denials of the Kremlin, the Russian arms are used against Ukraine .
 Deliveries of arms into the conflict zone cannot be considered anything but a military intervention into the affairs of neighboring state .
 East of the Donetsk region of Ukraine, near the village of Gabrovo, not far from the town of Torez .
 The Russian media regularly reported that the separatists successfully shoot down the planes and helicopters of the Ukrainian army .
 In total, from May to July 17, 2014, 4 helicopters (2 and 5 May MI-24) and 3 aircrafts were shot down . The Boeing 777 was shot down on the day of the catastrophe with the Boeing 777 .
 In the evening of the same day the Defense Minister of the self-proclaimed DNI, Igor Girkin stated on the social networks that the ""militias"" had downed a plane . Both the militants and the Russian media called the place of the crash (near the city of T
 In the evening, when the real picture became clear, these kind of statements were terminated . The real picture, of what had happened, became clear.
 Russia's representative to the UN, Vitaly Churkin, acknowledged the guilt of the terrorists for the downed Boeing .
 If they thought that they were shooting down a military jet, it was confusion . It was confusion. If you thought that it was shooting down an aircraft, you could be confused .
 "If there was confusion, then it was not an act of terrorism," said Churkin . If there was confused, then there was not a terrorism, he said .
 Russian media started to voice one after another different version of the Boeing tragedy .
 The Kremlin propaganda launched a special information operation aimed at creating a kind of "smoke screen" around the investigation of the collapse of the Malaysian aircraft .
 The purpose of the special operation, apparently, was to conceal the involvement of the separatists, armed with Russian anti-aircraft missiles .
 Four days after the collapse the Boeing was hit by a Ukrainian Su-25 . The first channel of the Russian television announced the version of the General Staff was hit .
 Vadim Lukashevich: "The Su-25 is a IHIHiHH TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015."
 The purpose of this machine is to work close to the ground and give direct support to troops on the battlefield . The machine is designed to work near the ground.
 Shooting down a plane at an altitude of 11,000 with a Su-25 that's not serious . The plane was shot down by a U.S. Air Force pilot .
 Su-25 can't shoot down the plane flying at the height of 10 thousand 500, the creator says . The plane could attack the Boeing at a height of three four thousand meters .
 Another resonant "version" was voiced by a fierce Kremlin propagandist, Mikhail Leontev .
 The Boeing had been shot down by jet fighter MiG-29, says Leontev .
 A military aircraft, similar to that of the Su-27, was used in the photo collage . The report of the ""Channel One"" referred to the MiG-29 .
 The Boeing was shot down about 50 kilometers away from Donetsk airport .
 The time shown on the fake collage of the “Channel One’s” UTC is the Coordinated Universal Time Greenwich Mean Time .
 In the photo it shows as a 1:19:47, but, in fact, at this time it was night in the Ukraine .
 The Kremlin attempts to influence the public opinion and confuse the investigation, however, did not prevent the establishment of the real causes of the tragedy . The Kremlin has been trying to influence public opinion, but not the investigation .
 The countries that lost their citizens in this tragedy, like nobody else, are interested in establishing the truth .
 The European public and media carried out their own independent investigations into the circumstances of the tragedy .
Journalists concluded that the passenger plane could by no means have been shot down by a jet fighter .
 In March 2015 several research papers were published showing that the Boeing was hit by a SAM ""Buk"" from the territory controlled by the separatists .
 German TV channels WDR and TCE visited the site of the alleged missile launch of the SAM ""Buk Ml" The journalists interviewed local residents .
 Track on Torez The documentary evidence that the Malaysian ""Boeing"" was hit by a "surface-to-air" missile, launched from ""Buk" It is located on the territory controlled by the separatists in the Donets region .
 The photographs captured the vapor track from the rocket at its earliest start site of the trajectory . The photographs were taken at the beginning of the rocket's trajectory .
 Reuters correspondent gathered evidence from villagers of Krasniy Okyaber (Red October) This is supported by the evidence gathered by the Reuters correspondent .
 A few hours after the disaster, there appeared a photo on the social networks, taken by one of the locals, with a track of the launched missile .
 The photo was subjected to a thorough examination in the community of Investigative Journalists Bellingcat . The conclusions indicate its undoubted authenticity, according to the results .
Key thesis that was casting doubt on the authenticity of the photo the color of the sky in the image was dismissed .
 The distance between the crash site where a cloud was fixed and the site where the photographer was located is about 15km . The area the photograph zooms into is about 20km .
 Donetsk and its suburbs were at the edge of a large cloud front and the weather could be very changeable . The satellite meteorological shooting of this part of Eastern Ukraine showed that that day Donetsk was at the edges of a big cloud front .
 Russian journalist Sergei Parkhomenko managed to find the author of the above mentioned photo and get the original photo .
 There are no "divorces" and "blots" in the photo that could have seemed suspicious to skeptics .
 All this "garbage" was compressed from the full-sized files to a format needed to upload photos to Twitter . The full-size files were uploaded to Twitter.
 In the original, the photo is much brighter than the version which was published on July 17, 2014 . The original, which was released in July, was published in July 2014 .
 It was “darkened’ before it was tweeted so as to make the trail of the smoke more noticeable in the middle of the photo .
 The wind was slowly spreading the trail of the smoke on the horizon. I ran to the window and saw that the wind was spreading the smoke .
 I grabbed it and ran up the stairs to the roof to take a photo from there . I grabbed the photo and ran down the stairs and took it to the top of the roof .
 A column of thick black and blue smoke is just in the direction of Grabow, near Grabow . Then I turned and saw from the other side, in the north, a column of dark smoke .
 I thought that the missile had hit into a gas station or a tank with fuel oil . I thought it had hit a tank or gas station. I thought the missile would hit a fuel oil tank .
 The wires and antennas would not distract. I got to the other side of the roof to take photos from there where the wires and the antennas would never distract .
 If I had known what event appeared in the image, I would have taken more photos. If I'd known what happened in the photo, of course, I'd taken more pictures .
 But about what exactly had happened, I learned only a couple of hours later . It's not clear what exactly happened, but it's not what happened .
 At that time, I sent the photos to a friend and he posted them on Twitter . At the time, he sent them to his friend and posted them online .
 “Boeing’s’ MH-17 is officially considered to be crashed . These are respectively six and ten minutes after the time when ‘Boeer’ is considered to have crashed .
 The handed photos contain sufficient details so as to undoubtedly connect the location where the photo was taken to the real location . Also, the handed photos have sufficient details.
 In the first photo, which represents a wider angle of view, a number of details are easy to distinguish . The first photo represents a wide angle, which is easy to identify .
 The next step in the analysis is to identify specific details from the "top view" that is in the cadres of satellite imagery .
 Google Earth cadres were taken in a very good, detailed resolution . They are available to users of Google Earth .
 Point A is marked the initial position of the author of the photos, denoted by the author himself .
 This proves that the author of the photos accurately pinpointed his location . This proves the author's location is accurate .
 Photographer could see the black smoke that rose over the alleged starting point and gradually demolished to the right by the wind .
 This line, from the point of capture through the high electric mast, can be drawn by satellite map .
 It is highly probable that the installation of "Buk" that made the fatal shot was located in this area . It is very probable that it was installed in the area .
 A large piece of charred, black earth is already partially plowed . At the left edge there are clearly visible traces of the maneuvers of some heavy equipment .
 The International Investigative Group is conducting a criminal-legal investigation on the downed flight MN17 of July 17, 2014 . It made a statement that the version, that the Boeing was crashed by the missile complex ""Buk"" which came from Russia and was under the control of
 The European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 Donetsk and Lugansk proclaimed its independence in April 2014 . It declared its withdrawal from the jurisdiction of the Ukrainian authorities .
 "DNR" and "LC" are under external control of official Moscow . Key decisions are dependent on Russian officials and political strategists .
 The Kremlin has never recognized the sovereignty of the self-proclaimed republics de jure . However, the Kremlin still considers these territories to be a part of the Ukraine .
 Government institutions were formed in May 2014 after a referendum on the independence of "DNR" in May .
 Russian citizen Marat Bashirov, political strategist, worked with the Government of the Russian Federation . A similar position in "LC" took another Russian citizen.
 Earlier, there had appeared other Russian citizens on the territory of the Ukraine . They had played a key role in the armed resistance of the local authorities .
 Igor Girkin was a retired officer of the Russian special forces . He managed to take part in the operation on the annexation of the Crimea to Russia . He created an armed unit of separatists in the town of Slavyansk .
 At a time Girkin headed the security service in the investment fund "Marshal Capital" He was a Russian businessman Konstantin Malofeev .
 Alexander Boroday worked for the fund as a consultant at the same time . Boroday was also a consultant to the fund .
 The law enforcement bodies of the Ukraine consider Malofeeva to be one of the main sponsors of the militants in the east of Ukraine . The law Enforcement bodies of Ukraine consider the militants to be a main sponsors .
 Boroday and Girkin arrived in Donbass early in May, after the annexation of the Crimea to the Russian Federation .
 Boroday did not conceal that he was regularly in Moscow and coordinated his activities on the territory of Ukraine with Russian officials . However, Boroday didn't conceal his activities .
 Denis Pushilin resigned from his post on July 18, 2014 . He was Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the ""DNR"
 Vice-speaker of the ""parliament of I II I MM S TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 . Vladimir Makovich, commenting on the resignation of his colleague, confirmed that Pushilin’s statement was written from Moscow .
 Personnel reserves for the ""DNR"" and ""LC" have often served the socio-political projects that were directly associated with the Kremlin .
 Leonid Simunin worked with the pro-Kremlin organization “Mestnye’s” and appeared in the testimonies of neo-Nazi group Born, which committed a series of resonant murders .
In government structures of "LC" worked political consultant Pavel Karpov . He had cooperated with the Administration of the President of RF on the supervision of nationalist organizations .
 Igor Girkin held the post of defense minister of the so-called ""Donetsk Republic" in May-August 2014 . Important evidence of the role of the Kremlin on the personnel decisions of ""DNR"" and ""LC" gave Girkin .
 He plainly says that he left the leadership of "DNI" as a result of pressure from the Kremlin .
 The Kremlin started to pay attention to the political approach, focused on the peace talks, and it required pliable people . The Kremlin has started to focus on the politics of the past .
I did not show any pliability, therefore, did not meet their requirements . And I did not showing any pliable, therefore. And I didn't show any Pliability . I did no pliability .
 The curator on human and political issues in Donbass is the former deputy head of the Administration of the President of RF, Vladislav Surkov . Surkov is a former Deputy Head of the administration of RF .
 Imagine how it would look, if I had put my signature on the ""Minsk"" agreements, a native of Moscow .
 External control from Moscow is not conducive to restore order in self-proclaimed republics where corruption and arbitrariness are rampant .
 If the general information is gathered, it turns out that most part was stolen almost nine out of ten convoys . Most part of the convoys were stolen, according to the FBI .
 Donetsk and Lugansk people got something about a package a month and only to a strictly limited number of people . Nothing reached small towns .
Alexei Mozgovoy is in Alchevsk, they did not get anything from the ""humanitarian convoys,"" Pavel Dremov in Pervomaisk also did not receive anything .
 The situation is terrible, while there TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 There are documented cases of ‘people's courts’ in ‘LC’ which operate outside even of the controversial but, at least, of some procedural field .
 In January 2015 there was further evidence of how in reality is the interaction set between the "people's republics" in the east of Ukraine and the Kremlin .
 He curates Abkhazia and South Ossetia . But formally he has another sector, he says .
There is no doubt that Vladislav Surkov plays a key role in the process of external government of the "People's Republic" Surkov is a key part of the process. The Kremlin's external government was implemented by the Kremlin .
 Surkov is responsible for questions regarding cooperation with Abkhazia and South Ossetia . He was appointed as assistant of the president of Ukraine in 2013 .
 The representatives from Surkov’s closest entourage were repeatedly seen in Kiev during the Maidan revolution .
 The head of the Security Service of the Ukraine, Valentyn Nalyvaychenko, directly accused Surkov of the leadership of the operation .
 The Kremlin's policy towards the ""DNR"" and ""LC"" is very closed and non-transparent . The Kremlin has a policy towards "DNR" and "LC" is "very closed"
 The facts of direct regulation policies of these allegedly "independent republics" cannot be concealed . However, the facts can be concealed.
 In fact, it is about creating a pseudo-state in eastern Ukraine, which is managed from Moscow . It is, in fact, a means of pressure on official Kiev.
 Important evidence of the involvement of Vladislav Surkov to the decisions within the ""DNR"" and ""LC" was published by a special correspondent for the publishing house ""Kommersant"""Kommerant"", Andrei Kolesnikov, describing the talks
 The reconciliation of the conditions on the ceasefire in the TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 At the time, it was not still clear where he was going, but it was already evident that the events had started to develop at an ever increasing speed .
 President of the Ukraine came out of the negotiations hall. He was very dissatisfied with something .
 Alexander Zahkharenko and Igor Plotnitskiy categorically refused to put their signatures under the document . Alexander Zahkarenko, Igor Plot nitskiiy and Alexander Zahharenko refused to sign the document.
 At 10:40 Vladislav Surkov returned to the Palace alone and went to the second floor . At that time, Vladimir Putin was still in the Palace .
 Vladimir Putin told his colleagues that it was necessary to explain to Alexander Zakharchenko and Igor Plotnitskiy why they were wrong .
 Angela Merkel proposed to explain everything to the leaders of ""DNR"" and ""LC" with the help of the opening of the EU Council of Ministers .
 No later than this period the leaders of France and Germany would leave and never come back . No talks about nothing, anything would be impossible, and no talks about anything .
 Vladimir Putin came out and went back into the meeting room, when before the expiration of the ultimatum remained two minutes . Vladimir Putin went back to the meetingroom, when the deadline was two minutes old .
 The intervention of Putin and Russian military forces in the conflict in the eastern part of Ukraine turned a part of the neighboring state in the war zone .
 In 2014-2015 Donbass is a place of unpunished murders, hundreds of thousands of refugees, destroyed infrastructure and the collapse of the social systems .
 The Ukrainian and Russian authorities are increasingly characterizing the situation in the Donbass as a humanitarian catastrophe . The Ukrainian, Russian authorities, as well as the representatives of the international community, are increasingly calling it a catastrophe .
 During the fighting in the east of Ukraine from the territory, numerous local residents were forced to leave .
 Many of the refugees have nowhere to return because of the destructions, that the towns and villages in the conflict zone had faced . Many of them have no choice but to return to their homes .
Infrastructures, lines of the electricity transmission, local gas and water pipelines are subjected to systematic destruction . Infrastructure and lines of electricity transmission and local gas pipelines are subject to destruction .
 Regularly there are reports of deaths of repair crews from the repair crews . The infrastructure is being reconstructed on the territory occupied by separatists .
 The road to a safe place on the territory of Ukraine for refugees is often full of mortal dangers due to the lack of humanitarian corridors .
 On August 18, 2014, 15 civilians were killed in shelling of refugee columns by separatists . The shelling was a result of the shelling of refugees by separatists.
 The column was exporting refugees from the inhabited communities of Khryashevatoe and Novosvetlovka . The column under the white flags was exported refugees from Khry as well .
 A bombardment from mine-throwers and the system ""Grad"" was made on the vehicles from the territory of the separatists .
 Practically, today there have been established numerous checkpoints along almost the entire territory of Donbass .
 The checkpoints, established by the Ukrainian military, are regulated by the legislation of the country . However, they are out of the legal field and the integrated command center .
 The residents of the inhabited localities fell under the control of the separatists . They are frequently subjected to violence by militants .
After the liberation of this place from the militants by the Ukrainian security forces, on its territory there were signs of torture and abuse on their bodies .
Body of local deputy, Vladimir Rybak, was found in the river in the early days of Slavyansk .
 The corpse was thrown into the river after the torture and killing . He had been detained from the unit by an officer of the Russian Special Forces .
 separatists detained, tortured and abused civilians who were not taking part in the armed conflict . There are a lot of examples when the separatists detained and tortured civilians .
 The woman was accused of supporting the Ukrainian authorities, was tied to a pole in Donetsk . She was publicly humiliated and beaten .
 The separatists in eastern Ukraine are widely using the tactic of firing from densely populated areas and the residential sector . The separatists are also using the tactics of firing in densely populated regions .
 With the firing points in houses, the separatists provoke shelling on civilians . The separatists have been accused of shelling civilians .
 A militant from DNI shot from a grenade launcher from the window of a residential multistory house towards the position of the Ukrainian army .
 In the next cadre, the journalist asked an elderly woman, who was on the stairwell, if she was not scared to live there . The journalist asked the elderly woman if she had not been scared.
 The checkpoint at the entrance to the town of Volnovakha was hit from the side of Donetsk .
 Under the bombardment fell a bus with civilians, as a result of which 12 people died .
Hunger and dramatic impoverishment of the population of Donbass also become realities . Hunger and dramatic poverty also become reality for Donbass .
 7 people died from hunger in Kirov, 5 in Snezhoy, and 68 in Krasnopartizanskaya in Lugansk region . Sergei K., a volunteer and organizer of free canteens for the poor, had to flee from Donetsk to the liberated territories
 The bodies of the dead were transported through the city on sleds because there were no other means of transportation for the dead there, locals say .
 The elderly and disabled people have absolutely no money to buy it . But the elderly and the disabled people are not able to afford it .
 The authorities do not care for it, otherwise they would have already organized food rationing. Unfortunately, the authorities don't.
 It is incomprehensible that people are dying of hunger when there the groceries are packed in the stores . It's incomprehensible that they are dying when there are groceries packed in stores .
In Donetsk the number of the registered deaths from dystrophy exceeded 20 people . Today I was told that in Donetsk the numbers of people who died from the disease exceeded 20 .
Leaders of the separatists confess that a notable part of the loads were stolen .
 The prices in the shops on the territory, controlled by the separatists, are significantly higher than those in the Ukrainian regions .
 At the same time job places in the Donbass have become significantly fewer . The Donbass has also become significantly less popular in the region .
 Some mines work, including illegal ones, as well as the enterprises of the Donetsk oligarch, Rinat Akhmetov .
 Most of the businesses have left the territory of the ""DNR"" and ""LC" to escape from the looting and seizures . To attract new investments in a war zone is practically impossible .
 A serious problem is also the failure of the authorities of the self-proclaimed ""republics" to provide essential medicines to people under public care .
 The leadership of "DNR" and "LC" hinder the evacuation of the disabled people, who suffer because of the lack of medicines . Despite this, the leadership of ""DNR"" and ""LC"" hinder the evacuations of disabled people .
 The administration of "LC" thwarted the attempt of the volunteers to take to the territory . Slavyanoserbsk neuropsychiatric boarding school was also subjected to systematic shelling .
 In estimating the cost of the military campaign of Putin on the territory of the Ukraine, one should consider two aspects .
 Russia's "hybrid" forces are actively involved in Russia's fighting, and costs in Russia. First, it is necessary to count how much direct fighting is involved .
 This is the direct cost of war, and obviously, it will not be too high on a state level . This is not too high. This is a state-level war, but it will be the direct costs of war .
 Russia's food embargo, imposed by Russia asymmetrically, with inflation and devaluation, with the fall of the economy . It is important to analyze the indirect cost, which is associated with the sanctions imposed on Russian banks and companies .
Militants' current maintenance costs include food, accommodation, medical care and so on . The cost of maintenance and repair of equipment used in the combat zone, as well as ammunition .
 The monthly maintenance of the local "volunteers" is three to four times cheaper . The cost of their maintenance for 10 months amounts to 25 billion rubles .
 The direct costs of the ‘volunteers’ amounts to 46 billion rubles for the 10 months of the war, or 4. billion Rubles a month . In total, the direct costs for the “volunteer’s’
 15% of the cost on the exploitation, repair and maintenance of military equipment, its transportation from the Russian warehouses another 7 billion rubles .
 All the ammunition used by the separatists, were designed for older types of weapons, were taken from warehouses, and are no longer produced in Russia .
 All the military equipment, destructed or damaged in the Donbass will not be restored by any repairs or purchases of additional pieces of military equipment .
 The direct costs of Russia on the war in the east of Ukraine for 10 months amounted to about 53 billion rubles . The cost of Russia's war on the Ukraine war amounted to around 53 billion Rubles .
 The annual expenditures of the federal budget of Russia is 15 billion rubles . The annual budget of the Russian government is $15 billion .
Hundreds of thousands of houses, social facilities and transport infrastructure were destroyed by the war in the Donbas .
 The fighting is not over, but it is not possible to estimate the scale of the destruction even roughly . But while the fighting isn't over, it is still not possible.
 Russia will not be able to recover from the war expenses . It is impossible to say now, what Russia will suffer from the expenses .
 Large numbers of refugees people cannot live with the constant risk of their lives, for the lives of their children . However, any war is also accompanied with the appearance of large number of refugees .
 There lived about 7 million people in the Lugansk and Donetsk regions of the Ukraine before the war . There were about 7million people in Lugansk.
 The data of the official Ukrainian and Russian authorities on the number of refugees strongly differs . The data is based on the data from the Russian and Ukrainian authorities .
 The UN estimates that about 1 million people left the entire conflict area in the spring of 2015 . About 1 million left the whole conflict area.
 The number of refugees has practically ceased to grow since last November . The number has almost ceased to growing since last year .
 UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs says number of refugees leaving for other regions of Ukraine is equal to 150 . About one and a half million Ukrainian refugees in the different regions of Russia .
 maintenance of Ukrainian refugees costs 12 billion rubles a month to the regional budgets . Since July 2014 this figure amounted to about 80 billion Rubles . This means that the maintenance of the Ukrainian refugees cost 12 billionRubles per month .
 Crimea will bring the standard of living and economic development in the Crimea to the average . The Crimea will be the first time the Crimea has been fully integrated into the Crimea .
 On March 31, 2014, President Putin signed a decree on increasing pensions of the Crimean to the average level . The decree was signed by President Putin.
 Prior to the annexation to Russia, the size of their pension was 5504 rubles . Prior to Russia's annexation, it was 5503 rubles.
 Since mid-2014 the size of the pension has been 10670 rubles in the Crimea and 1 1680 in Sevastopol . The size of a pension is 10670 in Crimea.
Financing of Crimean pensions is made at the expense of the Pension Fund of Russia . Financing of the Crimean pension funds is made in the Crimean region .
 Russian pensioners are now dependent on pension contributions made by a pensioner during his tenure . The pension reform was implemented in 2013, determining the size of payments to the pensioners is transferred to a point system .
 Crimean pensioners made their contributions to the Ukrainian pension system . It is clear that the payment of their pensions will be carried out by reducing the pensions paid to Russian pensioners .
 The government program has a small section on the costs which are to be financed through the so-called extra-budgetary sources .
 Sergei Chemezov should finance the construction of thermal power plants in the Crimea . For example, "Techpromexport" is a subsidiary of state corporation ""Rostec"
 All the investments for the construction of thermal power plants and the related income will be returned at the expense of the allowances for the consumers of the European part of Russia and Ural for energy .
 The result of the Kremlin's foreign policy was the introduction of western sanctions against Russian officials, businessmen and companies who supported the operation in the Crimea .
 It is difficult to estimate the damage of such measures, as a ban on the supply of equipment and components for military production .
 The Russian government says it will deter the production of domestic enterprises . But it is obvious that it will reduce the earnings of the Russians, it says .
 Personal sanctions against Putin's friends led to the freezing of their assets . Putin's friend's assets were frozen by the sanctions .
Some did it at the expense of administrative redistribution of the market . Some did it by the decree of the Governor of St. St.
 The accounts of a number of municipal companies were transferred to the bank ""Russia" Main shareholder of the bank is one of Putin's friends on the cooperative “Ozero" Yuri Kovalchuk .
 The banks which were Putin's friends and fell under the sanctions would receive tens of billions of rubles from the National Welfare Fund . They do not meet the criteria for the selection of banks, approved by the Ministry of Finance .
 Russian borrowers had to increase the demand for foreign currency on the domestic market in the autumn of 2014 . This led to a precipitous drop in the ruble exchange rate and inflation surge .
 Putin banned the import of agricultural products, raw materials and food from the EU, US, Australia, Canada, Canada and Norway .
 This triggered a reduction in supply in the market and increase in prices . This triggered an increase in supply and prices in the world .
 Russia has the largest reserves of arable land, but its agriculture cannot feed its population . Russia has a large population of about 20 million people .
 In 2013, 70% of fruits and berries, 41% of beef, 28% pork, 23% of dairy products were imported to the Russian market . The Russian market is the largest in the world .
 imports of meat and dairy products fell by 26%, of fish 48% compared to those in 2013 . Putin's decision already in the third quarter of 2014, in Russia .
 It shows the inflation rate of the services, non-food products, food products, and food products . The inflation rate shows the growth of the food products and services .
Almost 80% of the acceleration was connected with the devaluation of the ruble . 20% with the ban on food imports, according to the Bank of Russia .
 The devaluation of the ruble is not only because of the sanctions, but also the fall in oil prices . It is clear that the devaluation is not the only reason for the fall .
 The cost for the confrontation with the Ukraine for the citizens of the Russian Federation became an additional price increase of 5.5% over the year after the Crimea .
 Putin is a very shrewd man, according to the European Union Foreign Affairs Journal .
 Russian tank soldier from Buryatia, Dorji Batomunkuev, wounded near Debaltseve . Come on, explained in simple language what was going on in a simple language .
 In Russia there are training camps for militants, convoys of tanks move in the direction of the Ukrainian border . separatist leaders agree the actions in the Kremlin .
 Putin shakes his head with confidence to the direct questions . Churkin angrily denies all the accusations against the Kremlin at the UN Security Council .
 Neither Putin nor his generals had the courage to recognize the fact of the armed aggression against Ukraine . Neither Putin or his generals were willing to take responsibility for the aggression .
 Fain thearted lies and hypocrisy are portrayed as a great political wisdom . Fainthearted lies are portrayed by the British Prime Minister as great wisdom .
 We will pay for this venture with the lives of our soldiers, the economic crisis and political isolation . We'll pay for it with our soldiers' lives, the military says .
 There is no nation in the word closer and more related to the Russian nation than the Ukrainians .
 The war between the Russians and Ukrainians in the Donbass cannot be characterized otherwise than fratricidal . They are our brothers without pathos, and the war is not a war between Russia and Ukrainians, says the author .
 HeMH,OB noOenonocno CMOTpeji Ha Ok'py/KaiOLHnx, KaK oh ncnan Ka>KHbiH pa3, Koraa eMy npnxoflHJia b roji
 CBpana oh 6biJi y6HT Ha BojibmoM MocKBopeipcoM MOCTy.aBepuiHTb ncno HeMu,OBa B3anricb ero copaTHHKH, npy
 ConepacaHHe, pyxonHCHbie 3aMeTKH, noKyMcm bi — Bee, hto oh ocTaBHJi, 6buio Hcnojib30BaHO npn iiohi'Ot
 Hama Banana — paccKa 3 aTb npaBny o BMemaTejibCT be KpcMJia b yKpaHHCKyio nojiHTHKyio . KOTopoe npHBejio k Bomie, K
 HaxaHyHe npe 3 HneHTCKHx BbiSopoB 2012 rona B 03 HHKJia BcpoamocTb, hto noSmbca noScnbi b nepBOM Type eMy He y
Hau,HajibHoro JiHnepa. PyKOBonHTb CTpaHoir b npHBbiHHOM eMy aBTopHTapHOM CTHJie c no 3 Hu,HH. Hau, hau, H
 TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 . Eufaj.eu: eufaj @ libertas-institut .
 BepHyBHiHCb, no HToraM BbiSopoB, b npcBnacmcKOC Kpecjio, nyTHH iipunna pna nonyaHCTCKHx pememiHx
 K TOMy ace hciiojiijiiiciihc: 3a6yxcoBajio, h ciiycia roa nyTHH noaBcpi npaBHicjibciBO nySannHOH xp
 K aery 2013 roaa ciajio OHCBnano, hto Tpaanu, HOHHbie icxiiojioihm, oScciicwHBaBiHuc noiiyjiapnoci b nymHa Ha n
 Cyaa no BceMy, Kpcvuib Bcepbe3 oSecnoxoHaca HeraTHBHaeHu, heH h nawaa pa6ory Haa upHiinHajibiio hobmmh cnocoSaMH y
 Cu,eHapnH: B03Bpaiiici. HecoMHeHHO: 6bia ciuiaunpoBan h 'iniaicjibiio iioaroiOBJicn BJiacraxiH PO 3apaHee.
 IlpoaBHJi jioajibnoc'i b h xpbiMCXHH 6n3Hec, noaynaBiroaHbie xpeanTbi ot pocchhcxhx SaiiKOB Ha Hepbi
 KpoMe Toro, npeanpHHHMajiHCb aoaroBpcMcmibic ycHJiHa no ocaaSaciiHio yxpaHHCXOH sxohomhxh h ee iiohh
 Pci yjiapno HanHHajiHCb. Bohhw, BBoanancb h o i McnajHCb npoayKTOBbie 3M6apro. PciyapnoHanjajhb:  Bohhw.
 OcyuicciBJiajica HenpHxpbiTbiH HaacHM Ha yxpaHHCxne BJiacTH aaa npHiiy>xacnHa hx x ynacTHio YxpaHHbi bo
 IlpHCOcaHiiciiHC KpbiMa k Pocchh, aKTHBHO noflflepacaHHoe rocyaapcxBcmiOH nponai anaoH, no3BOJiHJio Ily
 OanaKO KpbiMOM hcjio He orpaHHHHjiocb, h BCKope Ha TeppHTopHH panonoB, hBCKopeHa TepphtopHH PanonoB .
 KaK CJieayCT H3 MaicpnajiOB npeaciaBJicmioio jioKJiana, aKTHBHyio nojiHTHHecKyio, a Taicace npfl\iyio BoeHHyio Boe
 IlepBaa Tpa TpaKTOBKa coctoht b tom, hto kpmmckhh ycnex y6cnnji iipcBHHema PO b totobhocth pyccKO.3biHHbix o
 CnoacHBrnaaca cmyaumi MOTHBHpoBajia IlyTHHa HCKaTb nOJIHTHHeCKHH BIXO/I H3 KpH3HCa, UCCMOipa Ha O
 IIpeKpameHHe oraa b /lonSaccc, KOTopoe ciioeoScii rapaHTHpoBaTb KpeMJib, movkct CTaTb ocHOBaHobaHHeM
 TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 . Eufaj.eu: eufaj @ libertas-institut.eu .
 OTKa3 ot TaKOH noa/jepaocH MoaceT 6biTb Bocupniiai KaK npcaarcjibCTBO HbiHeniHHx ctopohhhkob IlyTHHa h ciiocoSen
 Bo-BTopbix, npoTecTOB, KOTopbie MoryT BHOBb, noaopBai b peHTHHr uiaBbi Pep. H3aacr phckh coifHajibH
HaKOHeu,, oaiaOjicnnc no3Hu,HH IlyTHHa Ha mhpoboh ape. He h 3CKajiau, Ha pocchhckoyKpaHHCKoro KOHtJwiHKTa
H3MeHeHHe nioSaabiiOM hojihthhcckoh CHTyau,HH BnojiHe MoaceT 3a.HHTbc. H3MeHHeNio Saabiiom hojibHbiM o
 Jloacb h nponaraHja Hcjiobck, KOTopbiH peiHHT onHcaTb nojiHTHHecKyio xapbepy BjiaaHMHpa IlyTHHa, ctojiki
 MoacHO TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 BnpoMCM, caMH npoiiaii aiiaHC'i bi He CKpbiBajiH, hto b. Hto b: MHpHoe BpeMa. ohh paSo'iaior He Ha nojiHy
 CaMbiil nejiOBeHHbiH cobctckhh npa3£HHK CTaji maBHbiM Hau,HOHajibHbiH. Hau, HohajibhbiM npaaanHKOM nymHCKOH
 PnTopHKa BoeHHbix JieT OKa3ajiacb cnpoeifHpoBaHa Ha TCKyuiMC nojnrmHecKecKHe hobocth. Pn topH Ka BoeHHBix. J
HCTCKaa pHTopHKa, Hcnojib3yeMa: 0HLi,HajibHbiMH CMH, nepeBeaa iiojihi hmcckmh KpH3HC Ha a3biK
 BbiacHHJiocb, hto repoHHa cio>KCTa. Aance nnKoraa He SbiBana b CnaBaHCKe. Cna BaHCKe . CnaBana is a former
 CTOpOHHHKH BJIBCTH 3aTOBOpHJIH 0 MaKapCBHHC KaK 0 Bpare Pocchh h TpeSoBajiH jTH iu HTb ero rocynapcTB
 TaKaa ayaHTopna He noBepHT b ronocnoBiibic hctophh o «pacnaTOM ManbHHKe» h ipcSyci 6 ojicc TOHKoro noaxoaa. noaTOM
 TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 . Eufaj.eu: eufaj @ libertas-institut.eu .
 Koi a a 3 to Bee aaKoimmoi, Pocchh cmc aojii o npHACTCH npHxoAHTb b ce6x, H36aBJiaacb ot 3 thhcckhx h iiO
 TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 .
C^opMnpoBajin b OaTajibomiolaKi HMCCKMC rpynnw n OTnpaBHJin Ha caMOJieTax b AHany. C^opmnpo Bajin is the name
 H 3 Anaiibi Ha: Hac nepeSpocHJiH b Hobopocchhck, Hacneibi Ha : Hac NepeSpoSpochck. HacNepeiHjiH: Hacnei
 B KancciBC ochobhoh aanami HaM nocTaBHJiH pacnojioacHTbca h 6 biTb roTOBbiMH k BbinojiHeHHio jiioSoi jiIOSo
 BcKope Hama opm aiia nepeexajia b nocejioK IlepeBajibHoe, paAOM c KOTopbiM Mbi pa36HJiH najiaTOHHbiii Jiare
 B to ace Bpcvia, Ha TCPmopmo KpbiMa nanajiH aKTHBHO aaxoAHib namit BoeHHbie. B-to ace B- to ace.
 Ohh C03,uaBaj, 3ACCb He Hanajiocb Maiiaana. H ytcpciuicnna h opraHH30BbiBajiH naTpyjiH, hto 6 bi, He nail Bor, 3 ACC
 HaKaHyHe peepeiiAyMa Hac npcAyupcAHJiii, hto oyACT oObaBJicna TpeBora hcoOxoahmo 6biTb HaroTOBe. HaKaKaHy he peepe
 O'l'MCTHM, HTO OnHCaHHbie r HpKHIIblM CoOblTHB, HpHIIBLHHx oS'bCKiOB b KpbiMy, BJHonaa B
 To ecTb HepnoMopcKnii cbohmh Ba/iaiaMii cnpaBHJica — 6buiH flocTaBJieHbi — 6 buiHflocTaHbi. To ectb Hep
 B HHTepBbio ajih jiOKyMcmajibiioro (iHJibia) is a Jibia . B HhtepBio is a jiokyMcMajibioro .
 Mbi iiMKOEiia He 3aHHMajiHCb ^cc ra6Mj[H3auMCM oScxaiiOBKM Ha Y Kparnic h He 3aaBHJi, b nacTHOCTH
 IIpecc-ceKpeTapb iipc3nucm a PO ^mhtphh IlecKOB, BbicTynaa Ha KpyrjiOM CTOJie b TACC 31 MapTa 2015 roua, xau
 OanaKO cjiOBa pocchhckhx hhhobhhkob onpoBepraioT MHoroHHCJieHHbie CBMucxcjibcxBa npHcyrcTBHa cojiuaT h oHu
 Bepcnio o tom, hto poccHHCKHe cojiflaTbi h oHu,epbi BoeBajiH b ^OH6acce jieTOM 2014 roaa, B3BB '3aKOHHbie OTny
 Bepcna 06: AKTHBHO pacnpoc'ipanajiacb h Ha IlepBOM Kanajic pocchhckoto tcjicbmaciimh, me, HanpHMep, 4 ccmaSpa
BaTb b Oocbbix acmctbhxx bo Bpevia omycKa. Ba>KHO OTMeTHTb, HTO BOeHHbIM, lipOXOAHlHHM CJiy>K6y no KOHTpa
Ecjih OTnycx npoBOflHTca 3 a rpaHHiieH, to HyacHO nojiyimb pa3pemeHHe, to "Hyac HO nojiYimb pa 3pemeh"
 CnycTa HexoTopoe Bp cm is a Mhhhctcpctbo o6opoHbi PcD nbiTajiocb onpoBepraTajocb. BKJHOHaa is also a Mhhctcp
 CTapuiHH cepacaHT reHepajiOB Ajickccm HHKOJiaeBHH — 3aMecTHTejib KOMaiuiupa biboab; MJiaamnii cepacHT CaBOCTeeB Bjia
 Xoxjiob 3a. Xoxjiaob 3 a. JlyraiicKyio oSjiacib .
 Ilo ero cjiOBaM, ohh 6biJiH HaMepeHbi npHcoe. Iloero cjiaM cenapaTHCTOB b na#c>K#c Ha 6ojiee me#poe
 JeCaHTHHK K03JI0B B cenraSpe 2014 ro#a CTajio h3bcctho o BoeHHOCJiyacameM 31 -oil OT#ejibHOH rBap#eiHTypMOBO
 O cy#b6e napna. O cy #a #a#a Cepreii Ko3jiob. Ocy#a#A#a ceprei Ko3job .
 CorjiacHO ziamibiM BoeHHoro KOMHceapnaia 03epcKa, 2 1 -jictiihh HHKOJiaM Ko3jiob, aBTOMexaHHK no eneifHajibHOCTH
 Ko3jiob npHHHMaji ynacTHe b onepau,H»x Ha TeppHTopHH YKpaHHbi c caMoro nanajia npoTHBOCToaHHa. Ko3job np HHHMaji
 B MapTe 2014 ro#a oh ynacTBOBaji b 6jiOKHpoBaHHH pocchhckhmh BO eHHbIMH oS'bCKTOB B KpbIMy.My. B Mapte 2014 ro
 The world's most popular TV show, "The Biggest Show," airs on Sunday at 8 p.m. ET. ET . The show is hosted by CNN.com's iReport.com .
 Ilo cjiOBaM #a#H flecaHTHHKa, 3to (Jjoto c^ejiaHO b Kopnflope KpbiMCKoro BepxoBHoro coBeTa, b SjiOKn
 Ilo HToraM onepau,HH oh Bcpnyjica,HHoh b YjibaHOBCK, 6bui Harpaac#eH Mcaajibio. IloHToraM. Onepau is a one-pau
 Ko3jiob npnHHMaji ynacTne b oocbbix hcmctbhhx Ha npoTsaceHHH flByx iichcjib. Ko3jib npn HHMaji Ynactne b.
 Co CJIOB pOHC'IBCmiHKOB, OH BBIIIOJIIHIJI, B HaCTHOCTH, SoCBbIC BanailHH no HOnaBJIClIHIO apTHJIJiepH
 Kaic paccKa3aji Ccprcfi Ko3jiob, orpiut ero miCMamniKa nonaji b lacaay, KOi /ia iibn ajica ot6htb njieHHbix cocjiy
 Ilocjie oioio oh 6biji nepenpaBJieH ncpc3 rpaHHuy, OKa3ajic and poctobckom rocmrrajie h no3>Ke nepenppaBjieH
 BoeHHOcjiyacamiie noj bhjom joSpoeojibueB Ilocjie aBrycTOBCKoro koiii piiacTyiuiciimi cenapaTHCTOB h Macicii pocchh
 Ilo HToraM KOHcyjibTan,HH CTopoHaM ynajiocb aoroBopmbcx o npeKpameHHH oraa, hto 3aMopo3HJio kohcJjj
 CjicayiOHjan aKTHBHaa c.a3a Socbwx hchci bhh naiajiacb b KOHH,e 2014 ro.ua.ua .
 Koppccnoiuicmy H3flaHH a yaajlOCb B3»Tb HHTepBblO y HCTBCpbIX KOHTpaKTHHKOB apMHH PcD, KOTOpbie noflTBep
 KpoMe Toro, cojuiai bi aanBium, hto b otjimhmc ot jieTHeii HHTepBeHu,HH pocchhckoh apMHH, Kor.ua BoeHHbie Hacra nepe
 A nOMOTaTb MbI flOJDKHbl no BCeM nOHHTHHM, HOHMCpKIiyjl B CBOeM BbICTynJieHHH 0.HHCp. A.H
 Aiyiac ihScjih hjih pancnna pocchhckhx bociii (OCJ iy/KaniHx) is aiyiac Ihscjih bocii (OHHMaj) iaK/
 CanO>KHHKOB XBJIHCTOI ipa>Knai. Cano>K HHKOBXBJiJibua. CanO-KHHkOB XbJiHCToIipa. Iipa
Tax, oiiMCbiBaa bixoh CBoero noapaaaejiciiHM H3 OKpyaceHHa y cejia JIotbhhobo, CanoacHHKOB yKa3biBaeT Ha noMonj
 Co. Co CTOpOHbl JIHP 3aXOflHJIH TaHKH H pOCCHHCKHe noapa3aejiciiH>i.to poccHHCKaa apMHH, Sypaibi.to
 IlOfl Xlc XlcSajIbHCBblM CTOHJia 6 yp, TaM 6 bIJIH OflHH Sypaibi. IflHHSypaibi is the name of a group of young people who
 Mhc nacTO npHxoflHJiocb naxoaiTibca nptt inraSc, npHe3>KaTb, /lOKJiaabiBaib KaKyio-io HHopMau,H
 Ohh BMecTe Bee oio npnayMbiBaioT is a Mbi BbinojiH»eM» — nonwcpKnyji 6 ocbhk.
 The world's most famous names have been listed as "BoeHHbiii ohjic'i 2609999.
 O cbocm ynacTHH b 6oax b /lon6accc oh paccKa3aji /KypnajitiCTKC . EjieHe Koc'iiomciiko, iiaxoaacb b ojk
 CoSeCeflHHKHH HeMU, co CCblJIKOH Ha pO,UC'I BCm. CoSecefl HHKH He MU, coCCblJikoh Ha po, coccbl. MaccoBO p
 OAHOBpCMCIIIIIIO OHH ^aBajIH IIOAIIHCKM 0 Hepa3rjiameHHH 0 Hep a3rjame HHH no a yrpo30H yrojiOBHoro npccji
Hu,HajibHO yBOJibiiajincb H3 Boopy/Kcmibix chji no i pcOoBaiiHio pyKOBOACTBa. B otjihhhc ot nponuioro roAa Ha 3
 TaKHM o6pa30M, luianripoBajiocb cKpbiTb ynaci HC iiamcn apMHH b 6 oax, BbiCTaBJiaa BoeHHbix AoSpoSpoBO
 Kaic yBepaiOT hctohhhxh HeMit,OBa, rpoMKoe yroaoBHoe aeao npoTHB MiioioaernoH Marcpn CBcniaiibi ^aBiaoBOH .
 Bojicc toto, yStiMCTBO Bopuca HeMu,OBa ySeanno hx OTxa3aTbca ot jhoSbix rpc. SoBaiiMH k pocchhcxhm BJiacTa
 Hhkto h He 3aMeTHT. HHTepecbi ccmch aByx norH6uiHx aeeaHTHHKOB. rjiaea 5. Hhtepeac raBJHiiouiHH H
 PeryjiapHbie nacTH pocchhckoh apMHH bo mhotom npcaonpcacjiMJin BoeHHbie ycnexH eenapaTHCTOB Ha boctoxc YKpaHHbi. Ykpa
 Oanaxo 3a 3aMeTHyio pojib b Boopy/Kcmibix ctuiax. H3 Pocchh b 30Hy Boopy-xcmioi o xoHtJniHXTa. JIHP
 TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 . www.eufaj.eu.com .
 IIpoii,ecc npHBJieneHHa h OTnpaBKH: "Oujcci Bcmibix opraHH3au,HH, HH, b hbcthocth, cbok" iioaTBcpa
 Oocbmkob aaiacxyiokbjuiiotcji BoeHKOMaTbi b pocchhckhx ropoaax .
 Ilo ero CBHaeTejibCT by, BcpSoBKa poccnan b paabi . Bcp soBKa is a paabi. BCP soB Ka is a poccan b paab . BCP SoBKa was a p
 HanpaBJieiiHC, 6ocboc 3aaaHHe h OponcTCxnnKy ohh nojiynaioT HenocpeacT HenOCpeac TBeHHO nepeecMCiiHCM rpaHHifw.
 J33tas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 Baaoioe CBmicrcjibCTBO npcaciaBHJi Bcp soBiunK. BcpSoBiunk. BCPSoBiUNK: H3 EKaicpniiSypia, pyKOBoaH'ic
 IIo caoBaM uiaBbi MecTHoro othcjiciihh 3toh opraHH3au,HH MHxaHJia KojiMaKOBa, nonoSnwc oxpH,xw oxnpa
 Cnapa,unjin tomckhx aoSpoBOJibucB Ha ^ciibiH enoHeopoB, HMeHa KOTopbix opraHH3aTopbi OTnpaBKH npcanoHmaiox
 Co6paHHbie CBHflexejibcxBa noa i Bcp/Kaaiox, hxo anaMH i cjibiiaa nacxb pocchhckhx Socbhkob b ^OHS acce 6bi
 BnpoMCM, poecHHCKKHe, bnpo MCM, pnpoCKHx, pxxHx and pxhx hchctbhhx Ha cxopoHe . Pxxx
Tax, b OKxaSpe 2014 i oaa 6biJio B036yameH0 yrojiOBHoe acjio npoxHB acHxejia Mockbw PoMaHa >Kcj[C3i[OBa, Kox
 KajbipoBUbi 3 aMexHyio pojib b BOopyaceHHbix cnjiax cenapaxHcxoB nxpaex iionojineiiHe, iipn 6 wBaiomcc Ha
 TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 . eufaj.eu.com.
Spamibic CBHHC'icJibciBa'i, hto iiomoTOBJicnnbic b ero CHJiOBbix CTpyKTypax Socbmkh npHHHMaiOT aKTHBHoe yn
 Ero kOMamiup Aackcaiuip AackCaiiip XoflaKOBCKHH 1 mioiih 2014 rofla noai BepaHJi, hto bcciioh iioh ero nanajiOM
 BnpoMCM, HOKasaicjibC'i Ba npHcyTCTBHa TeppHTopHH Ha TepphtopHH YKpaHHbi BOopyaceHHbix hcmciickhx SoeBHKOB no
 Tax, 26 Maa 2014 ro^a 6bmo oSHapoflOBaHO BH^eo, CHHToe Ha MHTHHre ctopohhhkob. Tax.
 HaM MHHa nonajia nofl flHHme, Hac nepeBepHyao, OTopBaao iiepeaiiHC KOJieca . Hacnebephyao is the name of a non-fatal flHH
 AHP Ajickcaiuip Bopoaaii 3aaBHJi, hto cpe/m iioi hSlhhx 26 Maa 6buio ono3HaHO 33 rpaamamma Pocchh .
 OnepeflHoe MaccoBoe nonojiHeHHe HeneHCKHx Socbhkob b aBrycTe 2014 roaa, koraa Hanajiacb MaciHiaSiiaa onepau,Ha pocchh
 Ha kanpax 3aHKCHpoBaH anajioi SoeBHKOB Ha MCMCMCMCKOM a3biKe iiepea kojiohhoh TaHKOB h apyi oii 6poiiCTCxiinkn.
HHHiajuiax! — OTBCHaer MexaHHK-BOflHTeJIb B COJIHU,e3amHTHbIX OHKBX, BblCyHyBHIHHCB H3 JHOKa
 OanaKO hh o#hh h 3 opraHOB He aaji nojiHTHKy OTBeTa. 30 aBrycTa oOnapoaoBano Bnaco, Taxace cua ioc o#hm h3 Ka^b
 CBMacicJibci Ba npHcyrcTBHa BoopyaceHHbix mcmciihcb b paaax eenapaTHCTOB. I bCH C CHCTeMHOH nepHOflHHHOCTbK. 12 jfeKa
 CpeflH ynacTHHKOB stoto Oaiajibona, no npH3HaHHio ero KOMananpoB, no.Kom pojibitbic PaM3aHy KaabipoBy. Cpe
J33tas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
Bixoanbi H3 cneu,Ha3a, iipHHCM SojibuiHiici BO H3 hhx HMeiOT l Ocyaapci Bcmibic naipaabi. IIo eTO CJIOBa
 IIo ero CJIOBaM, orpaa 6a3npycrca b ropoac Kpacnoaon h oSeciiCHHBacT ero naTpyjiHpoBaHHe. IIoero er
 C caMoro iianajia xoHtJtJiHXTa poccnHCKne BJiacTH CTapaTejibHO CKpbiBajiH aamibic o iioi hOuihx H a Tepp
Tax, 2 mona 2014 roaa (JiOToacypHajiHCT Maprta TypneHXOBa onySaHxOBajia penopTaac o ncpeccMCiiHH yicpaHHCKO-pocc
 PoccHHexoe rpaacaaHCTBO iioi hOhihx noaTBcparia, b hbcthocth, pyKOBoamcab caMonpoB03rjiameHHOH flHP Aacxcan
 OaxTHnecxH 3 to CTaao nepBbiM aoKyMcmajibiibiM. 1 to CTAao NepbbiM 1 toCTaao NepibbiM . 1 to TlonOaccc. 3 to
 TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 . Eufaj.eu: eufaj .
 A6pocHMOB lOpHH OenopoBHH, 1982 rona po>KfleHHa.a,qoKyMeHTHpoHa raSejib h JKnaHOBHna Ceprea EopncoBHH
 BoeHHbie bjibcth. PcD oSbaBJiajin y6mbix cojinax iioi hShihmh Ha yncnnax b Poctobckoh oSjibcih. Bjibch
IlepBbie CBHHCTCJIbCIBa. Ilepbbie CBHCTC JleB LLDiocSepr. JlebbieCBHCTcIBa . IlePBbie. I
 IlpaBnoH OKa3ajiocb nepBoe coo6meHHe, o hcm CBuncrcjibCT byiOT iiohbhbhjhcch b Bbi6yrax MorHJibi ncKOBCK
 Mhhhctp oSopoHbi Ccpi cil IHoray h KOMaiinyiomHH B/(B BnanHMHp IUaMaHOB yraepacnaiOT, hto 76-a nHBH3na. He
 BymHH cnyacHJi bohhcxoh nacTH N°73612, xoTopaa iiocioamio iiHCJiOHupycTCH b YnbaHOBCxe, h 6bui 3aec
 BojibmHHCTBO noraOmHx cjiyacmiH b rurm nacTHx B^B, cociaBJHnomHx MHpoTBopnecxHH xopnyc PO o6mcii H
 Ilo uamibiM pouHbix, yexajin Ha ywcnna b PocroBCkyio oSjiaci b PocoBCkyIO oSjaci b h noi nSjin 25 aBrycTa. 98 -
 MecTHbie CMH nncajin o tom, hto moto CT p ejiKH Ba^HM JIapHOHOB, KoHCTaHCTH Ky3bMHH, Mapcejib ApanraHOB, Bac
 Ajicxcaiuip BapaHOB, Ccprcii Bojikob, BacHJiHH repacHMnyx, Ajickcch Kapnemco, TjieyacaH KHHH6aeB, Jleomm
 Oh iioipcOoBaji npoBepHTb HiK. Oh IioipCOoMauMio o i mScjim Ha TeppHTopHH YxpaHHbi pocchhcxhx BOcmi
 Pobho ncpc3 Mccau Bopnc HeMH, a r cucpajibiiaa npoxypaTypa Tax h He OTBeTHJia Ha 3anpoc nojiHTHxa. rjiaea 7. Jia
 BoeHTopr BjiajHMHpa IlyTHHa Bbiciyiiaa ncpeji /xypnajiHCiaMH 4 MapTa 2014 rojia, Bjia^HMHp IlyTHH onpoBepr ynac
 Cero/pia Tax Ha3biBaeMbie: "onojiHemi,bi 71oii6acca" ia h caMoe pa3HOo6pa3Hoe crpcjiKOBOC opy>XHe"
 The European Union Foreign Affairs Journal is a special edition of the EU Foreign Affairs journal .
 HaciriHHKauMHtcxiihkh, KOTopaa nocTynaeT Ha Boopyacemie cenapaTHCTOB H3 naciCH apMHH PcD, ocjiO/Knacica TeM
 B to ace BpcxiM xapaKTep Oocbbix uchctbiih hx hhtchbhoctb He /loiiycKaior hhoto B apnama, KpoMe iiocroMiinoro o6
 TaKHM o6pa30M, oflHH o6pHnacoB ajih o^Horo 3ajina cocTaBJiaeT 6ojiee 2 tohh.TaKHM O6p30M.
 B cjiynac HHTeHCHBHbix Socbbix hcmctbmh (xax 3to 6biJio b panouc ,H,e6ajibii,eBa b Hanajie 2015 ro^a) TaK
 Oc'iacica onpeacjiH i b, ckojibkhmh TaHKaMH h PC30 pacnonaraioT eenapaTHCTbi. Oc’iacica.H ib, c Kojibkmh
H3 3Toro KOJiHMcei Ba, 26 ETP, 19 CAY, 17 6yKcnpyeMbix opy^nn, 2 PC30 fjbijin aaxBaMCiibi cenapaTHCTaM
 Tla’s/KC ecjiH couiacH i bca c THnoTe30H, hto eenapaTHCTbi boioiot Ha Tpoc. Tla'/KC EcjiH CouiacH is the name of the couiac
 HanpHMep, b noKJianc mypnpyiOT BbiCTpejibi k pyMiiOMy npoTHBOTaHKOBOMy rpaHaTOMeTy Pnr-7, H3 MapKHpOB
 CooSmaeTca Taicace, hto b pyKH yKpaHHCKHX BoeHHbix nonaji pyHHoil oraeMeT MPO-A, ocnaiHcmibiii icp m o6op h m
MKCMpoBaj: Ha yjiHu,e OSopohhoh ncpc,e oaa BHacopcrncipaiop 3ac . The "RiaHu,Hpb-Cl" is the name of one of the
 CoBepmeHHO oneBHAHO, hto 3Ta TexHHKa Moraa nocTynHTb b floHSacc. ToJibKO nepe3 pocchhoyKpaHHCKyio rpaHHu,y.
 IIoCTaBKH B 0 Opy>KeHHH B 30Hy KOI lJ[ HK'i a IICB03M0/KII0 paccMaTpHBaTb mianc, xax BoeHHoe BMem
 TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 . Eufaj.eu: eufaj @ libertas-institut.
 H SoeBHKH, h poccHHCKHe CMH Ha3biBaiOT MecTO ero KpymeHHa (paiiOH ropoaa Tope3 TIoiicukoh oSjiacxH) H Bp
 Omiako k Bcicpy, kor.ua pcajibiiaa KapTHHa cjiyHHBineroca iipoacnac'ica, nouoSiibic aaaBJicnna upckpamaiOTca
EcJIH 3TO 6bIJI KOI 6bijya, 3TO He 6biJi aKT TeppopH3Ma. — cica3aji Hypkiin . — cICA3ajihypkiin. — — c
 KaK 3aMeTajiH cjiejbi nocjie i hScjih Eohht poccHHCKHe CMH iianajiH 3a apyi oii pa3JiHHHbie BepcHH cjiy
 H,ejibio cneu,onepaH,HH, cyua no BceMy, ciajio coKpbiTHe npHHacTHOCTH k Tpareumi eenapaTHCTOB, BOopyaceHHb
 L Icpe3 neTbipe ana nocjie KpymeHHa: "NepBbiil KaHaji" "PoccHHCKoro TejiCBnucnna" "Eohht obiji c6ht ynpamiC
 B icoaaaace 6bmo Hcnoab30BaHO oto Boemioro caMoaeTa, noxoacero Ha Cy-27, a b peiiop ia’s/KC:  nepBoro KaH
 Aaponop i HoncuKa is a EoHHr 6bia c6ht npHMepHO b 50 KHaoMeTpax ot Hero. Ha is a aaponop.
 BpeMa, yKa3aHHoe Ha noa^e^eJibiiOM Koaaaace — UTC — oio BceMHpHO CKOopawiHpoBamioe B peMa — Bpe Ma no rpHHBHH
 PaccJiejoeaHHe CTpaHbi, noTepaBnine cbohx i paacaan b otoh 'iparcanH, kuk hhkto apyron, 3aHHTepecoBaHbi
 B hbcthocth, /xypnajiHCTbi HeMeifXHx TenexaHajiOB WDR h TBK, a Taxxce ra3e.Tbi SiidDeutsche Zeitung noSbiBajin 6
 Cjieji Haj Tope3QM HoKyMcmajibiibiM 1 i our Bcp vktic i 1 m c m toto, hto Majia3HHCXHH, c6ht paxeTOH KJiacca.ua
 Ha OTorpaHax 3anenaTieH HHBepcHOHHbiH cjicu ot paxeTbi Ha caMOM paHHeM, CTapTOBOM ynacTKe ee TpaexTopHH.
 Hcpca Hecxojibxo nacoB nocjie Kaiacipobi is a coifHajibHbix ccthx noaBHJiacb Ha co cjichom ot 3anycxa paxeTbi
 P occHHCKOMy acypHajiHCTy Cepreio IlapxoMeHKO yaajiocb iiairtH aBTopa BbnncynoManyroro oto h nojiyHHTb ot Hero op
 Becb 3tot: Mycop, nojiyHHJica npi-i cacaran nojiHopa3MepHbix opMaTa, HeoSxoanMoro fljia OTorpaHH 3aicaHKH b TBHTT
 B opniHiiajic (Jdoto ropa3ao CBeTJiee Toro Bapnama, KOTopbiH 6biJi onySjiHKOBaH 17 rnojia 2014 roaa. Jdoto op
 CxBaran ee h SpocHJicn no jiccthhhc Ha icpbimy, hto6m cna i b orryaa. lUejiKiiyji b nepBbin pa3. Cxbaran e
 IIotom iiOBepnyjica h yBHacji c apyrofi CTopoHbi, Ha ceBepe (to ecTb, Kaic pa3 b nanpaBJiciiHH TpaSoBa) ctojio r
 I1ojic3 Ha apyryio CTopoHy KpbirnH, hto6bi cna i b orryaa, rac He MemaiOT npoBoaa h aHTeHHbi. I1oHyio C topoHy
 CjicayiouiHH mar aHajiH3a — nonbiTKa ono3HaTb 3 th xapaKTepHbie ncrajiH Ha — to ecTb Ha Kaapax cnyTHHKOBOH c
 Tbkhx KaapoB b HameM pacnopaaceHHH aoBOJibiio mhoto, h ohh cacjiaiibi b OMCiib xopouieM, noapoSnoM pa3pemeHHH
 TaKaa noti-inna yno6na mi a paaMcmcima paKcmoM ycTaHOBKHi npavio c flopora MMCC'iea cbC3a Hepe3 HemnpoKyK .
 UHEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 .
 IIpH 3TOM WpHflHHeCKH KpeMJIb TaK h He npH3Haji cyBepeHHTeT caMonpoB03rjiameHHbix pecnyOjiHK h no-n
 The world's most popular TV show, "Hollywood" and "Pornography" has been shown to be more popular than any other show .
 PaHee Ha TeppwropHH YKpaHHbi noaBHJiHCb h apyiTtc poecHHCKHe rpaacaaHe, cbirpaBrnne Kwone byio pojib b opraHH
 B nacTHOCTH, wupoKyio H3BecTHoCTH. H3becoH3BecOpea OTCTaBHOH oHu,ep pocchhckhx cncucjiy/KO Hrop
 Bopoaaii h r hpkhh 3HaKOMbi He nepBbiH roa. b CBoe Bpcwa r npKnn B03rjiaBJuui aiy>K6y 6e3onacHOCTH b HHB
 IIpaBOOxpaHHTejibHbie opraHbi YKpaHHbi opra h 3 ocHOBHbix enoHeopoB SoeBHKOB Ha BOCTOKe YKPAHHbi .
 TaioKe naBno 3Haio h yBaacaio noMomHHKa npewnema BnaancaaBa CypKOBa . Bnaanancaa Ba CypkOBa is a KOTopbiil Bceraa OKa3biil
 Bjiuahmhp MaxoBHH, xoMMemripya OTCTaBKy xojijicih, iioatbcpahji, mto 3aaBjici, m to 3aabjici . Eufaj.eu
 HanpHMep, nocT 3aMMHHHCTpa 3HepreTHKH, 3aHan JIcohha CnMyHHH, paHee paOoTaBHiHH and paHooTaBhiHH . He
 Oh npa\io roBopHT, hto yrneji H3 pyxoBOACTBa, b pe3yjibTaTe AaBJicnna Kpcvnia. Oh n pa\ioroBopht, h to yr
 B Kpeivuie BOcropacecTBOBajia nonHTHHecxaa jihiihh, opHcm npoBannaa Ha MHpHbie neperoBopbi, h AJia ototo TpeSoBaj
 A HHxaxoil ctobophhbocth He npoaBJiaji h noTOMy hx ipcSoBaiiHaM He eooTBeTCTBOBaji. A HHXaxoil Ctobopophh
 Bot h 6biji Bbiny/KACii ocTaBHTb cboh nocT. — aaaBHJi r npKHH b aHBape 2015 i oaa.
 BHeuiHee ynpaBJiciinc H3 Mocxbbi, OAHaxo, He ciiocoOci byei naBCACiiHio nopa^xa Ha TeppHTopHH caMonpoB03raameHHb
 AjICKCCH M03T0B0H TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May 2015 . eufaj.eu.eu: eufj @ libertas-institut .
 CniyauHa yacacHaa, npn 3 tom ecTb CBHacicJibC'i Ba npo/iaacH ryMaHHTapHOH noMOHjH Ha pbiHKax, paccKa3
 KpoMe Toro, b 'JIHP' and 'JiHP' are all three of the names used in this article . KOTopbie acHC i Byio i BHe — flaace cnopHoro — ho xoTb Kaic
 A6xa3Hio h lO/Kiiyio OceTHK. 3to Bbic'i yiuicnHC 3anHcaHO Ha bh/ico h onySanKOBano . 3to bbic’i
 OopMajibHO oh OTBCHaeT 3 a Bonpocbi co'ipyaiiHMeci Ba c AOxaincil h IO)khoh Occrneil, ho eme npn Ha3HaneHHH oceHb
 IlpcacraBHrcjiCH OjiHacailmero OKpyaceHHa CypKOBa, nacTHOCTH, nco/inoKparno bh/icjih b Khcbc bo Bpevia peBO
 KpeMJieBCKaa nojiHTHKa b othohichkh: "JIHP" Kpailne 3aKpbiTa h Henpo3paHHa. Kpe MJB: "Kpaille 3aPailne
 OflHaKO aKTbi npaMoro peryjinpoBaHHa hojihthkh 3thx hkoObi. Ofl HaKO a KTbi nPAMoro. AKTbi NpaMoko is aKTBI npa m
 OaKTHHCCKH peHb H/ICT O C03#aHHH Ha BOCTOKe YKpaHHbi nccB/torocy/iaprcB, ynpaBjiseMbix H3 MocKB
 CoraacoBaHHe ycjiOBHH npcKpauicnHa oi na b floHSacce upononacanocb bcio noMb, npn 3tom oi.Hu,HanbHO npcac raBH ic
 KpOMe Bcero nponero, nomiHcaHHe motjio 03HanaTb hx nojiHTHHecKyio (na h He TOJibKO nojihTHHECKyio) CMepTb.
 Ty/ia ace ncpc3 HeKOTopoe BpcMa noflHajiHCb h Opancya Onnaiui, h AHrena MepkCJib .
IioncMy ohh HenpaBbi. IIo Tiai 1 1 r biM . BnanHMHp IlyTHH CKa3an KOJineraM.
 He no3ace ototo cpoxa nmicpbi cppaHu,HH h TepMaHHH yeuyT h Oonbuie nnkoi na He Bcpiiy i ca, h HHKaKHe neperoBopbi h
 BnaunMnp nyTHH Bbirnen h CHOBa Bornen b neperoBopHyio, korna no hctchcih cpoxa ynbTHMaTyMa ocraBaniicb hbc MHH
 Mhoihm h 3 6e>KeHu,eB yace iiCKyaa B03Bpaixiaxbc. H3-3a pa3pymeHHH, KOTopbiMH noABcpnincb l opoaa
 TaK, 18 aBrycTa 2014 b pe3yabTaTe oScxpcjia kojiohhbi 6eaceHii,eB co CTopoHbi cenapaTHCTOB iioi hSjioih
 KojiOHHa noA ScjibiMH (jmaraMH BbiB03HJia ScaccnucB h3 HacejieHHbix nyHKTOB XpameBaToe h HoBOCBcniOBKa.
 IIpaKTHHecKH Ha bcch TeppHTOpHH,fl,on6acca ceroAHa ycraiiOBJiciibi MHoronHCJieHHbie SjlOKIIOCTbl. IIpakTHHECK
 Ilocjie ocbo soacaciihh ototo HacejieHHoro nyHKTa ot 6ocbhkob yKpaHHCKHMH CHJIOBHKaMH, Ha CTO TeppHTOpHH 6bIJ
 Eme b nepBbie ahh 3axBaTa CaaBaHCKa h paciiojiO/KCiniOH HenoAaJieKy f opjiobkh b peKe 6biJi o6napyaccii Tpyn Meem
 A nocne nbiTOX h yOnHCTBa BbiOpocHJiH Tpyn b penxy. Ero 3aaepacajiH oocbhkhhcxhx cneii;cnyac6 Hropa
 HeMajio npHMepoB, xoraa cenapaTHCTbi 3aaepacHBaaH, noasepraJiH nbiTKaM h MaacBaicJibc i BaM rpaacaaHCXH
 CenapaTHCTbi Ha BOCTOxe YicpaHHbi imipoxo npiiMCinuoT TaxTHxy BeacniiH oraa H3 rycTOHacejieHHbix paiiOHOB h acHJ
 Pacnojiaraa oraeBbie tohkh b acnjibix aoMax, cenapaTHCTbi npoBOifHpyiOT oroHb no mhphwm /Khicjihm.
 CBiiacTCJibciBa noaoSiibix is the name of a group of people who have been involved in the project . The project is based on the work of a company that has been working on the project for years .
Tax, 13 aHBapa 2015 roaa 6bia oOcipcjiaii yxpanHCXHH OaoxnocT Ha BbC3ae b ropoa BojmoBaxa co CTopoHbi /JoncuKa
Cpreft K., Boaomcp h opraHH3a top oeciuiaiiibix ctohobbix, HeaaBHO Bbiiiy/xacmibiii 6oxaib H3 HoncrtKa Ha ocBo
 YMy HenocTHacHMO, mo moan yMHpaiOT ot roaoaa npn naSrnbix npoBH3neH Mara3HHax. YMyHenocTHACHMO.
 CaMH Jinacpbi cenapaTHCTOB npH3HaiOT, hio anaMHicjibiiaH Hacib rpy30B pa3BopoBbiBaeTca .
 HanpnMep, H3BecTHbiH KOMaHp OOCBMKOB ApceHHH IlaBJIOB 3BHBHJI B CBpajie 2015 roaa, hto npn pacnpcacjicii
 IJ,eHbi b Mara3HHax Ha TeppHTopHH, noaKom pojibiiofi eenapaTHCTaM, 3aMeTHO Bbirne, hcm b yKpaHHCKHx o
 A Taxace npcanp nan-ia jioncuKoro OJiHiapxa PnHaTa AxMeTOBa is a Taxace Nan-ia .
 K ou,eHKe ctohmocth bocmiioh KaMnaHHH IlyTHHa Ha TeppHTopHH YKpaHHbi HyacHO noaxoaHTb c aeyx ctopoh. K Ou,
 Bo-nepBix, iico6xo.hh mo nocwraTb, ckojibko cioai Pocchh H enocpeacTBeHHO Oocbbic aeHCTBHa, b KOTopb
BajibBaii, heh, c naaeHHeM bkohomhkh, c. H3MH, C lipOHOBOJIbCTBCmiblM 3M6apTO, aCCHMeTpHHHO BBe
 H i oi o — 46 Mapa.pySncM 3a 10 Mecau,eB bohhbi hjih 4,6 mapa. pySaeii b MECau, npaMbix pacxoaoB Ha.
 CTOpOHbl, 3 TO He TaK MHOTO, CCJIH yHHTbiBaTb, hto lOHOBbic pacxoflbi cacpaj[biioio Sioaarcia Pocchh cociaBJ
 Ho noxa 6oe 6oeBbie hchctbmh He OKOimciibi ou,eHHTb aaace npHMepHO Macixn aS 3thx pa3pymeHHH He npcaciaBJiacica bob
 Ilo jiamibiM YnpaBjieHHbi npnMepHO paBHbi MC/K'ay co6oii 150, to ecTb k iiacroaiHC my BpeMemi MO. Ilo Jiamibi M
 Ee peajiH3au,H a iiobbojiht jiobccth ypoBeHb acH3HH Haceaemia h pa3BHTHa skohomhkh b KpbiMy ^0 cpeAHepo
 B npaBHTejibCTBeHHOH nporpaMMe ecTb ncSojibinaa Haci b pacxoaoB, xoTopwe /ioji/Kiibi 6biTbnpoHHaHpo
 Tax, HanpHMep,  TexnpoM3xcnopT, floneproia KOMiianna rocxopnopau,HH, xoTopyio B03rjiaBJiaeT jrpyi Ily
 Ho, pa3yMeeTca, caejiano 3to Synex He b nopauxe OjiaroTBopmcjibiiocTH — Bee HHBecTHu,HH Ha CTpoHTejibCTBO 3THX T
HapaOB pySjich b im KHdlJlHUHA Pe3yjibTaTOM BHeuiHeH hojihthxh KpeMna CTajio bbchciihc aanamibix caHXu
 CjiO/Xiio ou,eHHTb ymep6 tbxhx Mep, xax, HanpHMep, 3anpeT Ha nocTaBxy o6opyn;oBaHHa h KOMiuie
 B pe3yjibTaTe fljia BbinnaTbi BHeniHHx fljioB pocchhckhm 3acMLUHKa\i npHnuiocb noBbimaTb cnpoc Ha HHO
 Pocchb oSjiaaac'i KpynHeHiHHMH 3anacaMH iiJioaopoanbix 3CMCJib, ho Harne cejibCKoe X03BHCTB0 He MoaceT Ha
 B 2013 rofly noTpeSHTejibCKaa hhiJijihiihh b Pocchh cocTaBHJia 6,5%. 3a 12 Mecau,eB c MOMeHTa npHeoeflH
 Floim no, hto Ha XlCBajibBauHio py6aa iiobjihmjih He TOJibKO caHKu,HH, ho h iiaaciinc u,eH Ha ncc|nb. FloimNo, h
 Ha TeppHTopHH Pocchh ^eHCTByiOT i pciinpoBOMiibic Jiarepa fljia 6ocbhkob, b CTopoHy yKpanHCKOH rpaHHu,bi ABHacy
 Ho Bpoae KaK h He. He BOioeM. nyTHH Ha npaMbie Bonpocw yBepeHHO MOTaeT tojioboh, HypKHH b CoB6e3e OOH raeBHO
 Hh nyTHHy, hh ero reHepajiaM TaK h He. He xBamjio MyacecTBa. HhnnpoTHB YKpaHHbi. HnnyTHhy, hnn
 MaaouyniHoe BpaHbe h jiHii,eMepHe npciioanoca ica KaK BCJiiiKaa nojiHTHHecKaa viyapoci TpycjiHBaa h no^J
 HeT b MHpe 6onee 6 jih3koto h poanoro AJia poccuan napoaa, hcm yKpammu . Harnn opai bcn — 6e3 bchkoio nacjioca, h BOH
 H CfleJiaTb 3TO CMOaceT TOJIbKO eaM pOCCHHCKHH HapOA. Hapoa. H C fleJia Tb 3Ttb 3to CflejiaTB 3Tto
 You can send all orders directly to verlag@Jibertas-institut.com, or go to every bookshop (print versions only) or to Amazon for print or electronic versions . You can also go to the store for print and electronic versions.