 There were 41 co-sponsors on this resolution . The United States, France, Georgia, Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Poland and the United Kingdom .
 Russia has cut off the Kerch Strait that connects the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov . This is a result of Russia crossing a critical threshold in blocking the entry of three Ukrainian naval vessels .
 This was in Ukrainian territorial waters off Crimea and has been named the Kerch Strait Incident of November 25th . The incident was in Ukraine's territorial waters .
 24 Ukrainian sailors are being held at prison facilities in Moscow . Three Ukrainian vessels have since been confiscated and 24 sailors have been held in prison .
 An estimated half million Russian military personnel have been transferred to Crimea since 2014 . Since 2014 an estimated halfmillion Russian troops have been moved to Crimea .
 Ukraine's President Poroshenko has been warning the international community for some time that Russia wants the whole of the country . Crimea and the Donbass region are the first steps towards that goal .
This incident is actually another seizure of Ukrainian sovereign territory in maritime form . This incident is not a seizure of Ukraine's sovereign territory .
 Ukrainian territorial waters that run through the Black Sea meet up with the Turkish straits . The waters have played a significant role in European and world history .
 The seizure of Ukrainian vessels was without question Russia’s attempt to dominate these straits . Kerch Bridge was built soon after the illegal occupation of Crimea .
 Russian strategy is a replay of the Crimean War of 1854 that was fought on the Crimean peninsula, and on the Black Sea . Britain, France, Turkey and Sardinia all competing for influence in the Middle East .
 This translates into the larger role Russia has played in Syria, Turkey and the Middle East in general since the annexation of Crimea in 2014 . This translates currently into the bigger role Russia is playing in Syria and Turkey .
 Russia is seeking in some way to replicate its past in the present, think tanks say . It has been repeated by many intellectual think tanks that Russia is trying to replicate the past .
 Russia's brazen act by Russia is a result of the cumulative ineffective response by world leaders in the form of sanctions with Russia since the events of 2014 . The brazen act is the result of an ineffective response to the world leaders' sanctions against Russia .
 Russia may have been more self-sufficient and less willing to resolve issues diplomatically . It might have had the unexpected result of making Russia more self sufficient .
 The response by the international community has not and is currently not, deterring Russia’s aggression. In other words, the response has not been deterring Russian aggression .
 It has had the opposite effect of emboldening Russia to completely disregard the UN Charter . The UN Charter has had a negative effect on Russia .
 Ukraine gave Russia permission to sail their ships in Ukrainian territorial waters . This includes the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea and 2003 bilateral treaty .
 Russia’s blockage of Ukraine ships through the Kerch Straits was in fact a red line for the international community, says the author .
 UN attitudes at the UN are beginning to reflect that Russia has over played its hand on Ukraine . Russia might not admit it, but it has overplayed its hand, including its occupation of the Crimean peninsula in 2014 .
 Russia is increasingly becoming predictable to many UN member states as it no longer can find ways to justify its military aggression . Russia is resorting to sinister methods so unbecoming to a permanent member of the UN Security Council .
 Russia is without a doubt the guilty party and architect of the whole conflict . But for the most part even those nations that abstain on procedural votes on Ukraine all recognise that Russia is guilty .
I believe Russia is not succeeding in isolating Crimea as I once before thought . I believe Russia's efforts are not succeeding, I believe. I believe it is not successful in isolates Crimea .
 The Ukrainian leadership, the Ukrainian people and the indigenous Crimean Tatars have been front and center in supporting each others efforts in exposing Russia’s expansionist intentions .
 The recent resolution will further bring home to UN members that all hands need to be on board in supporting this resolution . The resolution will ultimately demand the withdrawal of all Russian military forces out of occupied Crimea .
 President Poroshenko is the best Ukrainian president for the indigenous Crimean Tatars . It is without doubt that he is best president for indigenous Tatars.
 His government endorsed the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples . Designating the Crimean Tatars as the indigenous people of the Crimean peninsula .
 This was a long standing request by our indigenous leader Mustafa Jemilev and Chairman Refat Chubarov of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People . This was the first request from the indigenous leader.
 The seizure and blockage of Ukrainian territorial waters was indeed a red line . The seizure of Ukraine's territorial waters is a big red line.
 24 young Ukrainian navy officers touched a chord in all of us. Held as captives, 24 very young Ukrainian Navy officers touch a chord.
 We did not want to hear any advice for Ukraine to “stand down” or “restrain’ or ‘refrain” as was the case in the 2014 illegal annexation of Crimea .
 Since the Euromaidan Revolution the Ukrainian people have taken responsibility of public life with an eye to defend their nation against an enemy of their freedom .
 President Poroshenko’s martial law places the people of Ukraine and its government on the same page . The law prohibits entry of Russian males into Ukraine .
 Crimea will be returned to Ukraine or is it doomed to become a Russian military outpost on the Black Sea similar to Kaliningrad on the Baltic Sea . Do you think Crimea will return to Ukraine?
 The indigenous Crimean Tatars can never accept Russia's annexation of the Crimean peninsula of Ukraine .
 Russia can only rule Crimea by oppression, repression and imprisonment of those who oppose its presence on its indigenous homeland . That is why Russia can't only rule the Crimea by repression, repression, and imprisonment .
 The Crimean Tatars know the true value of their indigenous homeland and the price that is being paid in rejecting the occupation of Crimea. The continual persecution today and the mass deportation in 1944 was mentioned in 1944 .
 Ukrainians have dug their heels deep in Ukrainian soil along with the indigenous Crimean Tatars . Both will not let its land be controlled by Russia no matter how long the resistance must take .
 A people or a nation displays its real values in times of emergency or confrontation . That is a people or nation displays their real values, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukraine was much more than the perception and propaganda Russia tried to fool the world with, it said . It displayed to the world that Ukraine was more than a perception. It displayed that Ukraine is much more. than the perceptions and propaganda.
 Euromaidan exposed the degree to which Russia undermined the tenacity and commitment of the Ukrainian people to be a democratic nation .
 This new aggression by Russia has not weakened Ukrainian people instead it has aroused the 2014 emotions against Russia’s occupation of Crimea . This new aggressive by Russia hasn’t weakened Ukraine people, but it has raised the 2014 tensions against Russia .
 Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars have taken action to place pressure on the international community to bring Russian aggression out of the darkness and back into the light . Once again, Ukrainians and Tatars are taking action to utilize all platforms to inform and place pressure.
 The indigenous Crimean Tatars in occupied Crimea immediately began mobilising an effort to collect donations and prepared care packages to be delivered to the Ukrainian naval officers . The indigenous Tatars are mobilising to collect donated care packages .
 There were also 12 indigenous Crimean Tatar lawyers led by Emil Kurbadinov . He is known for his role in defending political prisoners .
 Emil Kurbadinov has been detained since then on a trumped up charge of extremist comments made in 2013 on Facebook . He was detained on the same charge in 2013 .
 The Ukrainian Congress Committee of America and its Washington, DC bureau UNIS worked feverishly in mobilising Ukrainian Americans and American Crimean Tatars to condemn Russia’s aggressive acts against Ukraine .
 This resolution was approved by unanimous consent in the U.S. Senate . The vote was unanimous consent.
 The resolution addressed the continuing de-stabilisation of the whole region owing to the transfer of nuclear-capable and conventional weapon systems . For the world community, the resolution highlighted the 500,000 plus troops now in occupied Crimea .
 This undermines national sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine . It also undermines the security and stability within Europe itself .
High number of European nations that were co-sponsors on the recent resolution . This was reflected in the high number of countries that are co-sponsored on the resolution .
 There is currently a worldwide movement #LiberateCrimea in collaboration with Crimean Tatars and Ukrainians . The Crimean Tatar Resource Center in Kyiv is leading a movement calling to support the liberation of Crimea .
 It is a call to end the occupation of Crimea and return basic human rights to the indigenous Crimean Tatars . It is also a call for the return of basic human right to the people of Crimea .