 For the last four decades security in Europe has been burdened by armed violence . The disintegration of a number of states in the Eastern Mediterranean, Western Balkans and the territory of the former Soviet Union has led to violence .
New internationally recognised states, unrecognised state-like entities and unresolved ‘frozen’ conflicts . They have resulted in the creation of new internationally recognisable states .
 A probable newcomer to the last type appeared in spring 2014 – the Ukrainian-Russian conflict over Crimea . The Ukraine-Russia conflict over the Crimea is the Ukraine-Ukrainian conflict.
 Most of the international community does not recognise its annexation by Russia and considers that Crimea still belongs to Ukraine . Most of those in the world do not recognise Crimea's annexation .
 The political and legal stand-off between Ukraine and Russia has created an additional ‘frozen’ conflict in Europe .
 Security on the European continent has for the last four decades been burdened by armed violence and wars . The disintegration of a number of states in the Eastern Mediterranean, Western Balkans and the territory of the former Soviet Union has been blamed for the crisis .
 More than a dozen new and internationally recognised states have appeared on the political map of Europe . These developments have resulted in the appearance of more than adozen new and international recognised states .
Most successful secessions within some of these new states have also created a group of parastates that are unrecognised or less than universally recognised by the international community .
 Northern Cyprus, Transnistria, Abkhazia, Southern Ossetia, Nagorno-Karabakh and later also Kosovo have come to be treated in the international relations literature as ‘frozen’ conflicts in Europe and its vicinity .
With Kosovo moving out of this group, a very probable newcomer appeared in spring 2014 . Kosovo moved out of the group in March 2014 .
 The Russian Federation is heavily implicated, mainly through proxies, in Ukraine .
 Crimea and Crimea have been involved in several conflicts over the past few years . However, the two conflicts differ greatly in several respects from that over Crimea and so far .
 Crimea is geographically located on the southern periphery of the former Soviet Union . Like several ‘frozen’ conflicts mentioned above, Crimea is located in Crimea .
 The latest open conflict bears a number of similarities with four other ex-Soviet cases . Also substantively, the newest open conflict has similarities with the four other cases .
 The five ex-Soviet entities involved in these conflicts share an up to two-centuries-long history of Russian imperial and subsequently of Soviet communist rule .
 The Russian rule had been preceded by up to three centuries of direct Ottoman rule or of strong dependency on the Subleme Porte . The Russian government had been in power for up to 3 centuries .
 In the 18th and 19th centuries, the five lands were militarily conquered or ceded to and then annexed by the Russian Empire . In the 19th century, following Russian victories in several wars against the Ottomans.
 Russian expansion in the Black Sea region and in the Caucasus had been strongly opposed by the Western powers – Great Britain, France and Austria/Austro-Hungary .
 In the mid-19th century, this opposition went all the way to a direct military confrontation and a bloody war . The conflict was fought mostly in Crimea .
 The immediate pretext for the Crimean War was the Russian occupa197 tion of two Danubian principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia . The immediate justification for the Crimea War was a Russian occupation .
 In January 1854 the British and French fleets demonstratively sailed into the Black Sea . The British, French and British fleets were demonstratively sailing into the sea .
 Britain and France declared war on Russia following a Russian rejection of the British ultimatum to withdraw Russian troops .
 In September 1854, almost one million Ottoman, French and British troops landed in Crimea and started a year-long siege of the Russian stronghold of Sevastopol .
 The antiRussian coalition suffered staggering losses of over 300,000 dead soldiers, mostly from disease . The anti Russian coalition suffered massive losses from disease, mainly from disease.
 The Ottomans won the war against the Russian Army, which had lost about 400,000 soldiers . The Russian Black Sea Fleet and the fortress Sevastopol were destroyed .
 Austria's threat to join the coalition forced the Russian government to withdraw its troops from the Danubian principalities . Austria’s threat to joining the coalition forces the government to pull its troops out .
 The newest conflict in and over Crimea has developed since 1991 along the porous ethnic, linguistic and cultural line within a young successor state of the Soviet Union . The latest conflict is the latest in a long line of conflict between Russia and Crimea .
 In Ukraine, this line has separated a majority within the titular nation on one hand . 1–2/2015 Anton BEBLER a considerable part of the Russian and Russian-speaking minority on the other .
 ‘Russian’ population has constituted a strong local minority or a regional majority in parts of that successor state – in Eastern and Southern Ukraine and in Crimea . This 'Russian' population has, however, constituted astrong local minority.
 In Abkhazia and Southern Ossetia, the political divide has separated a titular majority non-Russian nation from two minorities living in provinces bordering the Russian Federation . In two other cases mentioned above, in Abkhaziia and southern Osseti – in
 In four out of five cases, the presence of Russian Armed Forces on the territory of a legally independent successor state offered psychological comfort and physical protection for separatists .
 This protection allowed them to carry out illegal referenda, to proclaim and defend the secession . This protection allows them to proclaim, and subsequently defend, an illegal referendum .
 separatists appealed to and begged the Russian Federation to be admitted into it . In the four cases mentioned above, the separatists appealed.
 Unlike in three other cases, it was promptly admitted and became reunited with the Russian Federation . Unlike in the three other case, it is promptly admitted .
 This exception may be explained chiefly by Russia’s wider geostrategic interests . This is the case of Russia's wider interests in the world .
 Crimea is psychologically much closer to the hearts of many Russians and particularly of the Russian military than any of the four other ex-Soviet territories . Crimea is more psychologically closer to many Russians than any other former Soviet territory .
Transnistria’s territorial discontinuity with the Russian Federation, to the landlocked position and awkward configuration of its narrow strip of land on the left bank of the Dnestre river . Transnistrian's additional drawbacks are related to its territory with Russia .
 The Russian government wants to mend its relations with Georgia and the fact that neither of the two populations belongs to the Russian ethnic diaspora .
 The entire territory of Crimea or its parts were ruled by the Greeks, Bulgars, Scythians, Romans, Goths, Huns, Khazars, Kievan Rus’, the Byzantine Empire, Venice, Genoa, Kipchaks, the Mongol Golden
 The Crimean Tatars established an independent Crimean Khanate after the destruction of the Golden Horde by Tamerlan .
 It encompassed most of the peninsula along with the territory of today’s southern Ukraine and part of southern Russia . It was also part of today's southern Ukraine.
 The Ottomans conquered the southern coast of Crimea, TEORIJA IN PRAKSA let., 1–2/2015 Anton BEBLER chased the Genoans away and annexed it to the Empire .
 In 1475 the Khanate was forced by them to become an Ottoman dependency . The Khanate became an Ottoman dependent in 1475 .
 Crimea had been an independent state for less than four decades . In its very long known history, Crimea was a state of independent state .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and Russian President Vladimir Putin are involved in the latest conflict over Crimea . The two leaders represent Slavic nations .
 The present dispute is about the peninsula bearing the name Krim or Krym which, in their closely related Eastern Slavic languages, was derived from the Turkish word qirim . However, the current dispute is over the name Krym .
 In the 13th century this name was initially given to the capital of a province ruled by the Tatar-Mongol Golden Horde . The name was first given to a provincial capital in the 12th century .
 The more ancient Greek name of that land Tauris/Taurica as well as the names of Sevastopol and of other old towns together with many toponyms point to the most ancient recorded inhabitants of Crimea . The name of the land is also known as Tauris
 Crimea became a colony of the Russian Empire in the late 18th century as a result of Russian victories in the first and second wars with the Ottoman Empire . Crimea became an Ottoman colony in the early 1800s .
 The Ottoman govern199 ment demanded the withdrawal of Russian troops from Poland . France was concerned by the situation in Poland .
 Following Russia’s refusal, the Ottomans initiated naval and land warfare . Following Russia's refusal.
 The Khan of Crimea Sahin Giray with his cavalry invaded southern Russia and soon returned to Crimea . About 20,000 able-bodied captives, reportedly, were captured .
 Crimean Tatars invaded Ukraine and southern Russia today . This invasion proved to be the last of almost regular slave-capturing raids by the Tatars .
 In 1774, the Ottoman Empire was forced to recognise Crimea’s independence . The Sultan retained his spiritual power over all Crimean Muslims .
 Sahin Giray fled Crimea in 1787 and was later executed by the Ottomans for treason .
 The Russian conquerors then gave Crimea a new name – the Taurida govenorate . The Crimean peninsula was then given a name - Tauridia .
 Numerous wars, the Russian imperial and later Soviet rule dramatically changed Crimea demographically, culturally, economically and politically . Crimea was once a Russian territory .
 In the period 1780–1790s, the land experienced summary executions, the exodus and mass expulsion of Muslim Tatars and Turks . The land experienced the demolition or conversion of 1,600 mosques and other Islamic monuments .
 In the 19th century the policy of forced Russification of the remaining population followed through public schools and administration, obligatory military service and Orthodox Christianisation .
 General Grigoryi TEORIJA was the conqueror and military governor of the huge “Novorossia’s’. The conqueror was the prime and energetic mover in this direction .
 Tavricheskiy was awarded the highest imperial decorations, vast estates and a princely title . For his victories, conquests and other achievements he was given the highest Imperial decorations and vast estates .
 He soon became a favourite of the German-born Empress Catherine the Second . He became a co-ruler of Russia .
 In 1783 General G Potemkin initiated the massive resettlement of ethnic Russians and the already Russified subjects from central and northern Russia .
 Russian authorities attracted colonists from the Balkans and southern German lands to Crimea . In addition, the Russian authorities attract colonists from Balkans and Germany .
 In 1944, the last remnants of the Crimean Greek minority were finally deported by the Soviet authorities . Today about 50,000 of their descendants are living in and around the Ukrainian town of Mariupol .
 Several tribal alliances of horse-riding semi-nomads were known in the 9th to 11th centuries under the names Polovtsi and Cumanis .
 Their descendants have subsequently been called the Tatars and Karaims . Their descendants are now called Tatars. Their descendants were later called Tatar and Karais .
 At the time of the Russian conquest, an estimated 420,000 Tatars reportedly constituted a strong majority of the Crimean population . The Crimean population is estimated to be at the time.
 Following the Crimean War and the Russian-Ottoman war, the number of Crimean Tatars reportedly dropped from 300,000 to about 100,000 .
 Between 1917 and 1933 half of the Crimean Tatars perished or were deported . Between 1917- 1933 half were deported or died or died .
 They probably still constituted a sizeable minority at the end of the German occupation in spring 1944 . They were probably still a sizeable majority at the time .
 In May of that year, one of the most tragic episodes in their history occurred . The tragedy occurred in May of 2013 .
 The entire Tatar minority was summarily repressed and deported by the Soviet authorities to Central Asia . The whole Tatar minorities were summarily deported by Soviet authorities .
 It is estimated that almost half of the deported Crimean Tatars died during and immediately after the deportation .
 Crimean Tatars were banned from Crimea for several decades . Unlike other deported Crimean minorities, they were not deported .
 Since December 1991, they have not been reinstated or compensated for the losses of life and property . They were legally rehabilitated in 1967, and since December 1991 allowed to return to their homeland .
 The official name and legal status of Crimea from 1917 to 2014 has changed many times . The two revolutions in 1917 and the end of the Russian Civil War have changed the peninsula's legal status .
 The Bosheviki launched a campaign to replace previously official imperial names of both provinces and cities with new ones .
Previous official name derived from Greek was replaced with a Turkic name Krym. As an expression of the new nationality policy and a friendly gesture towards Kemal Ataturk’s Turkey, the previous official name was changed to Krym .
 The new name and autonomous status were related to the presence of the still sizeable non-Russian minorities, primarily of the Crimean Tatars .
 In 1922 Crimea was incorporated into the Soviet Union and remained within the USSR until it was dissolved in December 1991 . In 1991 Crimea was dissolved into the USSR .
 The only exception was the period from late summer 1941 until spring 1944 . The only time was the time between 1941 and 1944 .
 Most of Crimea was then occupied by the Third Reich . From 1 September 1942, it had been administered as the Generalbezirk Krim and Teil bezirk Taurien .
 The transfer was then described by official communist propaganda as a symbolic brotherly gesture marking the 300th anniversary of Ukraine joining the Russian Empire .
 The decree was presumably adopted at the request of the Presidia of the two parliaments . The Presidium decree was likely adopted at a request of both parliament .
 The transfer of Crimea was said to have been prompted by the need to bring a large labour force and water for irrigation from Ukraine . The transfer is said to be prompted by a need for water and labour force .
 The decree clearly violated Articles 14 and 18 of the then valid ‘Stalin’s’ constitution of the Soviet Union . It required a formal agreement between Soviet Socialist Republics for any change of their borders .
 The Supreme Soviet of the USSR could only confirm such an agreement but not by itself pass a federal law and a constitutional amendment to that effect . The Supreme Soviets could only confirmed such a agreement but by itself could not pass that law and constitutional amendment .
 In the case of Crimea, no such parliamentary procedure was initiated and duly carried out in the two parliaments . No relevant parliamentary sessions were held, no debates took place, no votes were taken and no agreement adopted and signed .
 Crimean population was deprived TEORIJA in PRAKSA let., 1–2/2015 Anton BEBLER of its right to give or deny its consent for any major status change . Also deprived the Crimean population of the Crimea.
 In Soviet terms the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine was illegal, unconstitutional and clearly illegitimate . Even in Soviet terms, the transfer was illegal. Therefore, even inSoviet terms, it was illegal .
 The next status change of Crimea occurred during the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1990–1991 . Crimea was renamed Crimea in 1991 .
After an all-Ukrainian referendum in February 1991, the Crimean Oblast was upgraded again to the status of an autonomous republic . This time within Ukraine, this time in Ukraine, the Crimea was upgraded to an autonomous Republic .
 In summer 1991 an attempted coup against Mikhail Gorbachev took place in Crimea . The then President of the Soviet Union was vacationing in Crimea.
 At the latter referendum, the population of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea was not consulted on whether it desired to remain in Ukraine after the dissolution of the USSR or re-join the Russian Federation .
 The Soviet Union was in fact dissolved on 8 December 1991 at a meeting of the heads of the Russian Federation, Ukraine and Belarus .
Russian leader Boris Yeltsin failed to request Crimea's return to 'mother' Russia from his Ukrainian colleague, Leonid Kravchuk .
 Crimean parliament proclaimed Crimea’s independence in May 1992 . Crimea's first constitution was passed in 1992 .
Under pressure from Kiev, the latter was amended on 6 May 1992 with a sentence on Crimea as being part of Ukraine . Under pressure from the latter, the sentence was amended.
 Crimean parliament established the post of President of Crimea in 1993 . The Crimean parliament granted the Crimean Tatars regular representation in the consultative Council of Fourteen .
 On 17 March 1995, the Ukrainian parliament annulled Crimea’s constitution, removed the President of Crimea Yuriy Meshkov and abolished his office .
 President charged with anti-state activities and with promoting Crimea’s secession from Ukraine and its integration with the Russian Federation .
 Crimea’s secession from Ukraine and its annexation by the Russian Federation have continued on many issues . Since the breakup of the USSR political tensions between the two countries have continued .
 The Russian use of military facilities in Crimea, the number and status of Russian military personnel in Ukrainian territory. These had included those related to the status of Crimea .
 Moscow has covertly controlled the actions of Russian separatists in Crimea since 1991 . Since 1991 Moscow has also maintained a sizeable contingent of its own civilian and military intelligence agents .
 Russian contingency plans for the annexation of Crimea were probably prepared and regularly updated for at least two decades . Russian contingency plan for Crimea was probably prepared, regularly updated.
 Yulia Timoshenko publicly warned the West in 2007 of Russia’s policy of destabilising the Ukrainian government, particularly in Crimea .
 In 2008 the Ukrainian Foreign Minister Volodymyir Ohryzko protested against the mass distribution of Russian passports in Crimea .
 He described the campaign as a 'real problem' in conjunction with Russia’s declared policy of possible military interventions to protect Russian citizens living abroad .
Deputies of Russia’s State Duma had also acted in this manner while visiting Crimea .
 In August 2009 anti-Ukrainian demonstrations broke out in Crimea, calling on Russia to act in the same way as it had done in Southern Ossetia and Abkhazia during the war with Georgia in 2008 .
 The operational plans for an invasion were probably temporarily postponed after Victor Yanukovich was elected President of Ukraine . The operation was probably postponed after Yanukovich's election .
 The penetration of high governmental offices by Russian citizens is particulary the defense and security systems . Ukraine’s growing financial dependence on Russia is likely to have reduced the need for annexation .
 The situation abruptly changed on 22 February 2014 when President Victor Yanukovich and a group of high Ukrainian officials fled Ukraine . The situation suddenly changed.
 The temporary power vacuum and general confusion in Kiev offered an ideal opportunity to the Kremlin to carry out the latest version of the contingency plans to annex Crimea .
Military plans executed exceptionally well on the military side and less so on the political side . These plans were executed exceptionally poorly on the Military side and on the Political side .
 Clashes between pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian protesters broke out in front of the parliament building in Simferopol .
 1–2/2015 Anton BEBLER secession from Ukraine and asking for assistance from Moscow .
 In the early hours of 27 February masked armed individuals seized and locked up government buildings in Crimea . The premises of the Supreme Council were seized .
 The Supreme Council also voted to hold a referendum on the status of Crimea . The referendum was also held on Crimea's status .
 On 28 February 2014 a group of over 20 deputies of the State Duma submitted a draft amendment to the constitutional law on admitting new subjects to the Russian Federation to the Speaker of the Russian state Duma .
 The draft specifically justified the incorporation of parts of Ukraine into the Russian Federation on the grounds of alleged Ukrainian discrimination against national minorities . The draft was written on the basis of alleged Ukraine discrimination against minorities .
 Russianspeaking separatists and thus enabled Crimea’s amputation from Ukraine . They also assisted and protected unlawful actions by Russianspeaked separatists .
 The military take-over of Crimea was obviously well-prepared, rehearsed in advance and professionally executed . The military took over Crimea in Crimea in March 2014 .
 Assembled for this operation were reportedly about 2,000 naval infantrymen stationed in and around Sevastopol . About 7,000 special troops brought into Crimea in early March . About 15,000 troops transported by ferries to Kerch.
 These additional units mainly came from the Russian Southern Military District . The Russian Southern military district is the largest in Russia .
 The forces participating in the Crimean operation were much better organised, trained and armed than the Russian units which were engaged in the war with Georgia in 2008 .
 This time they also used a novel type of operation soon branded hybrid warfare . This time, they also use a novel kind of operation .
 In this TEORIJA IN PRAKSA let., 1–2/2015 Anton BEBLER type military power is combined with several kinds of non-military power resulting in economy of effort .
 The Russian command actively engaged fewer than 10,000 assault troops, mostly on wheeled BTR-80 armoured personnel carriers .
 The masked ‘green men’ were a hybrid of regular infantry and anti-terrorist police units with a secret chain of command and no insignia or visible ranks on their combat fatigues .
 All of this was clearly designed to conceal the state identity of the invading force . All of these was designed to hide the state name of the invasion force .
The easy success of the three-week operation was largely facilitated by three factors . The easy success was largely helped by the three factors, including the use of a special team .
 Russian marines who were already legally stationed at Sevastopol could well in advance reconnoitre the field and acted unopposed by Ukrainian forces . The Russian marines were already stationed at the Russian naval base .
 The short distances to the most important strategic locations in Crimea allowed for the quick insertion of air-transported troops and speedy acquisition of targets .
 About 20,000 Ukrainian military personnel capitulated without a shot being fired .
 Most of them switched their loyalty and opted to remain in Crimea . Also, most of them chose to stay in Crimea.
Most of the Ukrainian Navy was also captured by the Russian military without resistance . Most of the Ukraine Navy was captured without resistance by Russian military .
 Only several serviceable aircraft of the Ukrainian Navy escaped the capture . Only several aircraft escaped the captured Ukrainian Navy .
 Crimean police either failed to act or cooperated with the Russian Special Forces and Crimean separatists . The Crimean policeeither failed to acts or cooperate with the Russians .
 Russian Armed Forces de facto occupied Crimea . But they did not establish a military occupation regime .
 International law prohibits an occupying power from creating another state in occupied territory or to annex it . International law also prohibits an occupied state from annexing it .
 Putin still publicly denied the intention to annex Crimea in March 2014 . It remains puzzling why on 4 March 2014 President Vladimir Putin still publicly denied it .
 One possibility is that an Abkhazia-like scenario was still being considered by the Russian leadership . The Russian leadership is considering a similar scenario .
 A referendum on Crimea reuniting with the Russian Federation was hastily called on 27 February 2014, with insufficient notice . The referendum was held in Crimea on February 27, 2014 .
 Crimean secessionist authorities were not interested in updating the voter registers and in assuring that multiple voting would be prevented . The time pressure very probably did not allow for and, more importantly, the Crimean secessionists did not.
 The referendum held on 16 March 2014 reportedly proceeded peacefully and orderly . But in several important respects did not conform to high democratic standards .
 The ballot omitted two other possible choices – remaining part of Ukraine under the current constitutional structure, or Crimea’s independent statehood .
 The shortage of time did not allow for any real and substantive public debate on such a momentous issue . The shortage.
 Crimea was subjected to onesided information and often outright disinformation by the Russian statecontrolled mass media . The population of Crimea was thus subjected to thoseided information .
Public harassment and intimidation of Crimean Tatars reported . Unidentified men in military fatigues, as well as physical and oral threats to Ukrainian opponents of secession .
 Fifteen pro-Ukrainian journalists and activists were abducted, detained and ill-treated .
 Mustapha Dzhemilev, a leader of the Crimean Tatars and a deputy of the Ukrainian parliament, is barred from returning to his homeland . The Rus206 sian authorities barred him from the country .
 One known Tatar protester was reportedly abducted, apparently tortured and found dead .
 The referendum was held under the irregular circumstances of the Russian military occupation . The referendum took place under the circumstances of Russia's military occupation.
 The presence in public places of armed local Russian irregulars, Russian Cossacks and even Serbian ‘Chetniks’ has intimidating effect on those opposing Crimea’s secession .
 According to the Crimean authorities, 81.36 percent of registered voters took part in Crimea's referendum . 96.77 percent of them voted for its separation from Ukraine and for reunification.
Official figures on voter participation and on the approval rate could not be verified by impartial international observers . However, the official figures on voting and on approval rate cannot be verified .
 The OSCE Chairperson-in-Office Didier Burkhalter did not accept an invitation from Crimea’s authorities to send ODIHR observers . Crimea's referendum was unconstitutional, he said .
 The invitation did not come from an OSCE-participating state . In addition, the invitation didn't come from a state .
 Individually and selectively invited European observers stated that the referendum was carried out without violence and visible irregularities . Individually or selectively invited EU observers said that the vote was conducted without violence .
 The percentage of »yes« votes on Crimea in 2014 was about three points lower than the official results of the Austrian plebiscite on Anschlüss in 1938 .
 Crimea’s incorporation into the Russian Federation has been legitimised by Anton BEBLER .
 Crimean Tatars denied that official results reflected the position of presumably a majority among Crimea’s indigenous population .
 The main reason for this negative attitude was the painful collective memory of Russian colonialism . In the 20th century of terror, deportation, harsh exile and collective discrimination were carried out by Russian-speaking Soviet authorities .
 A good number of Crimean Ukrainians probably departed before the vote, abstained or voted against secession .
 The Ukrainian authorities refused to recognise the legality of the referendum and its outcome on constitutional grounds . The referendum was held in Ukraine on June 23, 2014 . The vote was held on the same day as a referendum in Ukraine .
 The Council of Europe’s Venice Commission and several EU and NATO member states shared the opinion . This opinion was shared by the Council of the Venice Commission .
 It seems reasonable to assume that the Russian-speaking majority supported Crimea's secession from Ukraine and its rejoining Russia .
 The decision probably reflected their deep dissatisfaction with the state of economic and political affairs in Ukraine, as well as widespread incompetence and rampant corruption in both Kiev and Eastern Ukraine .
Russian speakers in Crimea largely coin207 cided with the feelings of many Ukrainians, and also those of the Maidan protesters . In these respects, the Russian speakers' feelings of the Russian speaker in Crimea were largely Coin207 .
 Ukrainian parliament passes bill to abolish the official status of the Russian language . It was also used by the Russian mass media propaganda to scare off all Russian speakers in Ukraine .
 Most Russians in Crimea apparently no longer wanted to be a national minority in Ukraine . They are forced to learn and use another official language .
 The Russian speakers in Crimea had been promised by the separatists . They expected a tangible improvement in their standard of living .
 Crimea has been annexed by Ukraine since Crimea was annexed in Crimea in March 2014 . Crimea's annexation has been blamed for the annexation of Crimea . Crimea is now in the Crimea region of Ukraine .
 Crimea declared its independence on 17 March 2014 and asked the Russian Federation to join it . Crimea declared independence in March 2014 . The Russian Federation has asked Russia to join the Crimea .
 The Sevastopol City Council requested the port’s separate admission as a federal city .
 A treaty on incorporating Crimea and Sevastopol was signed in Moscow in March 2014 . Then, on 18 March 2014, a treaty on Crimea and Crimea was signed. Then, in April 2014, the treaty on Crimean Crimea was also signed .
 In just five days the “Constitutional Law on admitting to the Russian Federation the Republic of Crimea’s new Constituent Entities the republic of Crimea and the City of Federal Importance Sevastopol’ was quickly railroaded through the Russian Federal Assembly .
 The Russian government also discontinued its discount on the price of natural gas imported from Russia . The discount was linked to the basing agreements .
 The involvement of each of them varied greatly from the standpoints of legality and legitimacy of their actions . The involvement in each of their cases varied greatly.
 Ukraine was clearly a victim of an external aggression since part of its internationally recognised national territory was occupied by the armed forces of a neighbouring state and subsequently annexed by the latter . Ukraine was also a victim.
 Ukraine's interim government failed to use the Ukrainian Army, Police and state security services to prevent the violation of Ukraine's territorial integrity and Crimea's separation . However, the interim government did not use the Ukraine Army, police and security services .
 Ukraine's decision not to resist the occupation amounted to Crimea's surrender to the Russian Federation, under duress . Ukraine’s decision to withdraw its personnel and protest only verbally and diplomatically amounted to a surrender to Russian Federation .
 Ukraine's territorial waters and its exclusive economic zone potentially contains rich oil and gas deposits . Most of its military personnel located or stationed in Crimea .
 The Council of Federation of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation unanimously approved the request by President Vladimir Putin to allow the bringing in of a “limited military contingent’ of Russian armed forces to Ukraine .
 It also violated the ‘Declaration on Principles of International Law’ adopted by the UN General Assembly . It declared illegal any territorial acquisition resulting from the threat or use of force .
 The same applies to Principles I–V of the CSCE Helsinki Final Act . It also applies to the “Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between the Russian Federation and Ukraine’s Ukraine”
 The Russian Federation has thus neglected its obligations under international law . The Russian federation has thus neglected its obligations to the world.
 The Russian Federation has also violated the Agreement from 8 August 1997 between Ukraine and the Russian Federation on the status and conditions of the Black Sea Fleet of the Russia Federation in the territory of Ukraine .
 The movements of Russian troops in February-March 2014 in Crimea were in no way coordinated with the relevant authorities of Ukraine and the Russian forces left their places of dislocation in clear violation of the agreement . President Vladimir Putin and official Russian propaganda used the right of the Crimean people to self-
 Crimea reunification was said to undo the unconstitutional and unjust separation of Crimea from Russia 60 years earlier . It had been achieved with no known victims .
 The annexation of Crimea has somewhat increased the territory, population, territorial waters, mineral and other natural resources of the Russian Federation . Crimea has been annexed by Russia in Crimea .
 The Russian Armed Forces have increased their power projection capabilities in Crimea . By relocating additional TU-22 M3 strategic bombers, missiles, heavy armour and air-transported troops to Crimea, they have improved the military infrastructure .
 The addition of one of the two Mistral amphibious assault ships would further strengthen the Russian military presence . The 6 Article 5 of the Russian Constitution contains a provision for the right of the peoples to self-determination but does not confer on them the right to secede from the Russian
 Putin’s gamble on Crimea has paid off as the annexation was met with overwhelming support by the Russian public and greatly boosted his popularity ratings .
 The concern for Crimean Russians' rights and well-being has likely been of secondary importance . President Putin mentioned the alleged Ukrainian assimilationist pressures on the Crimean Russians and the recent 'terror' by Ukrainian ultranationalists .
 In the framework of Ukrainian constitutional and legal order, the holding of the referendum on March 16, 2014 and the declaration of secession was clearly illegal and unconstitutional . The holding of a referendum was clearlyillegal and unconstitutional.
 Most declarations of independence have been unconstitutional, including the declaration of USA in 1776 . Kosovo’s declaration in 2008 was the first in Kosovo .
 The International Court of Justice concluded Kosovo declaration did not violate the norms of international public law . The Kosovo declaration was declared in July 2013 .
 There have been several similarities between the Kosovo and Crimea cases . There have also been similarities between Kosovo and the Crimea .
 Russian officials and propaganda have consistently omitted very important differences . Russian officials have however consistently omitted many important differences.
 The Russian-speaking population of Crimea has not experienced anything similar to the protracted repression by the Ukrainian authorities . The de facto abolition of Crimea’s autonomous status, massive discrimination and firing of Russians from the public sector, mass displacement and expulsion from Crimea of several hundred
 Ukraine, Crimea and the ethnic Russians had enjoyed considerable autonomy and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea realized its right to self-determination . There was no need, unlike in Kosovo, to apply on humanitarian grounds the “responsibility to protect’s”
 Whether it was entitled to exercise this right is a debatable legal proposition . The right to exercise the right is not a legal proposition, says the author .
 The facts are that this right was flatly denied to it by the Soviet Communist authorities in 1954 and neglected by Russian and Ukrainian leaders in 1991 . The right was denied to the Soviets in 1954.
 Crimea has relatively peacefully expressed and exercised this right, in conformity with principle 8 of the Helsinki Final Act . Crimea has been in Crimea for more than two years .
 The two minority communities apparently acquiesced to the desire of the Russian-speaking majority . The two sizeable minority communities seem to have agreed to the request .
 Crimea's secession is a measure of legitimacy to Crimea’s secession and to its reunification with the Russian Federation . Crimea is now part of Russia and Crimea is part of the Russian federation .
 The annexation of Crimea encouraged the Russian-speaking separatists in Eastern and Southern Ukraine . They apparently hoped that Moscow will repeat the same scenario .
 The mass unrest, anti-Kiev demonstrations, tearing down Ukrainian state symbols and hoisting up Russian national flags took place in April 2014 in a number of Ukrainian cities .
 In Kharkov, Donetsk, Lugansk and Odessa ‘People’s Republics’ were proclaimed . In Donetsk, Donetsk and Lugansk “People” were proclaimed. In Kharksov and Lugans, ‘ people’
 Crimean Russians have presumably also participated in these events . Numerous Crimean Russians are believed to have participated .
 Russian, Chechen and other non-Ukrainian “volunteers’ from the Russian Federation’s territory and other countries have constituted, according to some estimates . Some estimates, over a third of the insurgent forces.
 Crimea and “Novorossia’s’ Eastern part of the Republic of Ukraine has been frequently called in the Russian mass media and occasionally by Russian politicians . There have been considerable differences between Crimea and the Eastern part.
 Crimea has been legally part of Ukraine since 1919, with only one exception during the Second World War . Unlike Crimea “Novorossia’s’ Crimea, it has been part of the country since 1919 .
 The flare-up of unrest and subsequently of violence in the Donbass area had however a somewhat different origin .
High representatives of U.S. and EU did a great disservice to Ukraine’s integrity when they openly and uncritically supported one side in the internal conflict .
 This ill-advised Western policy aggravated the conflict and contributed to the development which seriously threatened also mainland Ukraine’s territorial integrity . The conflict has seriously threatened the country's territorial integrity, according to the UN .
 The unrest in ‘Novorossia’ quickly deteriorated from seizures of state TEORIJA in PRAKSA to clashes with the Ukrainian forces . It degenerated into a full-fledged civil war .
 Heavy conventional weapons (tanks, armoured personnel carries, artillery and rockets) have been used by both sides . Helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft by the Ukrainian Army only and international humanitarian law gravely violated .
 The insurgents have enjoyed moral and political support of the Russian Federation . They have received critically needed economic, logistic, humanitarian, information, intelligence and other kinds of assistance .
 The insurgents seized considerable stocks of arms, munitions and captured many heavy and often obsolete conventional weapons from Ukraine .
 Some military and Russian security personnel have advised and guided insurgents, according to Ukrainian and NATO sources .
 Russian government representatives denied reports on a flow of sophisticated arms across the unmarked interstate border . But not the participation of Russian citizens as “volunteers’ on the side of insurgents.
 No complete units of the Russian Army have been observed in Crimea . Unlike in Crimea, no complete units have been verifiably observed .
 It allowed for a truce and the stabilization of armistice lines, an exchange of prisoners and a reduction of shelling and missile attacks . The truce allowed for the stabilization and the exchange of prisoner prisoners and the reduction of missile attacks.
 In the four following months there were nevertheless recorded about 1300 victims of violence . In four months, there were still about 1300 people killed in violence .
 The four parties’ agreement reached on February 12, 2015 in Minsk and signed by the highest representatives of the Russian Federation, Ukraine, Federal Republic of Germany and France . It paved the way to a peaceful resolution of the armed conflict in South Eastern Ukraine .
 If and when fully implemented the agreed upon measures would restore mainland Ukraine’s territorial integrity and meet at the same time the demand for extensive political, economic and cultural autonomy of the Donbass area . If fully implemented, the agreement would restore the territorial integrity.
 A reform of Ukraine’s present constitution to be adopted by the end of 2015 is expected to enshrine Ukraine's, at least, partial decentralization and remove the grounds for grievances related to assimilationist pressures and to the alleged discrimination of the Ukrainian Russians and Russian-spe
 The reforms by themselves will not terminate the sharpest conflict in Ukraine, but would allow for its peaceful management in years to come . The reforms would allow the Ukraine to be peaceful for years.
 By mid-February 2015 the civil war in Ukraine affected more than five million of its inhabitants . More than eleven thousand wounded, TEORIJA in PRAKSA let., 1–2/2015 Anton BEBLER over a million and a half internally displaced persons and refugees .
 "Novorossia" led to a very different course of events in the Crimea conflict . The Crimea conflict has been described as a "very different course" of events .
 Ukraine is on record favouring Ukraine’s federalization and a wide autonomy of the predominantly Russian-speaking regions . They are also on record favoring Ukraine's federalization .
 Moscow's statements appear to exclude a legal annexation of ‘Novorossia’ and an Abkhazia – like model of secession . The lack of open and massive military intervention across the Ukrainian border indicates Moscow’s real strategic intentions .
 Russian autonomous region or republic legally within Ukraine but will continue to be closely economically, culturally and politically linked to the Russian Federation . The North Atlantic Treaty Area will not be extended into predominantly Russian-speaking areas in Eastern and Southern Ukraine .
 The Republica Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Province of Quebec in Canada come close to a model presumably favoured by Moscow . The model is a model apparently favoured by Russia .
 peace and normalization in mainland Ukraine could result from a political solution only . Stable peace andnormalization in the country could be achieved only .
 Ukraine's state structure will have to be by necessity a compromise affecting Ukraine’s state structure . Ukraine's economic, security and foreign policy orientations between the West and Russia .
 The renunciation of non-alignment by the less than fully representative Ukrainian parliament on December 23, 2014 threw an additional roadblock to national reconciliation . Ukraine's parliament has been in power for more than a year .
 In Moscow's eyes it fully justified its decision to reacquire Sevastopol and Crimea . In Moscow’s eyes, the decision was justified .
 The new law could be viewed, on one hand, as an emotional and unwise gesture, or, alternatively and less probably, as a bargaining chip to be exchanged for the restoration of Ukraine’s territorial integrity .
 The conflict over Crimea and Sevastopol has developed in an international environment . The conflict has been in and related to Ukraine and the international community .
 European Union, NATO, OSCE, UN, USA, Germany, France, Poland et.al. These have been the European Union.
 The Russian leadership has for many years openly opposed Ukraine’s integration into the economic, and hence also political, “West” and in particular the possibility of its NATO membership .
In practice, this abstract legal right always depends on and is conditioned by a number of internal political and wider geopolitical considerations .
 President Vladimir Putin clearly stated the geopolitical rationale for the “reunification’s with Crimea . Putin spoke at a joint session of the Russian parliament on March 18, 2014 .
 The sheer possibility of Ukraine's membership in NATO has been viewed by Putin as an acute threat to the security of Southern Russia .
 President Vladimir Putin's statement expressed the primary motivation of the Russian leadership . Crimea's annexation prevented Crimea's conceivable inclusion into the North Atlantic Treaty area .
 The Russian actions in 2014 related to Ukraine and Crimea were thus largely – if not primarily – provoced by EU and NATO enlargement into the ex-Soviet space .
 Crimea's annexation was a consequence of the decision by the United States administration under George W Bush to offer Ukraine NATO membership . Crimea’s straightforward annexation was the result of the U.S. decision to offer NATO membership.
 Other members of the Alliance unwisely succumbed to American “friendly persuasion” and agreed to include the promise of membership in the conclusions of the Bucharest summit of 2008 .
 This promise was not preceded by a careful examination of its medium and long-term security and political consequences and of the Alliance's ability to bear their burden .
 The promise, despite having neither a date nor inclusion into the Membership 8 Kremlin, was made by the Kremlin .
 The promise did not entail an Art. guarantee, but it morally implied that the states promised membership would not be left “cold in the rain’ if their territorial integrity and sovereignty were to be grossly violated .
 Ukraine in 2014 (and earlier Georgia in 2008) were in fact effectively punished by the Russian Federation . But NATO basically stood by, while Russia stood by .
 In September 2014 NATO indirectly admitted the mistake when the Wales Summit Declaration did not repeat the promise to Ukraine .
 Moscow's action on Crimea expressed its defiance of NATO's further enlargement into Russia’s backyard . Moscow”s action on Crimean expressed defiance of the NATO’'s further expansion into Russia's backyard .
 It could be more generally understood as renunciation of the balance of power in the Euro-Atlantic area formed after the end of the ‘Cold War’ and as a demand for a redefinition of legitimate “zones of interest’ in Europe .
 It could be taken as a stern warning to other ex-Soviet republics to behave, for instance, to Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan . It could also be taken to other former Soviet republics, such as Kazakhstan.
 The occupation and annexation of Crimea provoked a vivid reaction in the international community . The Crimea annexation provoked a strong reaction, in the form of diplomatic protests .
 The resolution condemned the annexation of Crimea, declared the referendum "non-valid" and appealed to the international community not to recognize changes in Crimea .
 A majority of one hundred UN members supported the resolution while eleven members voted against it . The resolution was approved by one hundred members of the UN .
 The vote showed the Russian Federation’s considerable diplomatic isolation .
 Understanding and support for its action was expressed by states such as North Sudan, Syria, Zimbabwe, North Korea and by four Latin American countries . North Korea, Zimbabwe and North Korea also expressed support .
 Armenia and Belarus voted in Russia’s favour, while Ukraine and Georgia condemned the Russian action .
 The annexation put a large group of 58 states (including the BRICS members China, India, Brazil, Brazil and South Africa) into a delicate situation .
 The Russian Federation did not want to condemn the Russian Federation and decided to abstain . While generally supporting the principle of territorial integrity of member states, they did not wanted to condemn them .
 Active condemnation of Russia’s action was expressed in the strongest terms by a number of EU and NATO members .
 It was shared also by many non-aligned states who oppose any infringement on the territorial integrity of member states .
 On April 1, 2014, the foreign ministers of NATO member states condemned the annexation of Crimea and qualified it as illegal and illegitimate . The Crimea annexation was approved by the Russian government in March .
 NATO's relations with the Russian Federation. They also approved a number of measures negatively TEORIJA in PRAKSA let., 1–2/2015 Anton BEBLER affecting NATO’s relations with Russia .
 NATO leaders at the NATO Summit in Wales called on the Russian Federation to “ reverse the annexation of Crimea’s Crimea . They declared the suspension of all practical, civilian and military cooperation and the freezing the activities of the NATO-Russian Council .
 The ministers also decided to assist Ukraine with advisory teams, to support Ukraine’s defence reforms . Ukraine and the Russian Federation are close to the North Atlantic treaty area .
 The United States and later the European Union added to these measures . The U.S. and European Union also added to the measures .
 The conflict over Crimea and the related conflict in Eastern Ukraine raised the fears of escalation to a hot war between Ukraine and the Russian Federation .
 Some aspects of the confrontation and of the Western sanctions bore resemblance with the “Cold War period’s ‘Cold War’ period .
 The conflict over Crimea and its further ramifications have had a number of other negative international effects . The conflict has also had other negative effects, such as the Crimea crisis .
 The conflict also brought the US-Russia talks on anti-ballistic defence and on other strategic issues to an end . The conflict was already in deep troubles.
 The Crimean conflict heightened the sense of insecurity in states bordering on the Russian Federation .
 The three Baltic republics increased their defense expenditures while Lithuania decided to reintroduce universal military obligation . Lithuania also increased its defense expenditures .
 The Crimean affair has also reduced the possibility of de-escalation in several “frozen’s conflicts on the ex-Soviet periphery, over Transnistria .
 The application of EU and U.S. sanctions raised the question of their TEORIJA in PRAKSA . 1–2/2015 Anton BEBLER objectives, effectiveness and consequences .
 Washington’s hostility to Russia has been evident, he says . Washington's hostility to Russian has been apparent, according to him . Crimea and the Ukrainian crisis were used only as a pretext for mobilizing European allies .
 The U.S. initiated and still presses for sanctions against Russia while having openly admitted the failure of its own sanctions applied for 50 years against Cuba . It is an irony that the United States initiated and continues to press for sanctions.
 Most importantly, they are not likely to achieve any of the above-stated objectives . Most importantly they are likely to be able to reach any of their objectives .
 Russia is the second largest exporter of weapons world-wide . Russia has a near self-sufficiency in arms of the world's second largest weapons exporter .
 No kind and no intensity of international sanctions will ever return Crimea to Ukraine . It is already clear, that no kind of sanctions will never return Crimea.
 In this particular sense, the applica217 tion of economic sanctions is pointless . In this case, it is pointless, says the author .
 The developments in Eastern Ukraine have had no educational or deterrent effect . They have no discernible positive impact on the developments in Ukraine .
 The absence of a direct and massive military intervention by the Russian Army could not be attributed to them . The absence, so far, is not attributed to the military intervention .
 Crimean scenario has not been repeated for a number of other reasons . The Crimean scenario is not repeated for many other reasons.
 An open and massive Russian invasion would have caused an all-out war between Russia and Ukraine, with catastrophic consequences . An open war would have had catastrophic consequences for Ukraine .
 The Russian forces would face a bloody antiguerrilla warfare, similar to that in Western Ukraine in 1945–1949 . Although probably quickly victorious on the battlefield, the Russian forces will face the prospect of waging for many years .
 The human, political and economic costs of a massive invasion of Eastern Ukraine would far outweigh any possible gains for Russia . The human and political costs of the massive invasion and of the protracted occupation of eastern Ukraine would be too much for Russia.
 Moscow politically cannot and will not allow a military defeat of the insurgents in Eastern Ukraine . On the other hand, Moscow will not let a military victory in Ukraine .
 The war of sanctions already strengthened the autocratic elements of Vladimir Putin’s regime . It slowed down or stopped internal political and economic reforms in Russia favoured by the West .
 There have been many commentaries and a number of proposals on how to deal with the conflict related to Crimea and Ukraine .
 Some Western commentaries revive the spirit of the ‘Cold War’ depicting President Putin as a 9 News conference.
 Russia’s behaviour as a threat to the very foundations of international security, international law and liberal West .
 M O’Hanion and J Shapiro requested a repeated and binding referendum on Crimea . Another suggestion was made by M O'Hanion.
 58 percent of Crimea’s population were ethnic Russians, 24 percent ethnic Ukrainians and 12 percent Crimean Tatars . The last Ukrainian census was held in 2001 .
 The actual number and percentage of Russians were probably higher than the official Ukrainian count . The official count of Russians in Ukraine is based on the official number of Russians .
 There is no current data on the additional influx of Russian military, security and civilian personnel since March 2014 . Crimea has a large number of inhabitants who have left Crimea .
 The Republic of Crimea and the federal city Sevastopol are today de facto parts of the Russian Federation constituting the Crimean Federal District and part of Russia’s Southern Military District .
 On April 11, 2014, a new constitution was adopted by the Republic of Crimea . The new constitution is the first in Crimea since Crimea was adopted in April 2014 .
 Most of the international community does not recognize the annexation by the Russian Federation . The Autonomous Republic of Crimea is still belonging to Ukraine . The Russian Federation considers the Autonomous republic of Crimea as still belonging.
 A representative public opinion poll conducted by OSCE could be more palatable to Moscow . The poll could be conducted by a representative public poll .
 In December 2014 his government discontinued all rail and rail connections to Crimea, thus completing its full separation from Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has now completed its complete separation from the Crimea .
 The political and legal stand-off between Ukraine and the Russian Federation will undoubtedly continue creating an additional “frozen’s conflict in Europe. Ukraine and Russia will continue creating another ‘frozen conflict’